Social media can be a great marketing tool, but only if used properly. It is an all-too-common occurrence in the modern world for a company to begin using social media with high hopes, only to find that it isn’t making much of a difference.

Why does this happen?

This happens because they’re using it wrong. Followers on social media accounts don’t want to feel as though they are being advertised to nonstop. Instead, they want to feel connected to companies and professionals on a deeper level. If you can successfully make them feel connected, you can generate a type of customer loyalty like nothing else can. Customers will grow to think of your business as a good friend instead of just another place to sell products. There are two important aspects to creating this:

Keeping your social media accounts active Going about it the right way

Ready to find out how you can do this? Just follow these six simple steps to keep your social media accounts relevant. Check out the additional tips and tricks at the end for more ‘how-to’ information.

Step One: Craft A Post Daily

Crafting a well thought out social media post will literally take you five minutes or less. Although creating a post strictly for advertising purposes is fine once in a while, the vast majority should be aimed towards engaging with your audience. The best way to do this is simply ask a question. If you’re stuck on what to write or ask about, try something very basic, like this:

“The weather’s bright and sunny here today! What’s the weather like where you live?”

This super simple post will engage with your audience simply because you’ve asked a question. In order to remain professional about it, however, you need to remember a few things. Always double check for spelling, grammatical errors, and typos. Also avoid abbreviations, which are not only unprofessional but also incredibly annoying.

Step Two: Like All Comments From The Previous Day

Liking all comments left on your posts from the previous day is simple, and takes almost no time at all. Even if you had over 500 comments, it is entirely plausible that giving each of them a like will take you no more than about ten minutes. The ‘why’ behind doing this is that it makes your customers feel as though you actually care about what they have to say. This is a big part of forming that strong customer loyalty we talked about in the introduction.

Step Three: Personally Respond To At Least Five Comments

While it may be near impossible – or at least horribly time consuming – to respond to every comment you receive, you should be personally responding to at least five of them each day… per social media account. Even if it’s nothing more than a simple “thank you.” This helps solidify the idea that your company cares about what it’s customers have to say.

Recommended for You Webcast: Hacking SEO: The Fastest Way to Double Your Rankings in 90 Days

Step Four: Share Something

In addition to one personally crafted post each day, you should also be sharing something. Try to share items that are relevant to your customers. Preferably, these would be posts or articles written by businesses you have connected with on some level. Why? It would serve two purposes. First, it keeps your social media accounts active and relevant. Second, it prompts other companies and professionals to share your posts in return.

Step Five: Connect With At Least One New Person

Take just a second to connect with at least one new person each day. This will help to ensure your list of professional contacts slowly but steadily grows over time. Your professional contacts are incredibly important, because they serve numerous purposes. Primarily, it offers you a sharing network. If you share their stuff, they’ll share yours. Your professional contacts may also be able to offer advice, tips, tricks of the trade, and additional contacts to tap into.

Step Six: Repeat For Each Social Media Account

Now simply repeat the above five steps for each social media account you have. Most companies have between two and four social accounts they are active on.

Other Tips & Tricks For Social Media

As an added bonus, here are a few extra tips and tricks for keeping your social media accounts relevant:

Be personable. Professionalism does not automatically indicate that you must sound like a robot.

Never argue or fight on social media, even if someone else is instigating it. Publicly arguing with someone through the internet is incredibly unprofessional.

If you can’t keep up with the demands of your social media accounts, try hiring a freelancer to help.

Link your blog up with social media. This way, every time you write and post blog content, you will also be working towards keeping your accounts active.

Don’t stretch yourself thin. More is not always better. If you can’t stay active on all your social accounts, hire help or deactivate your least viable one.

Social media can be an incredibly useful marketing platform if used properly. If you’ve been using social media without the desired results, try utilizing the six above steps for keeping social media accounts relevant. Keep the additional tips and tricks in mind for optimal results.