By Williams, Curtis C Proquest LLC

Two weeks ago, minority collision shop owners, car rental agencies and their customers announced that a federal lawsuit had been filed on behalf of Mark's Car Rental, a Detroit -area minority-owned firm. The suit alleges that auto insurance companies have engaged in a practice of steering clients who have accidents solely to non-minority car rental agencies and collision shops.

COMMENTARY

Further, these preferred firms are allowed to bill insurance companies directly, so that clients do not have to pay out-of-pocket, while clients who take their business to similar minority firms must pay first and then wait for reimbursement. The lawsuit alleges racketeering under RICO (Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization Act), claiming that insurance companies have actually colluded to deprive Detroit and Detroit -area minority residents of equitable coverage. The lawsuit also alleges that a "special investigative unit," usually comprises of ex-law enforcement officers, acts on behalf of various auto insurance companies to specifically "red flag" investigate minority clients and companies for possible fraud.

While Detroit automakers are reveling in their success in this past year and encouraging many of us to buy new "rides," no doubt auto insurance companies are salivating about the prospect of big payments from those of us who live in high-priced zip codes: that is, the entire city of Detroit .

For the past 40 years, Detroit's residents have paid the highest auto insurance premiums in the country. This dubious distinction is supposedly predicated on actuarial tables - the probability of accidents, thefts or injury which may occur in the city limits. The late Erma Henderson , Detroit City Council president, shot this argument full of holes, as some do today, about other areas of the metro Detroit area which have as many or even more accidents, thefts and injuries north of Eight Mile Road , where insurance rates are half.

In this past week's Michigan Chronicle , Senior Editor Bankole Thompson gave his analysis and suggestions to recently-elected Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan . At the top of the list of things that Mr. Thompson urged Duggan to do was develop a response to the city's insurance redlining problem, a problem that has plagued Detroit for more than 40 years. Mayor Duggan has already acknowledged that this issue must be addressed.

If economic equity and growth are to be a part of the new Detroit , we must start with fairness. These practices kill job prospects, strangle Detroit businesses trying to grow, and further depress neighborhoods seeking to climb out of a deep pit of decline. You can't invest your money in yourself and your community if you're giving it all to the insurance companies, and then get criminalized by them when you try to legitimately file a claim.

The federal government has already acknowledged that these insurance practices are patently illegal: and there is a move afoot in the State of Michigan legislature to address the issue as well.

As a business owner who has spent thousands of dollars for auto insurance, I join with Bankole Thompson , local civil rights organizations and Detroiters who say, "Enough is enough!" Mayor Duggan, stand with us in this historic effort to eliminate this economic oppression of Detroit .

By Curtis C. Williams

Rev. Curtis C. Williams serves as Pastor of Aijalon Baptist Church in Detroit , and is the proprietor of Trinity Chapel Funeral Home .

Copyright: (c) 2014 Michigan Chronicle Wordcount: 547

[jetpack-related-posts]