GENESEE COUNTY, MI – With the Genesee Health Plan expected to lose upwards of 17,000 enrollees to the new Obamacare plan, local officials are racing to meet a March 31 deadline to help residents make the switch.

Uninsured residents or those covered by Genesee Health Plan, Michigan's only community-funded health plan, need to start looking at if they should be signing up for the federal health insurance program or if they qualify for the Medicaid expansion program, known as Healthy Michigan.

Enrollment started in October, but it was a very frustrating first couple of months, said Jim Milanowski, vice president of development and marketing for Genesee Health Plan.

"We would have all the computers set up and we couldn't even get on the website," he said. "The first couple of months, it was hit or miss."

But after the holidays, things seemed to move more smoothly.

Anita Cervantes, 46, of Mundy Township described the process as "Chaos."

She first went to a meeting at Genesee Health Plan in February to try and figure out the next step thinking she would have to sign up for the federal health insurance program -- Michigan market place health insurance exchange -- which gives 12 insurance plan options.

She recently found out that she would qualify for Healthy Michigan, so she's trying to do her research.

"I did not know where the start," said Cervantes, who has had Genesee Health Plan for about a year. "For people who have to pick their plan (through the federal health insurance) I'm sure it's going to be more difficult for them. I'm sure it's crazy."

The health reform is complicated, Cervantes said. She encourages anyone who has not started to look at the information yet to start now.

To get Genesee County residents the information and help they need, Genesee Health Plan officials have been holding informational meetings every day. Hourly presentations are being held from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekdays at the Genesee Health Plan, 2171 S. Linden Road, until March 31.

Between September and February Genesee Health Plan members grew by roughly 3,000, Milanowski said, because small business owners cut hours so they didn't have to offer health coverage. Things are beginning to balance out now, he said.

Getting enrolled in the new health insurance plans if residents qualify is a good opportunity because it offers more than the Genesee Health Plan covers, Milanowski said.

Genesee Health Plan covers visits to a doctor, prescriptions, X rays and lab work. The Affordable Care Act would include emergency room visits, mental health services and women's services, among other things.

"This is an opportunity for people to really get full health insurance," Milanowski said. "For a lot of people it's been a good deal."

So far, 55,700 have been given information and 1,200 have completed Affordable Care Act applications at Genesee Health Plan, Milanowski said. Even more residents started the application and then finished it on their own at home.

Tami Mackie, 51, of Flint said she had no idea where to start. All she knew was that she would have to apply or re-apply for some health insurance. She explains it as complicated and expensive.

"I think a lot of people can't afford it," said Mackie, who has had Genesee Health Plan for a year. "I don't like the fact that we are being forced into this."

Mackie went to Genesee Health Plan Friday to try and figure out what her next step was.

The Genesee Health Plan will not be going away, however.

There are 27,000 residents signed up with Genesee Health Plan, but within the next year that is expected to drop down to 10,000 to 15,0000 residents who are not covered by the Affordable Care Act or by the Healthy Michigan, Milanowski said.

And because of the decrease of Genesee Health Plan members, federal and state funding will no longer come into the organization. The main funding source will be the countywide millage, which brings in roughly $7 million a year.

Genesee Health Plan will also add an additional dental health care program to partner with plan members or those covered by the Affordable Care Act. There are enough funds to cover 2,500 people with dental insurance and people can sign up anytime. So far between 50 and 100 have applied for that and it will be available first come first serve basis, Milanowski said.

Here's some important information you need to know about the health care chances and the Affordable Care Act:

Enrolling in Healthy Michigan: Enrollment in Healthy Michigan, a Medicaid expansion program, begins April 1. Applicants must be between the ages of 19 and 64, not currently eligible for Medicaid, not eligible for or enrolled in Medicare, and earning up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level (approximately $16,000 for a single person and $33,000 for a family of four).

More information about Healthy Michigan can be found at www.michigan.gov/healthymichiganplan

Enrolling for the new federal insurance program: Residents without health insurance and those who are currently covered with the Genesee Health Plan and don't qualify for Healthy Michigan could qualify for insurance through the Michigan market place health insurance exchange, the new federal program. Enrollment is done at healthcare.gov. It does not cover dental insurance, so the Genesee Health Plan will now be offering a dental plan.

Qualifying for tax incentives: About 85 percent of people who are signed up for the federal health insurance will qualify for a tax credit or subsidy to help cover the monthly premium cost, Milanowski said. More information on that can be found at healthcare.gov. There is a calculator on the website to see if you qualify.

Do your research: Enrolling in the federal health insurance is not a quick process. Milanowski encourages residents to do their research before signing up. It takes roughly 45 minutes to complete and there are 12 health plan options to choose from. You must have a working email address before enrolling.

Deadline is quickly approaching: The deadline to enroll in a federal health insurance is March 31. If you miss the deadline, you will have to wait until November to enroll and you may see a penalty, Milanowski said. If you miss the deadline, Genesee Health Plan will still be available for a health insurance option.

Where to get help: For more information on Genesee Health Plan, health reform or Healthy Michigan, you can visit Genesee Health Plan's website at www.geneseehealthplan.org. Genesee Health Plan holds informational meetings and helps will federal health insurance enrollment every weekday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. until the deadline of March 31. After that they will also help with Healthy Michigan enrollment.

The informational sessions are held on the hour every hour at Genesee Health Plan, 2171 S. Linden Road. Call 800-232-0503 to see which sessions have openings.