Health Why The Government Is Trying To Increase Obamacare Outreach To Blacks And Latinos CREDIT: AP Photo/Nick Ut Esther Guzman, left, gets insurance information from Janelle Hartley, right, Thursday March 13, 2014, during a Covered California rally in Los Angeles.

With the next Obamacare enrollment period set to begin in two months, federal government officials have their sights turned on minorities who have yet to sign up for health plans through the marketplaces.

As part of an effort to boost African American and Latino Obamacare enrollment, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the Office of Minority Health recently doled out grants totaling $3.2 million to more than a dozen organizations — including universities, community health centers, and nonprofits.

The 13 organizations — all of which fall under the Partnerships to Increase Coverage in Communities — will use the funds to educate and mobilize underserved populations in the weeks leading up to the November 15 opening and during the three-month enrollment window.

“Racial and ethnic minorities have lower rates of health insurance coverage than the national average and stand to benefit greatly from the Affordable Care Act,” J. Nadine Garcia, Director of the Office of Minority Health, said in a statement.

A May HHS report showed a gap of 20 percentage points between the proportion of uninsured African Americans and Latinos and the turnout among those communities in the months after the October 2013 launch of the Obamacare enrollment website. Experts say a host of factors — including persistent misinformation about Obamacare and some states’ reluctance to expand Medicaid — likely come into play.

A survey conducted by the Commonwealth Fund in February, for example, found that less than half of Latinos in the U.S. knew about their state’s health exchange, compared to 68 percent of blacks and 69 percent of whites. Latino advocacy groups say the breakdown in communication between Latinos and the federal government — caused in part by the delayed launch of the Spanish language health exchange site, CuidadoDeSalud.gov — thwarted efforts to galvanize Latinos. Even when the site later launched in December 2013, not much time passed before Spanish-speaking patrons bemoaned the translation errors and confusing navigation.

Immigration concerns have also stunted insurers’ attempts to increase Obamacare enrollment among Latinos. In February, The National Alliance for Hispanic Health, an organization that at one point reported 4,000 Obamacare-related phone calls, told CNN that counselors often encountered mixed-status families — groups that had at least one undocumented immigrant. Skepticism among many Latinos hasn’t waned, even with Assurances by the federal government that healthcare data would not be shared with immigration officials.

“A lot of Latino people don’t come because they’re afraid,” Ruben Acosta, a Mexican immigrant living in Los Angeles, told Yahoo News in March shortly after he and his wife took a leap of faith and applied for health insurance. “Obama promised that [applicants’ immigration status] information won’t be shared, but he also promised he’d pass immigration reform.”

Obamacare enrollment numbers among African Americans, a historically underserved population, have also waned, but for reasons largely beyond their control. More than 2.5 million people of color live in states that have yet to expand Medicaid coverage. The coverage gap, as a result, has locked them out of health care coverage. Additionally, many African Americans don’t have enough income to qualify for subsidies given to purchase private insurance through federal exchanges.

Young African Americans, a demographic that accounts for 40 percent of America’s total black population, haven’t been quick to sign up for Obamacare. That may be part of a larger issue when it comes to healthy adults between the ages of 18 and 34, nicknamed “young invincibles”. Members of this group may have not accessed health care before the rollout of Obamacare, giving many of them little incentive to participate in the federal health program.

But health officials say that African Americans stand to benefit the most from Obamacare’s offerings — including preventative and specialized care — that could help them proactively tackle a host of ailments including diabetes, heart disease, and hypertension. Last December, Kathleen Sebelius, then health and human services secretary, raised this point in the midst of a Medicaid expansion fight in Georgia, a state with the second highest number of uninsured African Americans.

“The health care law is working to address long standing disparities in health care coverage and improve the health of the African-American community,” said Sebelius in a press statement. “Through the Health Insurance Marketplace, 6.8 million uninsured African Americans have new options for affordable health coverage that covers a range of benefits, including important preventive services with no out of pocket costs.”