Federal financing for a beneficial health insurance program for low-income children, known as the Children’s Health Insurance Program or CHIP, will run out next year unless Congress agrees to extend it. Bills are pending in both the House and the Senate to extend financing for four years, to 2019. Congress should approve the extension in the lame-duck session after the midterm elections so that families and state officials will know what the future holds. The program needs to be maintained amid uncertainty as to whether other good coverage will be available for these children.

CHIP was introduced in 1997 to provide insurance for low-income children whose families earned too much to qualify for Medicaid and too little to afford private health insurance. It has since grown to cover some eight million children at an annual cost of $13 billion, with the federal government paying most of the bill. Because states determine eligibility, coverage varies greatly from state to state. But over all, CHIP has helped cut the uninsured rate for children in half, from 14 percent in 1997 to 7 percent last year.

The issue of whether to fully finance the program along present lines has arisen because the Affordable Care Act has provided new options that will allow lower-income families with children to obtain subsidized private insurance or, in some states, qualify for Medicaid. This does not mean that CHIP can be eliminated entirely; many children will have no other affordable option. Rather, the discussion is whether to reduce costs by narrowing eligibility and shrinking benefits, or to extend funding for two to four more years. That longer extension makes sense because it would give the administration and Congress a chance to see how children are faring over the next several years with different forms of coverage before deciding on any drastic changes in CHIP.

If CHIP is not extended, many of the children who are now covered might find a transition to the exchanges difficult. A quirk in the law affecting employer-sponsored coverage, known as the “family glitch,” can mean that a great many working families will face unaffordable premiums at work and yet be ineligible for subsidies on the exchanges. Other children might be eligible for subsidies, but many are likely to face higher deductibles and cost-sharing as well as fewer benefits. Responsible estimates suggest that if CHIP is defunded, two million to 2.7 million children could lose access to coverage.

The Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, a group of experts who advise Congress, has recommended extending CHIP for only two years, until 2017 — enough time, it believes, to evaluate how well children will fare with alternative coverage. But surely a four-year extension, if it can be financed without harming other health programs, would be preferable, as it would allow for even more careful analyses before coverage that millions of children rely on is tinkered with.