KALAMAZOO, MI -- As chief executive officer of Kalamazoo's Family Health Center, Denise Crawford was happily anticipating last fall's rollout of subsidized health-care plans offered through the Affordable Care Act.

Instead, that Oct. 1 launch was an "absolute disaster," Crawford said. "All the problems with the website that people talked about were true."

In fact, it wasn't until November the Family Health Center finally started to enroll clients in insurance plans under Obamacare.

But in the weeks and months since, Crawford said, the federal website and its underlying support system "have done a 360-degree turn. I'm amazed at how much it's improved. It's been a complete turnaround."

Since November, Crawford said, her agency has facilitated about 1,000 applications for insurance. About half of the applicants are now enrolled in a plan, and the remainder still mulling their options or waiting for the start of Healthy Michigan, the state's Medicaid expansion plan.

Many are surprised at the affordability of the plans, she said. "Some people are even buying dental coverage," she said.

The Family Health Center is not alone. Enroll Kalamazoo County, a coalition of health and social service agencies that includes Bronson Methodist Hospital and Borgess Medical Center, is spearheading a coordinated effect to get uninsured residents enrolled in health-care plans.

That drive includes informational meetings, webinars and one-on-one assistance to help people consider their options and fill out the paperwork. This month, the group is sponsoring in-person assistance from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Feb. 12 at the Oshtemo Community Center and 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Feb. 19 at the Portage District Library.



RELATED STORY: Enroll Kalamazoo County holds offers help on insurance enrollment.

The enrollment efforts are "going really well," said Amy Terry, Bronson's community health coordinator and spokeswoman for Enroll Kalamazoo County.

"We've had a lot of people coming in," she said. "We've a lot of good success stories, where we're enrolling people who haven't had health care for decades."

Kalamazoo County's uninsured

The group has a sizable population to tap: The Census Bureau estimates that 22,500 Kalamazoo County residents lacked insurance in 2012, about 9 percent of the county's population.





Because Medicare covers those age 65 and older and Michigan offers MIChild for children under 18, almost all the uninsured are between the ages of 18 and 64, the Census data shows.



The majority of the uninsured -- about 57 percent -- are employed, according to Census estimates.



The remainder include people who are unemployed and looking for work; disabled people who do not currently qualify for Medicaid, and students not covered by their parents.



An estimated 12,500 of the county's insured qualify for Healthy Michigan, the Medicaid expansion plan expected to start in April.

Healthy Michigan will provide coverage to individuals and families with an income up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, which is roughly $16,000 for an individual and $34,000 for a family of four.



The other 10,000 county residents who are uninsured are required to purchase private health-care insurance by April 1 or face a fine.



The Affordable Care Act offers subsidies for households with an income of up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level, which is about $46,000 for single individuals and $94,000 for a family of four.

Since the enrollment process for the Medicaid expansion has not yet started in Michigan, Terry said that Enroll Kalamazoo County is targeting low- and moderate income workers who are required to buy private insurance.

That includes retail workers, beauticians and others who work for small businesses that don't offer insurance, Terry said.

"We're trying to help them find something affordable," Terry said. "It's been real interesting, because there is so much negative press (about the law) and people aren't hearing about the great things that are happening."

Many people she's helped are happy with the plans available to them, said Megan Zapinski, senior field organizer for Planned Parenthood of Southwest Michigan, which is one of the partners in Enroll Kalamazoo County.



"They usually shocked at how little it costs" once the subsidy is factor in, Zapinski said. "They're surprised by the options they have.



"My intern got a full-on hug from one woman. I wasn't expecting that kind of reaction."

Moving forward



Terry and Zapinski said the enrollment drive has pulled different factions of the community together.

"From my perspective, one of the interesting things about Enroll Kalamazoo County is that it involves a lot of nontraditional partners," Terry said.

It's not often, she said, that Planned Parenthood and the Family Health Center are sitting at the same table as Senior Services, Borgess and Bronson.

Zapinski said she's also impressed by the range of people volunteering to help others to sign up, and by the people turning to Planned Parenthood for help in filling out their insurance forms.

"We're getting a lot of people you wouldn't expect coming through our doors," she said. "People who are middle-aged or older, from a whole range of different areas."

Crawford said having trained volunteers is important because the enrollment process can be complicated.

"I compare it to doing your taxes," Crawford said. "It's unrealistic to expect most people to do it on their own."

Crawford said that implementing health-care reform is a process that will take years. But the ultimate goal is a better quality of life for Kalamazoo County residents.

Up to now, Crawford said, most of the uninsured didn't seek medical care until they were seriously sick and, even then, had limited access to specialists and other treatment for chronic health-care problems.

Getting people insured will result in much better preventive care, as well as better monitoring of chronic conditions such as asthma and diabetes, she said.



"The goal," Crawford said, "is to move the population to become a much healthier population."

Julie Mack covers K-12 education and writes a column for Kalamazoo Gazette. Email her at jmack1@mlive.com, call her at 269-350-0277 or follow her on Twitter at kzjuliemack.