A black recreational vehicle has been rolling through Maryland's broken-winged pterodactyl district — otherwise known as District 3 — that some say is the nation's most gerrymandered.

While a bus plastered with a candidate's name was Republican Gov. Larry Hogan's trademark during his campaign, a new candidate has taken up the moving billboard mantle.

He's a lawyer. He's a doctor. He served overseas in Iraq.

Annapolis resident Mark Plaster is running for Congress in the district, seeking to replace Democratic incumbent and likely favorite Rep. John Sarbanes. The GOP primary is scheduled for April 26.The GOP primary is scheduled for April 26.

And he hopes his experience as an emergency room doctor, a lawyer and the executive editor of Emergency Physician Monthly will give him the experience to support his Republican candidacy.

"Everything changed in November," Plaster said.

That change was the election of Hogan, who defeated former Lt. Gov. Anthony Brown in heavily Democratic Maryland. The decision was a mandate against the status quo and it symbolized that Republicans were building their voice in the blue state, Plaster said.

Maryland Republican Party officials said they think there is more interest in conservative campaigns in Maryland, where Democrats have a 2-to-1 voter advantage.

"We will definitely see a strong number of Republican candidates in this election," said Diana Waterman, Maryland Republican chairwoman. "The election of Governor Hogan brought hope to a lot of Maryland Republicans. I don't know if the RV will be a theme though."

Mark Plaster Campaign Bus By Chase Cook / Staff Harwood resident Dr. Mark Plaster sits in his RV Thursday while talking about his District 3 Congressional campaign. Plaster said he thinks people are tired of career politicians and he plans to bring his legal and medical expertise with him to Washington. Harwood resident Dr. Mark Plaster sits in his RV Thursday while talking about his District 3 Congressional campaign. Plaster said he thinks people are tired of career politicians and he plans to bring his legal and medical expertise with him to Washington. (By Chase Cook / Staff)

Plaster's campaign strategy is similar to Hogan's: Focus on the economy.

Another thing that Plaster borrowed from the Hogan camp is the RV. The governor drove around in a black bus, bringing it with him to campaign stops and parking it at events.

Plaster said he thought it was necessary when driving around District 3, a fragmented area stretching across the eastern portion of the state. The Annapolis resident said the RV was a personal purchase for business. It has been wrapped for the campaign.

He wouldn't disclose how much he paid for it. The inside has a leather interior with a small kitchen and a back office with extending walls.

"It was either (the RV) or making five campaign offices across the district," he said.

While some of Plaster's strategies are similar to Hogan's, he isn't running for a seat that would have as direct an impact as the governor.

Last week the governor announced the closure of the Baltimore City Detention Center, a long contentious state-operated facility with a history of corruption.

A freshman representative, on the other hand, probably wouldn't be able to do much in the first year or so —maybe even the in first term.

Plaster is aware of this, admitting that he doesn't have any legislation drafted or even plans for legislation if elected. He touted Republican staples of small business support, jobs and fixing health care.

His style is similar to that of the other elected candidates who don't want to be career politicians.

Set a philosophy and follow that.

"The issues I'm most passionate about are federal issues," Plaster said. "It's about having a voice in Congress."

He also plans to focus on medical legislation, using his experience as an emergency room doctor and publisher of a medical journal. Plaster said doctors and business owners have been crunched under the Affordable Care Act and rising health care costs.

One such business owner is Jim Blankenship, Linthicum resident and owner of Blankenship Electric. Blankenship volunteers to drive the RV for Plaster, moving it around the district as the campaign ramps up.

He said Plaster has his support because he is "sick" of career politicians, and he believes the Republican would benefit his small business and others around the state.

"We don't need anymore career politicians," Blankenship said.

Where do you park it?

Plaster's RV is large. So finding a place to park the beast can be a challenge. So far Plaster said he has moved the vehicle around the state, trying to get permission when leaving the RV overnight.

However, he recently ran into a problem when the RV was parked on Lindale Middle School property in Linthicum. Campaigning is not allowed on school property except on sanctioned days.

Since other cars used the property during off hours, Blankenship and Plaster thought it was OK to park the RV there. Once they learned of the complaint, Plaster said they moved the vehicle.