It was 390 days ago when Rob Gronkowski sealed what many believe was the beginning of the Broncos’ end to their 2014 season. On a first-and-10 off a slant route in the fourth quarter, in the Patriots’ final stages of their 43-21 blowout of the Broncos — in Foxborough, of course — Gronkowski stretched his 6-foot-6, 265-pound frame to evade the coverage of safety T.J. Ward and grab a bullet pass from Tom Brady with one hand, landing one yard shy of Denver’s end zone. Another pass from Brady put him over the goal line for the final dagger.

The Patriots didn’t need that highlight catch. The Broncos didn’t need to see the oversized tight end tally another victory against Denver. And they certainly didn’t need a reminder of their 2013 Super Bowl debacle against the Seahawks. But Gronkowski and the Patriots provided it all Nov. 2, 2014, in meeting that Ward said after was “our worst game.”

The Broncos — now with the league’s leading defense in yards allowed (284.3) and second-leading in points allowed (18.3)— hope to not see it again Sunday, when Gronkowski and the 10-0 Patriots roll into Denver. They have a plan, they say, but they don’t claim to have found any definite answer on how to stop the three-time Pro Bowl tight end.

“Uh … triple-team,” said cornerback Aqib Talib, who spent 2012-13 as Gronkowski’s teammate in New England before signing with Denver. “It’s his size and that speed. And that quarterback.”

Since 2010, when he entered the league, Gronkowski has recorded 523 receiving yards and 46 touchdowns in the red zone in the regular season, both league-highs in the NFL.

In the regular and postseason combined, Gronkowski is a perfect 5-0 record against the Broncos over his career, recording 428 receiving yards on 34 catches with five touchdowns in those meetings. No tight end has recorded more, all time, against Denver.

“Any coverage can work best on me,” the happy-go-lucky Gronkowski said. “… Obviously there are some better ones out there, but when you always get doubled a lot it’s definitely hard to get open.”

The Bills tried it last Monday, and found more success than others, holding him to only two catches and 37 yards as Brady completed only 28.6 percent his pass attempts to Gronkowski, well below his 62.1 percent on the season.

“(Buffalo doubled him) some,” Broncos defensive coordinator Wade Phillips said. “They didn’t all the time. He’s a great player and you have to be aware of him. Anytime they have a — they do the same thing defensively against teams they play. If you try to take away what they do best or take away their best player, that’s what you have to try to do. It means doubling him a lot, certainly, but it also means putting enough pressure on the quarterback where the guy doesn’t have time to throw to the guy even when he gets open sometimes. You can’t double-cover him every play, but there are certain things that we will. You have to.”

New England, already without receiver Julian Edelman (broken foot) and running back Dion Lewis (ACL), lost another, Aaron Dobson, to an ankle injury in the win against Buffalo, prompting the team to place him on the season-ending injured reserve Thursday. Brady still connected with seven different receivers for 271 net passing yards in the victory, but the Patriots’ growing injured list might force them to change their offensive game plan at Denver — and give the Broncos more incentive to place added pressure on Gronkowski.

“I think they’ve got the main pieces and that’s Gronk and Tom Brady,” Denver nose tackle Sylvester Williams said. “As long as they’ve got those guys, I think they’re going to always be in pretty good shape.”

The Broncos say they’re expecting the unexpected with the Patriots and Gronk, something Phillips and his players have learned first-hand in years of facing the Patriots and their star tight end.

“I don’t think anything works week to week,” Ward said. “Guys change it up and he adapts to different things that defenses do. We’ll have a plan.”

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or @NickiJhabvala

Rob Gronkowski vs. the Broncos

Rob Gronkowski, the Patriots’ 6-foot-6, 265-pound tight end, has faced the Broncos five times in the regular and postseason combined in his career. Here’s a look at how he’s fared:

Record: 5-0

Receptions: 34 of 42 (81%)

Rec. Yards: 428 (12.6 per catch)

TDs: 5

Avg. yards at catch: 6.6

Avg. yards after catch: 5.9

Red-zone catches: 7 of 8 (88%)

Red-zone TDs: 5