<p>FILE PHOTO In this September 2012 photo, Patrick Murphy poses for a photo at his campaign office in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla. (AP Photo/Lynne Sladky)</p>

By Isadora Rangel of TCPalm

U.S. Rep. Patrick Murphy won two elections in a swing district as a centrist who touted his votes across party lines in Congress.

That worked in District 18. Will it work in a Senate Democratic primary?

After becoming the first candidate to announce he’s running for Republican Sen. Marco Rubio’s seat on Monday, some of those votes — from his support for the controversial Keystone XL pipeline to changes to the Affordable Care Act — could be ammunition for a potential primary opponent trying to convince voters Murphy, a one-time Republican, isn’t a true Democrat.

Murphy might find himself courting liberals during the primary and switching to moderates if he makes it to the general election, experts say.

It’s unclear whether Murphy will have a primary challenger after former Gov. Charlie Crist and Rep. Debbie Wasserman-Schultz, the Democratic National Committee chairwoman, announced they aren’t seeking the seat in 2016. Rubio is expected to announce soon he will run for president.

Murphy is seen as one of a few Democrats with potential to win statewide as his party gears up to regain the Senate majority lost in last year’s midterm.

Orlando Rep. Alan Grayson, a liberal firebrand known for making inflammatory comments, said Murphy’s announcement didn’t discourage him from running but he said he’s in no rush to make an announcement.

He said he would motivate Democrats to take to the polls with a populist approach — calling for Social Security and Medicare expansion — similar to how President Barack Obama ran his campaigns. Grayson is famous for saying “Republicans want you to die quickly” during a 2009 House floor speech on health care.

“My campaign would generate the same kind of enthusiasm (as Obama) among voters,” Grayson, who didn’t want to comment on Murphy, said. “We create a campaign that gets people’s attention; a campaign with actual issues rather than personalities.”

Wasserman-Schultz said during a CBS Miami interview this month she expects a competitive Democratic primary, and mentioned several mayors who could also jump in, such as Bob Buckhorn in Tampa, Buddy Dyer in Orlando and Alvin Brown in Jacksonville.

DIFFERENCES

Murphy and Grayson sit on opposite spectrums of the Democratic Party.

Murphy, the son of a construction company owner, was a Republican until 2011 and switched parties soon before filing to run for Congress because of the Tea Party’s rise, and donated to Republican Mitt Romney’s presidential campaign in 2008.

He represents a slightly Republican-leaning district covering Martin, St. Lucie and northern Palm Beach counties. Grayson’s Central Florida district has more registered Democrats and independents.

Murphy voted against his party leadership on 62 percent of the final passage of bills this year, according to records from Open Congress, a nonpartisan website that tracks Congress members.

Grayson, a lawyer, only strayed from the party on 7 percent of votes.

Murphy, for example, voted to approve the controversial Keystone XL pipeline, opposed by Grayson and most Democrats because they say it would contribute to global warming. Last year, Murphy approved changes to the Affordable Care Act, such as a measure Grayson opposed that increases the full-employment threshold from 30 to 40 hours so fewer employers are mandated to offer health coverage to full-time employees.

STRATEGY

Murphy touted his independence during his re-election campaign last year and said he won’t change his strategy to appeal to different voters. Despite voting with Republicans, he has many progressive views: he supports gay marriage and laws requiring equal pay for women and is pro abortion rights, chief of staff Eric Johnson said.

“At the end of the day what voters really want is someone who can be effective and get things done,” Murphy said during an interview last week.

But as much as voters say they are tired of partisan politics, when they go to the polls they tend to stick to candidates who fit a party’s ideology, said Tallahassee-based GOP strategist Rick Wilson, adding House Democrats probably gave Murphy leeway to vote against the party because he’s in a swing district.

“He’s going to have to explain how ... he will have an effective leadership for Florida if he doesn’t have an ideological sense,” Wilson said.

Murphy has proven he appeals to voters across all parties but his real challenge will be in the general election, said Democratic strategist Steve Schale, who ran President Barack Obama’s 2008 Florida campaign.

“There’s a tone Grayson carries and I don’t think it appeals to voters,” Schale said.

If Rubio doesn’t seek re-election to run for the White House, Murphy could face Republicans such as CFO Jeff Atwater, a former state Senate president who Schale said appeals to Democrats as well. Other potential GOP contenders are Attorney General Pam Bondi, former state House Speaker Will Weatherford and Lt. Gov. Carlos Lopez-Cantera.

Political analyst Brian Crowley, a WPTV commentator and author of the Crowley Political Report website, said he expects Murphy’s opponents to focus more on his young age — he will be 32 on Monday — and inexperience than his ideology. Still, that might not work as more young voters normally vote during presidential election years, Crowley said.