BOULDER — Statistically, kickoff returns were a strength for Colorado a year ago.

The Buffaloes ranked fourth among Pac-12 teams in that category with an average of 22.6 yards per return. CU special-teams coach Toby Neinas is far from satisfied, however.

“We have to improve, or I’m not getting it done,” Neinas said Tuesday. “We have to see improvement in all the return phases of our kicking game. We have to be better for us to be a better football team.”

A linebacker by trade, Ryan Severson — 5-foot-10, 200 pounds and fearless — handled the majority of CU’s kickoff returns last fall as a true freshman, fielding 36 of the team’s 48 returns. Look for Severson to get more help this season.

Severson said Phillip Lindsay (5-8, 175), a redshirt freshman running back, has been getting a lot of work with him on kickoff returns during practice. Exceptionally quick, Lindsay is a former Denver South standout.

Others used as kickoff returners during Saturday’s scrimmage included running backs Tony Jones (senior) and Christian Powell (junior), and receivers Devin Ross (sophomore), Donovan Lee (freshman) and Lee Walker (freshman).

Neinas said he’d like to narrow the list to about five kickoff returners going into the season.

“We’ve got a lot of great athletes that we can use,” Severson said.

In addition to linebacker, Severson also played running back for Valley Christian High School in San Jose, Calif., rushing for 1,951 yards in 2012 as a senior with a long gain of 95 yards.

Severson was initially recruited by CU coach Mike MacIntyre when MacIntyre coached at San Jose State.

“I loved returning kicks last year; it was great,” Severson said. “Coach Neinas tells us to just hit the gap and not stutter. Having played running back in high school, returning kicks is just like offense — you have to find the hole and go.”

Severson also continues to compete for a spot in the two-deep at linebacker.

“I’m getting more reps there, which I’m excited about,” he said.

As for punt returns, veteran receiver Nelson Spruce was credited with each of the team’s nine punt returns. Colorado ranked 11th among Pac-12 teams in punt returns with a modest average of 5.0 yards per return, often calling for a fair catch or allowing the punt to be downed.

Neinas has a comfort level with Spruce but acknowledged becoming “really uplifted” by breakaway returns during the Saturday scrimmage by senior cornerback Greg Henderson and speedy freshman receiver Shay Fields.

“We’re still not where we’d like to be in that phase,” Neinas said of the punt-return unit. “But we’re getting better.”

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler