A plan unveiled Thursday by Mayor Jean Stothert to pay for mandated sewer separation in Omaha will cost Metropolitan Utilities District customers an extra $5 a month in 2015.

Download KETV's smartphone app Get breaking news wherever you are using our new app for smartphones and tablets. More

And that's just the start.

The four-year proposal still awaiting City Council approval would increase residential fees 45 percent by the year 2018.

-- Video: Mayor seeks increase in sewer separation fees

Residential MUD customers now pay $35 a month for "water infrastructure replacement" and sewer fees. It's a down payment on the $2 billion cost of the Clean Solutions for Omaha (CSO) program, now in its third year.

Under the fee schedule announced Thursday, the monthly fee would increase 13 percent in 2015, to $39.55.

In 2016, a 9 percent increase would up the monthly fee to $43.11.

In 2017, another 9 percent increase would boost the monthly cost to $46.99.

And in the last year of the proposal, another 9 percent increase would put the monthly fee at $51.22 in 2018.

Omaha is in the process of a massive project to separate storm sewer lines from raw sewage lines throughout the city. The changes have been mandated by the federal Clean Water Act.

"I have spent the last year studying and re-evaluating the CSO project, looking for ways to manage costs and protect the taxpayers from hardship," said Mayor Jean Stothert.

"The proposed increases in this ordinance are lower than we anticipated but still represent significant and necessary increases to comply with the federal requirements," said Stothert.

The CSO project is expected to last until the year 2027, and annual increases of 9 percent are expected beyond the four-year schedule going to the Omaha City Council. A public hearing on the plan will take place July 15.

Stothert noted a hardship fund is in place for residential customers who can not afford the increases.

Commercial and industrial sewer customers also face increased fees, under a formula already negotiated by the city.

Click here to learn about the Nebraska Low-Income Energy Assistance Program.