NEWARK, N.J. — Wayne Gretzky once said, “You miss 100 percent of the shots you don’t take.” Patrick Roy, who knows a thing or two about the game too, has been harping on his Avalanche players to heed the Great One’s old saying. Saturday night at the Prudential Center, Erik Johnson was rewarded with a goal on a shot that would have seemed to have little chance of going in.

While the Avs of the early season might have looked for a better scoring chance, Johnson just figured “What the heck?” and put a wrist shot at the pads of Devils goalie Cory Schneider that somehow sneaked through to tie the score. The Avs went on to win 3-2 over the Devils. Matt Duchene’s second-chance rebound putback goal with 2:53 to play broke the tie, and the Avs killed off a late Devils power play to get one of their most satisfying wins of the season.

A four-game road trip that started badly finished 2-2, and the Avs are now 6-8-5.

“I like to think the game is fair. If you play like the way we did, you’re going to get a bounce, and that was one where you just shoot on net and hope for the best,” said Johnson, who played a game-high 30 minutes, 25 seconds and had a plus-2 rating. “It trickled through. We’ve been a little bit too fancy lately, a little too perimeter on the first part of the road trip. But we’ve been emphasizing just shooting more pucks lately and see what happens.”

Things looked bad for the Avalanche after Eric Gelinas’ seeing-eye shot from the half boards by the Colorado bench found its way past a screened Semyon Varla- mov, giving New Jersey a 2-1 lead at 8:21 of the third. But the Avs kept their composure, with Varlamov keeping it a one-goal game with two nice saves, then got the fortunate goal from Johnson.

Then came the game-winner.

PHOTOS: Avalanche defeat Devils, 3-2

It all started after the Devils made a bad line change, partly because of soft play on the puck by longtime NHL star Jaromir Jagr as he skated to the bench. That opened up a break-in featuring Duchene, Alex Tanguay and Ryan O’Reilly. It was finished off when Duchene got the rebound of his own shot back to him and beat Schneider from the short side.

“We really wanted that game very badly,” Duchene said. “We’ve got four days off now, where we’re not practicing for the next two days, so this was something we really wanted to get before going back home. (Tanguay) almost scored right before there, and (O’Reilly) was doing what he was supposed to be doing, tying up a man behind the net. I was just fortunate to get that second chance on the shot.”

Varlamov was excellent in net for the Avs, making 23 saves.

“I thought we had a really good road trip, playing .500 hockey,” he said. “I mean, obviously we would like to be a little better than this, but if you’re looking at the teams we were playing, we’re very happy with those last two wins.”

Said Tanguay: “We’re desperate. We know we’re still in a hole, and we have to get back in the pile with the rest of the teams in the playoff hunt as soon as possible.”