Related Content {{ article.title | removeHtmlTags }} {{ article.publishDate | date: 'MMMM d, yyyy' }}

Jonathan Bush, 46, has never been one to closely follow tradition. He took two years off from his studies at Wesleyan University to work on the 1988 presidential campaign of his uncle, George H. W. Bush, and to train as a combat medic. While in college, he spent two summer vacations working as an emergency medical technician and ambulance driver in New Orleans, where he first got a sense that the U.S. health care system was bloated with inefficiencies.

After getting a bachelor’s degree from Wesleyan’s College of Social Studies, Bush went to Harvard Business School. With his MBA in hand, he signed on as an associate at J. Bush & Co., a firm founded by his father, Jonathan, that provided banking services to foreign embassies, and later did a stint as a managed-care consultant at Booz Allen Hamilton. Driven by a desire to “do well by doing good,” in 1997 he and Todd Park, a colleague from Booz Allen who would later serve as White House chief technology officer under President Barack Obama, opened a birthing center in San Diego. They planned to develop a network of maternity clinics around the country, but their company, Athena Women’s Health, struggled financially because of unreliable and inefficient payments from insurers. There was no organized system for managing the practice’s billings, so with the help of Park’s brother, a software developer, the company created one.

The first product, an electronic medical billing service called athenaCollector. debuted in 2000 and was quickly followed by multiple other services to help health care providers with everything from data management to secure communication with patients.

Bush views athenahealth as a disrupter. He says the company’s mission is to “create the health care Internet.” Products include athenaNet, an online community and application network for doctors; a patient engagement portal called athenaCommunicator; a clinical decision support point-of-care app called Epocrates, which the company acquired in 2013; and athenaOne, a suite of cloud-based services that combines electronic health records, practice management and care coordination, which the company began offering in 2010.

Bush moved the company to Watertown, Massachusetts, and in 2007 took it public at $18 a share. The stock tracked steadily upward, reaching a peak of $204 per share in March 2014, prompting activist hedge fund investor David Einhorn of Greenlight Capital to target it as a prime example of what he considers a health care technology market bubble. The stock has since retreated, to $159 as of October 23 (a level that values Bush’s stake at $151 million), but it still boasted a market cap of 7.3 times sales, compared to an industry average among health care information technology companies of 4.7, according to Morningstar. The stock jumped more than 27 percent on the 23rd after the company reported that revenues rose almost 24 percent year over year for the third quarter, beating estimates. Earnings expectations for this year had been conservative, but Garen Sarafian of Citi Investment Research chalks that up to athenahealth’s decision to tackle more projects in recent months. “The bears may say additional investments are an excuse, but the products athenahealth is selling now score very well,” Sarafian says. The company should be valued as a software as a service, or SaaS, provider rather than a business process outsourcer, he adds. According to Sarafian, athenahealth’s projected 2016 multiple comes in well below that of SaaS peers such as Salesforce and Tableau Software.