Transcript for How Your Insurance Could Pay to Help You Lose Weight

Also burning up the "Heat index," a story we first saw in "The New York times." How you can lose weight without breaking the bank. It turns out the new health care law actually requires insurance companies to cover some weight loss programs. ABC's Mara schiavocampo has the story for us. Let's go. Reporter: Losing weight. A universal struggle like some contestants on "Extreme makeover." You better run. Reporter: And losing that weight often requires pricey diet programs. But now some weight loss regimens are covered under the affordable care act which requires insurers to pay for nutrition and obesity screening. That's right. They pay you to lose weight. I went to every weight loss program under the sun and it just wasn't working for me. Reporter: Nanette who says she's struggled with weight most of her life was shocked when her doctor's program of high protein foods counseling and exercise was reimbursed by her insurance company. Had a $20 deductible and that was nothing compared to what I would have had to pay if I didn't have insurance. Patients are paying, you know, 40% to 80% less. Reporter: Today 23 states cover bariatric or gastric bypass surgery and 16 states now include some coverage for dietary and nutritional screening. Counseling and weight loss programs. And you don't have to be so swearly overweight. You'll be covered with a body mass index over 30 or bmi of 27 with obesity related diseases. Often their hypertension improves. Back pain. Reporter: Coverage is permitted for doctors and nurses and dietitians but not necessarily jenny Craig or weight watchers and supplements, pills and shakes are not covered. Although some prescriptions are. There are concerns that it is also creating a financial opportunity for some unproven weight loss methods. There will be people that will offer quick fixes that say, look, I can help you lose weight in six months, three months, 30 days, it's just not sustainable. Reporter: But for Nanette who has lost over 30 pounds and dropped her bmi to 27, it has been life changing. For "Good morning America," Mara schiavocampo, ABC news, new York.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.