A routine traffic stop took a strange turn on Wednesday after police say an Oklahoma City woman attempted to hide multiple drugs and drug paraphernalia inside of her vagina.

It happened on Wednesday near Interstate 35 and SE Grand Blvd.

According to a report by the Oklahoma Highway Patrol (OHP), a trooper on scene observed a white Cadillac traveling south on the northbound service road. The trooper pulled the vehicle over for the violation and asked the driver to take a seat in the front passenger seat of his cruiser.

The trooper then made contact with the passenger in the Cadillac, later identified as 23-year-old Nikita Hiner. The trooper then asked for permission to search the vehicle and the driver complied. Hiner exited the vehicle for the search, but asked the trooper if she could take her purse.

After searching the car, the trooper then asked Hiner if he could search inside of her purse. Hiner said she "didn't have anything in there", but opened the front pocket and showed in to the trooper.

In the report the trooper stated that he could clearly see a clear, plastic baggy containing a crystalline substance that he took to be methamphetamine. He then placed Hiner under arrest for possession of a controlled dangerous substance.

Hiner told the trooper that she found the baggy at a local gas station and took it so that no one else would pick it up. The trooper told Hiner that if she had any other illegal substance on her that she should admit it before they arrived at the jail. Hiner told the trooper that she didn't have anything, but "needed to urinate very badly."

The trooper stated in the report that he warned Hiner repeatedly about bringing contraband into the jail and each time she denied being in possession of anything else. However, once at the jail a nurse found several items stuffed inside of Hiner's vagina, including a morphine pill, a oxycodone pill, a zolpidem pill, a baggy of marijuana, and a syringe.

Hiner was later transferred to Southwest Medical Center where staff there also found a marijuana pipe inside of her. Details of a bond have not been released at this time.

The driver of the Cadillac was given a warning and released from the scene. He is not expected to face any charges from this incident.