Topics: Carly Fiorina, carolyn ryan, Jill Abramson, Maria Shriver, meet the press, New York Times, Video, Media News, Life News

On Saturday, New York Times owner Arthur Sulzberger Jr. attempted to dismiss allegations of sexism in the Times’s newsroom by issuing a memo to his staff in which he outlined the reasons for Abramson’s ouster: her abrasive personality.

He wrote:

I decided that Jill could no longer remain as executive editor for reasons having nothing to do with pay or gender. As publisher, my paramount duty is to ensure the continued quality and success of The New York Times. Jill is an outstanding journalist and editor, but with great regret, I concluded that her management of the newsroom was simply not working out. During her tenure, I heard repeatedly from her newsroom colleagues, women and men, about a series of issues, including arbitrary decision-making, a failure to consult and bring colleagues with her, inadequate communication and the public mistreatment of colleagues. I discussed these issues with Jill herself several times and warned her that, unless they were addressed, she risked losing the trust of both masthead and newsroom. She acknowledged that there were issues and agreed to try to overcome them. We all wanted her to succeed. It became clear, however, that the gap was too big to bridge and ultimately I concluded that she had lost the support of her masthead colleagues and could not win it back.

But, as the New Yorker’s Ken Auletta explained earlier this week, “abrasiveness has never been a firing offense at the Times,” and therefore “there is a reason that gender has been widely discussed in relation to Abramson’s firing and how she was judged, even if it was not the decisive factor.”

The discussion of sexism continued on Sunday’s “Meet the Press,” where New York Times Washington Bureau Chief and Political Editor Carolyn Ryan, former CEO of Hewlett-Packard Carly Fiorina and NBC News correspondent Maria Shriver joined host David Gregory for a panel discussion.

Ryan acknowledged that sexism is a cultural issue, but said that the Times is not a part of that narrative. The New York Times is “being caricatured as a bastion of sexism,” she said, “which isn’t true, and hasn’t been my experience there.”