By Bill Poovey

bpoovey@scbiznews.com

Published Jan. 2, 2015

Administrators at AnMed Health in Anderson have not ruled out joining the Greenville Health System’s new health care partnership that extends into nine counties, but they’re not in any hurry. GHS in its latest growth move has organized more than 1,800 health care providers in a physician-led network focused on “improving and standardizing care” and containing escalating costs.

Dr. Angelo Sinopoli, GHS chief medical officer and president of the new MyHealth First Network, said hospitals are among providers that have been consulted about the network and are welcome to join.

“We think the concept of My Health First Network has merit, but we have decided not to participate until we learn a little more about the structure of the network and the role each hospital system would need to play in making the effort successful,” Bill Manson, AnMed’s president and COO, said in an email statement.

Sinopoli

Sinopoli said the network includes providers in Greenville, Spartanburg, Anderson, Greenwood, Laurens, Oconee, Pickens, Abbeville and Newberry counties. He said they will be linked electronically to enhance care in a setup that should begin operating next year.

GHS earlier this year took over the Oconee Medical Center and its affiliated operations, one year after taking over the Laurens County Health Care System. The GHS board had voted to spend $40 million developing ambulatory care centers in Anderson and Spartanburg counties. The network announcement follows a statement made by GHS President and CEO Mike Riordan that, to succeed, health systems need to be developing “multicommunity integrated delivery systems that focus on keeping people healthier over their entire lives. The old episodic way of treating patients simply isn’t working anymore and too often results in fragmented or insufficient care.”

‘Our Market’

Following GHS board approval of the ambulatory care expansion, AnMed officials suggested that state oversight of major health care projects through the certificate of need process would help safeguard against “an entity from arriving from outside of a community with the intent of cherry-picking only certain patients.”

GHS Vice President of Strategic Services Malcolm Isley said cherry-picking paying patients was not the intent, but he described the Upstate as being “our market.”

Spartanburg Regional Healthcare System officials declined to comment.

AnMed’s Hanson, whose promotion to CEO became effective Thursday, said the Anderson-based system “will continue to communicate with GHS and others in the region that are a part of the network, and we will continue to consider our participation. Ultimately, we want to be certain we make the best decision on behalf of those we care for in this community.”

Part of something bigger

Sinopoli said there are about 250 such networks in the U.S. and GHS’ partnership is the first in the state. He said the network doesn’t require state licensing or a certificate of need and could expand, possibly into other states. He said the S.C. Medical Association has given its blessing.

Sinopoli said providers are learning that “to survive in the future you are going to have to be part of something bigger.”

The network is led by a 12-member board of managers and numerous committees “whose focus is on improving and standardizing care,” a GHS statement said.

Sinopoli said health care is changing from a fee-for-service model to one that focuses on health outcomes per dollars spent. He said the new network is not related to the Affordable Care Act.

“It’s no secret that the U.S. health care system is unsustainable, but what is most important is how we fix it and that we work together across county and state lines to ensure the people in our communities have access to the best care possible,” Sinopoli said in a statement.

The statement said network providers will coordinate care to identify and use evidence-based best practices to treat patients with chronic conditions.”

The statement added, “It also involves providers partnering with their patients in the delivery of this care ... Network providers will work with their patients to develop treatment plans that are customized to the individual and address barriers and gaps in care, as well as cultural differences and psychosocial issues that prevent compliance.”

Sinopoli said studies have shown that 5% of the U.S. population accounts for about half of total health care spending, and 20% accounts for 80% of total spending. He said the network’s increased coordination of care activities and new outreach will help control wasteful spending, such as emergency room care for nonemergency conditions. Sinopoli said 911 medical calls require emergency services responses and some calls will instead be referred to a nurse call center.

A Greenville nonprofit, Care Coordination Institute, will organize a system that allows providers to monitor patients’ health outcomes and “receive information, education and training to improve those outcomes,” the GHS statement said. The network’s information technology infrastructure will allow for greater communication among providers, the statement said.