On a historic day in Texoma, the area witnessed not only the visit of the nation’s 44th president, but also the unveiling of a new initiative to bring Internet to low-income families in the Choctaw Nation. Now, nearly six months later, progress on the project has been made.

The ConnectHome initiative is designed to bring high-speed and low-cost Internet to 27 cities and the Choctaw Nation. During his visit to Durant in July, President Barack Obama referred to Internet service as not a luxury, but a necessity. In an interview last week, the Choctaw Nation’s ConnectHome Director Scott Grosfield agreed, saying it’s a necessity many individuals in the tribe simply can’t get.

“They are basically remote, so they don’t have the same opportunities to connect them, to bridge that digital divide, as someone would in a larger city,” Grosfield said. “A lot of the schools are going paperless. Kids can’t do their homework, they can’t research. Eighty percent of our tenants have smartphones but less than 20 percent have devices, like tablets, iPads, laptops, and that’s a problem. We’ve just got to get caught up. We’re behind as far as the technology and connecting these people to the technology.”

That’s why he said when the opportunity to participate in ConnectHome presented itself, he was quick to have the Choctaw Nation apply for it.

“If you look at it from our perspective, we chose them,” Grosfield said. “The other tribes had an opportunity to apply for this and they didn’t for some strange reason. … I never dreamed it would turn out that the president would come down and make the announcement in Durant. It’s been crazy.”

For members of the Choctaw Nation, he said, a prevailing issue to overcome is what happens to elders who move closer to the nation’s health care center.

“That’s huge for our elders; they need to be able to Skype with their families,” he said. “A lot of the people live in our independent elder sites, a lot of them are 55 and older, a lot of them move to inside the service area where they can be closer to the Choctaw’s free health care so they’re kind of limited. They move away from their families because of health reasons, but staying connected with them, they’ll be able to Skype, shop from home, they won’t have to get out and drive, things like that.”

Grosfield said depending on the area of Choctaw Nation in which a resident lives, one of four services will take care of providing that low-cost Wi-Fi. These services include Cherokee Communications, Pine Telephone, Suddenlink Communications and Vyve Broadband, who will work together to ensure the nation’s public housing residents and elder communities have the ability to bridge this digital divide. In addition, Grosfield said other organizations and companies, such as Best Buy’s Geek Squad and GitHub code host will provide technology and training to these individuals to ensure this initiative is used to its fullest extent.

On that level, ConnectHome coordinator Fred Logan has served as the boots on the ground, seeing the impact of the program within the Choctaw tribe up close. His job involves traveling to the sites where the Internet will be available, while also planning to attend some digital literacy classes to ensure those run smoothly when they become available.

“We were handing out equipment tablets to our affordable rental units in Talihina, (Oklahoma, several weeks ago) … to get them to all of our children within the residency,” Logan said. “… That was just the first phase, … and that is our biggest rental property, we’ve got 60 units up there. As far as the kids go I think we handed out nearly 50 tablets.”

Both Grosfield and Logan said there was weeks of preplanning that went into the project, such as surveys to determine how many residents need to be served, as well as meetings to assemble a calendar of events and prices for the Internet itself.

Southeastern Oklahoma State University has been one of the organizations working closely with the Choctaw Nation on this project. On its end, the university is responsible for providing digital literacy classes and training for those receiving the low-cost Wi-Fi. Over the past few months, it has been busy locating what exact services it can provide.

“We’ve kind of identified all our internal resources, faculty that have expertise and digital literacy, different ways to deliver instruction … like hybrid instruction where we teach a class or two on the front end, and then work students through a series of modules maybe online,” Vice President of Academic Affairs at SOSU Doug McMillan said. “We’re not that far yet in determining how we want to offer it exactly, but we’re just looking at our plan, our resources and what we can bring to the table to assist in the project. And we’re kind of at the end of that part of it, and we’re going to be setting up meetings with the project leaders from the Choctaw Nation to see what of those resources that they would like for us to provide in assisting them with the project.”

Grosfield said this sort of training is mandatory for residents who can participate in the program, and that these classes will be offered to everyone from those with no Internet experience to advanced users.

“Whether they don’t even know how to turn the device on, just surfing the web, simple things like that,” he said. “And these tablets that were donated from GitHub already have software installed, so before we can even roll out the Wi-Fi to the tenants, they can already get started on basic learning skills at different levels.”

He said currently the plan is to roll out the Wi-Fi and digital literacy classes at the same time, which could be as soon as January, or February at the latest. Logan said the price tag for the Internet could run from $10 to $15 per month, depending on the area of service.

“It’s all about improving the lives of the Choctaw people,” Logan said. “This effort was started by the president, and he gave us this opportunity, so we took it and ran with it, with a lot of partners, with a lot of help.”