Topics: Bernie Sanders, Democratic Party, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, Hillary Clinton, President Obama, Republican Party, Elections News, News, Politics News

Donald Trump’s worldview is incoherent. To say he has a worldview at all is probably generous. He’s a grab bag of ethno-nationalist platitudes and half-articulated grievances, with a menagerie of grade school insults sprinkled in between. His blend of bombast and bigotry has catapulted him to the top of the GOP polls, however, and very likely to the nomination.

It will also cost the Republicans the White House in 2016.

Trump has splintered the party, exposed its tenuous fault lines. The culture wars and religious pandering have held the base together, but traditional conservatives – voters who are socially moderate but fiscally conservative – have been alienated by the emergent extremism. Joel Kotkin of the Orange County Register put it well: The GOP now “consists of interest groups that so broadly dislike each other that they share little common ground.”

Trump’s rise makes a lot more sense against this backdrop. He’s exploited the party’s internal divisions by appealing solely to voter frustration. “For years the GOP failed to give people a clear sense of our principles and plans.” Republican Sen. Ben Sasse recently told the Washington Post. “Donald Trump has filled that vacuum with lots of showmanship, hooey, and bluster, but he’s done more than just that. He’s waged an effective war on almost every plank of the Republican Party’s platform.”

Sasse is half-right: Trump has indeed filled a vacuum, but he’s done so, in part, because the Republican Party doesn’t have a consistent platform. The GOP drifted away from whatever principles it once had and is now a jumble of malcontents and culture warriors. Which is why Trump’s indignant bullshit routine resonates so deeply.

The problem, though, is that as much as Trump appeals to the angry conservative base, he’s a repellent to everyone else – including many conventional Republican voters. A New York Times/CBS News poll shows that 60 percent of Republicans are “embarrassed” by Trump and the GOP race more generally. 88 percent of Republicans say the party is divided. A paltry 51 percent of Republicans have a favorable opinion of their own front-runner.

That’s a recipe for defeat in November.

To make matters worse, President Obama has a 50 percent approval rating – the highest it’s been in two years. The economy has recovered; unemployment has dipped below 5 percent; Obamacare is working; and nearly 14 million jobs have been created in the last 69 months. History suggests these numbers will favor the Democratic Party in the general election.