--(BUSINESS WIRE)--JD Events:

What: Healthcare Facilities Symposium & Expo Presented by JD Events

(http://www.hcarefacilities.com/)

The Healthcare Facilities Symposium & Expo is the original event that examines the trends in healthcare and the trends in healthcare design as one single movement. Industry leaders from AEC Firms to healthcare providers come together for three days of education and collaboration. The Healthcare Facilities Symposium & Expo will take place October 6-8, 2015 in Chicago with pre-conference events on October 5, 2015.

Resonating through the event is the theme of At the Intersection of Design and Wellness. A comprehensive focus on wellness begins long before our first caregiver interaction. The impacts felt throughout the entire healthcare community are real and significant, as business models shift, treatment plans change and consumers become more sophisticated, involved and independent.

At the Intersection of Design and Wellness is echoed by keynote presenter Rick Evans, Chief Experience Officer at Massachusetts General Hospital. Evans will address how patient expectations about healthcare are rapidly evolving. With the emergence of models that focus on payment for outcomes and an ongoing shift to patients paying out of pocket for their care, we are all becoming healthcare “customers” in addition to being patients. “I am excited about sharing the perspective of someone working on the ground everyday on improving the patient experience with this group of professionals. How we design our facilities and services has such a significant impact on the experience of those we serve and I am very much looking forward to the dialogue!” says Evans.

The conference program will feature sessions presented by leading healthcare providers, AEC firms and researchers. Case-studies and instructional sessions will tackle issues challenging design teams today including integrating technology, influence of the Affordable Care Act, sustainability, renovation projects, and the task of doing more with less.

Returning for the third year is the Student Charette brokered through a partnership of Assa Abloy, The CARITAS Project, Chicago AIA and the CAIA Healthcare Knowledge Community. Promoting interaction and idea exchange between university students and attendees, this year’s design challenge will be Through the Looking Glass. And ask how would today’s students (next year’s healthcare design leaders!) re-envision a significant current healthcare project here in Chicago.

Details: The 2015 Healthcare Facilities Symposium & Expo includes:

Educational sessions featuring case-studies and instructional sessions presented by the upper echelon of thought leaders and industry authorities.

featuring case-studies and instructional sessions presented by the upper echelon of thought leaders and industry authorities. Exclusive networking opportunities on the show floor and off-site, including The Symposium Party with activities, music and the Annual Raffle which will benefit the Roger Pepper Adventure Camps.

on the show floor and off-site, including The Symposium Party with activities, music and the Annual Raffle which will benefit the Roger Pepper Adventure Camps. An Exhibit Hall with the latest products and solutions critical to designing cutting-edge facilities.

with the latest products and solutions critical to designing cutting-edge facilities. A Technology Pavilion: Stadiums For Physicians in the Exhibit Hall, attendees can experience live feeds from a simulation center and learn about technologies that are in development that will continue to advance the immersive experiences.

in the Exhibit Hall, attendees can experience live feeds from a simulation center and learn about technologies that are in development that will continue to advance the immersive experiences. Facility tours of the Presence Center for Advanced Care at Saint Joseph Hospital, Advocate Christ Medical Center Outpatient Pavilion and the Center for Advanced Care on the Advocate Illinois Masonic Medical Center

Where: Navy Pier

600 East Grand Avenue

Chicago, IL 60611

(312) 595-PIER

When: Healthcare Facilities Symposium & Expo

Conference: October 6-8, 2015

Pre-Conference: October 5, 2015

Exhibits: October 7, 2015, 10:00 AM – 3:00 PM

For: To request media credentials, please contact Jenabeth Ferguson, jenabeth@jdevents.com or (508) 759-0075

More Information / Show Updates:

Follow us on Twitter (@hcarefacilities), Facebook (Healthcare Facilities Symposium & Expo), and LinkedIn Group (Healthcare Facilities Symposium & Expo).

JD Events is dedicated to the creation of targeted and innovative industry-leading events that deliver results. The company brings together highly qualified buying audiences, education-rich content and high-level networking opportunities -- all geared toward increasing business transactions in the markets it serves.