Name: Jodey Arrington

Age and occupation: 43, President, Scott Laboratories - a health care innovation company

What makes you suited for this position?

Growing up in Plainview, I learned the importance of faith, family, hard work, and independence. Agriculture was more than just the backbone of our local economy; it was our family’s livelihood thanks to my dad’s career selling farm equipment. I was honored to serve alongside George W. Bush as Governor and President. As Senior Advisor to the President, I helped assemble his leadership team in agriculture and energy. While serving as Chief of Staff at the FDIC, I successfully applied my conservative values by cutting millions of dollars in federal spending, reducing regulations, and shrinking bureaucracy by almost 25%. Later, as Vice Chancellor at Texas Tech University, I led efforts to achieve record growth in enrollment, research, new technologies, and high-tech startup companies. Today, I am President of a healthcare innovation company that uses technology to provide remote access to health care for rural communities and lower overall costs of care.

What are the two most important issues facing this district?

Unquestionably, the most important issue facing our nation is strengthening national security, securing our borders, and keeping Americans safe. We need a new resolve in Congress to bring back Reagan’s “peace through strength.” National security starts with true border security where we enforce all of our immigration laws, use the military to help control who is coming into America, and empower our intelligence and armed services to protect Americans. The greatest long-term threat to our country is our national debt driven by years of reckless spending.

What will be your focuses in the next budget session?

I will focus on funding the federal government’s core mission and national priorities like strengthening our military and securing our borders. I will invest in critical infrastructure including transportation, agriculture, energy, and manufacturing. I will ensure our commitment to being the world’s laboratory of innovation by supporting basic and applied research.

I will look for significant cuts in spending to balance our budget and begin reducing our dangerously high national debt. Any agency or program that does not contribute to economic growth or strengthen our national security is “open season” for being radically reduced or eliminated.

How big a threat is ISIS to the U.S. how do you propose handling it?

ISIS is a radical Islamic ideology that is recruiting new followers every day, some of whom are here in our country. Their faith tells them that they must bring about Armageddon and destroy all those who do not subscribe to their beliefs. Their weapons are not just conventional as they are using cyber-guerilla warfare to recruit and inspire people to commit horrific acts of violence against civilians. We cannot appease or negotiate with them; we must kill and utterly destroy them. I would support measures to authorize the kind of attacks and destructive force necessary to eradicate ISIS and their followers.

Would you vote to repeal Obamacare? Why?

I would absolutely vote to repeal Obamacare and replace it with meaningful, pro-market reforms to expand coverage, lower costs, and get the federal government out of the way of a doctor and their patient. We need to: introduce more choice and competition by allowing health insurance to be purchased across state lines to lower costs; expand tax deductibility for premiums; allow greater use of health savings accounts; enact reforms to allow small businesses to band together in Small Business Health Care plans so they can negotiate for rates like large corporations and labor unions do, and provide maximum flexibility to states through Medicaid block grants so they can better meet the needs of their indigent population. Obamacare has been the single, most-destructive domestic policy hurting middle class families and harming our economy and job growth.

Are any subjects or interest of yours not being covered in the forums or in the media?

Veterans’ health care has not been given the attention it deserves. Under the Obama Administration the VA medical system has been disastrous and needs immediate reform. It is unacceptable for an American veteran to die because it took months to see a health care provider. I agree with conservative solutions to expand the health care options of veterans such as allowing them to go beyond the VA system and receive medical care from a doctor or hospital of their choice.

What can a representative of this district do to help struggling cotton farmers?

In the short term, we need to include cotton in the current Farm Bill’s oil seed program and provide some relief to our farmers. Longer term, we need to re-evaluate our trade deals where American producers are at a major disadvantage to our global competitors. Our trade deals must consider foreign market manipulation and the costs that come with US labor laws, tax policies, and regulations. When American farmers are allowed to compete head-to-head, they win every time! Finally, our next Congressman must be the “Educator in Chief” for our nation’s leaders and the next generation of Americans on the economic, cultural, and national security value of agriculture to our country. The next Chairman of the House Agriculture Committee needs to be from the “Great Cotton Patch”.

Please discuss the ways in which you separate yourself from your opponents.

We need someone who has roots in West Texas and a passion for our people, values, and way of life. It is important your representative has a reason to come home and engage those who sent him to Washington to do a job. I have demonstrated my commitment to West Texas in that - after my service with President Bush - I came home to raise my family and instill in my children those same core values of faith, family, hard work, and independence. I have a deep understanding of the key industries that drive our economy. I have a record of cutting spending, reducing regulations, shrinking bureaucracy and creating growth and opportunity for our hard-working families.

Yes/No

Vote to re-elect Paul Ryan as Speaker? Undecided

Voted for the 2016 omnibus spending bill? No

In favor of more farming subsidies? Yes

Vote to eliminate the U.S. Department of Education? Yes

In favor of a wall between the U.S. and Mexico? Parts