OXFORD, MS (localmemphis.com) -- University of Mississippi police are investigating two reported sexual assaults on campus.



They happened within a week of each other on the campus in Oxford.



University leaders said teaching students about sexual assault and safety is a constant priority.



Students were alerted of the reported sexual assaults in campus wide emails and those in charge of teaching about sexual assault here hope there is a silver lining now that the issue is front and center on students’ minds.



After two reported sexual assaults at Ole Miss just days apart, violence prevention coordinator Lindsey Bartlett Mosvick said the university's message is simple.



"We do encourage students to come forward and report if something like this does happen to them," violence prevention coordinator Lindsey Bartlett Mosvick said.



In the last two weekends, female students reported being sexual assaulted outside a dorm and inside a fraternity house.



It comes as new requirements from the U.S. Department Of Education make sexual assault teaching a top priority at Ole Miss and other college campuses nationwide.



"I'm at every orientation session, so every incoming student knows about resources. I go to a lot of first year student classes to again make sure they know what sexual assault is," Mosvick said.



Two reported sexual assaults within a week at Ole Miss is noteworthy considering that, according to University Police statistics, there were seven total reported sexual assaults in 2011, one in 2012, and five in 2013.



"Experts say that an increase number of reports is a good thing because students are aware of the resources and aware of all that's available on our campus," Mosvick said.



To date, University of Mississippi police have not announced any charges or made any arrests in either reported sexual assault case.



Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.