Republicans faced this problem most recently in the 2012 presidential contest. How Republicans lose by winning

It’s the predominant paradox of contemporary American politics: If Republicans prevail in this year’s midterm congressional elections, it will be because of their party’s sharp-edged stances on topics like abortion and Benghazi, Obamacare and immigration, gay marriage and the minimum wage — issues that energize the GOP’s core base of support.

But if Republicans lose the race for the White House in 2016, it will be because of their party’s polarizing, out-of-step stances on those very same issues, which alienate much of the broader electorate the GOP needs to win a national contest in a country whose demographics and political realities are shifting under its feet.

Story Continued Below

Establishment Republicans had a good night in Tuesday’s round of primaries, but they did so in part by adopting positions at odds with the long-term need to broaden the party’s support and move away from litmus-test issues. A wide range of Republicans see the party courting the same disaster it did in 2012, playing a base game that will keep it shut out of the White House.

( Also on POLITICO: Georgia Senate runoff: Nasty, brutish — and long)

“The Republican Party has essentially now two wings: a congressional wing and the national wing,” the veteran GOP pollster Bill McInturff said at a recent Pew Research Center forum on so-called millennial voters, those from 18 to 29 years of age. The congressional wing is thriving, especially in the South, in districts that are 75 percent, or even 80 percent, white, and where every incumbent’s worst fear is a challenge from the right.

But McInturff summed up the national party’s prospects with an old line from Mr. T in “Rocky III”: “Prediction? Pain!” He said the party’s “genetic instinct” is that younger voters don’t vote, and too many Republicans don’t understand the coming demographic wave. “Why am I a Republican?” he asked. “I believe in the power of markets. The marketplace is, you will lose — keep losing national elections — until you keep up.”

The Republicans have faced this problem before, most recently in the 2012 presidential contest. A prolonged GOP primary in which contenders sought to prove their conservative bona fides — and a subsequent airing of nominee Mitt Romney’s “47 percent” comments — left the party vulnerable to Democratic attacks. But the ideological divide within the Republican Party, and between its most conservative wing and the wider electorate, is sharper and starker than ever.

( Also on POLITICO: Payback: GOP incumbents learn how to win)

Republican House members seeking reelection may well benefit from their lockstep opposition to raising the minimum wage this year. But three past and future presidential contenders — Mitt Romney, Tim Pawlenty and Rick Santorum — recently called that a losing proposition in the longer term. “Republicans may benefit from near-term tail winds this fall,” as Pawlenty put it, “but the demographic reality is that diverse voters have a diminishing view of Republicans and that needs to be addressed.”

Sens. Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) and Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), under challenge from the tea party wing in safely Republican states, may help themselves this year with their support for a bill to ban abortions after 20 weeks. But the hangover from their party’s identification with such a position may well produce a backlash in battleground presidential states two years from now.

Republican House members seeking reelection may well benefit from railing against the Affordable Care Act, which nearly half of voters in a new POLITICO poll of the most competitive House districts and Senate states favor repealing outright. But overturning a law that has now enrolled millions of Americans, and given many of them health coverage they could not obtain before, will not be a winning proposition in 2016.

( Also on POLITICO: McConnell takes victory lap)

Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) may make hay with his coming House hearings on the attack on the American consulate in Benghazi, Libya. But even such prominent conservative voices as Charles Krauthammer have warned that Republicans risk playing with fire if they are seen as playing politics with a tragedy.

The Arizona Republican Party may satisfy its most vocal wing by censuring Sen. John McCain, as it did this winter, for an insufficiently conservative record on immigration. But congressional Republicans’ refusal to grapple with a comprehensive immigration overhaul that provides a path to legal residence for the millions of undocumented immigrants already here will not help the party in the most competitive districts around the country, where the recent POLITICO poll showed nearly two-thirds of Republicans back a comprehensive approach.

“The Republicans in Washington are just treading water,” Weekly Standard Editor William Kristol said Wednesday on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.” “They think, we’re getting a wave, we just have to sort of bob along, the wave is going to carry us along. I get nervous when I see that.” Kristol went on to criticize “the failure of the Republican leadership, especially in the House, to have an agenda, to push the issues, to go populist.”