CHARLESTON, S.C., April 8, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Benefitfocus, Inc. (NASDAQ: BNFT), a leading provider of cloud-based benefits software solutions, today announced that Southeastern Freight Lines (Southeastern) has selected Benefitfocus HR INTOUCH MARKETPLACE® to support benefit enrollment and employee communication as well as to facilitate compliance with the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Headquartered in Lexington, SC, Southeastern is one of the largest less-than-truckload (LTL) carriers in the nation with more than 7,400 employees, of which nearly half are drivers. Available from any web-enabled device, the cloud-based HR INTOUCH MARKETPLACE portal will allow Southeastern to begin offering their workforce convenient, 24/7 access to their benefits information this summer.

HR INTOUCH MARKETPLACE provides an intuitive user interface with decision support features and educational videos that guide employees through the enrollment workflow, facilitating Southeastern's transition from a paper-based passive enrollment process to an active open enrollment online. The BENEFITFOCUS® Plan Shopping App personalizes the benefits selection process by allowing employees to compare coverage details and estimate out-of-pocket costs so they can identify which plan best suits their healthcare and financial needs.

"We are updating our employee benefits program, and we believe Benefitfocus will help us implement any changes successfully," said Alvin Shaver, Director of Compensation & Benefits at Southeastern Freight Lines. "Not only is HR InTouch Marketplace a solution that can simplify the complexity associated with ACA compliance, it's the solution we need to enhance employee communication and benefits education during this time of transition. The user-friendly software that Benefitfocus provides is a great place for our company to start, and we are confident that it will be essential to supporting our growth."

Built on a rules-based engine, HR INTOUCH MARKETPLACE allows Southeastern to configure the enrollment workflow so employees are presented with all the plan options for which they are eligible. Acknowledgement forms and declination surveys can be incorporated within the enrollment workflow to confirm employee review of ACA-mandated communications such as the notification for public exchanges and the Summary of Benefits & Coverage. The portal provides Southeastern with the ability to report on this information in the event of an audit as well as the ability to drill down to review summaries of plan participation and employee enrollment status.

"Southeastern has achieved a reputation of delivering the highest quality of service in their industry as a result of their employees' commitment to service and their passion for excellence," stated Shawn Jenkins, Benefitfocus President & CEO. "At Benefitfocus, we are dedicated to achieving that high level of quality when it comes to designing technology that delivers an engaging and streamlined enrollment experience. We are excited to provide the software and service to make the transition to online enrollment seamless and simple for Southeastern and its employees."

Benefitfocus will introduce new developments to its cloud-based software solutions during its annual conference, One Place. 2014. The event will take place in Charleston, SC, from May 6-9. Visit www.benefitfocus.com/one-place-2014 to register or learn more about the topics that will be covered during the event.

About Southeastern Freight Lines

Southeastern Freight Lines, a privately-owned regional less-than-truckload transportation services provider founded in 1950, specializes in next-day service in the Southeast and Southwest and operates 81 service centers in 12 states and Puerto Rico. Southeastern has a network of service partners to ensure transportation services in the remaining 38 states, Canada, the U.S. Virgin Islands and Mexico. Southeastern Freight Lines provides more than 99.35% on-time service in next day lanes. A dedication to service quality and a continuous quality improvement process that began in 1985 has been recognized by more than 380 quality awards received from customers and associations. Southeastern Freight Lines subsidiary, Southeastern Logistics Solutions, provides expedited service and multi-modal transportation services across the nation through strategic capacity partnerships. For more information, please visit www.sefl.com and www.facebook.com/SoutheasternFreight.

About Benefitfocus

Benefitfocus, Inc. (NASDAQ: BNFT) is a leading provider of cloud-based benefits software solutions for consumers, employers, insurance carriers and brokers. Benefitfocus has served more than 20 million consumers on its platform, that consists of an integrated portfolio of products and services enabling clients to more efficiently shop, enroll, manage and exchange benefits information. With a user-friendly interface and consumer-centric design, the Benefitfocus Platform provides one place for consumers to access all their benefits. Benefitfocus solutions support the administration of all types of benefits including core medical, dental and other voluntary benefits plans as well as wellness programs. For more information, visit www.benefitfocus.com.

Except for historical information, all of the statements, expectations, and assumptions contained in this press release are forward-looking statements. Actual results might differ materially from those explicit or implicit in the forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially include: the lack of a long-term public market for Benefitfocus' stock and potential volatility; factors that could impact our anticipated growth including management of growth; the need to innovate and provide useful products and services; changes in government regulations; reliance on key personnel; competition, privacy, security and other risks associated with our business; and the other risk factors set forth from time to time in our SEC filings, copies of which are available free of charge within the Investor Relations section of the Benefitfocus website at http://investor.benefitfocus.com/sec.cfm or upon request from our investor relations department. Benefitfocus assumes no obligation and does not intend to update these forward-looking statements, except as required by law.

Benefitfocus, Inc.

843.284.1052 ext. 6846

pr@benefitfocus.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20110602/CL12553LOGO

SOURCE Benefitfocus, Inc.