Disapproval of the U.S. Supreme Court reached a new high in Gallup's latest poll, with half of Americans saying they don't approve of how the nation's highest court is handling its job.

Historically, the Supreme Court – which begins its next term on Monday – has remained largely insulated from the politics of Washington. Most polls from before July 2012 showed a strong majority of Americans approved of the court's actions.



Courtesy Gallup



Republicans have a more disapproving stance toward the court than Democrats, reflective of recent decisions that put the nine justices in the middle of political battles on the Affordable Care Act and same-sex marriage. In July 2015, the party divide was extreme, with 76 percent of Democrats approving of the court compared with only 18 percent of Republicans. Nearly 70 percent of conservative Republicans said the Supreme Court was liberal, as opposed to middle-of-the-road or conservative, in a July 2015 poll from the Pew Research Center.

Seven in 10 Americans also said Supreme Court justices are "often influenced by their own political views" when making their decisions, Pew said.



Courtesy Gallup

On both sides of the aisle, the high court has become a key topic in the run-up to the 2016 presidential election.

In the second Republican debate, CNN's Dana Bash asked Jeb Bush about his brother's nomination of Chief Justice John Roberts to the court, a decision many Republicans are starting to regret following Roberts' siding against conservatives in two major rulings on Obamacare. Also in the debate, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz attacked Roberts' appointment and said his own support for the justice's nomination was a mistake. Mike Huckabee, meanwhile, said he wouldn't support a justice unless he or she believed a fetus was a human being instead of a "lump of tissue."

The Supreme Court has also been a subject for the leading Democratic candidates due to its 2010 Citizens United decision, which removed restraints on the amount of money corporations could donate to politicians and led to huge amounts of cash being poured into the super PACs that are already playing a large role on the campaign trail. Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders have both said they support a constitutional amendment that would overturn the ruling. Law professor Larry Lessig has structured his entire campaign around election reform.

Notably, while Americans are almost evenly split on the Obamacare subsidies ruling, 78 percent of Americans think the Citizens United decision should be overturned, according to a September poll from Bloomberg Politics.



Bloomberg

The decline of Supreme Court approval follows a larger trend of dissatisfaction with the government. All three branches have been low in terms of Americans' confidence in them, according to recent Gallup polling. The most unpopular by far, though, has been Congress, with only 8 percent of Americans saying they have either a great deal or quite a lot of confidence in the legislative branch.

Courtesy Gallup

Confronting Americans' overwhelming anger at Congress and how the government functions can be a tricky thing for candidates on the debate stages, many of whom have national government experience on their resumes. Again in Gallup polling, Americans cite "dissatisfaction with government" as the most important problem facing Americans today, surpassing other issues like the economy, unemployment, jobs and immigration. (Talking about the Supreme Court is a much safer topic: Only 4 percent of Americans cite "judicial system/courts/laws" as the greatest problem facing the U.S.)

Americans are so fed up in fact, that a plurality says "we need to just start over" because our political system is so broken, according to the Bloomberg Politics poll.



Margin of Error: +/- 3.1 percentage points Lindsey Cook and Ethan Rosenberg for USN&WR; Source: Bloomberg Politics National Poll