A man who called 911 removed the temporary license before this photo was taken. (Source: Pinal County Sheriff's Office)

A 2015 Ford Focus he was driving was equipped with a PA system, siren and emergency "police" lights. (Source: Pinal County Sheriff's Office)

A San Tan Valley teenager is in jail on suspicion of impersonating a police officer after a motorist spotted his fake police vehicle was equipped with a temporary registration license plate, Pinal County sheriff’s deputies said.

Michael Montano, 19, was arrested Friday and booked into the Pinal County Jail on charges of impersonating a peace officer and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony offense. His vehicle and 9-mm handgun were seized and placed into evidence.

The motorist told deputies he was driving in San Tan Valley Friday morning and saw a vehicle driven by Montano come up behind him with red and blue emergency lights flashing. The motorist said he knew he was speeding and thought he was being stopped by a law enforcement officer.

Montano then drove by him and got behind another car on Ironwood Road driven by a young female, PCSO said. As the woman began to pull over, the first motorist noticed the temporary registration affixed to Montano’s vehicle.

He followed Montano to a Chevron Gas Station at Ironwood and Ocotillo, confronted him and asked if he was a cop. According to PCSO, Montano said, “I got this,” and lifted his shirt, revealing a 9-mm handgun concealed in the top of his pants.

The motorist then walked to the rear of Montano’s car, described as a 2015 Ford Focus, removed the temporary registration and called 911.

Sheriff’s deputies arrived and found Montano’s car equipped with emergency red and blue LED lights inside the rear window, inside of the front windshield near the passenger-side visor and in the front grill. The vehicle was also equipped with an operational siren and public address system.

Pinal County Sheriff Paul Babeu said his office uses unmarked sedans and Tahoes for detectives and deputies in traffic enforcement.

Babeu said Montano admitted he was using the emergency lights in his vehicle so that people would pull over, thinking they were being stopped by law enforcement personnel.

Sheriff’s deputies are trying to locate possible victims who may have been stopped by Montano.