Like airlines and military, medical schools are increasingly using simulation to train the doctors of the future.

The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign’s new engineering-based Carle Illinois College of Medicine, scheduled to open in 2018, will include a high-tech medical simulation center.

The university last week announced plans for the Jump Simulation Center in Urbana after it received a $10 million gift from Chicago fintech firm Jump Trading.

Rashid Bashir, professor of engineering and head of the university’s bioengineering department, explains how the center plans to create physician inventors and innovators.

Q. What kind of training will be done there?

A. The idea is to create real environments with virtual situations. These include mock facilities for the intensive care unit, the operating room and the patient-doctor interaction.

For example, they would be creating the smartest dummy you can make, which is built with sensors and all sorts of technology where the students can get a feel for medical practice without having students directly touching the patient right away.

Q. How will this advance how doctors are trained now?

A. Things are changing dramatically because of all the advances and new technology in genomics, imaging, sensors, big data, computation and, of course, all the financial parts of the Affordable Care Act. How do we provide health care to more people at a lower cost with a higher quality?

The idea is to develop a new curriculum in which we still teach the material that students need to be successful physicians and still be grounded in compassion and care.

But how do we train the physician of tomorrow who can be physician inventors and physician innovators, solving these problems through technology and learning the fundamentals of medicine and sciences but yet be very quantitative and technology-driven?

Q. Can you give examples?

A. For example, students would be using visualization and virtual environments a lot more. Imagine something like a Google Glass or some sort of 3D virtual glasses and students are looking through those, and when they look at their hands, they see the map of the hand on the screen which shows which bone is where and the different anatomical parts.

Or in an operating room where you set it up with technologies that are still in the research phase now but perhaps someday in the future will be translated to the clinical practice and getting students to experience that much earlier in their education.

We have work ongoing on our campus in developing skin-based sensors where they can measure vitals and all sorts of parameters that monitor the state of health. They may be using sensors from the blood where in the future people will be measuring their own indicators of disease at the doctor’s office or pharmacy or home.

Q. This facility will be based in central Illinois where rural hospitals are closing. How will this program address this shift?

A. We want to get ahead of these changes and hopefully be the driver of these changes. One is this idea of distributed telemedicine, or being able to provide medical care at remote and other sites that are hard to get to or where people are driving long distances to get to a clinical lab or to see a physician.

The fact is that more and more people will be managing their own state of health one way or the other, whether it’s in diagnosing or prevention. Over time, these new technologies and sensors are going to allow us to do that.

The physician will still be the decision-maker who decides how care is given. The question is how you do that in the future in a way that will not all be done by big hospitals and clinics. We think there is tremendous opportunity in central Illinois, but the impact is going to be all over the state and beyond.

Q&As are edited for length and clarity.

Kate MacArthur is a freelance writer.