Medical researchers in United Kingdom call technique a 'game changer'

A protein which "turbo-charges" the immune system, enabling it to fight off any cancer or virus, has been discovered by scientists. Described as a "game-changer" for cancer treatment, researchers at Imperial College in the United Kingdom have found a previously unknown molecule, which boosts the body's ability to fight off chronic illnesses.

Scientists at Imperial College London, who led the study, are now developing a gene therapy based on the protein and hope to begin human trials in three years. Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 4/20/2015 (1 year ago) Published in Health Keywords: Turbo charging, cancer research, genetics, lymphocyte expansion molecule

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - Scientists at Imperial College London, who led the study, are now developing a gene therapy based on the protein and hope to begin human trials in three years.



"This is exciting because we have found a completely different way to use the immune system to fight cancer," Professor Philip Ashton-Rickardt, from the Section of Immunobiology in the Department of Medicine at Imperial, says.



A beautiful reminder of the sacrifice of Christ -- wherever you look --





Ashton-Rickardt, who led the study, says this "could be a game-changer for treating a number of different cancers and viruses."This is a completely unknown protein. Nobody had ever seen it before or was even aware that it existed. It looks and acts like no other protein."Named lymphocyte expansion molecule, the protein promotes the spread of cancer killing "T cells" by generating large amounts of energy.Typically when the immune system detects cancer it goes into overdrive trying to fight the disease, flooding the body with T cells but then quickly runs out of steam.However, the new protein causes a massive energy boost, which makes plentiful T cells that the cancer cannot fight them off.The protein also causes a boost of immune memory cells, which are able to recognize tumors, and viruses they have encountered previously so there is less chance that they will return.Scientists made the discovery while screening mice with genetic mutations. They found that one type produced ten times the number of cancer-fighting T cells, suppressing infections and becoming resistant to cancer.Researchers found that the mice with enhanced immunity produced high levels of the unknown protein, which is also found in humans.They are hoping to produce a gene therapy, where the T cells of cancer patients could be enhanced with the protein and then injected back into the body. This development my lead to the end of harsh chemotherapies as the body itself would be fighting the disease, rather than toxic drugs.

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.