Good afternoon, Broncos. It is 2:25 p.m., Sunday, Nov. 15, in Denver, and this is your wake-up call. Have a good day.

Get up.

At the halfway juncture, Broncos, what are you?

The Broncos who trounced the Green Bay Packers two weeks ago or the Broncos who flittered away a victory in Indianapolis last Sunday?

Are you at the head of the class with the New England Patriots and the Cincinnati Bengals, or in the middle row with the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Buffalo Bills?

Are you the defense that totally shut down an all-world quarterback, or the defense that let an all-wounded quarterback beat you in the fourth quarter? Are you the offense that produced 500 yards against the Packers, or the offense that didn’t score a touchdown in Oakland?

Are you the Donks that were outplayed by the Kansas City Chiefs for most of the first matchup, or the High Horses that somehow pulled out a miraculous victory in K.C.?

Which 7-1 Broncos are you reminiscent of, the 7-1 Broncos in 2014 who lost in the playoffs, the 7-1 team in 1997 that won the Super Bowl, or the other five 7-1 Broncos in 1977, 1984, 1986, 1996 and 2013? Seven-up-one-down Broncos have reached the Super Bowl in four seasons and lost in the first round of the postseason three times.

The Broncos will win the AFC West, but that’s not enough in Denver. It’s OK for the Chieftains.

We have been spoiled.

This is the 15th time since 1977 that the Broncos win the division, and the 22nd season the Broncos will be in the playoffs.

But Pat Bowlen wouldn’t accept a cute little division championship banner. Nor will John Elway, who considers failure anything other than a Super Bowl. “Our standard here is to win a championship,” he has said. And not the division.

Coach Gary Kubiak understood that pressure when he accepted the assignment. “I know that each and every year this team is built, … it’s with one reason and one reason only, and that’s to win a championship.”

Peyton Manning didn’t come back to hoist his final division flag. This will be Peyton’s 13th with Indianapolis and Denver. He didn’t come back merely to set the regular-season victory record and the passing yardage mark Sunday.

He returned to play in a fourth Super Bowl and win a second.

Broncos season-ticket holders from 1960 and a sports columnist in Denver from 1974 got over 7-1 records long ago.

In this town, it’s Super Bowl or Bust.

Remember last year? There were no platitudes, proclamations and parades when the Broncos finished ahead of Kansas City, San Diego and Oakland.

If the Broncos want to celebrate something other than Manning’s career accomplishments Sunday, they should realize that with a victory, the franchise finally will catch the Chiefs in victories in the all-time series. After Dallas-Kansas City dominated in the early years of the AFL to win 19 of the first 20, the regular-season and postseason results are now Chiefs 56, Broncos 55.

A barbecuing of K.C. requires the defense to stop whining like Rodney Dangerfield — “We get no respect” — and committing foolhardy penalties. The defense was outplayed in Indianapolis by a chum offense, and the defensive staff was outcoached by a first-game “Chud” coordinator.

The offensive linemen have to put on big-boy football pants and create crevices; the running backs can’t underachieve and be overwhelmed; the tight ends and wide receivers have to find seams and force separation; and a 39-year-old quarterback on pace for the most interceptions since he was a 22-year-old rookie has to throw accurately and for touchdowns. (Plus, there’s the foot problem, and whether it will affect Manning as the thigh injury did a year ago.)

The coaches on offense should decide who’s actually calling the plays: the coordinator in the press box, the quarterback coach on the sideline, Kubiak his own self or Manning.

These Broncos probably will trundle along and finally beat the vastly improved Chiefs in the fourth quarter.

New England, Pittsburgh and Cincinnati are looming large.

The Broncos must not hit the snooze button again.

It’s time to get up and get right for the second half of the season.

Woody Paige: wpaige@denverpost.com