The former FBI agent who will guide Denver through its review of the sheriff’s department said the agency needs a “deep dive” review, and the internal affairs bureau especially needs attention.

James H. Davis, who will help select independent firms to review the sheriff’s department and search for a new sheriff, said the problem with the department’s internal affairs bureau may be its process rather than the people.

“Obviously, something needs to be fixed,” Davis said.

Davis and Mayor Michael Hancock met with the media Thursday to discuss their plans for the troubled sheriff’s department. They said a definitive plan has not been formed but pledged that everything is on the table when it comes to reforming the management, policies and organization.

Hancock asked for patience as the city tries to reform the department.

“These problems did not develop overnight and they’re not going to be solved overnight,” he said. “We’ve uncovered a complex web, a deep culture we’ve got to pull apart here.”

Later Hancock said, “I don’t know how it got this far. I think it’s decades of a lack of attention, a lack of leadership.”

Multiple reviews of the Denver Sheriff Department are in the works after a series of embarrassing videos surfaced that showed deputies abusing inmates. The most serious case has led to a $3.25 million settlement with former inmate Jamal Hunter, who was choked by Deputy Edward Keller and beaten and scalded by other inmates.

In that case, a federal judge called for a federal investigation into the agency.

DOCUMENT: Read Keller’s disciplinary letter. Note the letter contains graphic language that might be offensive.

Hancock offered more clarity on the reviews and how they would be used. Multiple internal investigations, including four task forces organized by former Sheriff Gary Wilson, will be given to the outside firm that eventually will perform a top-to-bottom assessment of the department.

That assessment will be in tandem with the national search for a new sheriff, said Amber Miller, the mayor’s spokeswoman.

The settlement with Hunter requires outside reviews of the city’s legal staff and the sheriff’s department.

Already, the law firm Lewis Roca Rothgerber has been chosen to review the city’s legal protocols, policies and attorney training. The firm also will look into the conduct of assistant city attorney Stuart Shapiro, who was accused of interfering in an investigation during the Hunter case. He has been placed on leave.

Davis is a former special-agent-in-charge of the FBI’s Denver Division and the former executive director of the Colorado Department of Public Safety and Homeland Security director.

Davis said he expects the external review to be much like an FBI internal inspection. That process includes interviews with top executives and command staff to develop profiles of them. And outsiders would be interviewed as well.

Among the issues that could be examined are the sheriff department’s use-of-force policy and whether the deputies should remain under the city’s Career Service System.

The police and fire departments are overseen by the Civil Service Commission. It would take a public vote to change the city’s charter before the move could happen, Hancock said.

Hancock said he had been talking to Davis about problems within the Denver jails before Wilson stepped down in July. It was unclear how much Davis will be paid for his work.

Hancock said he does not know how much the city will spend on the multiple reviews and on a search firm. But it will be less expensive to spend money on changes rather than to continue paying costly settlements, he said.

Hancock pledged the audits, reviews and evaluations would be as open as possible.

“What’s going to work here and how we’re going to instill and gain the trust of the public is to be as open as possible and share as much as possible,” he said.

Noelle Phillips: 303-954-1661, nphillips@denverpost.com or twitter.com/Noelle_Phillips