Almost everybody agrees some form of "smart card" may help to prevent fraud in the Medicaid program, but almost nobody agrees on how cards should work.

It's a big-dollar issue. Medicaid fraud costs about $160 billion a year nationally, and upward of $120 million annually in New Jersey. It's a strange kind of fraud because it's usually not the service recipient who's cheating, but the service provider. In other words, more fraud is committed by physicians, chiropractors, pharmacists and therapists than by patients. Criminal prosecutions feature payments for services never rendered and care of patients never seen.

While some Medicaid enrollees illegally lend their cards to friends who have no coverage, the incidence of this abuse has much less impact than outright gaming of the system by unscrupulous providers. And no smart card will prevent fraud when patients and caregivers collude to steal Medicaid money.

New Jersey has been talking about smart cards for almost a decade, and bills authorizing their use have been introduced by Assembly Health Committee Chair, Dr. Herb Conaway, D-Burlington. The current version of his bill (A-1951) merely authorizes the Commissioner of Health to develop a pilot program, not costing more than the anticipated savings. It doesn't describe the kind of technology to be used. It only requires authentication of the patient's eligibility at the time of transaction. The Commissioner may select a geographic area in which to pilot a selected system.

Ten years ago, Texas launched a program to combat Medicaid fraud using smart cards with fingerprints. Their "Medicaid Integrity" program issues smart cards to persons eligible for Medicaid, which must be shown to the provider at the time of service. The early pilots required providers to have biometric scanners in their offices to read patients' fingerprints, but after several years of testing, Texas officials decided the program worked well enough without fingerprints.

Louisiana began using smart cards for its subsidized child-care program in 2010, and a year later Georgia began to use them. Both states required biometric data in pilots but have now dropped that requirement. Indiana and Oklahoma use smart cards with magnetic stripes but are thinking about switching to biometric data. North Carolina, on the other hand, wasn't thrilled with the high cost of using biometrics and is considering cards with hologram photos, like on New Jersey drivers' licenses.

Conaway has said he believes biometric data would be helpful but he thinks it is more important that the cards contain personal health information which would make it easier for the doctor to absolutely identify the patient, as well as get a quick reading on the patient's previous diagnoses and treatments.

A report issued in 2012 by the Pennsylvania legislature estimated the cost of magnetic stripe cards at 23 cents while photo identification cards would cost about $8 each.

Many vendors are clamoring for states to use their cards, and each promises advantages and downplays potential problems. Swipe cards, like credit cards, can be used effectively but some physicians and other providers don't want to spend to install required card readers in their offices. So cards with chips that can be read like flash drives by any computer may be a cost-effective alternative.

Like with any other types of personal identification cards, there are concerns about hackers accessing data, but folks poor enough to be eligible for Medicaid aren't likely to be prime targets for hackers seeking financial information.

In last year's legislative session, Conaway's bill stalled after being released by the Assembly Health Committee by an 8-0 vote. He is expected to try again this year.

EDITOR'S NOTE: A former state assemblywoman from Jersey City, Joan Quigley is the president and CEO of the North Hudson Community Action Corp. in Union City. Her column appears in The Jersey Journal every Tuesday.