Sioux Falls, SD

After a search lasting for weeks, the urn found in a Watertown parking lot was reunited with a family in Sioux Falls this weekend. It is one of three carrying Jason Hall's remains, and the family has a tragic story to tell.

An urn contains ashes belonging to Lacey Hall's brother Jason.

After he died in 2010, his grandmother gave out three urns, one to Lacey, one to her mom, and one to her sister, so each could have a part of him. She says her mom's urn was stolen over summer. The family was heartbroken to go months without a part of their family, but then they heard some good news.

"My heart just dropped. My mom heard it over the news and her heart dropped too, and we all automatically knew it was my brother," Lacey Hall said.

She quickly got in touch with Herb Brown, the man who found the urn in the parking lot of this Watertown Gas Station. After proving the urn belonged to her family, Hall was able to bring the urn back to her mom.

"I was excited to get it back. It was the best Christmas present a child could give to give to her mother is giving her, her urn back," Hall said.

Hall and her brother Jason were born just ten months apart and he meant the world to her.

"He has four beautiful children that he gets to watch from heaven. It's too bad he can't be here to watch them grow up in person you know," Hall said.

The father of four is gone after he was killed in a fight with his friend Burton Eagle Hawk Junior.

"It was heartbreaking. It was like a nightmare that I was waiting to wake up from," Hall said.

Both were drinking the night Hall was killed, and his sister says she blames alcohol for what happened, not the person who committed the crime.

"My brother came to me in a dream a week after I lost him and he told me that it wasn't my spot to hold that grudge. If he forgave him then I had to forgive him too," Hall said.

Now after that tragic event, Hall says she's been going to AA meetings. Her family was dealing with a whole new heartbreak after losing the urn. After Brown found the urn in Watertown, those wounds have been healed. Now the family that was taken apart tragically, is back together again.