It started with surprise. Now, it’s culminating in the highest of expectations.

Two years ago, the Broncos were about to end the 2011 season on a three-game losing skid behind a quarterback who’s now out of the NFL. When they lost to the Chiefs on Jan. 1, 2012, they were 8-8, an record identical to the Raiders’ and Chargers’. Even so, Denver backed into the AFC West title by virtue of tiebreakers, and the Tim Tebow Show made it all the way to the playoffs, where the Broncos defeated Pittsburgh in overtime before getting crushed at New England.

In many ways, it was an end: the end of the Broncos’ season, the end of Tebow’s magical run, really the end of Tebow as any kind of factor in the NFL. Little did the Broncos know, though, it also was a beginning.

Two years later, the team has locked up its third consecutive division title under coach John Fox, marking the first time the Broncos have had a three-peat at the top of the AFC West. That might sound like a long time to go without three consecutive division titles, but consider this: Since the 1970 AFL-NFL merger, 14 teams have yet to accomplish such a feat, and only nine teams have managed it more than once.

“I think they are all completely different,” Fox said of his three division titles. “The first one was unique. Last year, from where we started to where we finished, was unique. We had higher expectations coming into this season. I think everybody in our city, state and region did as well.”

Now, the Broncos are the favorite to emerge from the AFC and make it to the Super Bowl.

Fox had never won three consecutive division titles as a head coach until coming to the Broncos, yet by virtue of such a high turnover rate in the NFL, he already has more career playoff berths than most head coaches. This will be his sixth playoff appearance in 12 years. Only Wade Phillips, Andy Reid, Bill Belichick, Tom Coughlin, Jeff Fisher and Mike Shanahan have more playoff berths among active head coaches in the league.

As far as three years in a row atop their divisions, the list of active coaches is even smaller. John Harbaugh had an opportunity to do so this season with the Ravens, but he won’t, as did the Packers’ Mike McCarthy and the 49ers’ Jim Harbaugh, both of whom still have a shot with a game to go. Reid won the NFC East with Philadelphia four years in a row, from 2001-04, and Belichick topped the AFC East with the Patriots for two five-year stints, from 2003-07 and now from 2009-13. Even Shanahan, who led the Broncos to back-to-back Super Bowl victories, never accomplished a division three-peat; in 1997, leading up to Denver’s first NFL championship, the Broncos finished second in the AFC West, behind the 13-3 Chiefs.

After winning the division last weekend, though, the Broncos aren’t quite ready to celebrate. They have plenty of reasons to — Peyton Manning’s NFL season touchdown passing record, for one — but the focus still is on the regular-season finale Sunday at Oakland and on locking up home-field advantage for the AFC playoffs, which requires a Denver win or a New England loss this weekend.

“One thing this team has done a good job of all year is just focusing on the opponent and the task at hand,” Manning said. “It’s a division game. I think that has served us well — that philosophy. It’s a crazy last week of the season.”

As usual, Manning is focused on the next game, the next win, not any records. But when forced to acknowledge the big picture last weekend, he was more interested in the team’s slot in the AFC standings than his 51 touchdown passes.

“It’s only a special thing when it’s come at the same time as winning games,” Manning said of the record. “If we were 3-12, it would not have been a unique or special accomplishment for the team because it didn’t help you win games.”

Fox also has noticed where his quarterback’s outlook lies, on the team and the playoffs more than the record book. This will be an era in Broncos history to remember, from the surprise run to a division title in Fox’s first year and dominating runs of No. 2 and No. 3. It’s not a time to look back, though, not yet.

It’s time for Oakland, for home field, for the Broncos to finish what they started in July.

Division dominance

Active NFL head coaches who have won three or more consecutive division titles:

Coach, team … Years

Andy Reid, Eagles … 2001-04

Bill Belichick, Patriots … 2003-07

Bill Belichick, Patriots … 2009-13

John Fox, Broncos … 2011-13

Joan Niesen: jniesen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joanniesen