The U.S. Capitol is photographed behind a chain fence in Washington on Sept. 30, 2013, just ahead of the government shutdown. (Reuters/Kevin Lamarque) Reuters

The one episode sure to define this Congress – last year’s government shutdown – is proving to be something of a footnote in campaign ads this year.

With the one-year anniversary right around the corner, the shutdown doesn’t register as a top advertising theme in House or Senate races, according to a tally of individual ads compiled by Kantar Media’s Campaign Media Analysis Group. (See the list of top themes in House races and Senate races.)

When the shutdown does surface, it is often used as part of a broader attack against incumbent Republicans for enjoying the “perks” of office while voting to shutter parts of the government.

Instead, the CMAG tally shows the two parties taking decidedly different approaches in their midterm messaging. Republicans have spent heavily to nationalize the elections by making them a referendum on President Barack Obama, while Democrats have seized on more local concerns.

In the tally of Senate races, Republicans and their outside allies have run more than 93,000 spots criticizing the president and more than 70,000 spots criticizing the Affordable Care Act.

The Democratic messages are more diffuse, hinging on issues more tailored to individual states, such as Republican budget cuts to public education in North Carolina or women’s reproductive rights in Colorado.

The two strategies have had mixed success for both parties in midterm elections.

Republicans lost seats in 1998 when they built their campaigns around then-President Bill Clinton’s sexual indiscretions in the White House, but picked up 63 seats in 2010 by making the race a referendum on the new health law and the still-struggling economy.

The all-politics-is-local argument tends to work in close races, but wasn’t enough to repel the Democratic wave in 2006 or the Republican one four years later.

There are signs the Republican Party’s battered brand has benefited from this shift away from the shutdown.

In the latest Wall Street Journal/NBC poll conducted earlier this month, 31% of registered voters expressed positive views of the GOP, while 41% viewed the party negatively.

That’s a major improvement from last October, in the immediate aftermath of the shutdown, when 53% of Americans viewed the party negatively and 22% expressed positive views. It’s also a modest uptick from other polls conducted earlier this year. But the GOP’s September numbers are still worse than how voters view the Democratic Party.

“What have Republicans done to improve the party’s image so dramatically in the past 10 months? Not much,” wrote Stuart Rothenberg, editor of the nonpartisan Rothenberg Political Report, in a column in Roll Call. “Basically, they have stopped doing really stupid things and allowed the public to focus on the president and the bad news that seems to arrive on TV each day.”

The CMAG data shows big splits between the parties in what issues they chose to highlight this election year in ads clogging the airwaves in competitive Senate races across the country. The exceptions: jobs and the economy, veterans’ care and energy and the environment – the latter category has already notched an all-time high.

Of course, the biggest underlying theme of the 2014 campaign ads is anger with Washington.

“Rare is the campaign ad these days that doesn’t dump on Washington or the elected officials who serve there,” Elizabeth Wilner, who runs CMAG, wrote on the Cook Political Report. “One notable undercurrent here, though: Incumbents are getting attacked for allegedly growing so used to the perks office – private jets and ritzy travel, subsidized health care – that they no longer care about their constituents.”

House Republicans recently attacked veteran Rep. Collin Peterson (D., Minn.) for enjoying perks like leased cars and gas reimbursement, just as the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee unveiled an ad assailing Rep. Lee Terry (R., Neb.) for taking a paycheck during the government shutdown – one of the few ads to mention that episode.