The result is an increasingly dynamic publishing universe where sites like Vox, Vice and BuzzFeed, and new enterprises like Pierre Omidyar’s The Intercept, are luring seasoned journalists as well as a new generation of storytellers.

In this high-tech universe, Vox Media’s content management system — which even has its own name, Chorus, and is used to publish all the company’s websites — has earned recognition. It is credited with having a toolset that allows journalists to edit and illustrate their copy in dramatic fashion, promote their work on social media, and interact with readers — all seamlessly and intuitively.

Even the competing website TechCrunch has written a love letter to Chorus, calling it “next generation” technology, while noting that comparatively “the rest of us have been stuck turning screwdrivers.”

Reporters and multimedia journalists say the enhanced technology of Chorus enables them to do things like make photos appear as a cursor slides down a page; add links automatically to copy; and identify problem commentators through word identification.

“Most journalists hate their content management systems,” said Melissa Bell, who was director of platforms at The Post before she left with Mr. Klein to join Vox. “The joke is that Chorus is a unicorn with a kitten on its back. People think it is a magical system that fixes everything.”

Photo

Chorus does not fix everything, of course, said Jim Bankoff, Vox Media’s ambitious chief executive, but it is sexy enough to be a recruiting tool. “For this generation of talent, which grew up digitally, having the proper tools to ply their craft is essential,” he said in a recent interview. “Being able to offer them the best possible platform to achieve their goals is a great advantage.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Recruiting is important for Vox, which was the fastest growing digital media site in 2013, according to comScore. (It reached 75 million unique visitors in March, according to its internal site metrics, which are measured by Google Analytics.)

Vox is adding publications as well as readers. Since its inception in 2008, the company has raised nearly $80 million in capital from Accel Partners and Comcast Interactive Capital, among others, and has used it to build The Verge, a technology site, and to acquire the food site Eater and the real estate and design platform Curbed.

Like Mr. Klein, the founders of all those sites confirmed that Chorus was crucial to their decision to team with Vox. Josh Topolsky, editor in chief of The Verge, came over in 2011 after growing frustrated with the limits of the computer system at Engadget, an AOL technology publication. He had grand ideas for a site that could do in-depth science coverage while integrating new design elements.

After looking widely, he said, he decided Chorus was the best option. “It was so obvious and where we needed to go,” he said. “From a storytelling perspective it couldn’t be accomplished in any other place that I have seen.”

Others are catching up, but the rich graphic interface and facile reader interaction have helped Vox earn a reputation for quality and attract a highly desirable audience: its largest demographic is educated households headed by individuals under 35 years old with incomes over $100,000.

Perhaps more important for its long-term survival, Vox’s formats attract attention directly, so the site does not have to turn to gimmicky features like quizzes, teasing headlines or lists to generate traffic through Facebook or Twitter.

The company’s attitude toward content management has its roots in the basement of Trei Brundrett, now Vox’s chief product officer. It was there that he and some partners developed SB Nation, a sports blogging website that became wildly popular when it was introduced nine years ago. Mr. Brundrett and his crew cast themselves as equal parts journalists and software developers.

Because SB Nation needed a platform where sports fans could communicate with one another, the team created word-recognition software that would help police comments. Because it covered live sports events, it created an organizational tool, called story stream, that allowed editors to click and drag relevant material — from previous stories, Twitter posts or commentary by the writers — all into one continuous flow.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That culture has translated forward into more conventional journalistic enterprises. Developers at Vox Media call themselves journalists and work continually with writers and reporters to build the tools they require. “It is thrilling as a journalist being able to envision a tool and having it become a real thing,” Mr. Topolsky said. “And it is rare.”

Mr. Klein, hoping to avoid incrementalism — “the biggest source of waste is everything the journalist has written before today,” he said — instead wants his journalists responsible for constantly updating pages that are the ultimate resource on a topic.

“It would be like a wiki page written by one person with a little attitude,” Ms. Bell explained.

To help accomplish this, the developers have been building a tool they call the card stack. The cards, trimmed in brilliant canary yellow, contain definitions of essential terms that a reader can turn to if they require more context. For example, a story updating the battle over the Affordable Care Act might include cards explaining the term “insurance exchange.”

Ms. Bell said Vox.com would start with roughly 20 reporters with expertise around specific topics, a limited travel budget, and, of course, very inchoate technology.

Ms. Bell confessed that she was both “excited and terrified” to go out with a product that has had just three months to gestate. “I worry people will say, ‘Hey, you guys promised us magic,’ ” she said, “and I’ll say, ‘Hey, wait a minute. Give us some time and we will get there.’ ”