The number of uninsured Oregonians has dropped 63 percent, from 550,000 to 202,000 people, since national health care reforms took effect, researchers say.

An estimated 95 percent of Oregonians now have health coverage, up from 86 percent last year, according to a study released Thursday by Oregon Health & Science University and the Oregon Health Authority.

The study results echo the anecdotal experiences of local hospitals and other providers, which say they've seen a huge drop in uninsured patients.

The reduction is far greater than a Gallup survey released in August, which found Oregon's uninsured rate dropped from 19.7 percent to 14 percent.

"This is a big drop," said Peter Graven, the OHSU health economist who led the study. He said he was concerned that Gallup came to such different conclusions but said his study used solid and more recent data – state enrollment reporting -- as opposed to Gallup's survey methods. "I think administrative data is better," he said.

Christina Milano, a family doctor at OHSU Richmond clinic, said her clinic has seen almost all their uninsured patients get covered. "This makes a huge difference for these patients who previously had to pay out of pocket or work out other payment agreements," she said.

The study used a state insurance survey that found that in June 2013, 550,000 Oregonians were uninsured. Those findings were echoed by U.S. Census survey findings also released Thursday that found 570,000 Oregonians were uninsured in 2013.

Graven and several researchers at the Oregon Health Authority added up enrollment data collected by the state from health insurers, combined with enrollment gains in the Oregon Health Plan – the state's version of Medicaid, which is overseen by OHA.

As of June 2014, Oregon Health Plan enrollment has jumped from 614,000 to 976,000, or more than 360,000 people since June 2013, the study found. Those gains more than offset a slight drop in private insurance, of about 10,000 people overall.

"Medicaid definitely drove it," Graven said of Oregon's gains.

Driving the Medicaid increases were changes made by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which boosted the maximum income allowed from 100 percent of the federal poverty level to 138 percent, or $15,521 a year for a household of one. Also, gone is the asset test that prohibited people with significant property holdings or savings from signing up; instead only income is considered. Oregon was one of a few states that used a highly streamlined approval process for food-stamp recipients, contributing more than a third of the total increase.

The federal government will initially cover 100 percent of states' costs for new Medicaid enrollees made eligible by the boost in income levels. Federal support will ratchet down to 90 percent of costs in 2019.

Within private health insurance, enrollment in employer-purchased plans dropped by 47,000 people, while individual market coverage gained about 37,000 people.

Graven suspected the individual market gains were driven by the mandate to have health coverage imposed by the federal health law, as well as the ease in comparison-shopping, tax credits and other subsidies offered by Cover Oregon. Not only that, but the law required coverage for people with pre-existing conditions who previously were denied by insurers.

Before the law, "There was a big chunk of people who just couldn't get insurance," he said.

--Nick Budnick