Tinder users may be encouraged to sign up as an organ donor if they swipe right on certain profiles. Photo courtesy of Pixabary, public domain

Swiping right to find a match on popular dating app Tinder may lead to more than just love — you might wind up literally giving your heart away. For the next two weeks, swiping right on certain photos will encourage Tinder users to register as an organ donor. Through a new partnership with Tinder, the National Health Service (NHS) in the UK aims to encourage more young people to join their organ donor campaign and will use Tinder to gain access to them.

By the end of 2014, approximately 50 million people used the app every month, making an average of 12 million matches each day. But the matches took a collective one billion swipes a day to achieve, exposing users to hundreds of people at a time, which is the level of exposure the NHS wants to tap into. They’ll do so thanks to an agreement with Tinder’s high profile users, including Olympic gold medalist Jade Jones, actress Gemma Oaten, and TV reality star Jamie Laing, who will feature an organ logo to garner attention to the importance of donations.

High-profile Tinder users have volunteered to lend their profiles to the NHS in hopes of gaining organ donors. Photo courtesy of Tinder

"Tinder users regularly make the decision to swipe left or right wondering whether someone may be the person they are looking for," said Tinder’s head of European Communications, Hermione Way, according to the BBC News. "While those swiping decisions are important and could be the first step to a successful relationship, we hope that the NHS profiles featuring Jamie, Jade, and Gemma will encourage people to make and act upon a different decision too — to sign up as an organ donor."

In the United Kingdom, where the Tinder campaign will be taking place, more than 4,400 people were saved or their lives were improved by an organ transplant. But after the number of donated organs fell for the first time in 11 years, the NHS announced a public call for everyone in the UK to discuss organ donation in July 2015. The decrease meant 224 fewer people received an organ transplant between the years 2014 and 2015. America isn’t too far off. According to the Department of Health & Human Services, an average of 22 people die every day waiting for transplants they need but can’t have because of the shortage of donated organs. The UK’s creative approach to reaching a younger population may be adapted to other regions in the world if they prove to be effective.

"Educating and encouraging people to sign up for organ donation — that’s what our partnership with Tinder is all about," the Director of Organ Donation and Transplantation at NHS Blood and Transplant, Sally Johnson, said. "Joining the register takes only a couple of minutes — about the same amount of time as a few swipes on Tinder."