For the past two years the number one debate in Washington has been about health care – not Obamacare in Congress, but the health and care of the Washington Nationals star pitcher, Stephen Strasburg, and the Washington Redskins star quarterback, Robert Griffin III.



The city – and much of the American sports landscape – has been consumed with the injuries and recoveries of both these young athletes. It has ignited heated debate within both sports, football and baseball, to the point where the championship accomplishments of both franchises have been overshadowed by arguments over the how they have protected their multi-million dollar athletic commodities.

It has been argued and discussed on the Sunday morning political talk show and even in White House press briefings.

In some respects, the stories are eerily similar. Each has some of the same ingredients – the young, high-profile athlete; the franchise decision-maker vilified; the role of two of the most prominent doctors in the history of sports medicine; and damaged ligaments treated with transplanted body parts – in Strasburg's pitching elbow and in Griffin's already once-repaired right knee.

Strasburg, 25, had a piece of a ligament taken from his left leg and transplanted into his damaged right pitching elbow – the well known and fairly common procedure known as Tommy John surgery.

Griffin, 23, had total reconstructive surgery after tearing two ligaments in his right knee, with a piece of muscle tendon being taken from the left knee to reconstruct the damaged ligaments

Yet the two young men's stories do differ, in one very important way.

The argument that has come to define Strasburg's career has been about whether or not the Nationals – then on their way to the National League East title and entering the postseason – protected their young ace too much, by shutting him down with three weeks left in the 2012 season. He therefore did not pitch in the NL division series, against the St Louis Cardinals.

The debate about Griffin – the 2011 Heisman Trophy winner who electrified the NFL with his speed and skill as a rookie quarterback, capturing the hearts of the nation's capital – has been about whether or not the Redskins failed to protect him last year by letting him play on with an injured right knee. That debate is now over whether the Redskins are rushing him back to play in Monday's season-opening game against the Philadelphia Eagles, eight months after that reconstructive knee surgery.

Robert Griffin III suffers a knee injury against the Seattle Seahawks. Photograph: Al Bello/Getty Images

Griffin first sprained a ligament in the knee (the same knee he had reconstructed in surgery in 2009, while at Baylor University) in week 13, against the Baltimore Ravens. The football world then watched as Griffin suffered further damage in a playoff game against the Seattle Seahawks, and saw him reduced to a one-legged, defenseless player who crumbled to the ground in the fourth quarter. After leading 14-0, the Redskins lost 24-14.

Three days later, Griffin underwent knee surgery.

The Redskins, and coach Mike Shanahan, came under fire for leaving Griffin on the field when he clearly appeared to be in trouble. This fire came not just from the media, but from NFL players. The Tampa Bay Buccaneers running back Derrick Ward tweeted:

Mike Shanahan should be fired for letting RG3 play today. Bottom line. You risk tearing his knee up trying to win and u see he isn't mobile.

It became prime fodder not only for sports talk debate, but also the morning news talk shows, beginning an entire NFL offseason of discussion about who was to blame – Shanahan, Griffin, for holding back how hurt he was, or the high-profile orthopedic surgeon Dr James Andrews – and who said what to whom on the sideline during that playoff game.

Griffin himself fed the controversy, with cryptic statements and messages like this tweet he sent in March to ESPN football host Trey Wingo:

I know where my responsibility is within the dilemma that led me to having surgery to repair my knee and all parties involved know their responsibilities as well.

That only fed the intrigue over the injury, which was already under scrutiny before the playoff game because Dr Andrews had refuted statements made by Shanahan after the Baltimore game, when the initial knee injury occurred, that the doctor had given the OK for Griffin to return to the field for that game.

The Griffin arguments were an appropriate heir for the No1 sports topic in Washington just a few months earlier – the shutdown of a healthy, uninjured Stephen Strasburg, the game's most heralded young pitcher, in the final weeks of a pennant race.

Strasburg, the No1 pick in the 2009 baseball draft who was advertised as the second coming of Walter Johnson in Washington, took center stage with a dazzling 2010 debut, striking out 14 Pittsburgh Pirates in seven innings before a packed house at Nationals Park. He was featured on the cover of Sports Illustrated and, in a town that had been without baseball for 33 years, was the biggest star since Johnson, a Hall of Fame Senators pitcher in the early 20th century.

However, several months later he was diagnosed with a torn ligament in his right elbow, and underwent Tommy John surgery. He wouldn't pitch again until the end of the 2011 season, and when the 2012 season began the Nationals general manager, Mike Rizzo, declared that he would be on an innings limit.

It was the same recovery plan that Rizzo had implemented the year before for another young starter coming off similar surgery, Jordan Zimmerman – a 160-inning season limit, to protect the pitcher for a long career. However, in that year, the Nationals were not involved in a championship run.

Washington Nationals starting pitcher Stephen Strasburg in action. Photograph: Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP

When Strasburg hit 159 innings, the Nationals pulled him from the rotation, even though he was not hurt. They went on to win the NL East and lose to the Cardinals in a heartbreaking fifth and deciding game, 9-7 after leading 6-1.

Rizzo was adamant in his defense of the Strasburg shutdown, even after the Nationals were knocked out of the playoffs. "We had a plan in mind," he said.

It was something we had from the beginning. I stand by my decision. We'll take the criticism as it comes, but we have to do what's best for the Washington Nationals. And we think we did.

The criticism had come throughout the season. Many in baseball reacted angrily. "I think it's a travesty," said Pirates broadcaster and former major league pitcher Steve Blass, when Strasburg was shut down. "I hope the Nationals get crushed." The Meet the Press host and Nationals fan David Gregory asked a former New York mayor, Rudy Giuliani, if he agreed with the Strasburg shutdown. "I don't," Giuliani said. "I'm not a big pitch-count guy."

The White House press secretary, Jay Carney, was asked if President Obama agreed with the Strasburg shutdown. "Well I have had this discussion with him, although not this week," Carney said.

As I think he's mentioned, he's following the Nationals closely. He is first and foremost a Chicago White Sox fan and that hasn't changed. But I think he has like all of us in Washington been caught up in the remarkable success of the Washington Nationals this season. And I don't have a firm opinion to state for you from the president about whether or not Stephen Strasburg should be shut down as you say, but he certainly appreciates the conundrum that Nationals management faces as well as Nationals fans, including myself.

Like the Griffin injury, the Strasburg shutdown had its share of medical intrigue. Rizzo said he made the decision to shut down Strasburg after consulting the team doctor, Dr Lewis Yocum, another prominent orthopedic sports surgeon. But Yocum told the Los Angeles Times he wasn't consulted. "I wasn't asked," Yocum said, going on to say that he "would not have been able to provide conclusive information about whether Strasburg's long-term health would be best served by shutting him down."

Soon after, Yocum (who died in May 2013) issued a statement backtracking from those comments: "I would like to correct the misimpression generated from today's LA Times article that I have not been a participant in discussions with the Washington Nationals regarding the recovery strategy for pitcher Stephen Strasburg. In fact I have been contacted repeatedly and have had numerous discussions with the Nationals GM Mike Rizzo and the team's medical personnel … while the final decision was up to the team, as is standard practice, I was supportive of their decision and am comfortable that my medical advice was responsibly considered."

The Strasburg debate continues today, with some critics gleeful that the Nationals have struggled this season. The Atlanta Journal-Constitution columnist Jeff Schultz wrote:

For those who believe Washington blew it, this is Nationals general manager Mike Rizzo getting run over by the karma train.

Now, with the NFL season upon us, the medical focus is on whether or not the Redskins are rushing Griffin III back to the field too early. He is expected to start in the opener against Philadelphia.

Obamacare might be the medical debate generating most passion around the country. But inside the beltway, the greatest debate continues to be held over the health and welfare of two young sports superstars.