Wile E. Coyote, Super Genius Who Gave You Obamacare

September 17, 2015

No matter what the obstacle or what the challenge, Wile E. Coyote always seemed to come up with some massively complicated Rube Goldberg contraption that defied gravity and common sense to capture the Road Runner and finally get a decent meal out in the desert.



We think Wile E. was on the legislative team that concocted and helped pass the ACA, the 'Affordable' (sic) Care Act, otherwise now colloquially known as 'Obamacare' which is neither 'affordable' and has not covered every uninsured person as promised in 2010.







(click through the title line if you want to see a classic video of Wile E. Coyote, this time with Bugs Bunny)



Consider this latest news from Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina, hardly a right-wing Tea Party mouthpiece when it comes to Obamacare:



'60,000 North Carolinians dropped their health insurance, 50% of whom did so after receiving expensive medical care'



60,000 people . There are only 459,714 ACA customers in North Carolina to begin with. 13% of all ACA customers dropped out of the ACA within the first year, 1/2 of whom received expensive medical care before dropping out.



And guess what? With guaranteed issue, these same people can come back into the ACA coverage before they need another round of expensive medical treatment, receive it and then drop out of the ACA again right after and stop paying premiums again until the next time they need medical care.



This was all predicted as far back as HillaryCare in 1993. Everyone knew it would happen if set up like this without any penalties or restrictions. Obamacare is just HillaryCare on steroids.



Here's some news headlines you won't see coming out of the Obama White House on the ACA, especially not when they are waving the banner of successfully completing the Iran Deal that apparently only they and 21% of the American people want in the first place:



'Nationally, the federal government reported that 11.7 million people had signed up for ACA coverage by the February end of the enrollment period for 2015. By the end of June, the number still enrolled had dropped by 1.8 million, to about 9.9 million'



As a result, BCBSNC has asked the state of North Carolina for another large rate increase, now for the 3rd year running, this time of close to 35% over last year.



We took out a blunt pencil and figured out that had the ACA not passed in 2010, our individual health care premium would today be over 50% less than it is expected to be for 2016.



Yours might be more. If you are working for a big company that is paying for most of your premiums or a large university or large non-profit organization, you probably don't feel the sting of these exorbitant and almost usurious health insurance rate increases.



But rest assured, every small business person or self-employed individual is taking the full brunt of the Wile E. Coyotes in the Obama Administration such as Jonathan Gruber who thought they were 'Super Geniuses' and had concocted the perfect health care insurance system in 2010.



All we can say is we agree with Bugs Bunny when he says at the end of this embedded clip:



"'Mud' spelled backwards is 'dum'"

We don't know what 'Obamacare' or 'Gruber' spelled backwards means. But it is apparently not 'smart' or 'perfect' by any stretch of the canine imagination.