Lucy Larner

June 17, 2015

Since the 1950s, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has permitted nonprofit hospitals to qualify as charitable tax-exempt organizations, allowing them to receive donations and, as a rule, be exempt from federal and state corporate taxes as well as state and local sales and local property taxes. In exchange, they must provide charity care to patients unable to pay, and proactively engage in activities that benefit their communities.

A new study, released by Health Affairs as a Web First, estimates the total value of the exemption to US nonprofit hospitals in 2011 at $24.6 billion. This compares to the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation’s $12.6 billion estimate for 2002. Authors Sara Rosenbaum, David Kindig, Jie Bao, Maureen Brynes, and Colin O’Laughlin found considerable variation in tax benefits by state, driven by several factors, including differences in state tax policy.

Another important study finding: according to recent IRS estimates, only 8 percent of the $62 billion that the hospitals spent in 2011 for community benefits went to community health improvements. By contrast, hospitals allocated the single greatest proportion of their community benefit expenditures—one-third of all community benefit spending—to offset what they reported as Medicaid “shortfalls.”

For the study, the authors identified 2,980 private nonprofit hospitals. The primary sources for the data were the 2011 cost reports from the Healthcare Cost Report Information System (HCRIS) maintained by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the hospitals’ 2011 Form 990s, maintained by the IRS and available to the public.

“The Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires tax-exempt hospitals to engage in communitywide planning efforts to improve community health,” observed the authors. “We hope that as the ACA’s insurance reforms continue to take hold, the resulting reductions in uncompensated care will lead hospitals to increasingly expand their mission to include community health improvement.”

This study will also appear in the July issue of Health Affairs. It was supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

Rosenbaum and Byrnes are with the George Washington University in Washington, DC; Kindig is an emeritus professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison; and Bao and O’Laughlin are affiliated with Avalere Health, also in Washington, DC.