Last year, after Sue Gallant’s beloved 13-year-old springer spaniel, Apple Dumpling, died, the Hampden resident knew there was another dog in her future.

“I have always had dogs,” she said.

When her children were young, there was a much loved golden retriever. Later, she and her husband took in their daughter’s mid-sized, mixed-breed dog. And then there was Apple, rescued in 2005 when the state shut down a large breeding operation in Dover-Foxcroft.

“This time, I thought I should get something smaller, easier to take care of and easier to travel with,” said Gallant, who is in her mid-60s.

But instead of the lap dog she envisioned, she came home from the Bangor Humane Society with Bubba, a 6-year-old, 85-pound yellow Labrador retriever.

“The only thing that fits in my lap is his head,” she joked in a recent conversation. “He is the antithesis of what I was looking for. But he is a wonderful dog — everything I wanted and more.”

Veterinarian David Cloutier of the Veazie Veterinary Clinic says many dog-lovers decide to downsize their dogs as they get older, for reasons ranging from ease of handling to portability.

“A lot of young families want a big, high-energy, durable dog like a Lab to play with the kids out in the yard,” he said. But older people often find that a large breed, however beloved, no longer suits their needs.

For one thing, the complications of human aging can make it hard to manage a big dog that needs a lot of exercise and training, he said. But even healthy, active older adults may prefer the convenience of a smaller breed.

“If you travel by air, a small dog can fit in a carrier under the seat,” Cloutier said. “If you enjoy visiting friends and family, a small dog is generally a more welcome houseguest than a big, rambunctious dog.”

Cloutier said most veterinarians are happy to help their clients find a new pet.

If a purebred dog is their preference, Cloutier says it’s essential to work with a reputable breeder. However, mixed-breed dogs also can be a good choice, he said, including dogs adopted from a shelter or rescue organization.

“Dogs are never at their best in a shelter,” he said, “so it’s important to spend as much time as possible getting to know them.”

At the Bangor Humane Society, Stacey Coventry said finding the right match is key to a happy adoption. An older dog or one with separation anxiety will generally do well in a home where there isn’t a lot of coming and going, for example, while an rambunctious younger dog is a good choice for a more active owner.

Cost can be another important consideration for older dog-owners, Coventry said, including food, grooming and veterinary care.

“We try to get people to think about it rationally, not just with their hearts,” she said.

But Coventry said there’s no reason an energetic older adopter such as Gallant, who has the support of her husband and adult children as well as an appropriate home setting, shouldn’t adopt a big dog such as Bubba.

“He has no issues and no bad habits,” Coventry said. “If you really fall in love with an 85-pound Lab, we would never tell you you shouldn’t have that dog.”

Gallant couldn’t agree more.

“My daughter told me not to pass up the right dog just because it was big,” she said with a chuckle. “I was trying to turn myself into a small-dog person, and I ended up with a horse.”