Maybe it's women coming to Michigan from Ohio and Indiana to obtain an abortion.

Maybe it's a 2012 Michigan law that tightened the penalties for clinics failing to report abortion procedures.

Maybe it's the drop in state funding for family planning.

There are multiple speculations as to why Michigan's abortion rate is going up at a time when the rest of the nation is trending downward.

According to the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, a total of 27,629 abortions were performed in Michigan in 2014, up 6 percent from 2013 and 19 percent from 2009.

That's counter to a national trend, in which abortions dropped 11 percent nationwide between 2009 and 2012, the latest year in which national numbers are available. Michigan and Louisiana are the only states seeing significant increases in abortions in recent years, according to a survey conducted earlier this year by the Associated Press.

State health officials declined to comment on the state numbers beyond their annual report.

But Genevieve Marnon of Michigan Right to Life and Lori Carpentier, chief executive officer of Planned Parenthood of Mid and South Michigan, offered several theories.

In fact, Marnon said, the increase in abortions was "something we anticipated."

The reason: In 2012, the Michigan Legislature tightened requirements for abortion clinics and also stiffened the penalties for failing to report the procedure.

Marnon said the bill reduced the number of abortion clinics in Michigan from 35 to 19.

"Some of the worst practitioners went out of business, and we're convinced they weren't reporting the abortions they were doing," Marnon said.

As an example, she cited the closing of the Women's Medical Services clinic in Muskegon in 2013.

"The state never reported abortions performed in Muskegon," even though Women's Medical Services offered the procedure, Marnon said.

"Now women are going to other clinics and the numbers are more accurate," Marnon said.

Under-reporting in the past may explain why Michigan's abortion rate per 1,000 women was consistently below the national rate until now.

Carpentier agrees the 2012 law likely resulted in more accurate reporting of abortions.

"I seldom agree with Right to Life, but that seems plausible," Carpentier said.

Carpentier and Marnon also agree that a factor in the rise in abortions in Michigan is an increased number of patients from out of state.

"We're getting a higher number of what I call medical refugees from Indiana and Ohio," where clinics have closed, Carpentier said.

In particular, Marnon pointed to the closing of an abortion clinic in Toledo. According to Marnon, the clinic's phone number was purchased by a chain of women's health centers in metro Detroit, so that when women called the closed clinic in Toledo, they reached a center in Michigan.

Although state data does not break down abortion numbers by the counties in which they occur, the numbers do show the number of out-of-state patients more than doubled from 553 in 2009 to 1,308 in 2014.

Demographics and the economy

Another explanation for the increase in abortions could be simple demographics, Carpentier and Marnon said.

While the female population age 15 to 44 declined in Michigan between 2009 and 2014, the proportion of 20-somethings increased — and it's women in their 20s who obtain the bulk of abortions.

Michigan's still-struggling economy also is a likely factor, they say.

A close scrutiny of the numbers shows the biggest increase in abortions has occurred among black women — up 41 percent between 2009 and 2015.

African-Americans now obtain half of the abortions in Michigan, although black women are 16 percent of Michigan's female population.

"That statistic should be screamed from the rooftops," Marnon said. "This is a real tragedy for the black community."

Both Marnon and Carpentier said the increase in abortions in black women is likely driven by the lingering impact of the recent recession, which disproportionately affected black families.

"Sure, poverty plays into the numbers," Marnon said. "We recognized it's an unfortunate reality that some people feel they don't have a choice" if they become pregnant and lack the economic means to have another child.

She noted that Right to Life operates pregnancy resource centers in high-poverty neighborhoods to support such women.

It's a terrible message, Marnon said, "to tell women that because you're in poverty, you need to kill your child."

Role of contraceptives

Carpentier suggests yet another possible reason for the abortion increase is the cut in state dollars for family planning services.

"The federal dollars have been stable, but the state's contribution has gone from several million dollars to less than $300,000," Carpentier said.

"That means fewer people have had access to subsidized family planning," which theoretically has increased the number of unwanted pregnancies and potentially led to more abortions, Carpentier said.

Marnon discounts that idea, pointing to a Guttmacher Institute study that found more than half of women who obtain abortions were using contraceptives during the month they conceived.

"There's a lot of user error," Marnon said. "The idea that increased access would eliminated unwanted pregnancies is laughable."

But experts say contraceptives play a major role in reducing abortion.

"Unintended pregnancy is the major contributor to abortion, and unintended pregnancies are rare among women who use the most effective methods of contraception," said a CDC report released two weeks ago.

"Increasing access to and use of these methods can help further reduce the number of unintended pregnancies, and therefore abortions, performed in the United States," the report said.

Outside of sterilization, the most effective methods of birth control are the IUD and an implant inserted in a woman's arm, according to the CDC. However, those two methods also have the biggest upfront costs, which can limit access to low-income women.

The Affordable Care Act should improve access to contraceptives, "but it will be a few years before we see the impact of that," said Carpentier.

Marnon said she is skeptical the ACA will bring down abortion numbers, "but I'll be happy if that happens."

"What we care about," she said, "is babies' lives being saved."

See the county database

This database shows the breakdown of abortion patients by county. Note: The numbers reflect where the women live versus where the abortion was performed. So an abortion performed in Kent County for an Allegan County resident is recorded under Allegan County.

Database: Abortions by county

Julie Mack is a reporter for MLive.com. Email her at jmack1@mlive.com, call her at 269-350-0277 or follow her on Twitter @kzjuliemack.

RELATED:

Who gets abortions in Michigan, and 11 other facts on abortion

More MLive Data Mine posts

Other searchable databases from MLive