Bernie and Donald and The Animal Farm

I’d rather President Bernie Sanders to President Donald J. Trump largely because I don’t believe the old Muppet would make it a matter of proud public policy to institute the torture regime of Oliver Cromwell on Iraqi five year olds. (Bernie Sanders’s CIA would still torture people, and he would probably make an awful foreign policy decision before his 82nd birthday, but it wouldn’t be nearly as blatant.) And Sanders does have a little bit to offer civil libertarians. He did actually vote against the Iraq War and the Patriot Act, and he offers benign if slightly incoherent ruminations on the fate of Edward Snowden, but aside from these unfortunately marginal issues Trump and Sanders are essentially the same man.

Trump, in a rare movement of real cleverness recently said of Bernie Sanders, “The one thing we very much agree on is trade. We both agree that we are getting ripped off by China, by Japan, by Mexico, everyone we do business with.” Young liberals, 92% of the people in my graduate courses, hear something like this and get vaguely angry. Their sense of multicultural decency is offended. They, being honest here, hate America’s relationship with the world so much that the thought of an advanced democracy like Japan or a country which supposedly needs our protection like Mexico ripping us off is beyond belief. I don’t know too many Trump supporters, but I’d assume the rhetoric of conflict excites them. Here’s what Sanders had to say on the TPP, “This agreement follows failed trade deals with Mexico, China and other low-wage countries that have cost millions of jobs and shuttered tens of thousands of factories across the United States.” This my college students can get behind! It sounds like he’s in it for the little guy, the brown-skinned foreigners who didn’t have jobs before the corporations started investing in their company and now suffer the indignity of working for low wages included. I’m sure Trump’s fans would have turned back to Wrestlemania by the end of Sanders’s sentence, but it matters little because what’s really fascinating is that two groups of people who are supposedly diametrically opposed are voting for the same position.

But how about immigration? Sanders says on his website, “We are a nation of immigrants. I am the son of an immigrant myself. Their story, my story, our story is a story of America: hard-working families coming to the United States to create a brighter future for their children. The story of immigrants is the story of America, a story rooted in family and fueled by hope. It continues today in families all across the United States.” It brings a tear to your eye, really does. Trump is obviously famous for his performance art against Mexican rapists, so we’re obviously at a stand-off right? In 2007, in a major legislative showdown, Bernie worked with far-right Iowa Republican Senator Chuck Grassley to kill a comprehension immigration reform bill being pushed by John McCain and the late Teddy Kennedy. Trump, another flip-flop, said in 2012 that ” Republicans need take care of this incredible problem that we have with respect to immigration, with respect to people wanting to be wonderful productive citizens of this country.” Brings a tear to your other eye. So immigration activists, devotees of Ann Coulter…who ya got?

Health care! Trump’s a Reaganesque paragon of right-wing America. Doesn’t he have to be? According to Politico.com Trump recently told a group of New Hampshire lawmakers, “I want to get rid of Obamacare and get you something great. We have some people that won’t be able to live. We have to help people. Don’t we have to help? What are we going to do, let them die in the street?” This is one of the most liberal exclamations for healthcare I’ve ever seen. Trump’s made a few random statements about market based healthcare, but his sentiment, expressed after a New Hampshire primary he just furiously won, is that Obamacare doesn’t help enough people and needs to be replaced with something which is going to help more people. Bernie Sanders’s website says on healthcare, “But as we move forward, we must build upon the success of the ACA to achieve the goal of universal health care. Twenty-nine million Americans today still do not have health insurance and millions more are underinsured and cannot afford the high copayments and deductibles charged by private health insurance companies that put profits before people.” The Affordable Care Act isn’t helping enough people…we need to find something better. The only real difference is literally that Bernie Sanders’s pays lip-service to Obama passed legislation and Trump doesn’t so, Gang A supports Trump and Gang B supports Sanders. Gang B ought to listen closely and pay a moment of attention to actual governance because the Republicans have majorities in both houses of Congress and it’d be a lot easier for a Pseudo-Republican to pass any sort of legislation than an avowed socialist. So I’ll say again what’s the flipping difference?

In an interview with The Hill last month Donald Trump, talking from a point of significant experience, told his interviewer upon being asked a question about the values of politicians, “Somebody gives them money, not anything wrong, just psychologically when they go to that person, they’re going to do it,” he added. “They owe them. And by the way, they may therefore vote negatively toward the country.” Listen to him, he sounds vaguely Marxist–much like, “Let’s be honest and acknowledge what we are talking about. We are talking about a rapid movement in this country toward a political system in which a handful of very wealthy people and special interests will determine who gets elected or who does not get elected.” Bernie–save our democracy Sanders!

We could actually do this for quite a while longer, foreign policy, both men were against the Iraq War in 2003 while Madame Clinton was not. And Clinton’s even more hawkish on dealing with the Russians than Sanders-Trump, so what per-tell is the point of all this? Do you care about vulgarism so much that you’ll never vote for a vulgar man? Fine. Where was that Puritanism when Bill Clinton was harassing women? No, then…then everyone was a grand pragmatist policy-wonk. Well Donald Trump is the most liberal policy republican since Richard Nixon. It doesn’t matter. Those people I don’t like or voting for Trump so he’s a crass and vulgar jerk, and the Trumpkins hate socialism when they’re all socialist-lite. They’re not precisely the same man, but listen to Trump. He’s far closer to what you want than Marco Rubio and even the supposedly lovely pragmatist John Kasich.

During his victory speech in New Hampshire on Tuesday Bernie Sanders did something interesting. He surveyed his audience mid speech and paused for a second…slowly–dramatically building tension–he slyly asked his audience “Now, do you want to hear a realll radical idea?” The audience went wild. It’s worth noting because it’s a Trump trick, but instead of radial Trump will say un-pc or something. The Middle America version of vulgar. He’d done it a few days earlier. To every liberal who still believes Bernie and Donald are polar opposites, watch a Bernie Sanders stump speech. Watch his riling the young folk up against “enemies,” and the talk of changing the system. Listen to how light on policy he can actually be. (No serious liberal economist thinks the bank failed in 2008 because of the Bush tax cuts of 2001.) It gets hard to distinguish, when you look at man and beast, which is which.

By: Luke Scarpa

Edited by:M.Al-waadh