The AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am is one PGA Tour event that players and celebrities look forward to each season, if for no other reason than to see what crazy clothes Bill Murray is wearing. Pebble Beach is known for its great weather, breathtaking views and sandy beaches. It is located on the Monterey Peninsula in Monterey County, Calif.

There were a number of great stories at this year’s AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am. Vaughn Taylor, who lost his game over the years, rallied on Sunday to win for the first time in a decade. With his win, the one-time Ryder Cup player punched his ticket to the Masters.

Earlier in the week during a practice round, Jordan Spieth, the No. 1 golfer in the world had a great moment with his caddie Michael Greller.

Greller, stepped to the tee box on the stunning par-3 seventh hole, and hit a full on shank. Spieth’s reaction to the shot is priceless: Afer Greller’s chili pepper, you can hear Spieth and the rest of the group laughing as Greller walks back to the bag.

Check out the full video below.



What’s worse than a shank at Pebble?… A shank with World No. 1 @JordanSpieth watching. Sorry, @Michael_Greller.https://t.co/ZeKKf65P9R — Under Armour Golf (@UAGolf) February 11, 2016

Justin Timberlake also joined the party while playing at Spyglass Hill, the second course used during the AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am.

Timberlake, playing alongside tour pro Justin Rose took a moment to serenade a small group of fans after the music star spotted a fan carrying a guitar.

Timberlake also did “The Carlton” dance from The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air with the the man who made if famous, Alfonso Ribeiro.

Spieth had another great moment Sunday on the practice putting green after his putter was taken away from him. While waiting to tee off, Dustin Johnson’s son, Tatum, for a moment stole Spieth’s putter.

The moment was captured by Janet Gretzky, the mother of Johnson’s fiancee, Paulina Gretzky. Below is the video she posed on Instagram.

A video posted by @janetgretzky on Feb 13, 2016 at 6:26pm PST

Fan favorite Bill Murray was not hard to spot on Saturday at Pebble, as the lifelong Chicago Cubs fan was spotted wearing some amazing Cubs pants. Check them out below.