An anonymous forum app is becoming more popular at Kansas schools.

The app “After School” is free from the app store on Apple iOS products like iPhones and iPads; the app is not available on Android or Windows phones.

The app allows students of their respective school to post anonymously on a forum board. It is similar to Twitter or Facebook but the user is not identified.

After School COO and co-creator Cory Levy says that the app’s staff monitor the posting and stop bullying all hours of the day, every day of the year.

“We will ban users if we see that their posts are constantly being flagged,” Levy said.

Levy, 23-years-old, says that the San Francisco based app has a staff of 25-to-50 people watch for posts and investigate when someone flags a post.

The app operates with no ads, Levy says the app is not profitable for him and that investors that back the app pay for the staff of monitors.

Levy insists that the app has many benefits. “Thousands of kids every single month that aren’t going to the school counselor, but coming to us,” he said referring to a previous statement he made about how students that have personal problems can get help using the app. Levy says that the app uses counselors to help students that are having a hard time, dealing with depression or having emotional issues.

Levy says that the anonymous element to his app allows students to be more open, but users can be tracked down if they are misusing the app.

Bullying expert Randy Wiler of the Kansas Bullying Prevention Program sees the app as a way to foster bullying.

“The concern is that there could be some bullying taking place…they can get alerts from other students in the school and then have quite the conversation and no one would know,” Wiler said.

The Kansas Bullying Prevention Program helps people identify bullying and how to handle it. The program is not only used in Kansas, but also helps serve Missouri. Click hereto be redirected to their website.

Wiler says that it is important for parents to identify bullying and try to stop it.

In Kansas, there is a law that makes online harassment illegal and punishable by a court of law. Click here to view the law. If a owner a phone that they give to their someone (such as a parent giving their child a phone) and knowingly allow someone to harass another on the phone, the owner of the phone can be prosecuted under Kansas law.

Wiler has three steps for children to deal with bullying online.

1) Preserve evidence; take screen-grabs of the bullying every time it happens.

2) Tell their parents; many times children will bypass their parents because of the fear they will lose privilege to their phones, even though they are the victim.

3) Contact police if the harassment is happening two-to-three times a month.

The app allows parents to add controls, but in order to do that, the parents has to have access to the phone with the app installed on it.

Wiler says that if a parent is paying for the phone, they should reserve the right to view the phone. He says children that are not doing anything bad should have nothing to worry about by having their parents or guardians look at the phone.

“Technology is their lifeline to the world,” Wiler said, “kids would endure [bullying] so they don’t risk loosing their phones.” He says that parents need to be upfront with their children and let them know that if they are not doing anything wrong, they will not loose their phone.

Many schools in Kansas are blocking the app from being used over the school’s Wi-Fi networks. Andover, Augusta, El Dorado, Haysville, Hutchinson and Wichita have the app blocked from being accessed on the school’s Internet. It is important to note that many schools block most forms of social media, such as Facebook, Twitter and Snapchat.

Levy says that the app was not intended to be used during school, even the name suggest that. “We want ‘After School’ to be the digital destination after school, not during school,” Levy said.

The app offers four levels of protection against bullying. It automatically filters keywords that bullies use or words used in threats; the “After School” staff monitor the apps usage; users of the app can flag material that is offensive or mean; and parents can control parts of the app.

“After School” was introduced onto the app market in November of 2014, updated in April of 2015. Levy did not have specific numbers on user of the app, but did say that there were hundreds of thousands of users and is accessible to students in over 20,000 schools.