Monterey County Health Director Ray Bullick said he plans to return to Visalia, where he previously headed up the Tulare County health department, to spend time with family in retirement. (David Royal - Monterey Herald)

Salinas >> It’s only been 5½ years since Ray Bullick took over as Monterey County’s director of health, but plenty of change has occurred in the Health Department during his short tenure.

Bullick, who plans to retire from heading up the county’s largest department next week, has overseen everything from the implementation of the Affordable Care Act to the designation of the county’s first Level II trauma center at county-owned Natividad Medical Center, as well as a shift toward community health policymaking.

The 62-year-old Bullick is retiring as the head of a 1,000-employee department with a $200 million annual budget for personal reasons, although he won’t get into specifics. He says part of him would also like to stay on until he was 65.

“There’s a lot left to be done, and we have a core of department managers really on board, and that makes it really difficult to leave,” he said. “Sometimes the decision is made for you.”

On Tuesday, the Board of Supervisors is set to recognize Bullick’s work at the head of the department charged with everything from behavioral health and emergency medical services to environmental health and animal services.

Bullick says his proudest achievement during his tenure was an “evolution” toward long-term strategic planning and policy aimed at improving community health and health equity.

“One of the things I’m most proud of is changing our strategic plan approach,” Bullick said. “That’s been the driving force to moving in the direction we’re going. If I’m going to be known for one thing, that would be it. That’s going to be an asset for a long time, and the Board of Supervisors has been very supportive. The board established community health as a priority and we need that long-term thinking.”

Under his watch, the county health department initiated its first-ever five-year strategic plan covering 2011-15 that established a policy blueprint for taking aim at addressing health inequities based on ethnicity, environment and education, and established a new policy and planning unit headed by Dr. Krista Hanni.

During that time, the department implemented a Health in all Policies initiative that sought to incorporate community health into decisions involving everything from land use to public safety, and helped implement an Early Childhood Development initiative that focused on the link between third-grade literacy and crime. It also helped influence the direction of the county’s Gang Violence Prevention initiative, renamed the “Action Plan for Building Safe and Thriving Communities.”

Advertisement

And the department actively worked with the California Endowment-funded Building Healthy Communities program focused on improving community health in East Salinas through a range of initiatives including political activism.

Supervisor Simon Salinas said Bullick brought “a lot of new ideas” to bear on improving community health during his time with the county, noting that Bullick oversaw expansion of health services to his constituents in the Salinas Valley.

“He really pushed for accessibility to health and mental health services,” Salinas said.

Supervisor Jane Parker said Bullick was instrumental in developing both the ViaCare program for the uninsured as a bridge to the ACA and the pilot program offering limited health care services to county residents in the country illegally. Parker said he also devoted a lot of time and energy to collaborating with other county departments and community organizations. He worked on everything from alternatives to incarceration and rehabilitation and treatment for substance abuse to homelessness.

“He was in the middle of all these big changes happening,” she said. “I’m sad to see him leave.”

Bullick said he plans to return to Visalia, where he previously headed up the Tulare County health department, to spend time with family in retirement. He said he would have liked to have stayed with Monterey County until age 65, noting a list of initiatives that still need to be completed. Those range from developing a “stronger nexus” between the county health department and Natividad offering fully coordinated services to a safe drinking water ordinance and joint management of animal services between the county and the city of Salinas.

The department is also poised to attain national accreditation status after years of effort by this summer.

Bullick rejected any notion that his departure was related to several lawsuits filed by current and former county health employees, mostly from Behavioral Health and the Public Guardian unit, calling them simply personnel issues.

Jim Johnson can be reached at 831-726-4348.