There was a time when Wes Welker was recovering from his second concussion that he felt he was ready to play.

The Broncos’ medical team held the star slot receiver out a while longer anyway, and in retrospect he’s glad for it.

“It took a little bit of time,” Welker said Thursday in his first interview since his second concussion in a three-week period. “Even when I felt I was 100 percent, looking back you weren’t 100 percent. It’s always a tricky injury and just trying to manage it and everything else, but the doctors and trainers did a great job of just doing the things necessary to get me back out on the field.”

Welker first suffered a concussion Nov. 17 during a game against Kansas City. He passed the NFL’s concussion protocol tests and was cleared to play in the next game, Nov. 24 against his former team, New England.

Welker also played Dec. 1 in a rematch with Kansas City. He was crossing the middle for a Peyton Manning pass against Tennessee on Dec. 8 when he was hit by Titans safety Bernard Pollard.

That concussion knocked Welker out of the game and he was held out of the Broncos’ final three regular-season games. He finished with 73 catches, his lowest total in seven years. But his 10 touchdown receptions were a personal best.

Welker was cleared for full football activity this week. He will play in the Broncos’ playoff opener Jan. 12 at Sports Authority Field at Mile High against Indianapolis, Kansas City or San Diego.

Still, with all the numbing information that has come out in recent years about the long-term effects of concussions, there is concern as to whether Welker should play at all this postseason.

“Of course, you’re always concerned any time you get a concussion,” Welker said. “Really, I feel good. I think we’ve taken a lot more action than what we would have in the past with this whole ordeal. I think we’ve taken enough time. It will be five weeks from the day I had any contact at all. I feel good. I feel fine. I’m ready to go.”

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis