I am signing a Local Disaster Declaration due to widespread weather damage. Please help our response by staying home and off roads/scenes. — Judge Clay Jenkins (@JudgeClayJ) December 27, 2015

Updated at 11:55 p.m.: Revised to include information on Glenn Heights. Rescue workers were scrambling Saturday night to offer help to families displaced after at least three tornadoes swept across North Texas. Glenn Heights was without power and declared in a state of emergency Saturday night after more than 100 homes were damaged in the city. The community also remained under curfew until 7 a.m. Sunday while workers assessed the damage, cleared debris and fixed power and gas lines, said Millicent West, Glenn Heights emergency management specialist. As many as 75 homes were heavily damaged or completely destroyed and another 75 were damaged. The Ovilla Road Church of the Nazarene was destroyed as well. All of the damage was contained in a 2-mile stretch along Hampton Road near Ovilla Road, West said. But, she said, no one was seriously injured. The storm continued north into DeSoto. Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins has signed a local disaster declaration in the wake of the tornadoes that claimed at least eight lives by 11 p.m. Saturday. Most of the storms were localized to the eastern edges of Ellis, Collin and Dallas counties. “Tonight was obviously a destructive night and a deadly night,” said American Red Cross spokeswoman Anita Foster. “When we lose people in disasters it really does bring home the gravity of what nature can do in a community.” City and county officials are still sorting through the damage, and there were no firm numbers of how many homes were damaged in the storms. Foster said Red Cross volunteers have been fanning out across the area to figure out where they are most needed. At least six Dallas police officers were among those who lost homes and vehicles in Rockwall and Ellis counties, said Sr. Cpl. Frederick Frazier, first Vice President of Dallas Police Association. He said the Assist the Officer Foundation will provide help for the officers. Go to atodallas.org. Donations can be made at RedCross.org or by texting Red Cross to 90999 to give $10. In the wake of the storms, authorities have been warning people to stay inside. Dallas city officials have been reiterating “turn around, don’t drown” after the National Weather Service issued flash flood watches and warnings. Steady rainfall is expected Sunday. Collin County officials also urged people to stay away from the worst disaster areas in Copeville.

TEXAS: As storms cross our state please heed warnings of local officials & stay safe. #txlege — Greg Abbott (@GregAbbott_TX) December 27, 2015

Complete coverage of the storm’s devastation

‘Total devastation’: Residents, emergency crews work frantically after tornadoes

Tornado in Rowlett classified as EF3; 11 confirmed dead in storms in Garland, Collin County

Officials identify six of eight tornado victims who died in Garland

Storm damages over 100 buildings in Glenn Heights

Floyd: Weather’s tragic capriciousness is still beyond our control

NBC5: Staff shortage left NWS scrambling to cover tornado outbreak

Colliding weather systems caused tornado outbreak

Gov. Abbott offers condolences, says state is taking action in midst of storms

Rescue workers assessing damage, needs in wake of tornadoes across North Texas

Tracking the storm

Interactive map shows storm’s route of destruction in North Texas

After the storm: Before and after images of the damage done by December tornadoes in North

Video, photos, tweets show massive damage tornadoes brought to North Texas

Updated photos: Daylight reveals damage from D-FW holiday season storm

El Paso to East Texas: Widespread images/video of extreme weather shake social media

Tales from the damage

Heartbreaking call during storm was Mesquite couple’s last

Survivor stories: Ruined churches, a flying lawnmower and a truck ride through the air

Editorial: What’s stronger than even catastrophic tornadoes? North Texans

Video: Glenn Heights family reunited with dog after tornado

Children hide under mattress as house falls around them

Resources

How you can help | How to get help

Resources for tracking lost pets in North Texas storms

Shelters are popping up in wake of tornado damage across North Texas

Watchdog: In tornado’s wake, protect yourself from bad builders’ scams

Check here for pet shelter updates

Managing traumatic stress after a tornado