I admit that I have been biting my tongue during the post-Synod 2015 firestorm about New York Times columnist Ross Douthat and the large army of liberal Catholic academics who have expressed their displeasure that such a theological lightweight has been allowed to comment on the Catholic faith in the world's most influential op-ed space.

Surely readers will join me in being shocked, shocked that a Times columnist has published controversial commentary about the Catholic Church. Can I get an "Amen"?

I mean, this is the same editorial setting in which a columnist named Bill Keller -- a few months after 9/11 -- compared the Catholic leadership, in the era of Pope St. John Paul II, with al-Qaeda. Readers may, or may not, recall the outcry from Catholic progressives in the wake of these words from Keller's May 4, 2002, column entitled "Is the Pope Catholic?"

What reform might mean in the church is something I leave to Catholics who care more than I do. ... But the struggle within the church is interesting as part of a larger struggle within the human race, between the forces of tolerance and absolutism. That is a struggle that has given rise to great migrations (including the one that created this country) and great wars (including one we are fighting this moment against a most virulent strain of intolerance).

The Catholic Church has not, over the centuries, been a stronghold of small-c catholic values, which my dictionary defines as "broad in sympathies, tastes, or understanding; liberal." This is, after all, the church that gave us the Crusades and the Inquisition.

So what happened to Keller after that theological outburst? A year later he was named executive editor of the Times.

Back to Douthat and his theological commentary about Pope Francis and the 2015 Synod of Bishops. You see, there is a journalistic issue here that affects reporters covering hard news events and trends, as well as commentary writers who are free to write their own opinions.

Religion writers past and present: Have you ever written about arguments inside religious institutions and, after quoting academics involved in these nasty fights, faced letters to your employer saying that you were not smart enough, or theological skilled enough, to understand what people were saying?

This has happened to me on the theological right and left, first in the Southern Baptist civil war era (while at The Charlotte Observer) and then covering fights among old-line Protestants over gender-neutral language for God (while at The Rocky Mountain News, RIP). In both cases, it didn't matter that my quotes were accurate, coming from audio recordings or even printed documents. What mattered was that arguments these insiders wanted to conduct in private were suddenly printed, and thus debated, in public.

In Douthat's case, the crucial fact is that he -- as a pro-Catechism Catholic -- has offended members of the liberal Catholic establishment by voicing opinions, and quoting key church documents, in an intellectual space that they have had every right to think of as their own. (If you want to catch up on the firestorm surrounding Douthat, click here for some heated commentary by Rod "friend of this blog" Dreher. The key is that Rod's piece contains plenty of URLs to tweets, columns, letters and other writings linked to the case.)

Now, veteran religion-beat professional Kenneth Woodward -- best known for his decades of work at Newsweek -- has offered his thoughts on the Douthat affair at First Things. You will need to read it all, but here is a large sample: