The Break of Dawn Restaurant has opened at its new location at 24291 Avenida de la Carlota in Laguna Hills, after the landlord at its old location in the Oakbrook Village decided to build an apartment complex, said owner and chef Dee Nguyen. The smooth, planned transition to the new location turned out to be more than three months of lost business, he said.

Nguyen built the new location with three R’s in mind: reduce, reuse and recycle, he said. The walls are covered with original graffiti art work by his friend Steve Wan, reclaimed wood, and metal from an old tin roof. Tables are made of reclaimed pallet wood and erected by old cast iron legs of vintage sewing machines.

The restaurant is inspired by his son Berlin, who has Eagle-Barrett syndrome. While undergoing one of his treatments, Berlin’s breathing tube became blocked by mucus, causing him to go without oxygen for more than 10 minutes, Nguyen said. He spent a month in a coma and sustained devastating effects from the loss of air.

The restaurant’s name indicates a new beginning, a new take on life, Nguyen said. He left his job as executive sous chef at the Ritz-Carlton Laguna Niguel and opened his own restaurant in 2006, 3 miles from home to be able to better help Berlin.

The restaurant offers everything from house-cured pork belly and lamb ragu to chicken stew and duck fat omelet.

Mission Viejo resident Karolyn McCarter plans to open a retail clothing franchise store called Other Mothers Trendy Trades in the Oaktree Village Shopping Center at 23162 Los Alisos Boulevard in Mission Viejo in mid-September, she said. The 6,716-square-foot store, which had its conditional use permit approved by the Mission Viejo Planning and Transportation Commission this month, will sell new and used items, including clothes, jewelry, shoes and baby items.

The franchise, which was started by a friend of McCarter in 1979, has other locations in Arizona, New Mexico and Wisconsin, but the Mission Viejo store would be the first in California, she said.

The business concept includes taking items in on trade and getting store credit for 35 percent of the sale price.

Gully Rosinkranz-McFatridge of Ladera Ranch has launched a business where she takes raw elements from nature and transforms them into Iceland-inspired work of arts. The company – RawModern – creates handmade and carved wooden items such as furniture, wreaths, candle holders and family plaques, which she sells online at etsy.com/shop/RAW modern.

“My passion is to work with raw and natural elements and make something ordinary out of it,” Rosinkranz-McFatridge said.

The Lake Forest Chamber of Commerce recently held a ribbon-cutting event for Diversified Medical Equipment and Supplies, 24371 El Toro Road in Laguna Woods. The retail store provides medical supplies for South County customers who have an injury or disability and need equipment at home, said owner Adrian Ioja, who also has locations in Huntington Beach and Los Alamitos. The company has grown as a result of the Affordable Care Act’s implementation, he said.

We R Fabrics Inc. at 25787 Obrero Drive in Mission Viejo is preparing to close its door after 30 years in business at the same location, said owner Heidi Leverant. After trying to sell the business without success, Leverant decided to close it down in October, she said. Until then, the 7,000-square-foot location that makes custom home decor, curtains, drapery, cushions and pillows will try to sell off as much of its inventory as possible for 40 to as much as 75 percent off, she said.

The Coldwater Creek clothing store at the Shops of Mission Viejo is closing at the end of the month, store workers said. A sale is underway with 60 percent to 80 percent off.

Another store that is leaving the Shops of Mission Viejo is Arden B, which is set to close in August, store workers said. Foothill Ranch-based Wet Seal Plus is expected to relocate its Shops of Mission Viejo store to that location, workers said. Both retailers are owned by the same company.

Boutique spinning studio Ignite Cycle has opened at 1501 Corporate Drive in Ladera Ranch. The studio, which uses Freemotion carbon bikes that show heart rate and burned calories, is owned by April Ferrara. There are no membership fees, and the first three rides are free.

The Mission Viejo Chamber of Commerce will hold a free business expo from 4 to 8 p.m. on Sept. 10 at the Norman P. Murray Community and Senior Center, 24932 Veterans Way in Mission Viejo.

Exhibitors are needed. Register at missionviejochamber.com

Contact the columnist at ekbergpadilla@hotmail.com