Participants compete to raise money for A Woman's Work, perform with a cappella band

This summer, some Colorado residents are hoping to buy their way on stage to perform with Face, an a cappella rock band.

To donate Visit: tinyurl.com/FaceOffProfiles To compete A Woman's Work will accept new participants through Aug. 1. Visit: tinyurl.com/FaceOffSignUp If you go What: Vocal Face Off fundraiser and concert When: 6:30 to 8:30 p.m. Aug. 10 Where: LifeBridge Christian Church, 10345 Ute Highway, Longmont Cost: $10, ages 10 and under; $15, general admission; $25, reserved seating More info: tinyurl.com/FaceOffConcert Preview the band Watch videos of Face performing at secondstorygarage.com

Longmont-based nonprofit A Woman's Work, which offers financial support to women in the St. Vrain Valley whose needs cannot be met through other methods and must, in return, peform an act of kindness, is pitting its supporters from Boulder County, Carbon Valley and Denver against one another in a new fundraising competition called Vocal Face Off.

Advertisement

Participants are collecting donations for the organization through Aug. 1. The top four fundraisers will perform with the Boulder County band during the group's only Longmont show this year, Aug. 10 at LifeBridge Christian Church.

The nonprofit decided to ditch its Magnificent Men fundraiser, which raised more than $70,000 last year, for something new and fresh, said executive director Kate Gaddis.

From left: Cody Qualls, Ryan Driver, Stephen Ross and Forest Kelly sing during rehearsal Tuesday in Louisville. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

"We're having a fantastic fundraising year, one of our best ever," Gaddis said. "And we're looking to focus more on individual giving instead of event-based giving so it seemed like the right time to try something new and fun."

A Woman's Work will continue to hold fundraising events throughout the year, Gaddis said, but it's hoping the Vocal Face Off competition and other programs will encourage more involvement from local residents.

The organization's board has been working toward increased individual donations for years to increase the nonprofit's sustainability, she said.

"For example, we hosted one of our annual events a few weeks after the flood last year," Gaddis said. "Had that event been canceled, we could have lost out on a large portion of our funding so individual giving adds stability to the organization."

Longmont resident Luke Kunselman was one of the Magnificent Men who participated in last year's fundraiser, and now he is a competitor hoping to nab a spot on stage with Face.

Kunselman began his fundraising efforts last week, including pleas to friends and family through emails, phone calls and Facebook posts.

Kunselman has some experience on stage, ranging from performances at Skyline High School to the University of Colorado's vocal jazz group to a karaoke contest he competed in last year. But these days, Kunselman gets in most of his performances at the gym or in the car.

"My friends give me a hard time because I've always liked to sing," Kunselman said. "If there's music playing, I'm singing along."

Kunselman said he is looking to raise at least $2,000, which he hopes will get him a spot in the top four.

It's not too late to join the Vocal Face Off, which currently has only a dozen competitors. Longmont resident Lee Smoot started her fundraising efforts last week by reaching out to friends and family.

As the director of music ministries for Central Presbyterian Church in Longmont and the director of the St. Vrain Singers children's choir, Smoot is used to being on stage. But she is looking forward to being directed by Face members instead of doing the directing.

"At the church and with the St. Vrain Singers, I'm leading them, getting them excited to perform," Smoot said. "So, for me as a singer to be on stage singing, it allows me to shine and to be me on stage."

Participants are not required to have any musical ability to compete in the Vocal Face Off, and Face member Mark Megibow said it doesn't matter what level of talent the winners have.

"We figured people would filter themselves out and maybe offer their spot to someone else if they don't want to be on stage," Megibow said. "But if the people who get up there are lousy singers, it won't affect anything for us. It's just about fun and supporting A Women's Work, and we'll roll with it."

Face, an a cappella group with members in Longmont, Boulder and Denver, use only their voices to create instrumental sounds, said Megibow, who calls himself the group's drummer. The 12-year-old group has appeared on the NBC show "The Sing-Off" and was to have performed their 700th show in Boulder on Saturday.

Proceeds from the Longmont concert also will support the nonprofit.

"We really want people to know that they're not just supporting a great cause but they're also getting a full show," Megibow said. "This will not be a typical show for us, it's definitely a special performance, but I think it will be extra fun for the audience because they'll be rooting for the people up here singing with us."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com