(Photo: Hannah Hart)



This interview is part of Yahoo Health’s Body-Peace Profiles series, in which we talk with our favorite celebrities about embracing body positivity and healthy habits.

Maybe you’ve only seen 29-year-old Hannah Hart in ads for YouTube, posted online, in New York subways, and on billboards countrywide, her head adorned with a pasta colander. But if you’re a YouTuber in any way, shape, or form, you’re probably familiar with her award-winning series My Drunk Kitchen, which features videos of Hart cooking up meals while — you guessed it — pounding drinks.



But while other YouTube stars hone in on their specialty (creating makeup lines to accompany makeup channels, for example), Hart’s been on a mission of sorts. She’s chatted with President Obama and filmed a controversial video on the Affordable Care Act. She’s started filming videos that veer away from food, covering everything from insecurities to going to the gym. Mental health and body positivity isn’t her main shtick, but that’s what makes her videos on the topics all the more powerful for her 2.4 million followers.



Yahoo Health got the chance to talk with Hart about feeling at peace in her body, and more. Check out the conversation below:



Yahoo Health: Have you ever struggled with body confidence?

Hannah Hart: When I was younger, I was really insecure about body hair. I’ve got fair skin, and people would be like, “Oh, you should go wax,” and give me all this advice. But not all the advice really works for everybody. So one [struggle I had] was feeling comfortable taking care of body hair in a way that works for me, getting rid of the stigma of wanting to talk about it.

And the other instance [I struggled with body confidence] was, as a lesbian, having sex with other women, being like, “Wow, you’re so hot!” I’m definitely somebody who feels confident with verbal affirmations with my partner, and that’s something that I had to learn about myself. As much as I’d love to say, like, “Just say more positive things to yourself!,” it’s also OK to say, “I have a need!” Because I need my partner to verbally reassure me sometimes, and that’s OK. It’s OK to have that need, and it’s OK to vocalize it. I think we convince ourselves that we need to be totally singular without the support of anyone else, but sometimes it’s OK to say, “Babe, tell me I look good.” I think I can say that with confidence because I’m working on loving myself and being confident, and obviously those are massive pieces of the equation, but it’s also OK to know that you need your partner to say things or do things.

(Photo: Instagram)

I’m not saying to only seek outside support — rather, surround yourself with people who are kind. I’m not fishing for compliments. If I think I look amazing, I’m going to be like, “I look great!” Just don’t ignore the fact that the way people talk to us has an effect on the way we feel.

What about with YouTube or social media comments — do those affect you?

You can only take the good, you can’t take the bad. With the comment section, you get an outpouring of positivity and positive comments, and it’s really lovely in that it’s so motivating. But that one negative comment usually has nothing to do with your channel, it’s just someone spouting negativity. But sometimes, if they’re like, “I don’t know, I feel like Hannah really rushed that one,” and they’re right, I’ll be like, “You’re right, I did rush that one.” But 9 times out of 10, if someone is spouting negativity, it’s them projecting, trying to find power in the wrong place. You just have to brush that dirt off your shoulder.

You’ve talked about how you recently started going to the gym — why?

Read More