When you don't need government, anything government does is too much. When you do, nothing government does is enough.

That pretty much captures the intensifying polarization of the American electorate: warring ideological camps that refuse to agree or compromise on much of anything. But what happens when people who think they don't need government suddenly discover they do?

Occasionally, an issue comes along that kicks us in our collective butts for playing politics with literally every matter of public policy to the point of forsaking common sense. The latest one has a powerfully efficient name: Ebola.

An apparently healthy Thomas Eric Duncan, a Liberian national, traveled to the United States from West Africa on Sept. 20 carrying the Ebola virus inside him. He began developing symptoms of the illness, and five days after his arrival visited a Dallas emergency room — only to be sent home with a handful of antibiotics.

His condition deteriorated, and three days later he was admitted to the hospital with full-blown Ebola. By then it was too late for Duncan — he died a week later — but not for the virus itself. At least two of the patient's nurses contracted the disease from him and are now fighting for their own lives. Scores of people who had contact with the infected individuals – some as far away as Cleveland, where one of the nurses traveled after exposure – are in quarantine or under observation.

There has been abundant discussion in the media about whether the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — read, the federal government — responded appropriately to the threat posed by this highly lethal bug. There also have been murmurs from advocates wondering if slashed funding for the CDC might have hindered the development of an Ebola vaccine, especially considering that private drug manufacturers haven't been tripping over themselves to develop drugs whose primary market would be poor — read, unprofitable — African nations.

But the question I am waiting for conservative politicians in the Florida Legislature and elsewhere to address is whether their staunch opposition to the Affordable Care Act and the expansion of Medicaid — so-called Obamacare, their poster child of "bad" government — really makes sense in view of the kind of public health menace presented by Ebola.

Would one of those politicians kindly explain why it is a good idea to deny millions of Americans — including more than 750,000 Floridians — the opportunity to develop productive ongoing relationships with doctors and other medical professionals? Do we really want people who can't afford a clinic visit to try to ride out a potentially contagious illness rather than seek proper care? Would you feel secure knowing your neighbor decided to wait until projectile vomiting and explosive diarrhea finally compelled him to go to an emergency room?

Yet it seems many critics who say the CDC hasn't done enough to combat the spread of Ebola are the same people who say government shouldn't work to help millions more get health insurance coverage. I read that as politics trumping common sense.

Duncan, America's Patient Zero for Ebola, did not have health insurance. That makes him Patient Zero for the consequences of being uninsured. This is what can happen when we rely on harried emergency room staffers to make hasty judgments about patients they have never seen before while dozens of other (very often uninsured) patients are waiting in line to be seen.

Wouldn't it be smarter if more patients, not fewer, had doctors who know them and their medical histories? Wouldn't a coherent national health policy, unencumbered by political point-scoring, be the most effective way to confront a threat like Ebola? Would these same elected officials also argue that evil government should stay out of addressing the rarely fatal but miserably debilitating chikungunya virus, which is establishing a beachhead in Florida after laying low hundreds of thousands in the Caribbean? Perhaps the mosquitoes that carry it will agree to wait for the next election before attacking.

I am not a doctor or medical researcher, but I know this much about the Ebola virus: It doesn't care whether it infects Democrats or Republicans, liberals or conservatives. You'd think this would be one rare, precious occasion when we could call a truce and ask, "What is in our collective best interest?"

Robert Steinback is a freelance journalist living in Miami. He can be reached at rlseinback@gmail.com.