Billions in higher costs to taxpayers are looming as millions of low-income people unexpectedly sign up for Medicaid instead of buying private insurance with higher premiums — not a surprising development except to the backers of the unaffordable “Affordable Care Act.”

A report by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office projects that over the next decade the costs will be $136 billion more than was projected six years ago when Obamacare was enacted by a Democrat-controlled Congress without a single Republican vote.

This year, the report says, Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program will enroll a total of 68 million people — 16 million more than projected when the law was passed. Last year the number of people enrolled in Medicaid grew by three million. In 10 years it is expected that an additional six million will sign up.

The unforeseen spike in Medicaid enrollment, observed the Washington Post, is “particularly remarkable because under Obamacare” the expansion of Medicaid by states “was expected to be significantly larger.” Indeed. But to date, 19 states have refused to take part in the program due to the costs which will continue to soar. And in view of the CBO report, why should these states take part when the federal government has so woefully underestimated the flight of low-income people to Medicaid?

Georgia, with a large number of uninsured people, ranks last among the states for adults without health care insurance because of costs. Gov. Nathan Deal has pointed out that Medicaid expansion in this state would require $2.5 billion in new spending over a decade, severely affecting public education. As a spokesman for the governor has said, Medicaid expansion would add another expensive layer of entitlement spending even as current entitlements crowd out essential spending projects, adding: “Medicaid expansion is too expensive for Georgia.” The General Assembly has even enacted a law mandating legislative approval of any expansion of the program.

Gov. Deal has rightly called for federal block grants to the states for Medicaid, allowing more flexibility to make the program work for the unique demographics of each state “rather than a one-size-fits-all Washington mandate.” But such a commonsense approach is not acceptable to the Obama administration and the Democrat minority in the Congress.

The latest CBO report simply confirms — again — how unworkable and unaffordable Obamacare is. It also underscores the urgency of voters electing a Republican president and keeping a GOP majority in the Congress, opening the way to finally repeal Obamacare and replace it with a sound, affordable private sector-based health care insurance program.