The Rockies’ pitching rotation found a respectable stretch in August. And the starters soon will be bolstered.

Chad Bettis, out since July 18 with right elbow inflammation, likely will pitch for the Rockies as soon as Tuesday. He returned to Coors Field on Saturday from a minor-league rehab assignment.

“On the cusp of possibly coming back, it puts my mind at ease to know that there are no issues anymore,” Bettis said. “I feel strong and healthy enough to go.”

The Rockies will start David Hale in Sunday’s series finale against the Mets, followed by Jorge De La Rosa. Bettis’ arrival may push back Jon Gray’s next start. Yohan Flande is penciled in to pitch Wednesday, which would have been Gray’s day on normal rest.

Gray has been on a tight pitch count and innings limit since his debut this month. But the Rockies are not ready to shut him down, manager Walt Weiss said.

So the Rockies may soon move to a six-man rotation.

“It’s possible,” Weiss said. “Certainly for the month of September, we’ve discussed that. When all the pieces get healthy, we’ll have to unscramble that. But that’s one of the scenarios.”

The starting rotation had allowed three runs or fewer in 11 of the Rockies’ past 16 games entering Saturday. And they had a 3.45 ERA over 10 games Aug. 10-20.

For a rotation that has struggled all season, the recent run shows some potential.

“We have to believe that as a starting rotation,” Bettis said. “We have to figure out how we all work best together moving forward, because we can’t go backward, especially now.”

Guidance for Gray. Bettis said he talked to Gray late Friday night, after the rookie right-hander allowed seven runs in just over an inning against the Mets. It was only Gray’s fourth big-league start.

“I said, ‘Hey, look, you’re better than this. You know it and everybody else knows it. Don’t read too much into it,’ ” Bettis said. “I told him he can be as mad as he wanted to be, but once he stepped out the door, to hit the reset button.”

In Bettis’ fourth start in the majors, in 2013, he gave up seven hits and eight runs (two earned) in just over two innings against the Orioles.

It comes with the process of learning to pitch, Bettis said.

“It was something I had to learn. It’s part of the maturity of pitching,” Bettis said. “If you start trying to do too much, you dig yourself a hole. The less you think about it, the better you’ll be.”

Footnotes. Kyle Kendrick (right shoulder inflammation) will pitch a simulated game this week as part of his rehab. There is no plan to move Kendrick to the bullpen upon his return, Weiss said. … The Mets traded for speedy outfielder Eric Young Jr. on Saturday, sending cash to the Braves in return. The former Rockies player is the son of Rockies first-base coach Eric Young, and he will report to Triple-A

Mets’ Logan Verrett (0-1, 2.82 ERA) at Rockies’ David Hale (3-4, 6.17), 2:10 p.m. Sunday, ROOT; 850 AM

Hale returned last week from a five-week stint on the disabled list with a groin injury. He gave up six runs on eight hits in five innings of a 15-6 blowout loss to the Nationals. Hale’s role still seems unsettled. After the Rockies traded for him from Atlanta, Hale was angling for a starting job out of spring training. But a strained oblique set him back, and he began the season in Triple-A. He has pitched in just 10 games, including nine starts. He could use a healthy run through September as a tryout for next season.

Monday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (7-5, 4.50 ERA) at Braves’ Julio Teheran (8-6, 4.32), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Tuesday: Rockies’ Chad Bettis (5-4, 4.88) at Braves’ Mike Foltynewicz (4-5, 6.06), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies’ Yohan Flande (3-1, 3.94) at Braves’ Shelby Miller (5-10, 2.50), 5:10 p.m., ROOT