A messianic Jewish leader finds it a chilling thought that a newly formed coalition of Islamic groups wants to empower Muslims to be more involved in the U.S. political process.

Earlier this month, ten U.S. Islamic supremacist organizations announced the formation of new umbrella group known as the U.S. Council of Muslim Organizations (USCMO). The mission of the group is to serve as a "representative voice" for American Muslims. Participating groups include the Muslim American Society and the Council on American-Islamic Relations, both of which have had ties to terrorism.

Jan Markell, founder and director of Olive Tree Ministries, says it shouldn't surprise anyone that most Americans don't trust those groups. "They've got a track record which shows, number one, they can't stand America," she says. "They say that they love America, but we all know that that's just blatantly false."

USCMO, however, identifies as one of its "challenges" an external "vociferous cabal of extremists [that] increasingly maligns Islam to turn America dangerously against itself" – and the need to counter "the falsifiers seeking to mislead and betray American society ...."

In contrast, Markell maintains some members of USCMO want to establish a Muslim caliphate "from sea to shining sea" – and will not rest until they achieve their goal.

According to a recent report by The Washington Times, the group plans to conduct a census that will create a database that will be used to help promote the rights and goals of its members in upcoming elections. The goal is to have that database completed in time for the 2016 presidential election. Markell admits she's concerned USCMO wants to enhance Islamic participation in U.S. elections.

"We know what side of the aisle they're going to vote for. They're going to vote for radical leftists," says Markell. "America's being taken over – and I say that very cautiously because it's too shocking for most Americans to comprehend that we are being taken over by, quite frankly, forces of evil that are just shocking."

The Times identifies several other groups involved in USCMO – Muslim Legal Fund of America, American Muslims for Palestine, Islamic Circle of North America, Muslim Alliance in North America, Muslim Ummah of North America, and The Mosque Cares.