Throughout his tenure in the Oval Office, the angriest foes of Barack Obama have had a few consistent lines of attack against the two-term President — all of which have been exposed as rampantly hypocritical as many of those very same people now rush into the arms of Donald Trump.

Let us count the claims by the Obama-deranged.

One: He diminished the presidency. By filling out a March Madness bracket. By consenting to being interviewed by YouTube stars. By putting his foot on the Oval Office desk. And serial other imagined offenses.

GOP CANDIDATES CLASH IN DEBATE, ATTACK TRUMP'S CREDENTIALS

Two: He demeaned Congress. By failing to meet frequently enough with House and Senate leaders. By ramming Obamacare through the legislature. By generally being arrogant.

Three: He disrespected the Supreme Court — most notably by attacking the Citizens United decision in his State of the Union Address.

Four: He unconscionably and probably illegally expanded executive authority. By issuing executive orders (fewer than his predecessors, but never mind that) that allow undocumented immigrants to stay in the country and strengthening enforcement of gun safety laws, among other things.

FULL COVERAGE: THE 2016 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

Five: With messianic zeal, Obama built up hopes to such obscenely high levels, they were destined to be dashed.

Support for Trump by some of Obama’s angriest critics makes a mockery of a sham of all these complaints.

Trump, after all, is a man who boasts about the size of his genitalia, and insults a reporter by referring to her menstrual cycle, and mocks another reporter’s physical disability, and repeats the word “pussy” from a presidential podium. He remains a reality-TV star and pageant king through and through. All that and more threatens not to diminish the Oval Office, but to douse it in in gasoline and set it on fire.

Trump would govern through bullying and intimidation, and believes the definition of compromise is when people come around to his position. After winning on Super Tuesday last week, he said House Speaker Paul Ryan will have to get along with him or “he’s going to have to pay a big price.”

Trump is a man who regularly lambastes Chief Justice John Roberts as a “disaster” and a “nightmare” because he ruled in a such a way that did not advance Republican policy priorities.

Trump is a man who sees other branches of government as an annoyance — and praises Obama for having “led the way” through using executive authority forcefully. His pledges to ban Muslims, deport millions, squelch political dissent and more would surely test and tear the bounds of presidential power.

TRUMP FLIP-FLOPS ON SKILLED WORKER VISAS THREE TIMES IN DAY

And not least, Trump is a man who has built up hopes so high, with such outlandish and impossible promises, they are destined to die violent and painful deaths.

Punitive tariffs will not bring jobs back by the millions. A Muslim ban, even if it could be put into effect, will do nothing to keep America safe. Mexico will not pay for that border wall.

And so on: Trump guarantees the sky and will deliver, at best, a painted ceiling.

Millions of Trump supporters now cheer for a would-be President whose leadership style would make Obama look calm, modest and heroically responsible. Is their double-standard merely rooted in political opportunism, or is it about something else?