The 2016 election could be one for the record books in South Dakota.



The election is still more than a year away, but that's probably a good thing, because South Dakota voters are going to need all the extra time they can get to read up on the issues.

As of right now, there could be a record 17 ballot measures to vote on next year.

There's probably a pretty good chance you have been asked to sign a petition this year to put an initiated measure or an amendment on next year's ballot.

As of right now, only three measures will be on next year's ballot for sure. They are Amendment B, Referred Law 19, and Referred Law 20, which deals with the minimum wage.

Then there are nine proposed initiated measures where organizers are still circulating petitions to get enough signatures.

They include everything from capping interest rates on payday lending to legalizing medicinal marijuana to decriminalizing the possession of one ounce or less of marijuana and pot paraphernalia.

There are also two measures that have received the Attorney General's explanation, but have not yet been submitted to the Secretary of State's Office for final approval to begin circulating petitions. Both deal with establishing nonpartisan elections.

Finally, three other measures that still need Attorney General's and Secretary of State's approval and written explanation before organizers can begin circulating petitions; one of which increases the minimum sentences for certain crimes against children.

If all 17 measures get put on next year's ballot it would be a record. The previous record was in 1916 and 1918; both had 13 ballot measures.

The Secretary of State's Office is encouraging voters to read the title and the Attorney General's explanation on the petition before signing. If they still have questions or are confused after reading the petition, they can review the petition on the Secretary of State's website or contact the the sponsors of the petitions. That information can be found on this link.

By state law, circulators are to provide each person who signs the petition a form containing the title and explanation of the measure or amendment as prepared by the Attorney General.

Ballot Issues {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.