The Colorado Springs Police Department's Community Impact Team has been busy this week.

The team, which cracks down on violent crime, gang activity and repeat and violent offenders, arrested two men this week on felony weapons offenses, recovering about 20 guns in the process.

Facebook photos led to the arrest of 35-year-old Ronnie Paige, Colorado Springs police said.

Paige, whom police described as a gang member and felon, landed on CSPD's radar after a separate investigation led detectives to his Facebook page.

On the Web page, police said they saw several pictures of Paige holding guns.

He was also connected to a call for service after staff members at a motel found a gun in a room rented out to a Ronnie Paige in September, police said.

According to police, Paige had previously served three years in the California Department of Corrections for selling drugs, and witnesses told police he sold methamphetamine.

On Tuesday, detectives pulled over a Chevrolet Tahoe with no license plates they had seen in Facebook pictures. Paige was arrested after police found a 7-inch knife concealed under his jacket. Detectives found a loaded gun, ammunition, drugs and a fake Colorado driver's license in the vehicle, police said.

Police later found four guns, ballistic vests and hundreds of rounds of ammunition in Paige's apartment.

Paige remained in the El Paso County jail Friday night on $100,000 bond, according to jail records.

A day after Paige's arrest, a tip led detectives with the Impact Team to Manitou Springs, where they arrested 48-year-old William Fee on felony gun charges, including multiple counts of possession of a weapon by a previous offender.

Police removed 14 guns from a residence on the 300 block of Manitou Avenue.

The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives and the FBI's Rocky Mountain Safe Streets Task Force worked with CSPD's SWAT team and Strategic Information Center in Fee's arrest.

According to online court records, Fee pleaded guilty to drug possession charges in 1995, 1998 and 2001.

Fee is out of jail on a $1,000 bond.

-

Contact Lisa Walton: 476-1623

Twitter @LisaWaltonCO

Facebook: lisa.walton.92372