Education and health care are of top priority in federal budgets in Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development member nations. They regularly claim between a quarter to a third of government expenditures. Generally, perceptions of the effectiveness of the two public services are closely aligned within a country. In a recent study of 60 Best Countries , perceptions of a country’s public education system and public health care system differed by less than five points on a 100-point scale on average. But in three countries – Japan , South Korea and the United States – perceptions of public education are among the highest, while perceptions of public health care lagged behind by an average of 28 points, dropping almost a third of the way down the scale.

[SEE: Best Countries Data Explorer ] Health care is a defining issue in the 2016 presidential election in the United States, leaving the fate of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 up in the air as candidates offer varied plans from reform to repeal. There are inherent inefficiencies in all health systems, says Dr. Sanjeev Gupta, deputy director of fiscal affairs for the International Monetary Fund. In advanced economies, people can fall into poverty if there is inadequate coverage for health care expenses. And in emerging economies - like South Korea - and low-income nations, people don’t demand health care from the government in the same way they do education. [READ: Obamacare: What Went Right And What Went Wrong? ] "They are willing to pay high out-of-pocket prices for health care," he says. "It’s an anomaly we haven’t yet figured out." In Japan, about 80 percent of health care spending is covered by the government, a number in line with Denmark and Sweden , countries whose public health systems were most favorably perceived. Public spending on health care is slightly lower in South Korea and the United States, at 53 percent and 47 percent, respectively.

But all three nations have significantly increased the share of public spending on health care during the last five years or so. This goes against the trend among OECD nations has been to decrease public spending on health care in favor of private spending by about 1 percent in the same time frame.

The key to helping patients feel valued in public health across all types of economies, says Gupta, is open access to the system.

"If you want people to realize their full potential, then you want them to be able to live as long as possible with the best possible services."

When it comes to real health outcomes, though, it all comes back to education.

Even if a public health system is open to all, constant change and innovation favors those with higher education, says Adriana Lleras-Muney, a professor of economics at UCLA and editor of the Journal of Health Economics.

[READ: The Best Countries for Education]

"When you give people access to health care, some people are going to take much more advantage than others," she says. "The set of things you can do for your health is constantly changing and it is always the more educated people using advanced technologies, choosing to take the new medicines."

Whether the relationship is causal or just an association is still to be determined, but health benefits of education are the same up through the full spectrum: health outcomes are better in a high school graduate than a high school dropout and in an individual with post-college experience compared with one with a college degree.

"The amount of money a country spends on health care on a per capita basis is not nearly as important as education in predicting who does well in terms of health," says Lleras-Muney.