There's no need to ever feel left out again at the water cooler conversation. Here's a rundown of the stories currently trending in the world, the country and your backyard.



Yahoo

Considering training: The White House is considering sending U.S. military trainers to Syria to help the rebel fighters organized against the Bashar al-Assad regime. The program would expand a CIA training program already in place in Jordan. An official with the administration acknowledges that finding a trustworthy group to help train could be a problem. Full story: The Associated Press



Affordable Care Act: The Treasury Department is looking for help in gathering information from businesses on how many employees they have in order to be able to enforce a portion of the Affordable Care Act. The "employer mandate" requires companies with 50 or more employees to provide health insurance for those employees. This implementation of this portion was the law was delayed this summer in order to figure out how to collect that information without overburdening businesses, the administration said. The Treasury Department wants comments on options to reduce or streamline reporting by employers. Full story: The Associated Press



Model helicopter kills teen: A teenager boy operating a remote control helicopter in a New York City park was virtually decapitated when the scale-model machine flew into him Thursday. Police say 19-year-old Roman Pirozek Jr. died Thursday afternoon near a parkway in Brooklyn when his neck was severed by the blade of the model aircraft. Full story: The Associated Press

Google

Baldwin to get talk show: Alex Baldwin, generally not one to keep his feelings to himself, will have his own talk show this fall on MSNBC. "Up Late With Alec Baldwin" is set to air Fridays at 9 p.m. CT beginning in October. "After two seasons of my WNYC podcast, I've developed a fondness for hosting a show that involved talking with smart, talented, and engaging people in every imaginable field," Baldwin said in a statement. "I'm grateful to MSNBC for helping me bring a similar show to television." Full story: E Online

Cam named captain: Former Auburn quarterback Cam Newton has been voted team captain for the Carolina Panthers. Prior to being named captain, Newton said, "I recognize, and everyone knows around the league, when you're a team captain, that's not just a patch on the jersey," Newton said. "You're holding yourself to a higher standard with being accountable. Full story: ESPN





Sofia tops list: Sofia Vergara, who stars on ABC's hit comedy "Modern Family," is the highest paid actress on television, according to a list from Forbes magazine. The Celebrity 100 list, which has Oprah Winfrey in her familiar No. 1 spot, ranks Vergara 54 overall, first among TV actresses. Vegara made $30 million with her salary and endorsement deals with Diet Pepsi, CoverGirl, Rooms to Go, Comcast, State Farm Insurance and Synthroid, a thyroid medicine. She also has a clothing line in K-Mart and is co-owner of Latin World Entertainment, a management company. Full story: Los Angeles Times



Click here for more world and national news



YouTube



The dog has a little surprise for his rescuer. Our “ahhh” for the day.

Aunt Chippy telling it like it is about Miley Cyrus’ “performance.” Testify Aunt Chippy!

al.com



What inspires you : It may be music, an act of kindness, or a pastor who says the exact sentence you need to hear at the exact time - whatever the moment that happens to inspire you, we want you to share it with us. Join Carole McPhail online on Sunday afternoon and tells us about what inspired you this weekend.