Contract talks with receiver Demaryius Thomas and tight end Julius Thomas aren’t dead.

They’re not active, either.

Meanwhile, here comes the season.

While there doesn’t appear to be a hard deadline with these negotiations, once the Broncos’ season begins Sunday night against the Indianapolis Colts, focus shifts to the field.

As of Thursday, no deal with either player was imminent.

“Can’t worry about it,” Julius Thomas said. “Got to play football.”

Dez Bryant’s ongoing contract talks with the Dallas Cowboys might have put a crimp in bargaining between the Broncos and Demaryius Thomas. His agent, Todd France, probably doesn’t want to strike a deal worth $X million a year only to have Bryant get $XX million from the Cowboys.

Demaryius Thomas is making $3.275 million this season, the final year of his contract. He can become a free agent at season’s end, although he would be a primary candidate for the franchise tag, which would allow the Broncos to retain him on one-year salary.

Julius Thomas would seemingly have greater incentive to reach a deal on an extension because he is making $645,000 in the final year of his contract.

The Broncos have exchanged contract proposals with Julius Thomas’ agent Frank Bauer, but those talks appear to have stalled.

Garland, Jackson out. It shows how much the Broncos thought of Ben Garland that they put the backup guard on their 53-man roster, even though he has an ankle injury that will sideline him the first two weeks of the season.

Also absent from practice Thursday was defensive lineman Malik Jackson, who was attending his father’s funeral. He is expected back in time to play Sunday night against the Colts.

Rod and the kid. After practice, rookie receiver Cody Latimer stayed to get extra work with Broncos great Rod Smith, the team’s all-time receptions leader.

“I know who he was. I’m glad he spent some time with me,” Latimer said. “He was telling me how as a big, fast receiver, I can put the pressure on the cornerback. Keep my pad level the same when I’m cutting and keep my eyes up.”

Defensive tradition. Earlier this week, the Denver defense watched footage of the old Orange Crush defense from the 1970s.

“This is an offensive-minded regime, but we’re trying to be the No. 1 defense and we’re bringing that Orange Crush back,” defensive end DeMarcus Ware said.