Accepting the Gold Medal Horse Farm Award for Somerset County Park Commission Lord Stirling Stable are (l to r): Freeholder Peter Palmer, Park Foundation President John Kitchen, Park Deputy Director Cindie Sullivan, Stable Manager Marge Margentino, Park Director Ray Brown, Freeholder Patrick Scaglione, Park Commission Vice-president Bill Crosby, Park Commission President Don DiFrancesco. (Photo: Somerset County Parks Commission) Story Highlights Lord Stirling Stable is only the fourth facility in the state to earn Gold Medal Horse Farm

Lord Stirling Stable is located on the site of the former John Jacob Astor estate

Lord Stirling Stable (LSS), located at 256 South Maple Avenue in Basking Ridge, has been selected as a “Gold Medal Horse Farm” by the New Jersey Equine Environmental Stewardship Program (NJEESP).

Lord Stirling Stable is only the fourth facility in the state to earn this honor.



The award was presented to Stable Manager Marge Margentino, Park Commissioners, and senior staff at a reception at the Cook College Center on the campus of Rutgers University during a ceremony earlier this month.



The NJEESP is a joint project of the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station at Rutgers University (NJAES), the Rutgers Equine Science Center, and the New Jersey Department of Agriculture (NJDA).



The Gold Medal Horse Farm program recognizes outstanding equine farms for management practices; stewardship of the land; the health, safety, and well-being of the horses; programming; and dedication to environmental sustainability. Further, it underscores the efforts of the New Jersey equine industry to maintain the beauty of the Garden State.

The award recognizes Lord Stirling Stable’s accomplishments including a new Nutrient Management plan developed to benefit the stable and the entire park system. The on-site composting facility transforms manure and stable waste into an organic, nutrient-rich material which is used to fertilize the pastures and plants at all Somerset County Park locations



Additional management practices include non-chemical control of weeds, dragging pastures to break up manure, pasture renovation, and daily removal of manure from smaller paddocks and turnouts.



“We are honored to be recognized for providing proper care of our horses, protecting our land, and delivering a rewarding riding experience for our guests,” Stable Manager Marge Margentino said.



Established in 1968, Lord Stirling Stable is located on the site of the former John Jacob Astor estate within the Great Swamp Watershed. It is home to 80 horses and ponies and serves the recreational equestrian needs of Somerset and nearby counties.



Lord Stirling Stable joins Woodhollow Farm (2014), D’Arrigo Racing Stable LLC (2013) and Showplace Farms (2012) as the state’s only Gold Medal Horse Farms.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Hx5Kuk