Seattle boss Dan Price is cutting his pay from nearly $1 million to $70,000 so all workers at his company can make at least $70,000 a year. The move comes close to defying gravity.

Seventy employees will see their paychecks grow and about 30 employees will see their earnings double during a three-year, phased-in plan. The average salary at Gravity Payments, a credit-card payment processing firm that Price founded in 2004 at age 19 in a Seattle Pacific University dorm room, is $48,000 a year. (A shout out to SPU, the small Christian college that dorm-housed me in 1989 and 1990.)

This ambitious and admirable share-the-wealth storyline will no doubt be invoked in numerous discussions about minimum-wage increases raging everywhere, even though Gravity wasn't a minimum-wage employer. There were $15-per-hour rallies aplenty Wednesday and Oregon had legislative hearings on the topic last week. But let's not forget that there's a difference between a person finding wisdom in and choosing this sort of move, and someone forcing it upon him. Employers aren't responsible for addressing poverty, just as they aren't responsible for financial hardship to begin with. Individual choices usually are.

A new study by the Berkeley Center for Labor Research and Education at the University of California is already erroneously slanting the discussion. Its researchers found that nearly three-quarters of the people helped by programs geared to the poor are members of a family headed by a worker. The report estimates that state and federal governments spend more than $150 billion a year on four key antipoverty programs: Medicaid, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, food stamps and the earned-income tax credit. Even some of the nation's best-educated workers have turned to taxpayer support; a quarter of the families of part-time college faculty members are on public assistance.

"When companies pay too little for workers to provide for their families, workers rely on public assistance programs to meet their basic needs," said Ken Jacobs, chair of the labor center and a co-author of the report. He says this represents the hidden cost of low-wage work.

In, "Working, but needing public assistance anyway," Patricia Cohen of the New York Times highlighted the study released Monday and various minimum-wage-hike efforts. In her article she writes, "Taxpayers are providing not only support to the poor but also, in effect, a huge subsidy for employers of low-wage workers, from giants like McDonald's and Walmart to mom-and-pop businesses."

The press release and Cohen's news story do not mention this important detail from the report: "We define working families as those that have at least one family member who works 27 or more weeks per year and 10 or more hours per week."

Now, one can reasonably argue that a minimum-wage job doesn't allow for a comfortable family lifestyle. I would. I'd add that it isn't meant to, even when in some cases that is what is expected of it. But this information offers valuable perspective about the finding that 73 percent of people receiving government aid are "working families."

Instead of concluding that trying to run a household on pay from as few as 270 hours a year is a problem and that sticking with a job and seeking advancement in hours or roles is important, Jacobs goes with, "Raising wages would lift working families out of poverty and allow all levels of government to better target how our tax dollars are used."

I agree with the goal of better targeting, which is why I'd like to see us cast safety nets that aren't so wide. A New York Times story asking if the Affordable Care Act is working said more than half of the people who are newly insured as a result of the act signed up for Medicaid, especially in states that opted to broaden eligibility for the program. Due in part to eligibility requirements, working-age people are now the majority recipients of food stamps, overtaking the share who are children and seniors, according to an analysis from The Associated Press and University of Kentucky economists.

The 2014 report shows 50.2 percent of U.S. households receiving food stamps since 2009 are made up of adults between the ages of 18 and 59. In 1998, the portion of such households getting food stamps was 44 percent. Federal spending on the program has almost doubled since 2008, costing taxpayers $80 billion in 2013. A family of four receiving a maximum food stamps allotment receives a dollar figure in the $600s each month, according to the Department of Agriculture. SNAP has become a victim of America's generosity.

Perhaps most troublesome is targeting employers for individuals' financial pain distracts us from talking about how individual choices, expectations and family breakdown are major culprits. In Oregon, 14,274 divorces in 2013 impacted 6,761 children. Divorce creates a situation in which a family's income has to cover two households instead of one. Poverty and income disparity is undeniably linked to the presence or absence of marriage. Broken families earn less and experience lower levels of educational achievement.

Instead of beating up on companies, let's address parent absence, family breakdown and society's expectations of the basics, which includes several modern amenities. Emphasizing and reconnecting Americans with personal responsibility can do more than wage increases. But it's easier to suggest that workers are dependent on government because they can't rely on a villainous employer.

Dan Price is an employer. He created a company that paid an average salary of $48,000 to 120 employees, even before he decided he wanted them all making a $70,000-salary minimum.

Elizabeth Hovde writes Sunday columns for The Oregonian/OregonLive. Reach here at dehovde@gmail.com