Girl Scout Angel Potter poses in the reception area of Loaves & Fishes Ministries where she recently completed a child-friendly area for kids. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

One idea, two friends and their moms, and countless hours of painting equate to lots of happy children — and parents.

Cañon City Girl Scout Angel Potter, from Troop 255, recently completed her Gold Award qualifications through the Scouting program.

For her seven-step community project, Potter, 18, redecorated the reception area of Loaves & Fishes Ministries to make it more child friendly. The waiting area now features a fun wall mural with encouraging messages, a small play area and a variety of books. The new area adds a lot of color and brightness to the foyer, Potter said.

"This is to offer more activity for the kids here," she said. "The kids don't have a lot to do when they are staying in the shelter, and it also helps the parents when they bring kids up front and they are really bored."

The community pitched in to donate books and toys, and the project materials largely were donated by Home Depot. Potter purchased a chalk table at New Horizons Thrift Store, and Design u'r Memories assisted with the vinyl lettering.

Along with her fellow Girl Scouts, Katie Abbott and Nani Albertson, Potter spent several hours after school last spring painting and redecorating. She recently completed all the steps required to earn the prestigious Gold Award.

The Girl Scouts' website states Girl Scout Gold Award recipients "do well in life. They rate their general success in life significantly higher and report higher success in reaching their goals within many areas."

Potter said sticking with Girl Scouts through high school is an accomplishment in itself.

Advertisement

"Most girls quit Girl Scouts around middle school because they have too many activities going on, they don't like it anymore or they don't have the motivation to do it," she said. "There are six girls at the high school, or less than that, that are in Girl Scouts."

Potter participated in Girl Scouts from first through 12th grade, and she graduated from Cañon City High School in May. Her favorite part of Scouting, without question, has been Girl Scout camp. As a camper, she participated in zip-lining activities, rock climbing, hiking and backpacking events.

She can't be a camper anymore, but she can be a worker. She worked at two different camps last year washing dishes and planning events and theme-weeks. Being a camp leader requires some sacrifice, she said.

"I participated in the 'Hunger Games' with girls for two weeks," she said. "Each team got a bag of colored paint with glitter, and I sacrificed myself and got every single color of paint on my shirt — it didn't come out of my clothes or off my skin for a week.

"It was so fun — it was great."

She also will miss the annual bridging ceremony at the Royal Gorge Bridge, father-daughter dances, mall lock-ins, tea parties, come-as-you-are breakfasts, World Thinking Day, and all the other events and activities she has enjoyed for years.

In addition to Girl Scouts, Potter also has been active with the yearbook staff at CCHS and she sometimes babysits. This fall she will begin classes at the University of Northern Colorado. Her goal is to earn a PhD in psychology with a minor in Spanish.

Potter and her brothers, Walter and Fred, each have achieved the highest advancement rank in Scouting. The triplets' parents, Dion and Bettina Potter, heavily have been involved in their Scouting journeys since day one.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com