WASHINGTON–Earlier this morning at a stately reception on the South Lawn of the White House, Pope Francis warmly praised President Obama’s aggressive use of the EPA and the Clean Air Act to fight climate change, an agenda many Texas Republican lawmakers have vehemently condemned.

Related American Airlines will fly Pope Francis around the East Coast this week

But while those comments lit up the Internet — Francis borrowed from MLK and also said the poor of the threatened planet cry out to Heaven for action — he also issued a strongly worded admonishment to Obama that will please conservative critics of gay marriage and Obamacare’s healthcare mandates involving abortion coverage.

Pope Francis said one of his primary stops in the U.S. will be Philadelphia, where Catholics around the world will gather at the World Meeting on Families. Also, next month bishops will gather in Rome for a synod devoted to church teachings on the family.

The US Conference of Bishops has been among the staunchest advocates for excluding gays from marriage, citing the Church’s view that even civil marriage should be reserved for heterosexual couples.

But now that the Supreme Court has established the right marriage as equally guaranteed by the Constitution for gays and straights, much of the conservative criticism has focused on fears that the religious liberty of Catholics and others who see it as contrary to God’s will will be compromised as Americsn courts interpret the ruling in various settings, from the workplace to the awarding of government grants.

After his welcome at the White House, the pope was headed to a private prayer service with bishops from America’s 195 dioceses, including Bishop Kevin Farrell of Dallas. In an interview yesterday, Farrell told me the key to hashing out differences over religious liberty is for all sides to talk calmly to each other, instead of “the shouting across the TV set” that more typically passes for dialogue in today’s political environment.

He said Catholics believe that religious liberty means more than the right to worship as one pleased, but also to live according to tenets of whatever faith one chooses.

That’s created a tension as citizens, businesses and even government officials have increasingly cited religious beliefs as reasons to exempt themselves from laws designed to protect the rights of others.

The pope did not specifically cite these tensions in his brief remarks, but underscored the priority his church places on the issue.

Here is what the Pope said this morning: