Why religion does not have a role in Barack Obama’s White House

Politics depends on our ability to persuade each other of common aims on a common reality ...

WASHINGTON, December 25, 2014 – Former President George W. Bush, a Methodist, tried hard to keep his presidency in line with America’s traditional Judeo-Christian values. The questions becomes was Bush a better president because he allowed Christianity to guide him in his decision making?

Bush strongly opposed abortion, embryonic stem cell research, and same-sex marriage, making him a trusted ally of many religious leaders. Obama has polar opposite views on these very same issues, at least politically.

Bush also had a healthy relationship with then-Pope Benedict XVI. He threw a birthday party for the pope in 2008, during the pontiff’s visit to the United States. Barack Obama met Pope Francis in March of this year, his first papal visit since 2009 when he visited with Pope Benedict XVI in 2009.

The US president has reportedly been inspired by Pope Francis’ messages of inclusion and equality, though the pair disagree on abortion, contraception and gay marriage. Obama flew into Rome after three days of talks with EU leaders in the Netherlands and Brussels

In addition, in an interview with Raymond Arroyo, Bush said that he saw God when he looked into the pope’s eyes, in reference to a previous comment about Russian President Vladimir Putin.

Now, let us contrast that with President Barack Obama’s presidency and his public past.

Obama has restricted religious freedom. The Affordable Care Act (aka “Obamacare”) dictates the implementation of the HHS mandate, which forces many religious institutions to pay higher insurance costs so that free birth control and other anti-life products can be offered to their employees. The mandate has met much opposition from Christian groups, especially the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops.Many businesses and organizations, including Hobby Lobby, have filed, and won, lawsuits in an attempt to protect their conscience rights.

Obama’s policies on Syria have been disastrous for Christians in the Middle East. His encouragement of the rebels has caused the killing of priests,the kidnapping of bishops, attacks on religious sites, and the imposition of strict Sharia law in rebel-controlled territories.Plenty have questioned the wisdom of supplying weapons to the rebels, many of whom are known to have links to terrorist cells. Vladimir Putin, an Orthodox Christian and the strongest supporter of the Syrian government, has said: “If the United States … recognizes one of the key Syrian opposition organizations, al-Nusra, as terrorist … how can one deliver arms to those opposition members? … Where will(those weapons)end up? What role will they play?”

Once you understand Obama’s mind-set, his actions are not all that surprising. He follows the Alinsky playbook.

Obama is a secularist, as this video of his 2006 speech shows, through and through. The question is does America want a president guided by faith, policy or policy guided by faith.