EDITORIAL: Medicaid extension game in Texas can't continue

If Texas voters suspect they are being played over Medicaid expansion under Obamacare, it's understandable. For years the Republicans who control state government have insisted they can't compromise on the issue. Except they just did this week for one part of it.

Even though that's cynical, it actually offers a ray of hope. It shows that these same state officials could reach a larger compromise on the issue if they tried. In fact, after the November presidential election, they may have to.

The latest agreement gives the state a 15-month extension of the so-called 1115 Waiver, a funding program that has given $29 billion to health care providers over the past five years.

Doctors and hospitals have been pleading for this extension - just as they have been supporting for larger expansion of Medicaid. They know that without this program, they will either provide health care to low-income Texans without getting reimbursed - or watch those people do without the care they need.

But this agreement is the last life-preserver for the 1115 Waiver. It expires at the end of next year. Without a solution, Texas would then lose 25 percent of the waiver's funding to treat people without health insurance each year until the money is gone. The Texas Hospital Association aptly called that scenario "catastrophic."

State officials can't let that happen. If a Republican is elected president in November, the issue could become moot if Obamacare is repealed as all GOP contenders pledge. If a Democrat is elected, if means a veto that would stop any proposal to end the program. Should that occur, the need for reasonable agreement would become even stronger.

The ongoing refusal to expand Medicaid has kept 5 million Texans without any kind of health insurance - the largest number in any state. The state has walked away from $18 billion in federal subsidies that could have helped countless patients. That standoff must end, either with a Republican president in Washington or a Republican compromise in Austin.