Open enrollment for California’s health insurance exchange begins this week, offering Sonoma County residents who already have coverage a chance to shop around for a better deal — and those without it an opportunity to purchase insurance and avoid a hefty tax penalty.

Thousands of Sonoma County residents will be reviewing their options for individual and family health coverage over the next three months, facing a Jan. 31 deadline to buy coverage for 2016.

State and local health officials are urging consumers to closely examine their choices. In California, health insurance is sold in four primary tiers — bronze, silver, gold and platinum — that offer, for a price, increasing levels of coverage for medical expenses. Within each tier, however, prices may have changed significantly over the past year, health officials said.

“If you shop around within the same metal tier, specifically the silver, you might be able to find a better deal than you had the year before,” said Larry Hicks, a spokesman for Covered California, the state’s health exchange set up under President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

The current open enrollment period is Covered California’s third such period since the Affordable Care Act was signed into law. There are 21,980 Sonoma County residents actively enrolled in one of its plans, according to the most recent data available from Covered California, with 34 percent in a bronze plan and 21 percent in a silver enhanced plan.

On Monday, the state exchange launched a $29 million ad campaign in multiple languages to promote open enrollment, which started Sunday. If you get health insurance through your employer or through Medi-Cal or Medicare, the open enrollment period and deadline do not apply.

The average rate increase will be about 4 percent for plans offered through Covered California, down slightly from the 4.2 percent increase consumers experienced last year, state officials calculated.

The rate increase is less dramatic than the “double-digit” increases that were common before Covered California, Hicks said.

But Dave Hodges, a Santa Rosa-based broker with Vantreo Insurance Brokerage, said out-of-pocket maximums on most small group plans are jumping to $6,250. Last year, out-of-pocket maximums on most plans were between $3,500 and $4,000, he said.

Hodges said only a few gold plans and platinum plans offer no out-of-pocket maximums, but these are expensive.

One newcomer to the local health insurance market is Sutter Health Plus, an HMO sold by health care giant Sutter Health. Hodges says the plan is competitively priced and has enviable benefits.

“It’s the best rates in the county right now,” Hodges said.

There is one significant caveat: the plan is not being marketed through Covered California. That means those who purchase the new plan are not eligible for government subsidies under the Affordable Care Act.

Sy Neilson, a spokesman for Sutter Health Plus, said Sutter focused its priorities this year on expanding its service area. It now includes five counties in the Bay Area, including Contra Costa, Alameda, San Mateo, Santa Clara and San Francisco counties, which were added in September.

Sutter launched its HMO in the Central Valley in 2014 and added Sonoma County last March.

Unlike the Kaiser network of doctors, Sutter Health’s affiliated physicians still will accept other health insurance plans even as Sutter grows its own HMO product.