Buy Photo State Capitol (Photo: The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

FRANKFORT, Ky. – Among dozens of budget provisions vetoed by Gov. Matt Bevin on Wednesday was state funding for indigent care at the University of Louisville Hospital.

The governor deleted state funding of up to $7.5 million over the 2016-18 budget period to the program called the Quality and Charity Care Trust that cares for medically needy patients.

Bevin said in his one-sentence veto message that provisions of the Affordable Care Act make appropriation and rules for the indigent care program at U of L Hospital "duplicative."

KentuckyOne Health, which operates the hospital for U of L, released a statement saying it was disappointed with the veto.

"We have a deep commitment to delivering quality health care to economically disadvantaged and vulnerable populations across the Louisville community," the statement said.

The statement said U of L Hospital will continue working with Louisville Metro council, state government and others "to identify continued sources of funding for this vital health and wellness program."

Since 1983 the Quality and Charity Care Trust has funded care for medically needy patients in the Louisville area. The program required that Louisville Metro Government match the amount of funds put up by the state.

The veto relieves metro government of the requirement to provide matching funds.

Metro government spokesman Chris Poynter said metro government had no objection to the veto and agrees that funding indigent care through the Affordable Care Act is the correct approach.

The argument that Medicaid expansion and the outreach efforts of the Affordable Care Act should eliminate the need for the funding of the U of L Hospital program is one frequently made in recent years by some Republican legislators, particularly Senate President Robert Stivers, of Manchester.

But KentuckyOne Health and U of L Hospital said in its statement Thursday, while the Affordable Care Act helps, "there remains a financial shortfall to ensure coverage for all those in need."

State Rep. Rick Rand, a Bedford Democrat who chairs the House budget committee, said that a need remains. Rand said the $7.5 million the General Assembly provided in its version of the budget is much less than in prior years.

"We've vastly reduced this appropriation from what it was because of the Affordable Care Act because so many more people do have insurance now," he said. "But nevertheless, there will always be some people who have no insurance and need to be covered."

Reporter Tom Loftus can be reached at (502) 875-5136 or tloftus@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1TzcdqC