Aims to grow programs, funding

Peg Peterson, the new director of Family Resource Center, talks with Tom Westfall, who teaches parenting classes at FRC, during a reception Thursday, July 10, for former director and program founder Karen Torres. ( Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Peg Peterson (Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

The Family Resource Center has a new director.

The FRC Board of Directors has named Peg Peterson to replace Karen Torres, who founded the non-profit and served as executive director for eight years. Torres resigned from the center in June to take a position at the Colorado State University Regional Engagement Center in Sterling.

Peterson, who officially starts Monday, July 14, brings more than 20 years of experience managing non-profit organizations to her new position. Her career began in 1990 when she was Executive Director for the High Plains Easter Seal Society. She was in this position for nine years, during which time she tripled the amount of direct assistance the organization was able to give to its disabled clients. In addition, she spearheaded the capital campaign and raised over $250,000 through grants and fund raising events to establish the James B. Harrigan Center for Kidney Dialysis.

Peterson also spent 13 years with Girl Scouts of Colorado, first as a Membership Manager in Northeastern Colorado, and four years as the Membership Director for 13 counties in Colorado: Logan, Morgan, Phillips, Yuma, Washington, Sedgwick, Kit Carson, Lincoln, Cheyenne, Adams, Larimer, Weld, and Boulder. While in this position she was responsible for growth in membership, support, recruitment, and training of volunteers, managing the Fort Collins Service Center and staff, strategic planning, and supporting fund raising efforts. Most recently, she worked at the Journal-Advocate.

Advertisement

According to the board's announcement, Peterson is looking forward to continuing the great work that Torres started. Her plans are to expand the services being offered, expand the volunteer base, establish new partnerships, enrich partnerships already in place, and find the funds to allow the organization to grow.

Peterson can be reached at 970-526-2439 or by stopping by at 120 Main Street.

Contact Journal-Advocate managing editor Sara Waite at 970-526-9310 or swaite@journal-advocate.com