PAM BONDI

Mixed feelings

One has to applaud Attorney General Pam Bondi for asking for money to pay for processing long untested rape kits.

But you can’t push for tax cuts and then expect essential services not to suffer.

The current effort by the attorney general causes one to ponder this question:

Would there be a need for additional funds if Bondi hadn’t wasted public money, legal efforts and time filing or joining lawsuits to overturn the Affordable Care Act, deny same sex marriages and oppose abortion rights?

With the track record of those efforts, we can only be thankful Bondi does not coach our favorite team.

LaRue Boyce, Jacksonville

KENTUCKY COURT CLERK

Many questions

Many people have labeled Kim Davis a hero for standing up for her conscience.

I question those people on how they define the word “hero” and what kind of value of standards they put on “conscience.”

Davis, an Apostolic Christian, swore an oath to uphold the law and perform her duties as a county clerk, topping it off by the words, “so help me God.”

But when it came to actually performing these duties, Davis refused, singling out one particular group of society and citing her personal religious beliefs.

What kind of conscience guided her to break the trust of the very people who entrusted her to do the job?

What kind of conscience guided her to betray the trust of not only the taxpayers who she so blatantly told to go elsewhere for services for which they help pay?

What kind of conscience guided her to take that oath and then claim that the same God told her to disobey and break the law?

What kind of conscience does all this while asking for special accommodations and claiming Christian persecution?

To me, it would seem to be a very twisted type of conscience.

Or the lack of one.

Richard Kusnierek, Orange Park

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

Defenses still needed

“BANNED” signs and tables filled with challenged and banned books drew puzzled looks and many questions during One Spark 2015 and the recent ArtWalk.

Most who stopped didn’t know censorship still happens.

It does despite First Amendment guarantees of freedom of expression.

And it’s not just books.

Laws and policies referencing “community standards” suppress expression considered offensive or dangerous in:

■ Literature.

■ Music.

■ Films.

■ Theatre.

■ Art.

■ Journalism.

■ Public speech.

While some are grateful for the government’s intervention, others object to any limits being placed on expression or their access to published materials.

BANNED and its collaborative partners are creating programs and safe places for the public to discuss these complex issues.

Area college campuses, libraries and other venues in Duval and St. Johns counties will host the discussions that will continue into 2016.

Express Yourself! is the first program in the BANNED series. This celebration of freedom of expression, literature, literacy and the arts takes place in Hemming Park on Sunday, Sept. 27.

Lectures on the history of Nazi art censorship follow at the Cummer Museum of Art & Gardens on Sept. 29.

Next, BANNED brings 2014 National Book Award-winner and JAX Reads! author Jacqueline Woodson to town Oct. 3 and 4.

Woodson will lead free workshops for teachers and young writers and be our guest of honor at BANNED’s fundraiser.

The highlight of the weekend is Woodson’s presentation of her memoir, “Brown Girl Dreaming,” at the Main Library courtesy of the Jacksonville Public Library and BANNED.

Visit Facebook.com/bannedjax often for program announcements and event details.

BANNED is made possible by grants, the support of generous sponsors and community partners and the tireless efforts of many volunteers. Sponsorship opportunities are available.

Please join the conversation.

We are listening.

Leslie Kirkwood, chair, BANNED

Neptune Beach