Illinois hospitals facing Medicare penalties over infection rates

Northwestern among 6 in state that could have payments docked

Included on that list is Northwestern Memorial Hospital, which logged one of the highest rates of hospital-acquired conditions in Illinois.

At least six Illinois hospitals are at risk of having their Medicare payments docked this fall, the government's toughest effort yet to crack down on unnecessary infections and other patient injuries, federal records show.

Norwegian American Hospital's Dr. Qaiser Jamal checks on a patient as medical student Julie Weinberg, left, and nurse Elizabeth Holland observe. Norwegian American Hospital ranked among Illinois’ best performers, according to Medicare’s preliminary analysis. (Scott Strazzante, Chicago Tribune)

Based on preliminary federal data, Northwestern and at least five other Illinois hospitals are facing annual penalties that could reach into the hundreds of thousands of dollars, starting in October.

The financial penalties, which amount to 1 percent of every Medicare payment for a year, are designed to provide a powerful incentive for hospitals to improve patient care and, as a result, save the federal government and taxpayers money.

"We want hospitals focused on patient safety, and we want them laser-focused on eliminating patient harm," said Dr. Patrick Conway, chief medical officer of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

Federal officials in April released preliminary data showing which hospitals would be assessed, identifying 761 institutions. When Medicare sets the final penalties later this year, the list may change because the government will include performance over a longer period.

In Illinois, 26 of 125, or about 21 percent, of the hospitals scored by Medicare would face penalties based on that preliminary analysis, including most of the region's teaching hospitals.

The Tribune, working with Kaiser Health News, focused on Illinois hospitals that experts said are the most likely to face penalties after Medicare compiles the complete data.

Aside from Northwestern, the remaining five hospitals are located outside Chicagoland. They include OSF St. Anthony Medical Center in Rockford, OSF St. Elizabeth Medical Center in Ottawa, Iroquois Memorial Hospital in Watseka, FHN Memorial Hospital in Freeport and Richland Memorial Hospital in Olney.

Each ranked among the bottom 10 percent nationwide on the government's scoring system, which includes three measures:

•The frequency of bloodstream infections in patients with catheters inserted into a major artery to deliver antibiotics, nutrients, chemotherapy or other treatments.

•The rates of infections from catheters inserted into the bladder to drain urine.

•A variety of avoidable safety problems in patients, including bedsores, hip fractures, blood clots and accidental lung punctures.

The final infection-related scores will be based on data for 2012 and 2013; the data for avoidable safety problems include incidents that occurred from July 2011 through June 2013.

Dr. Clifford McDonald, a senior adviser at the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the worst performing hospitals "still have a lot of room to move in a positive direction."