Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va. (AP) — Malcolm Brogdon said he wasn’t trying to assert himself any more than usual. It just worked out that way.

Brogdon scored 17 of his 26 points in the first half and No. 3 Virginia used a 16-5 second-half run to break open a tie game and held off No. 7 North Carolina 79-74 on Saturday night, the Cavaliers’ 19th consecutive home victory.

“I just had opportunities,” Brogdon said of the first half, when he made 6 of 8 shots, including a pair of 3-pointers, to help the Cavaliers to a 38-35 lead at the break. “I try to come out aggressive every game. I try to take what the defense gives me but at the same time, I try to sense when my team is struggling on offense or doing well on offense and I try to adjust my game to that.”

Anthony Gill added 15 points and London Perrantes 12 for the Cavaliers (22-6, 11-5 Atlantic Coast Conference), who moved within one game of the Tar Heels in the conference standings with two regular season games to play.

It was Brogdon who set the tone, North Carolina coach Roy Williams said, and it carried over all game long.

“Malcolm in the first half was as good a performance as we’ve had against us this year, maybe several years,” he said.

After halftime, Gill led the way, scoring 11 of his points, including the last six in the run that whipped the sellout crowd, which included Virginia great Ralph Sampson, into a frenzy. After a recent scoring slump, Gill’s resurgence was a welcome sight, coach Tony Bennett said.

“We needed it all, and that’s what I like to see,” he said.

Joel Berry II led the Tar Heels (23-6, 12-4) with 21 points, including five 3-pointers. Marcus Paige added 13 points and Brice Johnson and Justin Jackson each had 12, but Johnson, like Brogdon a league player of the year candidate, didn’t score for the last 17 minutes of the game.

“He got very discouraged,” Williams said of the 6-foot-10 senior, who arrived averaging 17.2 points and 10.6 rebounds, but was limited to just nine field goal attempts and was guilty of five of the Tar Heels’ 13 turnovers, including one pass that went well into the crowd.

“He got discouraged at that point, too,” Williams said.