FORT COLLINS — If this keeps up, college basketball fans from Aurora may require an entire section at Moby Arena for Colorado State home games.

They certainly will have favorite sons to cheer for. The CSU roster includes two players from Aurora: 6-foot-10 junior forward-center Marcus Holt and 6-3 freshman guard Carlton Hurst. And next season, Rangeview High School star Jeremiah Paige will make it a trio, with the 6-2 senior guard having signed a national letter of intent with CSU in November.

“Having three of us at CSU, that’s going to be cool,” Holt said. “Carlton and I are really close. And Jeremiah lives only about five minutes from where I’m from. I remember when he was a freshman at Rangeview and I was a senior. I kind of took him under my wing and told him to stay confident. Look where he is now.”

Holt helped lead Rangeview to the state quarterfinals as a senior, then played two seasons of junior college ball in Texas. Hurst, meanwhile, averaged 24.3 points last season for Aurora Central. Paige is generally rated the No. 2 senior prospect in the state, behind Colorado-bound guard Dominique Collier of Denver East.

Having the top in-state players stay at home is becoming a trend along the Front Range. Next summer, Collier will join two CU starters from the state: 6-10 Josh Scott (Lewis-Palmer High School in Monument) and 6-9 Wesley Gordon (Colorado Springs Sierra).The rosters of Air Force, Denver, Northern Colorado and Wyoming also include Coloradans.

“There are probably more current and future Division I players from this state than we’ve ever had,” said veteran Denver East coach Rudy Carey. “We see more recruiters from colleges in other states coming in here to look at our players. And high schools in Colorado are hiring better coaches.”

Mike Brookhart, the longtime coach at Cherry Creek, said the growth of area AAU teams has made an impact.

“There are more opportunities for kids to play basketball year-round now,” Brookhart said. “This year’s senior class is very strong. But there are also some really good classes coming up. It takes a really top athlete with special skills to compete at the D-I level, and you’re seeing more kids from Colorado with that ability.”

CSU coach Larry Eustachy said it’s “mostly coincidental” that his team will include three players from Aurora by next season. Independently, Eustachy was impressed by each player’s potential.

Holt barely weighs 200 pounds and averaged fewer than four points per game in junior college. But he is long and bouncy. Holt comes off the bench for the Rams, playing behind 6-9 senior Gerson Santo.

“Marcus is really raw,” Eustachy said. “But he’s really athletic and he blocks shots. And he can shoot. He’s skilled.

“He’s probably the most improved player on our team from when he first arrived in the summer. His potential is off the charts. Marcus just needs to work on playing through adversity, fighting through it when things are going wrong in practice or in games.”

Despite posting modest numbers at Paris (Texas) Junior College, Holt also was invited for official visits to Marquette and Nebraska before signing with CSU.

“I wanted to come home,” Holt said of choosing the Rams. “My mom didn’t get to see me play when I was in Texas playing in junior college. I thought it would really mean a lot to her to come to every CSU home game.”

Hurst has started four games this season but was slowed by a toe injury and now comes off the bench. CSU’s coaching staff likes what it sees.

“Carlton has the potential to maybe become an all-league player before it’s over,” Eustachy said. “He has the mental makeup to become that. He’s tough enough.”

Hurst picked CSU after also making official recruiting visits to Nebraska, Saint Mary’s and Wyoming.

“The biggest change at this level is having to play hard on every possession,” Hurst said. “Like Coach (Eustachy) says, every day is a new opportunity. So I try to go hard every day and get better. I knew what I was getting myself into coming here; I knew he is a demanding coach. But I also knew, at the end of the day, he is going to help me improve.”

Paige’s offer list also included Utah State, Wyoming and San Francisco. At Rangeview, he averaged 20.3 points, 4.3 rebounds and 3.6 assists as a junior.

“Jeremiah is an unbelievable talent with huge upside as he gets stronger,” Eustachy said. “He can really shoot it. He has the mental makeup.”

Eustachy said he was convinced he should recruit Paige after hearing reports from CSU players who played with Paige in pickup games.

“Because of NCAA rules, we can’t watch those (pickup games),” Eustachy said. “But afterward, guys on our team came up to me said, ‘We’ve got to get him. He took it to some of our guys.’

“That was good enough for me. Players know players.”

Especially in-state players, it seems.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Colorado influx

The quality of basketball along the Front Range has greatly improved in recent years and area schools are taking notice, signing the top tier players to stay near home. A look:

AIR FORCE

F Kyle Broekhuis, 6-6 Fr., Colorado Springs Christian HS, USAFA Prep School

F DeLovell Earls, 6-6 Jr., The Colorado Springs School, USAFA Prep School

G Zach Kocur, 6-3 Fr., Arapahoe HS, USAFA Prep School

F Kamryn Williams, 6-4 Jr., Colorado Springs Sierra HS, USAFA Prep School

COLORADO

F Wesley Gordon, 6-9 RS-Fr., Colorado Springs Sierra HS

F-C Josh Scott, 6-10 Soph., Monument Lewis-Palmer HS

G Xavier Talton, 6-1 Soph., Sterling HS

COLORADO STATE

F-C Marcus Holt, 6-10 Jr., Rangeview HS (Paris, Texas, JC)

G Carlton Hurst, 6-3 Fr., Aurora Central HS

DENVER

F Drick Bernstine, 6-8 Fr., Cherokee Trail HS

F Marcus Byrd, 6-7 Soph., Highlands Ranch HS

G Nate Engesser, 6-3 Soph., Colorado Springs Christian HS

G Brett Olson, 6-5 Soph., Highlands Ranch HS

NORTHERN COLORADO

*G Cameron Michael, 6-5 Soph., Loveland HS

C Connor Osborne, 6-9 Sr., Columbine HS

WYOMING

G Josh Adams, 6-2 Soph., Chaparral HS

G Riley Grabau, 6-2 Jr., Boulder HS

F Austin Haldorson, 6-8 Soph., Highlands Ranch HS

F Alan Herndon, 6-9 Fr., Colorado Springs Widefield HS

*sitting out this season as a transfer from Air Force