President Obama speaks with ABC's George Stephanopoulos. | POLITICO screen grab Obama rips Carson: Destroying the Islamic State isn't 'easy'

Ben Carson does not know much about the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, President Barack Obama says.

In an interview with ABC's George Stephanopoulos taped Thursday before U.S. forces carried out drone strikes believed to have killed the infamous British "Jihadi John," Obama responded to a question about what he thought about Carson's assertion during Tuesday's GOP debate that the U.S. could take out the terrorist group "fairly easily" by bombing its oil fields because "several generals" told him so.

Story Continued Below

“Well ... what I think is that he doesn’t know much about it," Obama said after chuckling and cracking a smile in a portion of next Sunday's "This Week" interview aired on "Good Morning America" on Friday. "Look, George, I think it’s fair to say that over the last several years, I’ve had access to all of the best military minds in the country and all of the best foreign policy minds in the country. And I’m not running for office, and so my only interest is in success. And if I’m down in the situation and I’m talking to people who have worked in these regions and have run major military operations from the chairman of my Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joe Dunford, to individuals like Gen. Allen, who was involved in Iraqi operations in 2007, 2008. And if they don’t think it’s easy, then it’s probably not easy."

Obama's response comes after Carson gave a vague, confused explanation of what he would do to defeat ISIL in Syria during Tuesday's debate. "In order to make them look like losers, we have to destroy their caliphate," Carson said. "And you look for the easiest place to do that? It would be in Iraq. And if — outside of Anbar in Iraq, there’s a big energy field. Take that from them. Take all of that land from them. We could do that, I believe, fairly easily, I’ve learned from talking to several generals, and then you move on from there."

The president's interview was recorded hours before Carson's chief rival, Donald Trump, declared to a Fort Dodge, Iowa, audience that he would "bomb the sh--" out of the Islamic State's oil fields in order to defeat the group. In the past, Trump has said that he would "bomb the hell" out of them and take the group's oil holdings as well.

"I would just bomb those suckers," Trump pledged. "And, that's right, I'd blow up all of the pipes, I'd blow up the refineries, I'd blow up every single inch. There would be nothing left. And you know what? You'll get Exxon to come in there and in two months — you ever see these guys, how good they are, the great oil companies? They'll rebuild that sucker brand-new. It will be beautiful. And I'd rig it, and I'd take the oil. I said, I'll take the oil."