In writing legislation, choosing the right language is important.

That is true at the federal level, where the future of the Affordable Care Act, or “Obamacare,” is in now serious doubt before the Supreme Court because it is not clear what Congress meant by a single four-word phrase in one section of a 2,700-page bill.

It’s equally true in Texas, where a much-needed and widely supported bill now moving through the Legislature will fail to do what the legislators who support it hope it will do, because it unwittingly uses a single inappropriate term in several critical places. The Texas legislators backing the new Texas Compassionate-Use Act, though, have a big advantage over Obamacare supporters now arguing their case before the nation’s highest court: they still have time to fix the problem before it becomes law.

The Compassionate-Use Act (SB 339) allows patients with intractable epilepsy to obtain “low-THC” marijuana if a Texas physician who specializes in the area and who has exhausted other treatment options recommends use. Low-THC marijuana contains compounds that provide significant medical benefits, but does not contain significant amounts of THC, the chemical in weed that gets you stoned. It’s like wine that does not contain alcohol. Not even a toddler can get high on low-THC marijuana, while the substance provides many of the legitimate medical benefits found in the cannabis plant. It is safe enough that it is routinely recommended for children in many U.S. states.

The act has wide and bipartisan support in the Texas Legislature. The sponsors, Rep. Stephanie Klick (R-Fort Worth) and Sen. Kevin Eltife (R-Tyler), along with the legislators who support them, clearly want to bring a safe and much-needed product to a group of people — many of them children — who desperately need their help. But a review of federal laws and the experience of other states make it very clear that unless the language is changed, the act will not accomplish what the legislators intend.

The act authorizes physicians to “prescribe” low-THC marijuana for patients under a set of very stringent conditions. That word “prescribe” is the problem. Most people doubtless assume that words like “prescribe,” “specify,” and “recommend” are interchangeable. But under federal drug laws their meanings are very different. A “prescription” is a very specific thing: an order from a physician to a patient directing the patient to consume a particular medication, and to a pharmacy to prepare and dispense the medication.

While federal law (and the First Amendment) allow physicians to “recommend” or “suggest” to patients anything they believe appropriate, federal drug laws specifically prohibit “prescribing” or writing a “prescription” for a “controlled substance” without registration authority from the United States Drug Enforcement Administration.

A physician cannot prescribe controlled substances — which include routine prescription painkillers, antidepressants, sleep aids, medical steroids, and a vast range of other things — without approval by the DEA. And the DEA specifically forbids physicians from “prescribing” any form of marijuana, whether it contains THC or not.

Thus, any Texas-licensed physician who prescribes low-THC marijuana to a Texas patient under Texas law will be directly in violation of federal law, and will lose his or her right to prescribe any controlled substances. The physician will also be subject to criminal penalties. As it happens, the DEA’s web site currently features a cautionary case: an Ohio doctor who is facing five years in prison for not following the rules.

By using the word “prescribe” and requiring a “prescription,” the act’s language effectively makes it impossible for physicians to help patients, and for patients to get access to low-THC marijuana. Physicians who want to help a child racked with savage bouts of Dravet syndrome — an intractable, incurable, horrific disease that can destroy every aspect of a child’s life — cannot do so without risking their medical licenses and even their liberty. No physician in Texas can simultaneously comply with the Compassionate-Use Act, as written, and DEA regulations. The people whom the legislators so obviously want to help will get no benefit from the Act.

Fortunately, the way around this problem is remarkably simple. Get rid of the word “prescription.” What the legislators plainly intend is that no patient should be able to access low-THC marijuana unless a qualified, expert physician has determined that it would be helpful in treating his or her condition. But there is no need to demand a “prescription” — an order sent to a pharmacy — because the Act does not provide that DEA-regulated pharmacies will be filling these orders.

On the contrary, they will be filled under the act by a separate system of state-licensed, nonprofit “dispensary organizations.” Thus, what is needed to make the system work is not a “prescription,” but a certification on a prescribed form by an appropriate physician that the patient qualities for the substance. The dispensing organization, not a pharmacy, then supplies the low-THC marijuana pursuant to state law guidelines.

Such a certification form can, in fact, be even more effective as a means of control than a simple prescription, since anyone who has ever received a prescription knows that it can be little more than a few cryptic notes scribbled on a preprinted blank. Low-THC certification forms in other states can require substantially more information than is found on a simple prescription blank.

The sponsors and supporters of the Compassionate-Use Act deserve tremendous credit for bringing this important piece of legislation to Texas. It would be terrible thing to see it fail because of an incorrect term. There is still time for the Legislature to take a simple step that will avoid that fate. Get rid of the terms “prescribe” and “prescription.” The words “recommend” and “recommendation,” when embodied in a written certification to a dispensary organization, would do the job just as well without potentially sabotaging the whole system.

In fact, they would be even better, since the recommendation form can be specifically tailored to get exactly the information the dispensary organizations need to make safe and effective medicine available to Texans who need it.

Frank Snyder is a professor at Texas A&M University School of Law in Fort Worth, where he teaches legislation and regulation. He is also the author of CannabisLawProf blog. Reach him at fsnyder@law.tamu.edu.