Death Spiral: The Affordable Care Act was a promise to provide health insurance for all those tens of millions of Americans who weren’t covered. So far, it’s not even close to keeping that pledge and probably never will.

The Kaiser Family Foundation, a pro-ObamaCare organization that, among other activities, keeps up with health care data, says that more than “47 million nonelderly Americans were uninsured in 2012.”

There’s no broad agreement with the accuracy of that number, though. The actual figure is unlikely to be that high. Not every one of those 47 million was chronically uninsured — millions go without coverage for short periods due to job changes, for instance, yet are still counted among the uncovered.

Many others simply make a conscious (and often rational) decision to not buy insurance, though they can afford it. As many as 8 million of the “uninsured” use Medicaid, and another estimated 10 million aren’t citizens.

But whatever the number is, ObamaCare will fall short of providing — or even establishing the conditions for — universal coverage.

Four months ago, the administration happily reported that 8 million had signed up for ObamaCare coverage. But now, in the middle of August, that number looks to have fallen to about 6 million or less, according to IBD staff writer Jed Graham.

Reporting Tuesday, Graham said that, based on attrition at Aetna, one of the larger insurers participating in the ObamaCare exchanges, there are “indications that enrollment has turned down.”

Graham noted that Cigna also expects to lose enrollees. “Other major insurers” avoided “questions about attrition,” but none denied that it was occurring.

Reasons for attrition vary, says Graham, from high premium costs to the plans’ high deductibles to enrollees changing plans “so they wouldn’t have to switch doctors.” Others landed jobs that have health benefits, and some “lost income and qualified for Medicaid.”

Another reason for the fall from the 8 million-enrollee peak is simply bad faith on the part of the White House.

As we’ve covered in our Issues & Insights pages, the administration used an artificially inflated number because it tallied enrollees who dropped out before ever paying a single premium. We said in May that the White House counted anywhere from “800,000 to 1.4 million people” who never enrolled. We also said that readers shouldn’t “be surprised if more stop paying or cancel their plans once they realize how little they’re getting for their bloated premium payments.”

Universal coverage will never be achieved without the establishment of an authoritarian system such as in Great Britain. And let’s not confuse coverage with care — remember that in Britain, there is a high quantity of the former and a low quality of the latter.

Americans don’t deserve to have that forced on them.