Johnstown resident Jeremiah Timmons talks Oct. 17 about his recent surgery where he had a subcutaneous implantable defibrillator implanted under his skin. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Jeremiah Timmons, 34, is a big man, with gentle eyes and a big heart. But in Timmons' case that's not necessarily a good thing.

Timmons' heart is enlarged and weakened as a result of years of dangerously high blood pressure that led to cardiomyopathy. His heart functions at 30 percent pumping capacity, compared to a normal heart that works at around 60 percent. Sudden cardiac arrest looms as a possibility at all times in his life.

We've all seen the medical dramas on television. A patient suffers a cardiac arrest. Doctors rush in, pull out the defibrillator paddles, place them on the patient's chest and shock the heart to restart it.

In April of this year, Timmons, of Johnstown, received what one could call his own personal paddles. Dr. Tim Johnson, a board-certified cardiologist and electrophysiologist at Medical Center of the Rockies, placed a subcutaneous implantable cardioverter defibrillator or S-ICD under the skin in Timmons' chest. For individuals like Timmons, it may literally be a lifesaver.

Implantable cardioverter defibrillators, ICDs, are not new. They have been used since the 1980s. They have extended and saved the lives of many people.

ICDs continue to be used successfully for many heart patients, especially those that may require a pacemaker as well as a defibrillator. The ICD contains both.

Advertisement

The ICD uses a wire or lead that is placed within the heart to deliver the shock, should sudden cardiac arrest occur.

"The weak link in that system is the wire," said Johnson. There are two main problems. They are inside the body and inside the heart. The wires are subject to physical stress. If you take a wire and keep bending it, it's going to cause problems. There are well-known failure rates for leads inside the body.

Dr. Tim Johnson, a board-certified cardiologist and electrophysiologist at Medical Center of the Rockies, put a subcutaneous implantable cardioverter defibrillator in Jeremiah Timmons' chest. He's holding an early version of the battery pack for the S-ICD. The newest one is slightly smaller and thinner. It sits under the skin, just under a patient's left armpit. (Jeannie Lancaster / For the Reporter-Herald)

"The other weak leak is that it's a foreign body in the blood stream," said Johnson. If that gets infected, it can cause major problems, because you cannot eradicate the infection on a foreign body inside the blood stream. If these systems get infected, everything has to be removed.

"Once the wires have been in place for more than about six months, they get scar tissue formed around them. They are attached to the blood vessels in the heart. If you try to pull them out you're going to pull out some stuff that somebody really needs."

The S-ICD is much less invasive, sitting just under the skin. It provides protection from sudden cardiac arrest without directly touching the heart. It also reduces the risk of infection significantly.

The battery pack is placed below the left arm pit. A lead runs from the pack to an area below the sternum and then up the chest, all just under the skin.

"I didn't want it because I was so young," said Timmons. "I was like, 'really, I have to have this thing?' But I accept that it was right to do it."

Age was actually an important factor in choosing the S-ICD for Timmons. "He had not had a sudden cardiac arrest," said Johnson. "But he had cardiomyopathy and was at risk for a sudden event. We chose to use this for him — because he's young." Had physicians chosen the ICD, the wire inside the heart could potentially have been subjected to 50 years of torquing and bending.

Individuals with some congenital heart disorders may also be good candidates for the device.

Physicians did not make the decision to place an S-ICD in Timmons lightly. He had been having tightness in his chest and dizziness for some time before a trip to the emergency room in 2011. At that time, his blood pressure was 200 over 120. He was sent to a cardiologist. "They tried to work on meds to slow it down, but it wasn't doing anything," said Timmons.

His cardiologist, Dr. Justin Strote, eventually referred him to Johnson, who Timmons refers to as the, "heart electrician."

Before an S-ICD is implanted, specific protocol must be met. "You need to screen, because if somebody has an indication for a pacemaker or indication for treatment for congestive heart failure, or if someone has known tachycardia, they are not a candidate for this device," said Johnson. "You have to talk to them in great detail about the benefits of one versus the other."

Timmons is taking a proactive approach to his health. He will have gastric sleeve surgery in December in hopes of losing weight, lowering his blood pressure and healing his heart.

For now, the S-ICD sits quietly, without discomfort, just below the skin in his chest — insurance against an event he hopes will never happen.