Topics: Air Travel, Racism, The Weeklings, Travel, TSA, Life News

This article originally appeared on The Weeklings

MY NINE YEAR-OLD daughter has developed a fear of the TSA. She doesn’t say it in so many words but I know.

“I’m glad we’re going on our trip, Mama.” She pauses, chewing her lip. “But I wish… I wish we didn’t have to go through security.”

“Me too,” I agree, remembering a time when she was barely out of diapers, and a TSA officer tried to wrench her, screaming, from my arms, and make her walk alone through the metal detector.

She has a faraway look, as if she’s remembering all the times that she has been yelled at in security, many more times than her fairer skinned older brother. Or perhaps she is remembering how often I, her dark-skinned mother, am ‘randomly’ stopped to have my hands coated with bomb-detection liquid. Random or not, this has never happened to her European father.

But nine year olds are optimists, or at least this one is, so she soon brightens up. “Wouldn’t it be awesome if we could just travel by floo network?”

Harry Potter-based travel possibilities – even ones involving fireplaces and chimneys – would be fantastic indeed. As far as I’m aware, there is no TSA at Hogwarts.

“Only think of all the soot,” I say. My heart unclenches a little at her smile. “What if instead we travelled by port-key?”

And she is off – imagining if it will be a “manky old boot” or a tri-wizard tournament cup that magically transports us, TSA-free, to our destination. But as we near the airport, my anxiety is rising. Mothers are supposed to protect their children, after all, we are supposed to make their world a safe and trustworthy place.

Kind of like what the TSA thinks it is doing, I guess.

But the TSA is not our parent, it is a government institution founded on fear, and deeply imperfect systems of screening. We, who speak languages other than English, instinctively keep our voices down in airports, lest we be suspected of plotting terror when we are actually just wondering about the location of the closest Starbucks. Consider that airports now have ‘behavior detection’ officers whose job it is to ‘deter’ terrorist activities by targeting, according to an August 2012 New York Times article, “Not only Middle Easterners… but Hispanics traveling to Miami… or blacks wearing baseball caps backward.”

There is something particularly heinous about a ‘system of protection’ that so blatantly racially profiles. In the case of our multi-skin-toned family, this racial profiling is so obvious as to seem like a joke, splitting us down the middle, right along color lines.

When I travel alone, I know it will happen. It has gotten so bad I sometimes think twice before wearing any Indian clothes – which is unusual for me, since I’m usually wearing some item of Indian clothing. But without doing any actual statistical analysis, I know that I get pulled aside more often – and for more thorough searching – when I’m dressed ‘ethnically’. Because, I guess, terrorists like to wear batik scarves and colorful cotton kurtas? (Or rather, that ‘difference’ and ‘terrorism’ have become conflated in this country?)

But, it’s far more painful when I’m traveling with my family because the colorism of the profiling is so ridiculously obvious.

We are frequent air travelers – my husband, children, and I. We are a global family with relatives all over the world. A love of travel is in fact one of the first things that drew my husband and I, both children of immigrants, together. But back in those days, a plane trip was not so different from a flying bus. There were no liquids to throw away before security, no shoes and jackets to take off while trying to keep a baby or toddler from crying.

But then came 9-11, a day when brown-skinned Americans like me, people of South Asian and Middle Eastern origin (not to mention anyone else who could belong to the all-encompassing category of ‘potential terrorist’) came to know what our African American brothers and sisters said was the experience of ‘Driving while Black.’ (or, as in the case of Trayvon Martin, Walking While Black). Random screenings and checks stop feeling so random when they happen each and every time one goes to the airport. That became the reality of ‘Flying while Brown.’

“I’m glad they do it,” says a fair-skinned, blonde-haired haired friend of mine, as I try to tamp down my ire, “They need to keep us safe. Heck, I’d undress down to my underwear if they wanted me to.”

(Not that she would have to, if she went through the old ‘virtual strip search’ back-scatter X-ray machines which would do the undressing for you. But we apparently no longer have that kind of scanner, or so they say, in airports)