Buy Photo The General Services Building for Oregon state government in Salem on Wednesday, Oct. 21, 2015. (Photo: ANNA REED / Statesman Journal)Buy Photo

The Public Employees' Benefit Board has voted unanimously to restructure state employee health care premiums, averting hundreds of millions of dollars in future federal excise tax payments.

The restructuring doesn't take effect until 2017, but eventually premiums for individual employee plans will drop and family plan premiums will increase.

The changes come because of an excise tax within the federal Affordable Care Act.

The tax has been called the "Cadillac Tax" because it is levied on the most expensive health plans. It takes effect in 2018 and taxes insurers 40 percent of premiums for plans above an annual threshold — $10,200 for individual plans and $27,500 for plans with dependents.

Oregon's employee-only plans currently cost $14,256 a year — well above the threshold triggering the tax. The state's most expensive plans, which are its family plans, are $19,536 a year — well below threshold.

If the tax is triggered, the state would have to potentially pay up to $335 million in taxes over 10 years. Instead of either paying the tax or slashing benefits, PEBB took advantage of a creative actuarial solution. The Cadillac Tax is triggered by total premium paid. By changing premiums, the state could avoid the tax without cutting benefits.

Tuesday's vote balanced the premium tiers closer to actual costs of the plans. Plans for single people had slightly subsidized the cost of family plans.

PEBB voted to offset increased family plan premiums with a two year subsidy, meaning those employees won't pay premium increases. (All employees will have to pay for inflation-related costs, however.)

The subsidies come from PEBB's stabilization fund, currently sitting at a $15 million surplus with more than $362 million in the fund.

Without the subsidy, employees with dependents would have to pay nearly $20 more a month for health care.

Beginning in 2019, it's expected PEBB will begin weening employees off the subsidies. At that point, monthly payments will go up for employees with dependents. But the subsidies will be reduced a little at a time over several years.

"Rather than rip that Band-Aid off we’re going to go in two steps," Kathy Loretz, PEBB's deputy administrator, said.

gfriedman2@statesmanjournal.com, (503) 399-6653, on Twitter @gordonrfriedman, or Facebook.com/gordonrfriedman

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/1RXi1bQ