Members of Jersey City’s Al Tawheed Islamic Center lost their mosque to a fire yesterday, but they found a place to continue their daily prayers when city officials provided the Jersey City Armory for the day.

And while the city came through in a pinch — even providing bus service from the West Side Avenue center to the armory on Montgomery Street — Newark Archbishop John J. Myers has asked his staff to “explore possible places for worship for the future,” said Jim Goodness, a spokesman for the archdiocese.

“We all saw how the Jersey City community really came together today,” Islamic center Board of Trustees President Ibrahim Eldewak said inside the armory building after nearly 200 members participated in afternoon prayers.

The board president of the 20-year-old Islamic center said: “We saw elected officials on the spot immediately. To us, it was emotional and moving to see everyone come to offer us help.”

He said Jersey City Mayor Steven Fulop and city council members arrived at the fire scene and quickly made the armory available.

Friday afternoon prayer is the most important prayer session of the week and more than 1,000 worshipers normally attend at the center, said the 59-year-old Eldewak, adding that many likely prayed at home or went to other mosques yesterday. He said the center is working out how it will move forward and where daily prayers — observant Muslims pray five times a day — will be held until it reopens.

Mohamad Ali, 21, of Jersey City, said he believes the fire will revitalize the center.

“Everyone was kind of neglecting the mosque, including the youth, but Muslims and non-Muslims will come together to help now — they did today,” said Ali.

On the day the mosque reopens, Ali said “It is going to be pleasing, a warm feeling, and I know everyone is going to come together before then.”

Asked if it was important to have a place for Friday prayers, Ali said: “Friday is like a Saturday for Jews and Sunday for Christians. It was a great feeling for the city to give us the armory.”