A quotation often attributed to Sigmund Freud, the father of psychoanalysis, cautions against finding significance where there is none: “Sometimes a cigar is just a cigar.”

He also allegedly said that “time spent with cats is never wasted,” so take Freud with a grain of salt.

But nowhere is his advice ignored more fervently than in politics, where ascribing psychological motivations for transgressions perceived or real is our lifeblood.

Why did President Clinton cheat on his wife? Because he was an egomaniac.

Why did Anthony Weiner post photos of his crotch on Twitter and then lie about it? Because he’s an egomaniac and a sociopath.

Why did President George W. Bush mislead the country on Iraq? Because he’s an evil warmonger.

The newest iteration of this is to ascribe a psychology to President Obama’s assertion that you can keep your health insurance plan and doctor if you like them under the Affordable Care Act, a promise which will not in fact come to fruition.

Historian Arthur Herman wrote, “Some people might think Obama’s penchant for lying, repeatedly and blatantly — even when he knows people can check and catch him at it — is a character flaw, but it’s not. It’s ideological, and its roots go back some 2,400 years.” And by that, he means Plato. And by that, he means that all liberals lie.

To the New York Times, “Obama clearly misspoke,” but didn’t lie outright, suggesting that Obama didn’t hear very well when a number of his own advisers cautioned against the strongly worded language.

CNN contributor LZ Granderson admitted to the lie, but reassured that it was well-intentioned. “Time and time again, Americans have said we can deal with the lies that President Obama tells us because we believe in his heart, he has the best interest for the American people.”

Why delve into psychoanalysis when the plain fact of a fib is right before our eyes?

But not every left-leaning pundit-analyst is defending the President. Both Bill Maher and Piers Morgan effectively called Obama a liar, and President Clinton suggested that Obama fix the Affordable Care Act to turn the lie into reality.

Another strain of psychoanalysis measures Obama’s lies next to President George W. Bush’s.

Washington Post columnists Jonathan Capehart, on the left, and Marc A. Thiessen, on the right, battled it out in print, with Thiessen arguing, according to Washington Post opinion editor Fred Hiatt, that Bush never actually lied about the reasons for going into Iraq.

And there’s even psychoanalysis of the psychoanalysis! When Vice President Dick Cheney said Obama had lied about the insurance plans, MSNBC host Chris Matthews effectively called those remarks racist.

Breaking down the “truthiness,” as Stephen Colbert might call it, of Obama’s promise isn’t a worthless exercise. It’s one I’ve engaged in, and one that America has weighed in on. The President’s poll numbers, particularly on honesty and trustworthiness, have sunk to new lows in the wake of these mistruths.

But it wasn’t calling the President a liar that tanked his poll numbers. Republicans have insisted Obama was a liar since he announced his run for President six years ago. In some cases, they were wrong. In others, they were probably right, but most people didn’t care.

It was the fact that the lie was self-evident, and that he told it to a significant number of people for whom it mattered greatly.

The public has a way of deciding what lying looks like on its own. Just ask Bill Clinton, whose popularity is higher than ever. Or Weiner, who will likely permanently reside in the ash heap of history.

One lone holdout amongst all of us Freuds is New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. At a press conference on Monday, he told reporters, “I don’t know whether the President didn't know that everybody could keep the insurance they had and just said what he thought was right. Or whether he knew what he was saying wasn’t true. I don’t know which one it is. But what he should do is just tell the American people the truth of what it was.”

Perhaps, ironically, it’s this honesty that makes Christie untrustworthy with far-right ideologues and popular with most of the country. He wisely leaves the psychoanalysis to the rest of us.

Contact Cupp at www.thesecupp.com.