Topics: BuzzFeed, clickhole, humor, Internet Culture, parody, The Internet, Upworthy, Video, Media News, Entertainment News

Clickhole, the Onion’s parody of viral content sites like Buzzfeed and Upworthy, was one of this year’s biggest online success stories. A pitch-perfect sendup of the current clickbait-dominated media landscape, Clickhole is also very, very funny. In fact, it’s so consistently funny that there’s no way even the most devoted readers could have caught all the good stuff. Here are 13 of our favorite stories from the year that you may have missed:

13. “Youngest Child Ever? Jonah Is Just 3 Years Old”

“You might have heard of a 6-year-old, or maybe even a 5-year-old. But a human being who is just 3? As far as we know, Jonah’s April 10, 2011 birth date makes him the youngest child ever to walk the face of the earth.”

12. “Cry.”

11. “6 Billionaires And Their Fucking Sons”

“Here’s the founder of Dell Inc. He’s valued at $15.9 billion. And there’s his goddamn son. Fucking typical.”

10. “I Am Everywhere,” by Ariana Grande

9. “As A Freshman, I Didn’t Know Who I Was, Had No Long-Term Memories, Was Covered In Unexplained Tattoos, And That’s Okay”

“Thinking back, what stressed me out most were all the unanswered questions: Am I already hurting myself by taking the wrong first semester courses? Where was I born? Who is Katya? Why do I keep having daytime visions in which I am pursued through a metal-walled forest compound at night by a tall, muscular man apparently called Vlad? In short, how do I make my way through this crazy thing we call “college”?”

8. “This Video Seems Silly, But It Makes A Good Point”

7. DO NOT PUB

IMAGE TK CAPTION TK

6. “I Never Understood My Father Until I Traveled Through Time And Became Him”

“To be totally honest, before I warped through space-time to instantaneously voyage to 1972 to meet, court, marry, and impregnate the woman who would become my mother, I just thought that my father was an irrationally cruel and cranky man. But as I experienced everything my father did and gradually felt the pressures of raising myself as a child, I began to see the world through his eyes.”