SAN JOSE, CALIF. — While Super Bowl 50 ticket holders saunter through the techy confines of Levi’s Stadium, other NFL enthusiasts up the road in San Francisco will pack a fan village to play interactive football games where digital avatars and live video will pop up before them on giant video screens.

And when the cheers erupt for the Broncos and the Panthers, the spotlight won’t just be on the biggest game in the football season but on the tech companies that pitched in during the week-long festivities.

“Every year, fans (going) to the Super Bowl become more connected and more tech-savvy. But this year presents an amazing opportunity in terms of technology, given Levi’s Stadium’s state-of-the art technology and the connectivity in and around the Silicon Valley,” Michelle McKenna-Doyle, the NFL’s chief information officer, said via e-mail.

The Santa Clara stadium features 40 gigabits per second of Internet bandwidth, massive video boards and more cameras than other professional football venues, offering fans at least six replay angles per play and plenty of Wi-Fi to use mobile apps to get food delivered to their seats, snap selfies and text their friends.

Designers of Levi’s Stadium said when construction on the $1.3 billion venue started in 2012, San Francisco 49ers co-chairman John York wanted a next-generation football stadium that wasn’t only environmentally friendly but reflective of the area’s culture of innovation.

“Sitting there in the valley and surrounded by where the birthplace of technology is, there was a very high expectation of what would be done in the building,” said Lanson Nichols, vice president at HNTB and senior project manager for Levi’s Stadium. “It’s a platform that facilitates a lot of different things, not just the events, but the ability to host the technology and drive that as another element of the fan experience.”

The open space celebrates California’s sunny weather. Lower seating creates a more collegiate feel. And local materials, including reclaimed redwood from the Hangar One facility at Moffett Field in Mountain View, fill the stadium.

“When people see a picture now of Levi’s Stadium, they know it’s in the San Francisco Bay Area. We’re really proud of the fact that Levi’s is about the Bay Area and its culture,” said Tim Cahill, senior vice president and chief design officer at HNTB and chief design principal for Levi’s Stadium.

VenueNext CEO John Paul said a separate app will launch for Super Bowl 50 that includes extra features on top of what fans already get with the Levi’s Stadium app, which the tech firm developed. The new app will:

• Allow people at the game to view a Super Bowl commercial once it airs on television.

• Provide images from a live camera so attendees can see celebrities at the stadium.

• Help with express pickup for merchandise.

About 30 percent of fans at Levi’s Stadium use the stadium app during 49ers games, allowing them to watch video replays, order food, check a bathroom line, find better parking or explore the venue, Paul said. During other sports games, he noted, mobile use has been higher. And while there are still fans who stay away from using a smartphone, he expects that will become more rare in the future.

The tech firm has tested the Super Bowl app for the last three games at Levi’s Stadium, and with the massive amount of bandwidth at the stadium, VenueNext is confident it won’t freeze on game day.

“Our system has never had any significant failures during big events, so we’re keeping our fingers crossed that I haven’t jinxed us by saying that,” he said.

Outside of fans attending a game in person because they want to see a team live, some also want to brag about being there on social media. Facebook unveiled a new feature recently that allows people to view live stats, comments from friends, news stories and more by searching for the game.