Trojans seeking first state title since 1991

Pine Creek coach Todd Miller has quite vivid memories of the somewhat recent playoff showdown between his Eagles and Longmont.

It was an epic struggle with an even more epic finish. And if the dust settles in a similar manner come the early afternoon Saturday, fans of the Longmont Trojans will be able to begin a long-awaited celebration.

Longmont and Pine Creek face off for the first time since a memorable Class 4A quarterfinal match five years ago on Saturday, and the stakes will be even greater as the teams vie for the 4A crown at Sports Authority Field (11 a.m., Altitude TV).

The Longmont Trojans are seeking their sixth state title overall and first since 1991 in the 4A championship game against Pine Creek. (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera)

"I keep going back to our 2009 game with them — there's a lot of similarities," said Miller, whose club dropped a thrilling 42-41 decision in that 2009 quarterfinal battle. "There's a lot of similarities with what they do with their quarterback, whether it's throwing the ball or running the ball. Their offense is very, very impressive.

"I didn't have a chance to watch their early games, but in the two playoff games I've seen there's a willingness to take their playmakers and put them in good spots. On defense they're not the biggest group, but they fly around and they're aggressive. They look like they really enjoy the playing the game, and that's a tribute to their staff."

The key play in that 2009 slugfest was a 78-yard fourth-quarter touchdown pass from former Longmont quarterback Jake Johnson to Daulton Cole. Yet the Trojans will be less concerned about re-examining history lessons than writting a new chapter in the history of a program seeking its sixth state title overall and its first since collecting the last of three consecutive titles in 1991.

The Trojans parlayed that 2009 win against Pine Creek into a title-game appearance, but Longmont suffered a 42-28 loss against Heritage.

"You hear about this all year long, and then to finally get here is something special," senior lineman Sean Glenn said. "It's good to see it all come to fruition. It's a beautiful thing to see. I think we've been playing very well as a team. We may not be the most talented team out there, but no one is going to outwork us."

While Pine Creek has rolled to an undefeated 13-0 mark and will defend its 2013 4A crown as the owner of a 24-game winning streak, Longmont's well-documented road into the title tilt began along a rocky path. The Trojans started the season with a 1-3 mark, suffering all three of those losses to teams that reached at least the quarterfinals in their respective state tournaments — Pueblo East, Fort Collins and Broomfield.

Longmont avenged those regular-season losses against Fort Collins and Broomfield with victories the past two weeks in the quarterfinals and semifinals, extending the Trojans' winning streak to nine games. Overcoming the sort of adversity that has made every game a playoff game for the Trojans since Week 5 has Longmont battle-tested and supremely confident heading into the finale.

"If you ask coach (Doug) Johnson, he'll tell you we've been in that playoff scenario since that last loss in Week 4," Glenn said. "That idea that we can't lose any more games has already been there, and since we've been in the playoffs that hasn't changed. I think that really helped us move forward."

Longmont's defense, a hard-hitting unit that seemingly has improved every week, will be called upon to slow Pine Creek running back Josh Odom. A converted linebacker, Odom has collected 1,955 rushing yards and has been remarkably consistent, getting held under 100 yards just twice in 13 games. Odom has gained 414 rushing yards in the Eagles' three playoff wins.

"They're an option team, so you have to find a way to play aggressive without running by people who might have the football," Johnson said. "That's the hardest thing with the option — they take your smash-mouth mentality and turn it into a finesse mentality. We've got to make sure we break down and tackle, and we don't let missing an assignment hinder us and slow us down. Because they're a team if you play finesse, they'll knock your butt off the ball and run it down your throat."

Follow Pat on Twitter: twitter.com/prooney07