Earlier this month, Walmart announced it would build a second distribution center in Bethlehem, just down the road from another distribution center under construction for online retailer Zulily.

Similar facilities are in various stages of development across the Lehigh Valley, from Lower Macungie to Lower Nazareth to Allen townships.

The transportation and warehousing sector is booming — a point underscored by the monthly workforce data published Tuesday by the state Department of Labor and Industry.

Record employment in the sector — 19,700 jobs, 6 percent more than the same month last year — helped the region's labor market bounce back in September after a late-summer slowdown.

Overall, the Lehigh Valley gained 3,600 jobs from the previous month and was up 600 over the year.

That left the region with a seasonally adjusted total of 349,200 non-farm jobs, edging past a record set in May. The previous peak was in October and November 2007, just before the start of the Great Recession.

GRAPHIC: Unemployment rates around the state Tribune Tribune

"It tells us Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton is growing [and] the economy is improving," state labor analyst Steven Zellers said.

Other than August's slump, the Lehigh Valley's labor market has shown consistent improvement over the course of the year. In June, the unemployment rate dipped below 6 percent for the first time in nearly six years.

In September, the unemployment rate fell further, dropping one-tenth of a point to 5.8 percent — the lowest level since August 2008.

Other sectors buoying the labor market included professional and business services with a record 49,000 jobs — 1,400 more than the previous year.

Zellers said the expansion in professional and business services is an especially good omen because it is a sector encompassing a hodgepodge, from lawyers to landscapers to temps. The ranks of such workers, many of them contract workers, only grow when businesses and people have enough money and confidence to hire them, he explained.

"That's a sign the general economy is improving," he said.

The construction, mining and logging sector, meanwhile, continued to grow, too. It added 100 jobs since the previous September, bringing its total to 13,300. Driving construction is the redevelopment of downtown Allentown.

Though some projects downtown, such as an office tower and the PPL Center hockey arena, are winding down, other projects, including an apartment complex, are ramping up. Meanwhile, many of the area's new businesses are already hiring.

Partially offsetting gains in some sectors were losses in other sectors.

Education and health services, for example, had 69,400 jobs, which was 1,800 less than the previous year. The bulk of that decline was in health care and social assistance, suggesting a link to the implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Leisure and hospitality lost 1,800 jobs from August, though mostly due to normal seasonal decline. Year-over-year, the sector was down 500 jobs.

Government, meanwhile, was down 900 jobs from last year.

skennedy@mall.com

610-820-6130