A female white-tailed deer walks through a woodlot in Polk County last November. Credit: Paul A. Smith

The road to new Wisconsin deer hunting regulations is nearing its final stop.

At least, the latest spate of changes. Anyone who has bought more than a dozen backtags knows change in deer hunting is more of a constant.

But this round is special, started as it was by Gov. Scott Walker.

The process began in 2010 when Walker, then campaigning for the state's highest elected office, responded to a faction of unhappy hunters and pledged to review the state's deer management process.

After he was elected, Walker used an executive order and created the position of Wisconsin white-tailed deer trustee. Walker then named James Kroll of Nacogdoches, Texas, to the position.

Kroll was signed to a $125,000 contract to assess Wisconsin deer management and provide recommendations for changes. Kroll issued a July 2012 report of 62 recommendations, compiled with assistance from Gary Alt of California and David Guynn of South Carolina.

A public review process and public hearings lasted through 2013. The work included four action teams of volunteers who met from March to July last year in Stevens Point to help implement recommendations of the deer trustee report.

If the process sounds long and convoluted, you're right. You also won't be surprised to hear the outcome is a strange mix that's barely recognizable even to many who were involved each step of the way.

The DNR's final proposals were published last week and will be considered at the Wednesday meeting of the Natural Resources Board in Madison.

The recommendations include:

■ Creating a system of 72 deer management units along county lines.

■ Creating a panel in each county to advise the DNR on deer management. The panel would be chaired by the head of the county's Wisconsin Conservation Congress delegation.

■ Doing away with quantitative deer population goals and instead expressing the local management objectives as "increase, decrease or stabilize."

■ Instituting a bonus buck system in which a hunter would get one extra buck tag after killing an antlerless deer. The bonus buck rule would apply in all southern farmland units and any other units in the state with with goals of "decrease" or "stabilize." Hunters would be capped at a maximum of three bucks a year if hunting with both gun and bow.

■ Allowing phone or Internet registration of deer kills.

■ Creating a system of public and private antlerless deer tags.

■ Creating a deer management assistance program.

With regard to hunting seasons, the archery, youth, nine-day and muzzleloader hunts would stay the same (except archery gains the Friday before gun season).

A four-day antlerless deer hunt would be held in December in the central forest and central farmland regions only.

The recommendations also include a holiday gun deer hunt, but only for antlerless deer and only in the CWD management zone.

When the process started, Kroll said he wanted to involve the public and produce a result that improved the working relationship between the DNR and the state's citizens. That was a laudable goal.

But public participation in the hearings (397 people), online survey (3,812 responses) and action teams (53 people) was extremely low. Even if you add all of these together, it's less than 1% of Wisconsin deer hunters.

And when it comes to Wisconsin deer management, there are more than 700,000 opinions — at least one for each hunter.

Early reactions to the proposals are mostly negative, partly because they ignore some key input from the action teams.

The Kroll report encouraged Wisconsin to resolve the issue of baiting and feeding. Volunteers last summer voted to prohibit baiting and feeding statewide. While the Legislature would have to take action on the topic, the DNR missed an opportunity to embrace this view of the public in its proposals.

The proposals also ignore the public's recommendations to continue with deer management units along habitat and natural boundaries as well as managing to numeric deer population goals.

Other criticisms include concern that the bonus buck rules will result in harvest of too many mature bucks each year, worry over complexity of tag options (county and private/public land specific) and the loss of in-person registration data.

And what about the rest of the state's residents?

If you're not a hunter, you probably want to make sure state officials are working to keep deer populations in balance with the habitat and at numbers low enough to control agricultural damage, collisions with motor vehicles and spread of diseases. With its more qualitative and less scientific approach to deer management, the plan isn't likely to reassure the general public, especially with its passive approach to chronic wasting disease.

The board could accept the entire package or make changes to it.

Altering deer management is as risky as proposing tax increases. Most politicians stay clear of both.

Send email to psmith@journalsentinel.com