The attack ads between Donald Trump and Governor John Kasich are appearing all over TV, radio, and online.

But is there any truth in what they're saying about each other?

“Ohioans are too dang smart to ever trust you,” says the voice in Kasich’s ad referencing Trump.

“John Kasich just another all talk no action politician,” says the ad produced by the Trump campaign.

The attack ads show how important Ohio is to both campaigns.

We showed both ads to Amy Hanauer of Policy Matters Ohio and non-profit nonpartisan research institute. We had her examine claims from both camps.

We'll start with Mr. Trump's ad claim.

Claim: After John Kasich helped Wall Street predator Lehman Brothers destroy the world economy.

Yes, Kasich did work for Lehman Brothers in a two-man office in Columbus but his campaign claims he had no executive or strategic role. Is this claim true?

“Lehman Brothers was not at all helpful to the world's economy," Hanauer said. "But I wouldn't say they destroyed the world's economy, it's still functioning."

We're calling this ad claim FALSE.

Claim: Kasich gave Ohio Obamacare.

This claim takes some explaining.

“He didn't bring Ohio Obamacare; that was a federal decision,” Hanauer said.

But since Kasich used Obamacare, also known as the Affordable Care Act, to pay to expand Medicaid which allowed thousands of Ohioans to get health coverage.

We're saying this claim is TRUE.

A new ad from the group New Day For America, boasts Kasich's jobs record.

Claim: 417,000 of us now have good paying jobs.

Hanauer says it's not the whole story.

“It's not inaccurate to say those jobs came to the state but it's not much to brag about because our job creation has been lower than the nation as a whole,” she said.

We're giving this claim PARTLY TRUE.





Claim: Kasich cut state spending cut our taxes increased our wages.

Is this true?

“He cut taxes for the wealthiest Ohioans and raised taxes for lower income Ohioans," Hanauer said. "He did cut spending for local governments."

Which she says forced those local governments to ask voters to approve more taxes. We're giving this claim PARTLY TRUE.





As the November election draws closer, expect to see more ads like these. Hanauer says don't rely on ads for the facts.

“I don't think any of these ads give you a full picture,” she said.

The Anti-Trump ads appear to be working for Kasich who is now tied in with Trump in the latest Quinnipiac University survey released Monday.