Mr. Donovan, the son of a longshoreman and a factory concession worker, spends most Sundays visiting his 88-year-old mother, who has dementia. He said his mother took offense when criticism came his way, but because of her illness, “she can’t read about this stuff.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I grew up in the neighborhood where Eric Garner died,” Mr. Donovan noted. “No one knows that about me.” He recalled being raised “not knowing prejudice” in a diverse, working-class apartment building in the neighborhood, Tompkinsville.

“A Puerto Rican family lived downstairs,” he said. “A black family lived across from us. And downstairs, was the Jewish family. My mother’s Polish, my dad was Irish. I grew up knowing nothing different.”

Contrary to suggestions that he steered the grand jury, Mr. Donovan said he never entered the grand jury’s chambers and never met a single witness of the 50 who appeared. The case was handled by eight lawyers on his staff in whom Mr. Donovan said he has “unwavering confidence.”

“We did everything proper,” he said. “We spent an extraordinary amount of resources.” He urged the public to show greater deference to the grand jury’s deliberations: “People can disagree with it, but people ought to respect it.”

The Garner family and an array of legal advocates, including the New York Civil Liberties Union and the office of the New York City public advocate, have filed suit to obtain transcripts of the grand jury proceedings. Mr. Donovan has opposed that suit, though he said he had sought permission from a court to share more information about the proceedings than he was ultimately allowed to release.

He said he was unable to characterize what additional information he asked the court to disclose.

Mr. Donovan warned that certain proposed changes to the system could undermine due process and the separation of powers. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, and Jonathan Lippman, chief judge of the New York Court of Appeals, have each proposed measures that would give extra scrutiny to cases involving police officers.

Within days of the Garner decision, Mr. Donovan said, “another grand jury on Staten Island refused to indict a young African-American man for assaulting a public servant.”

“No one’s asking to reveal those grand jury transcripts,” he continued. “Nobody’s saying that the system was broken then.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Asked for additional information about that case, a spokeswoman for Mr. Donovan said he was unable to speak further about a sealed matter.

Photo

The race in Mr. Grimm’s congressional district, the 11th, which includes Staten Island and parts of Brooklyn, has taken shape slowly. Mr. Donovan has not started to campaign in earnest, and only on Friday did the governor’s office schedule the vote for May 5. Democrats are still choosing their candidate from a list that includes Councilman Vincent J. Gentile.

Nevertheless, Mr. Donovan’s powerful allies in the city elite have quietly reassured him that he can count on their support. For instance, at the wake for former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo in January, former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg offered his help. (Mr. Donovan recalled Mr. Bloomberg’s saying, “I don’t understand why you want to do this, but I’ll support you in anything you do.”)

Robert M. Morgenthau, the retired Manhattan district attorney in whose office Mr. Donovan began his prosecutorial career, defended him as a “man of integrity.” A pillar of the city’s Democratic establishment, Mr. Morgenthau offered a forceful character endorsement for his Republican protégé.

“He’ll faithfully represent his constituents without fear or favor,” said Mr. Morgenthau, who also opposes overhauling the grand jury system. Of the Garner case, Mr. Morgenthau said, “I don’t know how I would have voted, but I’m confident that Donovan played it right down the middle.”

Should Mr. Donovan prevail, he would represent a contrast with Mr. Grimm, a volatile official who once threatened to hurl a reporter off a balcony in the United States Capitol. Representative Peter T. King, a Republican from Long Island, said Mr. Donovan had told leaders in Washington that he would not “embarrass the Republican Party.”

Among his vices, Mr. Donovan included the New York Times crossword puzzle and infrequent trips to the movies.

The Rev. Dr. Victor A. Brown, pastor of Mt. Sinai United Christian Church, where the Garner family often attends services, said he had never seen evidence of dishonesty or racial bias in Mr. Donovan, though the preacher said he felt consternation as to “why the grand jury in the Garner case came back with the decision it came back with.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Dan Donovan has not done anything to demonstrate to me that he’s anything other than an honest man,” the preacher said. He declined to say if he believed Mr. Donovan could properly represent the members of his predominantly black congregation.

While Mr. Grimm came to Congress in 2011 vowing to roadblock President Obama’s agenda and to repeal the health care law enacted the previous year, Mr. Donovan said he favored an approach to the Affordable Care Act that would “piece by piece, tweak it so that it works better.”

Mr. Donovan said that he took a traditional view of marriage, but that he expected same-sex marriage to become legal nationally and called himself “very respectful of people’s privacy.”

He offered only hesitant criticism of Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat who is an unpopular figure on Staten Island: “There were some missteps taken by the mayor, that I believe now he’s very much trying to rectify.” Mr. Donovan added he would gladly go golfing with the president, and counts Edward I. Koch and Robert F. Kennedy among his idols, along with Ronald Reagan.

Although he opposes Mr. Obama’s recent executive action on immigration, Mr. Donovan called it a “terrible idea” to impede the policy by blocking funding for the Department of Homeland Security, as some conservatives in Congress have done. Alluding to the Sept. 11 attacks, Mr. Donovan said, “We know the importance of having homeland security in this district.”