WASHINGTON — The Affordable Care Act is picking up steam, and repealing it now would cause a huge backlash from voters, Rep. Joaquin Castro, D-San Antonio, said today.

“We’re hoping that Republicans will come to their senses and realize how valuable the Affordable Care act is to the American people,” he told reporters on a White House conference call that also included Sen. Debbie Stabenow, D-Mich, Rep. Matthew Cartwright, D-Pa. and a senior Obama adviser, David Simas.

“This is no longer an abstraction,” Simas said. “At the end of the day, this is a pocketbook issue for millions of Americans across the country.”

The White House today released estimates of the law’s benefits for Texans.

According to their numbers, more than 5 million Texans with private insurance have gained access to cost-free preventative care such as immunizations, birth control or mammograms. And the nearly 5 million uninsured in the state have expanded choices in terms of healthcare plans through Medicaid or the ACA marketplace.

Castro said the ACA is gathering momentum in Texas. Though only 3,000 people in the state signed up in the program’s first month, he said, last month saw more than 14,000 Texans join. “We believe the third month will be even higher,” he said.

The state is dealing with a “very difficult, and in some ways unique, situation,” Castro said, due to its high number of uninsured and rapid demographic changes. “We’re in a dire state here in Texas.”

He placed some blame at the feet of Republicans, calling their attitude callous and decrying actions like Gov. Rick Perry’s refusal to expand Medicaid.

He also blasted Sen. Ted Cruz for his efforts to defund or repeal the ACA, and said Republicans could cause another fiscal standoff like the one that lead to October’s government shutdown and near-default on the nation’s debts.

“Senator Cruz, who caused the government shutdown, still talks nearly every day via social media about repealing the Affordable Care Act,” he said. So they could threaten the debt ceiling again. We don’t put that past them. ”

Republicans pushing for repeal say the law is too costly and will cause millions to lose their health care, their jobs, or both.

“The only reason the White House held this call today is because enrollment numbers for Obamacare have been disastrously low,” said Cruz spokesman Sean Rushton. “Texans, like millions of Americans all over the country, know this terrible law is costing them jobs, the plans they liked, and forcing them to pay more for their insurance through higher premiums and deductibles.”

Castro said repealing the law is unpopular with voters, and that further attempts to topple it would have consequences for Republicans.

“The American people, and Texans, will not stand for the repeal of the Affordable Care Act. If they try to repeal it, there will be a real backlash among Texans,” he said.