Buy Photo John Thune (left) and Tom Daschle. (Photo: Argus Leader file photos)

The quirky state of South Dakota politics always makes for good conversation, even if that conversation is fictional.

Take the case of Republican senator John Thune, who strolled near his Capitol Hill office without a care recently, pondering the absurdity of possibly going unchallenged for a second consecutive re-election bid.

Actually Thune was thinking about sports, but let's keep this on point.

The era of Republican domination (and Democratic ineptitude) in South Dakota is impossible to deny, with all three U.S. congressional delegates from the GOP and the party thriving as expected in Pierre.

High-profile Republican candidates jockey for position as primary battles loom, while Democrats desperately search for leadership in between bake sales and the latest George McGovern séance.

More:Columns from Stu Whitney.

Thune considered these realities, and also his fantasy football lineup, while enjoying a brightly lit Washington D.C. morning. When he looked up from his reverie, he saw a familiar face approaching and thought briefly about changing course.

It was too late. Tom Daschle had spotted him.

The former Senate majority leader from South Dakota has stayed active as a political consultant since suffering a devastating defeat to Thune in 2004 – a nationally significant Senate race that also set the stage for Democratic downturns back home.

On this day, Daschle approached Thune and offered his former rival a hearty handshake, which Thune accepted while looking around furtively for cameras. It was Daschle who spoke first.

"You look surprised to see me, John. You know that I'm a D.C. resident, right? You seemed more than anxious to point that out back in '04."

"Of course, Tom. Sorry about that. I'm just taken aback when I see a Democrat from my home state in the nation's capital. It's been a while, I guess."

"The local party has fallen on hard times, no doubt about that. I think about it often, John, when I consider my upbringing back in Alexandria."

"I thought you were from Aberdeen."

"Whatever. The point is that South Dakota Democrats used to resonate nationally, with strong policy from respected politicians such as McGovern, Abourezk, Johnson, Herseth and Hitchcock."

"Hitchcock? You mean the guy who directed 'The Birds'?"

"No, Herbert Hitchcock. From Mitchell. He was appointed to a vacant U.S. Senate seat in 1936 and served two years before being passed over in the next election."

"Sounds like a bit of a reach, Tom."

"Maybe, but we haven't had a lot of highlights, as you can understand. Building support can be challenging in a conservative state like South Dakota, where the fine electorate has voted Democratic in presidential races just four times in history, most recently in 1964."

"And that was only because Republican nominee Barry Goldwater threatened to blow up the entire world, including the car museum in Murdo."

"I'm not sure about that, John, but I do know McGovern failed to win his home state in 1972 against Nixon, and you know how that turned out."

At this point Daschle was dismayed to see Senator Thune glance at his watch and perform a few rapid-fire jumping jacks on the sidewalk before returning to the conversation.

"I'm sorry," said Daschle. "Am I boring you?"

"Of course not!" replied Thune, giving him a pat on the back. "I just haven't gotten my workout in because we were late getting out of the Taylor Swift concert last night. That fundraising circuit can be a real grind. I think I may have strained a hamstring during 'Shake It Off.' "

"Well, that's a shame, but there are pressing issues that must be addressed. I think the Democratic Party in South Dakota should be more reflective of the national scene, where President Obama has scored recent victories."

"Come on, Tom. I speak for Mike Rounds and Kristi Noem when I say that we will stand up to the president to ensure that his left-leaning agenda doesn't see the light of day. That means getting rid of Obamacare and fighting to overturn a potentially disastrous nuclear deal with Iran."

"You do realize Republicans have lost key battles on both those issues, even though you and Rounds signed that bizarre letter to the Iranian government threatening to undercut the president's authority."

"I was told it was a birthday card for Ted Cruz."

"OK, whatever. The point is that people are tired of politics as usual, which explains Donald Trump's stunning rise. Americans have seen enough of leaders taking a stubborn stance on issues simply because of the established ideology of their party. This country was made great by statesmen who could think outside the box, or across the aisle, to move the country forward at major moments."

"Funny you should say that, Tom, because I don't recall you working across the aisle very often when you carried the water for Bill Clinton in the Senate."

"That was the way things worked, John, and the stakes have gotten higher. I see that you have $11 million in your campaign war chest and you might not even be opposed in 2016. Politics should be less about money and influence and more about ideas."

"That seems a little high and mighty coming from someone who makes his living as a well-connected Washington D.C. lobbyist."

"Please call me a consultant, John. Not a lobbyist."

"That's like referring to Hillary Clinton as stoic rather than charmless."

"We try to find the bright side, John, but it's not always easy. When it comes to the Democratic plight in South Dakota, pessimism reigns. One gets the feeling that Kristi Noem could take out challenger Paula Hawks with a well-timed Instagram post, and I don't even want to think about the race for governor in 2018. We need fresh ideas, better organization, something or someone to get excited about."

After listening to Daschle's assessment, Thune seemed reluctant to speak up, then relented.

"Well, Tom," he said. "If you're looking for a bright side, there's always Mike Huether."

"Thanks," replied Daschle. "Don't you have more jumping jacks to do?"

Argus Leader Media city columnist Stu Whitney can be reached at swhitney@argusleader.com. Follow him on Twitter @stuwhitney

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1UNSFNC