Photo

Senator Mitch McConnell gave the country a glimpse this week of what Republican control of the Senate would look like. If it produces a familiar depression, it’s because we’ve seen what happens when Republican leaders in the House have used the identical tactics, and most people have little interest in seeing Washington return to battle stations.

In an interview with Politico, Mr. McConnell, the minority leader, promised to govern through extortion if his party picks up enough seats in November to make him the majority leader come January. He plans to attach provisions to must-pass spending bills that would roll back the administration’s policies, and dare President Obama to veto them.



“We’re going to pass spending bills, and they’re going to have a lot of restrictions on the activities of the bureaucracy,” Mr. McConnell said. “That’s something he won’t like, but that will be done. I guarantee it.”

When a spending bill is vetoed, the resulting impasse leads to a shutdown of the affected departments. If no spending bills can pass, the result is a government shutdown like the one that lasted for 16 days last October, after the House tried to dismantle the Affordable Care Act.

No one expected Congress to get much done during Mr. Obama’s final years, but Mr. McConnell apparently intends to escalate the level of confrontation. By promising to resort once again to the use of extortion — and presumably that would extend to raising the debt ceiling — Mr. McConnell demonstrates that his party lacks positive ideas, and is beholden to its most reactionary elements. Many Republican leaders, including Mr. McConnell himself, seemed to have learned how unpopular the shutdown technique was, and had vowed not to use it again. But the party’s base, as best embodied by Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, has become addicted to the very act of confrontation, and wants to engage in showdowns whether or not they are fruitful in political or policy terms.

Mr. McConnell, the opposite of a firebrand, needs those kinds of voters in Kentucky to survive his current challenge from the Democrat in his race, Alison Lundergan Grimes. That’s probably why the example he gave in his interview was to add restrictions to the Environmental Protection Agency, which has become unpopular among some voters in the state because of its proposed limits to coal-plant emissions.

Even if it’s just a veneer of toughness for campaign purposes, it’s the wrong kind of message to send to voters who are weary of seeing Washington on the brink. It raises expectations among extremists, and will embolden other candidates to make the worst kinds of threats. It also sends a clear message to Democratic voters who are thinking of sitting November out. The midterms matter a great deal.