Buy Photo David Twombley, left, and his partner Larry Hoch, both of Urbandale, react to learning of the Iowa Supreme Court ruling in favor of legalizing gay marriage in 2009. (Photo: Register file photo)Buy Photo

If anyone can identify with Tyler McCubbin, it’s retired school teachers Larry Hoch and David Twombley.

McCubbin is the 26-year-old track coach and substitute teacher who was recently denied a full-time teaching contract at Dowling Catholic High School in West Des Moines. He was denied for one reason. He is openly gay.

Twombley and Hoch are the self-described “Old Farts Couple” of Varnum v. Brien the unanimous 2009 Iowa Supreme Court decision that opened the door to marriage equality in the nation’s heartland and beyond. When that door flew open, many legal benefits came rushing in as well.

For three decades before retiring, Hoch taught middle-school math in the lower Hudson Valley of New York; Twombley was a long-time music teacher in Iowa.

The two were respected, devoted educators. They kept their jobs for all those years not only because they knew their craft, but also because they knew how to keep a secret. In their 70s now and living in Urbandale, the two spent the better part of their lives hiding their sexual orientation.

While McCubbin made no secret of his engagement to another man, Twombley and Hoch were the products of a different time. As teachers during an era when homosexuals were often prosecuted by overzealous law enforcement officials, both men said they never were under the illusion they could be honest about their sexual preference.

“I kept a log of everyone I’d told so I could keep my story straight,” Hoch said in interviews for the book “Equal Before the Law: How Iowa Led Americans to Marriage Equality.”

Married at age 39 in 1982 but divorced 10 years later after the birth of two children, he had watched teachers like himself lose their jobs. Not until his retirement in 1999 did he disclose to his family he was gay. Like Twombley, Hoch first told a brother.

“The noose was no longer around my neck,” he remembered.

Twombley also hid his orientation from his bosses. To take his mind off the complications of living with this secret, he took up running at age 49 and raced three times in the Boston Marathon. He also obtained a pilot’s license.

“I wasn’t resentful,” he told us. “For a long, long time in my 20s, 30s, 40s, I just tried not to think about it.”

Years later, when Twombley finally went public with his homosexuality, he felt compelled to meet with one of his favorite former students, Joel Fry.

“One of the sharpest trumpet players I ever had,” Twombley said. “A very mature, reliable kid with a great sense of humor.”

By then, Fry, had married and become a member of the Iowa House.

Twombley will never forget Fry’s reaction during their meeting. Why did you choose to be gay?

Twombley’s response: “I could no more chose my orientation than my eye color.”

As a legislator, Fry supported a constitutional amendment limiting marriage to a man and woman. Though he remained dubious about Twombley’s homosexuality, he told Twombley his old teacher was still the same person he looked up to as a teenager.

There is no disputing Dowling Catholic’s legal right to deny McCubbin a teaching contract. His lifestyle is at odds with church teaching, and under Iowa law the school has the right to exercise that judgment.

But consider this: Would the students have been better served with a coach or teacher who couldn’t be honest about himself? Isn’t it likely they would have learned from McCubbin and positioned their views on his personal life into the proper context of their religion?

While views have drastically changed since then, Dowling remains firmly anchored in the fog of don’t ask, don’t tell. Someday that fog will lift. Not at the proper pace, of course, but lift it will.

Someday, gay men and women will not have to live a lie to serve their God and teach at private schools like Dowling Catholic. The world is changing. And, believe it or not, so is the church. When Iowa’s high court ruled on Varnum in 2009, the Iowa’s Catholic bishops favored a constitutional amendment to right the wrong.

Here’s what Richard E. Pates, Catholic Diocese of Des Moines, said in a joint statement with Iowa’s other three bishops:

“This decision rejects the wisdom of thousands of years of human history. It implements a novel understanding of marriage, which will grievously harm families and children.”

Grievously harm families and children.

When the Iowa Supreme Court justices launched into the research in preparation for Varnum, they were inundated with science that concluded just the opposite.

This is what Pates told the Register on the fifth anniversary of the decision:

“According to several indicators, there is a growing acceptance of same-sex marriage nationwide, and there’s no reason to think it’s not true in Iowa. I believe most people who support same-sex marriage do so in good will, but I think there is much more than good will involved.

“First, many of us can agree on this: God loves everyone, gay or straight. No one is excluded, and sexual identity is only one component of who we are. Gay people are welcome in the Catholic church. Many of them are hurting from hateful attitudes, and as Pope Francis has said, Christians should see themselves less as enforcers of rules than as doctors in a field hospital.

“Furthermore, all of us, not just gay people, are challenged to approach our sexuality in a responsible and mature manner.

“This said, the church holds that marriage is the union of a man and a woman and is the best way to nurture and protect children. This position is based on the solid teaching of Scripture and our own tradition about its meaning, which is derived from the ‘natural law’ deeply embedded in the humanity of each of us by a loving creator.

“Despite what the Iowa court has ruled, we also believe that limiting marriage to a man and woman is best for the common good and the future of society.”

No mistaking the change in tone. No mistaking the wishes of the Dowling students who walked out of school in protest of what they believed to be a wrong-minded decision to take back the job they’d promised McCubbin before the truth popped up on Facebook.

Those Dowling kids aren’t going away. There are tons more like them. Someday they’ll have more say in such decisions. It doesn’t help McCubbin much or the students he might have had. Small consolation, Tyler, but you just took one for the team.

TOM WITOSKY AND MARC

HANSEN wrote for the Des Moines Register for more than 30 years before retiring in 2012. Their book “Equal Before the Law: How Iowa Led Americans to Marriage Equality” will be released June 1 by University of Iowa Press. Contact:

twitosky@gmail.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1ymRorQ