Open enrollment season begins Nov. 1 for the health insurance exchange, and to help consumers, insurance agents and brokers better understand New Mexico’s exchange, beWellnm CEO Amy Dowd and Superintendent of Insurance John Franchini are touring the state, providing information. They answered questions from CMI on Thursday:

What kind of coverage is included in the beWellnm plan?

Dowd: beWellnm is the New Mexico health insurance exchange, where all of the products that have been certified as qualified health plans by the superintendent of insurance are presented, and people can go to bewellnm.com and shop and select their plan and potentially be eligible for assistance to reduce their premium.

It’s free to shop, and it’s actually free to get help whether that be through an agent or broker or enrollment counselor that are located and certified across the state of New Mexico. We also have a call center where we assist people with understanding their options in the exchange, and you can also go out and do it on your own if you’re comfortable selecting a plan on your own.

Franchini: This year there will be 38 plans available in the exchange on the individual marketplace, and there will be another 24 available on the commercial marketplace in the exchange.

Does it only cover individuals or does it also cover families and small businesses?

Franchini: In commercial accounts and small businesses.

Dowd: Individuals and small businesses up to 50 employees can shop at beWellnm.com, and there’s an option; if you’re an individual or family you go one path, and if you’re a small business you go another path.

How can someone enroll? Do they need to contact a broker or agent?

Dowd: No, you can do it on your own. We always encourage people to use a knowledgeable agent or broker to assist them with their plan selection.

It’s free to use an agent or broker, so we sometimes get questions. People will think, “Well if I use an agent or broker I’ll have to pay a commission,” and the process doesn’t work like that. The individual does not pay for the services of an agent or a broker, and you can go to our website and find a listing of agents, brokers or enrollment counselors that are in your area, so we do have certified individuals to assist people as well in this area of eastern New Mexico.

How many services are offered in versus out of network?

Franchini: We have the four carriers that are in the exchange now that have very extensive networks in this area now. The four carriers are Molina Healthcare, Presbyterian Insurance Services, Christus and New Mexico Health Connections. All four of them are expanding their networks in this area in (eastern New Mexico) and expanding them into Texas, because we’ve realized the citizens in this area are very comfortable using health services out of Amarillo and especially out of Lubbock.

We have extensive networks in the Lubbock area and we’re moving towards Amarillo. (Enrollees) will not lack good medical care.

Is everyone eligible for insurance on the state exchange?

Dowd: Not everyone. If you’re an adult, a citizen and you’re not eligible for other assistance programs such as Medicare or Medicaid, then you can shop and purchase on the exchange and, depending on your income, you may also be eligible for assistance to reduce your premium. But you can shop on the exchange whether you’re looking for assistance with your premium or not.

As long as you’re not eligible for affordable care through your employer and you’re not eligible for other assistance programs (you can shop the exchange).

How big of a discount on your premium are we talking here?

Franchini: It depends on your income. As I found out myself, I have seven people in my family, and I found out under the federal government’s rules, I’m a poor person. I make 100-some thousand dollars a year, and I’m a poor person. I could still qualify for credits if I didn’t have a health care plan in the exchange. It goes up to $130,000 if you have a family of six or more.

I know of one person who is 55 (and retired) and his wife is 46, and his current salary is $40,000. Their health plan they bought in the exchange is $600 a month. He said that’s cheaper than the health plan he had at his business for he and his wife, so he was very happy. People just don’t know they can do that, they really don’t.

Dowd: Somewhere around 40 percent of New Mexicans who have purchased coverage on the exchange get some form of assistance, and the majority — especially at the silver level where you get additional savings and assistance with premiums and co-pays and intervals — 50 percent of those eligible for silver have premiums of $100 or less, so it’s worth it to go out and shop and see.

It’s important to note, too, that the penalty this year (for not having insurance) increases, so for 2016 if you do not carry health insurance and you’re not eligible for any type of an exemption, then the penalty does increase significantly in 2016.

So you may be further ahead going out and shopping and finding a health care plan than to face paying the penalty. The penalty amount varies, but I know for a family of four for next year, you could be paying over $2,000. So it’s worth it to go out and shop.

How many people in New Mexico enrolled in the health insurance exchange last year?

Dowd: At the end of last year there were over 53,000 New Mexicans that selected a plan through the exchange. There’s a difference between plan selection and those that actually have effective coverage through the year, but suffice it to say that’s the number we use.

Why was the state exchange created?

Dowd: We created it so that we could manage our health insurance system to the greatest extent possible. Exchanges were created through the Affordable Care Act so New Mexico decided to use the federal grant money that was available to all states to set up an exchange that’s tailored to the needs of New Mexicans.

Franchini: We wanted more state control. We felt the governor signed the bill and directed us to set up our own state exchange. We feel like we provide more cost benefits and state savings to our citizens by having a state-based exchange, and it proves it because we have the fifth most economical rates in the country for a state-based exchange.

It’s worked.

How does the state exchange affect private insurance companies? Have you collaborated with them?

Dowd: Absolutely, it’s a very collaborative process. In fact for the exchange, we have health insurance companies on our board of directors, so it’s a very integrated system. We work closely with agents, brokers, consumers, advocacy groups and the department of insurance, so yes it’s highly collaborative.

There are more individual New Mexican policies now sold through the exchange than off the exchange.

It’s showing it’s working for New Mexico.

Is there anything else you would like to add?

Franchini: Blue Cross Blue Shield is not going to participate this year, but the other four (Presbyterian, Molina, Christus and New Mexico Health Connections) are committed to covering all these policyholders in the northeastern part of the state. They’re here and committed to providing coverage for our policyholders.

— Compiled by Staff Writer Brittney Cannon