In a statement posted on his web site and emailed to supporters on Sunday night, Rep. Frank Guinta doubled-down on several assertions about his campaign finances that federal officials found violated election laws, landing him one of the biggest fines levied against a congressman this year...Guinta said documents he provided to the Federal Election Commission proved the funds he loaned his campaign — $355,000 during his first primary election — belonged to him. But federal officials said the loan illegally came from money in his parents’ account. The FEC said Guinta received several checks from his parents totaling $381,000. Of that money, $355,000 ended up in Guinta’s campaign war chest, according to the FEC report.“I made an error on the first financial disclosure report,” Guinta told supporters in the email, posted on his website and titled “ A Note and Apology from Frank Guinta.” (Click here to view the statement.) Throughout the investigation, Guinta has explained the error several ways: He forgot about the account; he was not sure he needed to report it; and he did not report it because it was illegal to “over-report” assets.In their report , the FEC said the funds did not belong to Guinta...After several years of investigations, including a federal grand jury, Guinta was fined $15,000 because the FEC said those contributions from his parents were illegal. He did not face criminal charges...On Sunday, Guinta sought to reassure supporters.“Did my parents issue checks? Yes. Due to my status as a minor in the early years, my parent’s (sic) names were at the top of the account. Was it their money? No,” the email reads. “Documents prove the funds were mine.”..Guinta also said he has “sought opportunities to openly share this information with the media,” citing interviews with the Union Leader, WMUR-TV, NH-1 and WGIR.But during an interview with Union Leader reporters and editors on Friday, Guinta refused to allow copies to be made for further review under any circumstance, on advice of his attorney, he said...The documents showed about $100,000 in deposits going back several decades, but Guinta would not explain how those funds grew to almost $400,000. He also would not comment on whether he paid state interest and dividends taxes, saying only that his parents took care of taxes on what he termed a “unique family” account...Guinta’s attorney in the case, Cleta Mitchell, said the congressman cooperated fully with the FEC investigation. Mitchell, a partner in Foley and Lardner, in Washington, D.C., has represented Guinta since 2010, when questions first arose about the origins of $355,000 in the then-candidate’s campaign treasury...Guinta signed an agreement in April, which acknowledges that the money came from a bank account owned by Guinta’s parents, thus constituting an “excessive campaign contribution” in violation of campaign finance laws...There are no limits to how much a candidate can donate to his own campaign, but donations from outsiders, even family members, were limited to $2,400 per person during his first campaign for Congress.The congressman agreed to pay a $15,000 fine and restore the money to his parents’ checking account...The agreement mentions two violations, saying the congressman failed to “properly disclose that the funds Guinta loaned to his committee were drawn from accounts held in his parents’ name,” and “that Friends of Frank Guinta accepted excessive contributions as a result.”..On Friday, Guinta told the Union Leader he didn’t disclose the asset because he didn’t think he had to...