<p>Cute boy using a laptop</p>

By Sunshine Collins

Optometrists say parents need to keep their eye on the eyes of their children, who more and more are using electronic devices.

While advances in technology seem to enhance learning, new research shows that prolonged use of digital devices can affect vision health.

According to a recent study by the American Optometric Association, 85 percent of parents surveyed said their children use an electronic device for up to four hours every day. The survey also found that 41 percent of children have their own smartphone or tablet while 32 percent use both e-books and textbooks at school. And 66 percent of children use a computer or tablet to do homework or study.

“While digital devices are great learning tools, they do need to be used in moderation. Many devices are still relatively new and the long-term effects on children’s eyes are not yet fully known,” said Dr. Wendy Barton.

Barton — a practicing optometrist at Vision Source in Naples — agreed that prolonged use of the digital devices can affect vision and digital eye strain, a temporary but uncomfortable condition caused by extended exposure to the devices. Symptoms commonly associated with overexposure to digital devices include eye strain, headaches, fatigue, loss of focus, blurred vision, double vision and neck pain.

Barton also noted that optometrists are closely monitoring new research surrounding the increasing amount of time children spend indoors on electronic devices and the decreasing time spent outside playing.

“New studies suggest a lack of exposure to sunlight could affect the growth and development of the eyes and vision,” Barton said, “possibly contributing to an increase in the number of cases of myopia, or nearsightedness, in younger people in recent years.”

The Vision Council released a report this year called “Hindsight is 20/20/20: Protect Your Eyes From Digital Devices.” The report recommends some tips to help reduce digital eye strain. Aside from computer eyewear and increased text size, they promote practicing a 20/20/20 rule. The rule advocates taking a 20-second break every 20 minutes and viewing something 20-feet away.

Barton concurs with the 20/20/20 rule and tips suggested but also urges parents to make an appointment for a comprehensive eye exam before the beginning of each school year.

“This is one of the most important investments a parent can make to help maximize their child’s education,” Barton said.

Collier County Public Schools continues to integrate technology into the classroom but also acknowledge the affects it can have on vision. The school district works with Vision Quest in Florida to provide all students in Title 1 schools — schools with lower income students — with annual vision screening, eye exams, and two pairs of glasses if needed, said Traci Kohler, Ph.D, instructional technology director for Collier County Public Schools.

“One pair is kept at school and one pair is given to the student,” Kohler said.

The program, funded by Naples Children and Education Foundation, is entering its fourth year. Staff from Florida’s Vision Quest screen the students and those who do not pass the screening are referred for an eye exam from the Vision Quest Mobile Unit that visits each school. During the 2014-15 school year, 19,583 students were screened through the program, 2,988 were provided vision exams and 4,356 pairs of glasses were dispensed.

Like Barton, CCPS also believes it is essential to make comprehensive eye exams a priority each school year to protect children’s eye and vision health. Through the Pediatric Essential Health benefit in the Affordable Care Act, parents can take advantage of annual exams for children ages 18 and younger.

The report recommends some tips to help reduce digital eye strain. Aside from computer eyewear and increased text size, they promote practicing a 20/20/20 rule. The rule advocates taking a 20 second break every 20 minutes and viewing something 20 feet away.

Barton agreed with the 20/20/20 rule and tips suggested but also urges parents to make an appointment for a comprehensive eye exam before the beginning of each school year.

“This is one of the most important investments a parent can make to help maximize their child’s education,” said Barton.

Kim Reed, who has a son attending Gulf Coast High School, said she monitors his time on digital devices.

“I make sure he’s involved in real-life activities, such as ROTC,” Reed said. “In this day and age, there’s no taking technology away, so balance is what I believe.”