As details emerge about the Oklahoma Health Care Authority’s Obamacare Medicaid expansion rebalancing proposal, the most vulnerable Oklahomans, policymakers, and taxpayers should be very concerned.

The OHCA estimates 175,000 people will enroll in their new Obamacare-compliant entitlement program, yet their own consultants estimated that up to 628,000 would be eligible. In states that have already undergone rebalancing, actual new enrollment surpasses projections by an average of 91 percent.

The OHCA has revised cost estimates upward at least twice. State taxpayers will suffer harmful tax increases in order to pay a minimum of $390 million for the program over the first four years.

The U.S. Government Accountability Office estimated that a similar plan as proposed by the OHCA, which is now in effect in Arkansas, would cost taxpayers nearly $800 million more than traditional Medicaid expansion.

The OHCA is trying to sell lawmakers on the idea that the new entitlement program won’t see any enrollment growth or any medical cost growth over a four-year period.

What the OHCA isn’t telling policymakers, the most vulnerable Oklahomans, and taxpayers is even more concerning. Internal OHCA data reveals that a mere $10 million – at most – is needed to maintain provider rates for nursing homes to be sure vulnerable elderly Oklahomans are not displaced. So the OHCA and proponents are merely using the elderly as a human shield.

Savings requires kicking 175,000 women and children off Medicaid in 2019. But that’s unlikely; already some providers are admitting that, for political reasons, this part will never happen.

A February 2015 SoonerPoll survey reveals 56 percent of Oklahomans oppose changing Insure Oklahoma to qualify for Obamacare dollars. The OHCA is pushing such a proposal. Based on a letter from the federal government to the OHCA and the experience of other states, Insure Oklahoma will have to be gutted of its most important features by removing enrollment caps, work or college requirements, and accountable cost sharing. This is not a surprise because the same experience happened to Indiana, which has now adopted Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion in the manner OHCA wishes Oklahoma will do.

The OHCA proposal is out of balance. We must heed Gov. Mary Fallin’s warning from 2014: “Both the president’s (Medicaid expansion) plan and alternative proposals that rely on federal dollars in the Affordable Care Act amount to the same thing: a dramatic growth in unsustainable government spending.”

Jonathan Small serves as president of the Oklahoma Council of Public Affairs (www.ocpathink.org).