Not-for-profit real estate agent wants landlords to give cheap or free rent to homeless

Updated

A not-for-profit real estate agent is hoping generous landlords will provide free or low-cost rental properties to homeless people and low-income families.

The high cost of renting a home is seen as a major contributor to Australia's rate of homelessness and it is estimated there is a shortage of about half-a-million low-cost rental properties.

The rental charity idea is the brainchild of homelessness group HomeGround Services.

Chief executive Heather Holst says the lack of affordable private rental properties is a big problem.

"We get as much access as we can to public housing and community housing but between them they add up to in Victoria, under 4 per cent of the housing supply," she said.

Dr Holst says private rentals make up 25 to 30 per cent of the market.

She is hoping landlords will pay the service to manage their properties, offer properties to low income families at reduced rent or even donate properties for rental.

She believes the scheme will be a first for Australia.

"We don't know how it will go. It's a bit of an experiment, but we're hopeful," she said.

"Private rental is the big part of the market so private rental is where we've got to put our emphasis."

Dr Holst says the homelessness problem will only get worse.

"Well, just more people staying in motels, on friend's couches, more rough sleeping, more families being broken up," she said.

The biggest uncertainty for the new project is the number of landlords who will contribute property to rent or manage.

One landlord already on board is businessman, Philip Endersbee. He has leased out his investment property at reduced rent.

"In the whole of scheme of things it's not really that much," he said.

"I mean if you're saying that a two bedroom, lounge room, kitchen, nice sized unit probably has a market rental of about $450 to $500. We may get $350," he said.

He is hoping the project will give those in need a fresh start.

"We offer a place in the eastern suburbs to someone who may be from the women's refuge or someone from the refugee centre," he said

"What better to move into an area where you know they haven't got other issues in the street and if they've got children they can go to a government school in an area and hopefully get that break in life that we all need every now and then."

Veteran real estate agent Philippe Batters has volunteered to act as the agency's principal advisor.

"With the housing crisis as bad as it is, different ways, new thinking, has to be applied to try and solve the issue," he said.

Topics: housing-industry, homelessness, charities-and-community-organisations, community-and-society, australia

First posted