UPDATE: Official Team Release:

Wichita, KS (April 16th) - The Wichita Thunder, proud member of the ECHL powered by Toyota, announced today that the team will not renew the contract of Head Coach Kevin McClelland.

"This has been such a tough decision," said Thunder Owner Rodney Steven II. "Kevin was the head coach when we purchased the team in 2011. Since that time, we have appreciated the relationship we have had with him and his family over these last five years and we are thankful for the contributions he has made to the Thunder. However, we felt it was best for the organization to move in a new direction for next season. We sincerely wish Kevin and his family all the best. We made a commitment early on to this organization to win - three years of not making it to the playoffs has been very hard for us to endure."

McClelland came to the Thunder in 2010 and guided the Thunder for six seasons. He is the longest tenured coach in Thunder history, having led the team for 408 games. During his time in Wichita, McClelland compiled a record of 194-166-48.

"We are very committed to this league but honestly and more importantly to the Wichita Thunder, we want our team to win and win! There are no sure answers when it comes to switching coaches but I promise you this, Coach McClelland will always be an important part of what got us into hockey and will remain close friends with him!"

A search for the next coach of the Thunder will commence immediately.

-----------------------------

WICHITA, Kan. -- The Wichita Thunder will not renew the contract of head coach Kevin McClelland, according to multiple sources with knowledge of the situation.

Thunder officials informed McClelland of the decision Friday night.

In six seasons with the Thunder, McClelland posted a record of 194-166-52 while winning the Central Hockey League Coach of the Year Award in the 2011-12 season. He also won the award in 2006-07 with the Memphis RiverKings. He led the Thunder to the CHL Finals in two consecutive seasons, landing as runner-up in both trips.

Following those championship appearances, the Thunder missed the playoffs in each of the next three seasons. The team transitioned into the more talent-rich East Coast Hockey League in 2014 and won 50 of its 148 contests over two seasons.

McClelland's contract expired as the 2015-16 season concluded April 9th. The team finished with the worst record in the ECHL at 18-41-13.

McClelland is well-known for a lengthy career in the NHL where he played in 588 games and won four Stanley Cups with the Edmonton Oilers.