State funding for a network of New Orleans area community clinics that provide health care to 57,000 uninsured patients would be eliminated under Gov. Bobby Jindal's proposed fiscal 2015-16 budget.

Kristy Nichols, Jindal's top administrator, presented the $7.7 million cut as part of an overall $1.2 billion in proposed budget reductions before state legislators Friday (Feb. 27).

If the funding is eliminated, the effective impact would be to end the Greater New Orleans Community Health Connection, said Susan Todd, executive director of 504HealthNet, a coalition of organizations concerned with providing health care to uninsured in the Greater New Orleans area.

"You're going to see a drastic reduction in mental health services and primary care services available to the community," Todd said.

The $7.7 million ensures the federal government commits another $12.6 million toward the program, which provides primary care and mental health services with no out-of-pocket costs to people at 41 clinic sites across Orleans, Jefferson, St. Bernard and Plaquemines parishes.

The program is essentially a waiver of Medicaid eligibility for people age 19 to 64 and whose are at our below the federal poverty level, but who don't meet the current Medicaid eligibility requirements. Their incomes, for example, must be less than $11,496 per year for an individual or less than $23,556 for a family of four.

"I know that these clinics provide valuable services," Nichols said during the budget hearing before the Joint Legislative Committee on the Budget in Baton Rouge. But Nichols said the state has provided the match over the past several years with the hope and expectation that the local government would find a way to support it.

Todd said it's hard to say exactly how many clinics would be forced to close completely under the proposal -- the clinics involved in the network provide services to other patients as well -- but it's clear elimination of the program would have a profound impact, forcing many of these patients to seek medical attention at area emergency rooms, where research shows treatment costs can easily run into the thousands.

"People are still going to get sick," Todd said. The clinics, she said, enable clinicians to provide responsible care to people in their own communities in "the lowest-cost setting."

Eighteen health centers with 41 site locations are involved in the network. In 2013, the program resulted in 96,753 patient visits. It generated jobs for 188 people in full-time medical-related positions while supporting another 121 jobs in other industries, according to material Todd provided.

Todd estimates that about 24 physicians or nurse practitioner positions would be eliminated across the network. That's roughly a quarter of the physicians and nurse practitioners in the clinics.

"But every single clinic would have to let go of providers and other staff," she said. And mental health services are usually the first to go, she said.

Many of the patients who participate in the health network would have been able to obtain health care coverage through a Medicaid expansion provision allowed by the Affordable Care Act. But Jindal and many state lawmakers have opposed expanding that federal health care program in Louisiana. The governor has argued that a Medicaid expansion would shift too many patients from private to public insurance, and would cost the state too much.

The Greater New Orleans Community Health Connection has received accolades in national public health circles as being an innovative approach to bringing quality health care to underserved areas. Yet every year for the past several years, advocates of the program have found themselves begging for funding to be able to extend the waiver.

Calder Lynch, chief of staff for the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals, said the agency has tried to be supportive in structuring the program in a way that it would lend itself to securing another source of long-term funding beyond the state. "We've always been willing and anxious to find a local match," he said.

But Charlotte Parent, director of the New Orleans Health Department, said she believes that because the program is a waiver of state-run Medicaid, the state of Louisiana does have responsibility for funding it.

"The city believes and feels that, while it services those parishes in our area, this is a state issue," Parent said. "We are part of the state and our people are part of the state. And we should want to provide services that are going to provide good outcomes. And for a state that has poor outcomes, this is a project that helps us to move forward."

Parent said she will be working with 504HealthNet and the area providers to fight for continued funding.

Both she and Todd said it's unfortunate that they find themselves once again lobbying to get support for a program that fulfills a clear community need.

"We're essentially back in the same position as we were last year trying to make sure this program continues," Todd said. "We're picking up the phone and calling our state representatives."

Rebecca Catalanello can be reached at rcatalanello@nola.com or 504.717.7701.

This story has been updated since its original posting to reflect interviews with New Orleans Health Department Director Charlotte Parent and Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals Chief of Staff Calder Lynch.