Topics: ani bezzerides, HBO, Rachel McAdams, true detective, TV, Entertainment News

“True Detective” Season 2 may not be much of a success, compared to its predecessor. This season’s story is spoken about metatextually rather than with the engaged engrossment of rapt viewers—every episode is analyzed ruthlessly, but little enjoyed. The possible reasons for why this season isn’t as good as last season are numerous and well-discussed: sophomore slump, the loss of Cary Fukunaga’s creative vision, less talented actors, a far less enchanted setting.

But there is a way this season is brilliant, and that is with Rachel McAdams’ Ani Bezzerides. Vince Vaughn’s character, Frank, seems to be the one that creator and showrunner Nic Pizzolatto imbued with all of the circular dialogue and thwarted poesy of last season’s breakout character Rust Cohle, played by Matthew McConaughey. But where Vaughn can’t quite render the convoluted lines given to his character with any kind of grace, McAdams has stepped up to offer unexpected texture to her part, just as McConaughey did with Rust. I haven’t given up hope on “True Detective” just yet, because I think that through Ani, this season is doing something brilliant. Ani is thwarted, impotent, raging, like all of “True Detective’s” heroes—but she’s raging on behalf of all women as much as her own trauma. In a show saturated with masculinity and bogged down by antiheroes, Ani is the hero of the hour.

When her casting was first announced, the character of Ani appeared to be a sad sop tossed to critics of the show who observed the first season’s lack of compelling female characters. Ani is almost a parody of a “strong female character”—a tough cop who toughly toughs out tough situations with toughness. She has little discernible femininity (aside from an inexplicable dye job that is managed so unrealistically that it’s obvious a man wrote the show; how have her roots not grown out after two months?). As Alan Sepinwall observed in his review of the first few episodes, on one hand, it’s great that there’s a female character expressing her identity however she wants to, but on the other hand, it’s kind of troubling if the only female character a male auteur can come up with is just like his male characters, but with boobs. Ani is as damaged and emotionally incompetent and incoherently moralistic and commitment-phobic as her male counterpart, Ray (Colin Farrell); aside from her affection for e-cigarettes and Ray’s distinct inability to keep anything together in the first few episodes, there’s almost nothing to tell them apart.

That changes with the knives. After a brief, silent scene that shows Ani strapping on her weaponry in the police locker room, Ray casually asks her about them. “The fundamental difference between the sexes is that one of them can kill the other with their bare hands. Man of any size lays hands on me, he’s going to bleed out in under a minute.” Ani does not use the term “feminism”; that’s introduced by Ray, who quips, “Well, just so you know, I support feminism, mostly by having body image issues.” Ani cracks a barely perceptible smile.

It’s one of Ray’s more charming moments, but it’s incongruous with what came before. Ray is making a little joke; Ani is outlining the crisis of literally half of humankind. Women are always at the mercy of men, in any situation, in every civilization; it’s only the strength of numbers, culture and empathy that combat them. If those fail—and they often do—women are raped, murdered, beaten, enslaved, almost exclusively at the hands of men. Ani may not be terribly “feminine,” according to our social definition of the word, but in terms of the fear and anger that is part of her lived reality, she is as female as any woman who has lived in the world. This is the horrible inequality baked into our world, one that must be stumblingly and painfully taught to every successive generation of girls. Except in the slimmest of alternate scenarios, you will always be the weaker one, the more vulnerable one. Unless, perhaps, you carry a lot of knives.

* * *

The word “vagina” means “sheath.” It comes, like so much, from Latin, except that the Romans didn’t use it to refer to any part of human anatomy. “Vagina” was a scabbard, or a husk; the female sexual organs were instead the vulva or the pudenda (a word indicating, “thing to be ashamed of”). In the 1680s, medical texts began referring to the birth canal as the “vagina,” and so it is still called today. “Penis,” meanwhile, comes from the Latin for “tail,” but the Romans started using it to mean the other thing often enough that we can trace “penis” to Cicero. Considering that “vagina” limits the female sex organs to merely a receptacle for the penis—and, indeed, does not include the clitoris—“vagina” is a usage that is the subject of some debate among feminist intellectuals. The word “cunt”—which has existed since at least 1230, but only began being used as a derogatory term in the 1920s—has been suggested as a substitute (if only because the denizens of the British Isles use it constantly) and has been repurposed in fascinating ways by various female music artists in the U.S. and writers like Inga Muscio.