x Embedded Content

The Republican primary looks like a poorly-made reality TV series—but unfortunately, it’s real. It’s even more unfortunate that contrary to popular belief, one of those incompetent demagogues could be our next president.

If we’re to believe polling data, America is becoming a much more liberal country. In fact, it’s likely directly responsible for President Obama’s epiphany that support of same-sex marriage was the right thing to do after all. It may even be the reason why many of the arguments against the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) were not fatal, as they were for Bill Clinton when he attempted the same thing in the ‘90s. It’s interesting to note that a substantial portion of those who oppose Obamacare do so because it did not go far enough.

The result is lots of liberals talking about getting the popcorn ready as they sit and watch the train wreck that is the Republican primary. Liberals are behaving as if a Democrat is a shoo-in for the 2016 presidency. But Democrats had better be careful with their cocky assertions, and start digging a bit deeper beyond the façade of invincibility.

Republicans had similar turmoil in 1980, as you can see in the video above. Today’s political charlatans are Donald Trump and Ben Carson. Back then they had an actor, who was an incompetent candidate running in a field that included a competent politician, war heroes, and others.

One must remember that the incompetent candidate won that election. The competent candidate that disparaged the actor’s economic plan as voodoo economics became the vice president. And Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush cleaned the Democrats’ clock.

Many will blame the Iran Hostage Crisis and the economic malaise of the time. But wait—isn’t income inequality a malaise, and isn’t the frustration with the Iran Hostage Crisis congruous to the ISIS crisis in the manufactured angst currently being presented to Americans?

Much is being made about the anti-immigrant and racist rhetoric emanating from the candidates. Yet, the Republican field is more reflective of America with a black man, a woman, two Latinos, a presumably gay man, and a South Asian man. Democrats offer a white woman pre-ordained to be the Democratic nominee and several white men. The ads are likely already being tested in focus groups.

By every metric Democrats should win the White House in 2016. Likewise, by every metric Democrats should control the Senate and the House of Representatives. They should be in control of more governorships and state houses. But that isn’t the case.