GILBERT WELCH: What’s the biggest misconception about us doctors? It’s that–when it comes to your current health–we know more than you do.

For most patients, it’s simply not true.

I’m not saying we have nothing to offer; I am saying how you feel says a lot. That’s why good doctors take the time to explore how patients feel. For those who feel bad, we’ll explore what makes you feel worse–and what makes you feel better. Not infrequently, the information gleaned from this exploration–we call it the history–point to both a diagnosis and a strategy for managing the problem.

And for those who feel healthy, it’s just possible you might be right.

The idea that only your doctor can tell whether you are healthy or not is an unfortunate side-effect of our current emphasis on preventive medicine. Not the health promotion part of prevention–that’s the stuff your grandmother might have told you when you were young: Get plenty of sleep, eat your fruits and vegetables, go play outside and don’t start smoking. Instead it’s a side-effect of the medicalized part of prevention: when doctors embark on a high-tech search for early disease and “silent” abnormalities.

It’s a paradigm that has created a new operational definition of health: the absence of detectable abnormality. It is a test few can pass–and one that gets tougher every day as our diagnostic technologies are increasingly able to detect minute perturbations in our anatomy, physiology, biochemistry and genome.

You can even test yourself. While direct-to-consumer genetic testing may be falling out of favor, there is a developing mobile-health industry–or m-health–producing devices and apps to give people dashboards, gauges and alarm signals.

That doesn’t sound healthy.

Don’t let doctors’ machines and tests define health–it’s a recipe to make you sick. How you feel matters.

Dr. H. Gilbert Welch is a general internist at the White River Junction VA and a professor of medicine at the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice in the Geisel School of Medicine.

Read the latest Health Report.