It's designed to provide people a way to get affordable health insurance but some say ObamaCare is still unaffordable,unworkableand unfair.

The Heritage Foundation is one group that says problems continue to plague the Affordable Care Act. Ed Haislmaier, a senior research fellow in Health Policy Studies for Heritage, points to premium increases as one sign that ObamaCare is still unaffordable.

Haislmaier

"Well, I think we've seen recently some premium increases being proposed by insurers," Haislmaier says of the health insurance law. "That is certainly what most Americans, when they're considering this law, are looking at. How much does my insurance cost, has it gone up?"

A second issue is higher out-of-pocket costs, says the Heritage analyst, since people are now paying more for those costs, too.

Asked what would fall into the "unworkable" category, Haislmaier, points to taxes. Tax preparer H & R Block reported earlier this year that two-thirds of its customers, who got a subsidy, still had to pay money back.

"The reason for that is the provision is very complicated," Haislmaier explains, "and people didn't estimate their income as precisely as they needed to. You can fix all the other stuff in this legislation or fix the website, but you're still going to have that problem next year and the year after and the year after that."

When it comes to ObamaCare still being unfair, Haislmaier says it provides very generous new subsidies - but only to some people.

The researcher explains: "We looked at the states that might be affected by the King v Burwell case, when the Supreme Court rules in the next week or so, and if you look at those states and you say, Well, how many people are in the individual and the small employer, that is 50 or fewer markets who saw their premiums increase because of the new benefit mandates, and the rating rules in ObamaCare, versus the number of the subset that actually got a subsidy?"

The answer, he says, is "only one in five got a subsidy."