The federal government continues to impose Medicare reimbursement penalties on hospitals in hopes of jolting them to improve performance. As part of that effort, Munroe Regional Medical Center is slated to experience a 1.01 percent cut in its Medicare reimbursements in 2015, and Ocala Health System, which owns both Ocala Regional Medical Center and West Marion Community Hospital, will see a 0.31 percent cut.

The reduction for the 421-bed Munroe, operated by Community Health Systems, could cost more than $1 million in lost revenue, based on predictions hospital administration made when such cuts were discussed previously.

Nearly 500 hospitals will see Medicare reimbursement cuts of 1 percent or more.

This is the first year the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) is implementing all three of its Medicare quality and safety incentive programs. Hospitals will be penalized based on readmissions, hospital-acquired condition (HAC) and value-based purchasing rates (VBP).

Readmission rates refer to how frequently patients must be readmitted soon after getting treatment.

HAC refers to how often patients are injured in the hospital because of a procedure or acquire an infection.

VBP measures such things as how well hospitals adhere to certain best practices, such as administering antibiotics promptly and communicating effectively with patients. Hospitals that show improvement in this category can see Medicare bonuses.

The accumulated penalties imposed on Munroe and Ocala Health System, as well as other hospitals nationwide, were calculated by Modern Healthcare using CMS data.

Modern Healthcare analyzes and reports on health care trends. CMS verified Modern Healthcare's calculations for Munroe and Ocala Health.

Of Munroe's 1.01 percent penalty, 0.51 percent was because of its patient readmission levels. Ocala Health saw a 0.04 percent readmission penalty.

In 2013 and 2014, Munroe had zero penalty for readmission. Ocala Health's readmission penalties have fallen in recent years: From 0.42 percent in 2013 to 0.33 percent in 2014 and now 0.04 percent.

Munroe's VBP penalties have gotten progressively worse since 2013, when it was penalized 0.10 percent. That climbed to 0.17 percent in 2014 and now 0.50 percent.

Ocala Health's VBP has fluctuated during the past three years and registered at 0.27 percent this year.

Neither Munroe nor Ocala Health will be penalized for HAC, although Ocala Health's HAC ranking was better than Munroe's.

Community Health Systems (CHS), a Franklin, Tennessee-based health care company, owns or operates more than 200 hospitals in 29 states. Ocala Health is owned by Hospital Corporation of America (HCA), which owns or operates more than 160 hospitals.

Munroe officials did not grant an interview request for this story. Instead, they sent the Star-Banner an email statement.

In reads, in part: "The care and safety of our patients is the highest priority at Munroe Regional Medical Center. Our committed team of physicians, nurses and other caregivers regularly review outcomes to identify opportunities to strengthen our discharge process and the transition of patient care.

"Our team assesses patients' risk for readmission over the entire course their stay, first by identifying those at high-risk as soon as they are admitted. All patients are provided comprehensive post-discharge education about topics like medication instructions, and we work closely with post-acute providers and payers to communicate this information and alert them to any increased risk for readmission."

Munroe recently initiated a program using hospital volunteers to help discharged patients who are at risk for readmission. The volunteers use phone calls, home visits and other methods to check in on such patients.

Ocala Health also sent the Star-Banner a written statement about its Medicare penalties.

"Patient safety is essential and that's why we embrace quality measurement and always look for areas in which we can improve," the statement says.

"A number of clinical, quality and patient safety initiatives support our efforts to improve quality and deliver the safest care to our patients at Ocala Regional Medical Center and West Marion Community Hospital," wrote Dr. Art Osberg, chief medical officer for Ocala Health.

"Readmissions are closely tracked which helps us identify trends and make improvements," he wrote. "We work closely with nursing homes, skilled nursing facilities and home health care agencies on patients' treatment plans to coordinate care when they leave the hospital."

As for reducing acquired conditions, Osberg wrote: "Ocala Health also has several initiatives in place to prevent (HACs), including ongoing education and training of staff on HAC event prevention."

As for value-based purchasing, Osberg wrote: "At Ocala Regional and West Marion, abstractors monitor patients on a daily basis to ensure that the care being administered is in line with these evidence-based guidelines. We also have several teams dedicated to improving patient satisfaction. The results of our patient satisfaction surveys are shared with staff and physicians on a weekly basis."

The feds will penalize 2,610 hospitals during fiscal year 2015 for readmission issues, according to a Kaiser Health News analysis. That's up from 2,225 in the program's second year and 2,213 during its first year.

That means from Oct. 1, 2014, through September 2015, those hospitals will receive lower Medicare payments for every Medicare patient stay, not just for those patients who are readmitted. CMS estimates that fines just for readmission will total $428 million.

More than 1,400 hospitals are exempted from the penalties. They include certain cancer hospitals and facilities dedicated to specific services such as psychiatry or rehabilitation.

A total of 1,375 hospitals will be penalized under Medicare's value-based purchase program. More than 1,700 will get Medicare bonuses because of improvements.

More than 700 hospitals will suffer HAC penalties. The feds estimate that Medicare reimbursement payments will drop by roughly $330 million in 2015 due to those penalties.

Nearly 800 hospitals face no penalties.

Critics of the Medicare penalty programs complain that teaching hospitals and critical-access hospitals are disproportionately represented among the worst-performing hospitals.

The penalty system needs to be changed to ensure they are not creating additional hardships, said Dr. Atul Grover, the chief public policy officer for the American Association of Medical Colleges, according to Modern Healthcare.

UF Health Shands Hospital in Gainesville will incur a 0.37 percent total penalty, with zero deducted for HAC issues.

Aaron Liberman, professor emeritus from the University of Central Florida's Department of Health Management & Informatics, said although the Medicare reimbursement withholdings appear small, "that's still a significant amount of money."

Prior to CHS' lease of Munroe, Munroe records showed that Munroe's patient revenue was more than $300 million annually. Medicare accounted for about 50 percent of the hospital's gross revenue.

Liberman predicts that the current trend of Medicare clampdowns will continue.

Allan Baumgarten, of Allan Baumgarten's Health Market Reviews and Consulting, said the Medicare penalties are part of larger revenue changes for hospitals. With the Affordable Care Act sending more paying clients to hospitals, revenues are up.

"But you don't want to be in the position in which you're doing better (with paying clients) but worse on Medicare reimbursements," he said. "No one can gloss over these penalties."

Private insurers are watching the Medicare penalties carefully, he said. The next reform wave could include private insurance payers adopting a similar system.

"Hospitals have existed by being able to navigate through obstacles," Baumgarten said, "and they will do that in the future."

Contact Fred Hiers at 867-4157 or fred.hiers@starbanner.com.