LITTLE ROCK — Arkansas Department of Human Services Director John Selig will step down at the end of the year, the agency said Thursday.

Selig, 55, is the longest-serving director in DHS history. Appointed in 2005 by Republican Gov. Mike Huckabee, he served throughout Democratic Gov. Mike Beebe’s two terms in office and continued serving after Republican Gov. Asa Hutchinson took office in January.

Selig has worked for Arkansas state government for 27 years, all but two of them with DHS. He previously served as director of behavioral health services and director of in-home health services at the Arkansas Department of Health.

“I have loved working at DHS because I truly feel it makes a real and positive difference in the lives of so many Arkansans,” Selig said in a statement. “It’s hard to leave, but I feel like the time is right. DHS may see some big changes next year, and I think that would be a good time for new leadership.”

Hutchinson said in a statement, “Yesterday, Director Selig informed me that he wished to leave government service in order to spend some time in the private sector. I asked if he would be willing to stay on through the end of the year. I am grateful that John agreed to help us through January 1, 2016.

“John has given so much to the state of Arkansas through 25 years of service. I am personally appreciative of his leadership, friendship and wise counsel during a time of great change in the healthcare industry and during the first year of my administration.”

Selig oversaw the launch of the Medicaid expansion program known as the private option, which uses federal Medicaid money to subsidize private health insurance for low-income Arkansans. Since enrollment began in 2013, more than 200,000 Arkansans have signed up for the program, Arkansas’ alternative to the Medicaid expansion envisioned in the federal Affordable Care Act.

Selig’s announcement of his plans to resign comes as legislative committees are investigating cost overruns and delays in the development of DHS’ computerized enrollment and eligibility verification system for Medicaid programs, including the private option. The agency had sought to re-verify the eligibility of about 600,000 Medicaid beneficiaries by Oct. 1, but the federal government has given Arkansas until Dec. 31 to complete the process because of multiple setbacks.

The state Legislature voted this year to end the private option at the end of 2016. Lawmakers are expected to decide what will replace it during a special session sometime next year.

Selig is a graduate of Stanford University and has a master’s degree in public administration from Princeton University. Before joining state government, he was a member of U.S. Sen. David Pryor’s staff and served two years in the Peace Corps as a teacher in West Africa.