Amgen Inc. shares appear to be headed for a fall when trading opens on Thursday after the biotechnology giant gave investors a double dose of bad news after the close Wednesday.

Bloomberg

The company /quotes/zigman/19815/delayed /quotes/nls/amgn AMGN said it was unable to meet its primary goal in a test of the effectiveness of its blood-cancer drug Kyprolis when compared with current regimens involving two other drugs — dexamethasone or similar corticosteroids, and cyclophosphamide.

That, by itself, caused Amgen shares to dip more than 2% in post-session deals to $124.70, after the stock had moved up by more than $1 during the trading day to $127.34.

Amgen and its recently acquired subsidiary, Onyx Pharmaceuticals, believe they can still market Kyprolis, based on positive results released last week on a different test that proved it was effective in treating myeloma when coupled with other drugs.

Onyx spokeswoman Danielle Bertrand said two other Phase 3 tests are being conducted on Kyprolis to measure its effectiveness against Velcade, a product of Japan’s Takeda Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. /quotes/zigman/198337/delayed JP:4502 Takeda, in fact, received approval last week from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to sell Velcade for patients who have relapsed even after using the treatment for their first bout with myeloma.

If that wasn’t enough, Amgen also announced a voluntary recall of what it said were nine lots of its anemia drug Aranesp after particles of what is believed to be cellulose and/or polyester were found in prefilled syringes of the treatment. Company officials said a total of 15,880 syringes were being recalled.

Amgen said none of the lots were distributed in the U.S. but instead went to 14 nations in Europe and the Middle East.

The FDA has said that, depending on the quantity of particles, patients could experience inflammatory and allergic responses, and contamination of the syringes could be life threatening.

Follow @russbrittmktw

Follow @MWHealthBlog

More must-read health coverage from MarketWatch:

Will Robin Williams’s death focus more attention on mental health?

Insurers look to hike Obamacare premiums by an average of 8%

Health-care companies do better than other S&P firms in second quarter