Several thousand Iowans are receiving notices this week that their health insurance premiums could rise substantially next year.

The letters were sent to people who bought individual policies from CoOportunity Health or Coventry Health Care. The companies are the two main Iowa carriers selling insurance on the government’s new online marketplace, which is a key part of the Affordable Care Act.

CoOportunity Health sent letters to 9,100 Iowa customers saying it has proposed raising base rates 14.3 percent next year. Coventry told customers it plans to raise their rates by varying amounts, averaging 8.7 percent. A Coventry spokeswoman said she was unsure how many letters went out.

The two companies proposed their rate increases to Iowa’s insurance commissioner, who will hold public hearings next month before deciding whether to approve the new prices. Customers also are invited to send comments to the insurance division, which has begun posting them online.

Predictably, consumers are unhappy to see proposed price increases. “It feels like the ultimate bait and switch when an increase comes so early in … enrollment and implementation of the (Affordable Care Act),” one CoOportunity customer wrote. Another consumer wrote: “It’s upsetting and I feel like we were used and betrayed.”

Cliff Gold, CoOportunity’s chief-operating officer, expressed sympathy. “We wish we weren’t increasing this much either,” Gold said in an interview.

Gold said about half of his company’s proposed price increase was due to an unexpected quirk in the way the federal and state governments are enforcing new coverage rules under the Affordable Care Act.

The law, passed in 2010, said that by 2014, all insurance policies would have to meet new requirements. Those rules included that no one could be excluded from coverage or charged more due to pre-existing health problems. However, the government last year let carriers extend their previous policies through 2014. Then it announced this year that it would allow another two-year extension.

Most Iowans affected by the policy extensions have health insurance from the state’s dominant insurer, Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield.

In general, Gold said, the old policies covered only relatively healthy people, because those with chronic health problems were excluded from the pools. The policy extensions let members of the old pools retain their relatively low premiums, while leaving the rest to buy new policies that meet the Affordable Care Act rules, Gold said. That situation is forcing up premiums for people in the new plans, he said.

Gold said 38 percent of CoOportunity’s proposed premium increase is due to increased health care prices and use of services. He said the percentage of premiums going to cover his company’s administrative expenses is dropping, because those costs are being spread over more members as the new company grows.

Gold said CoOportunity members who receive coverage via their employers will see much smaller premium increases than individual policyholders face, because the policy-extension wrinkle only affects the individual-policy market. The proposed premium increase also doesn’t affect CoOportunity Health members who received their policies via the Iowa Health and Wellness Plan, which is Iowa’s version of an expanded Medicaid program. The government pays the entire premium for those people.

Many of the consumers receiving CoOportunity or Coventry notices about proposed premium increases would not have to pay the entire increase. That’s because they bought their insurance on healthcare.gov and obtained federal subsidies. Those subsidies should rise next year to help cover increased premium costs.

Wellmark is expected to announce this month how much it plans to raise premiums next year for the 150,000 Iowans who buy its individual policies. It also is expected to say soon whether it will start selling policies on healthcare.gov, which is the only place Iowans can purchase insurance that is eligible for federal subsidies under the Affordable Care Act.

Hearings

The Iowa Insurance Division has set hearings for July 26 to consider the proposed premium increases from CoOportunity Health, Coventry Health Care and a third carrier, Time Insurance. The division is also posting written comments on its website, at iainsuranceca.wordpress.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1pVYMlQ