The Culpeper County School Board approved the school division’s recommended operating budget for the 2016-17 school year during Monday’s regular meeting potentially increasing next year’s spending plan by $3 million.

The $86.77 million budget, which includes food services, increases the current $83.7 million financial plan by 3.6 percent.

The proposed budget includes $45.7 million from the state, level $3.9 million funding from the federal government, $31.7 million in local funding and about $902,000 from local miscellaneous sources.

The aforementioned increase would mean an additional $1.475 million from the state and an increase of $1.5 million from local general fund transfers next fiscal year.

Earlier this year, Culpeper County Public Schools Superintendent Tony Brads told the school board that Culpeper’s teachers’ starting salaries were the lowest compared to Albemarle, Charlottesville, Fauquier, Greene, Fredericksburg, Madison, Orange, Rappahannock, Spotsylvania, Stafford, Loudoun and Prince William.

Loudoun County teachers’ average starting salary is $47,975 while new Culpeper teachers earn $39,000.

To bring new teachers salaries to the midpoint, the proposed budget recommends starting their salaries at $41,972 and addressing other employees’ salaries with step increases. If an employee’s salary is already at market value, the budget suggests a 1 percent cost of living increase.

“This plan attempts to get us in a more competitive market with the comparisons that we’ve made,” explained Brads. “To get groups to market, we analyzed every position in the division and we are very pleased with where we are in terms with this recommendation.”

On Tuesday, Brads will present the school division’s recommended budget to the Culpeper County Board of Supervisors, the county’s governing body that provides county funding.

The supervisors will finalize the county’s budget and tax levies in May.

The school division’s proposed budget also includes six new teaching positions.

The projected budget, in addition, suggests implementing a self-funded health insurance plan rather than the fully funded option. Essentially, a self-funded health plan is where an employer provides health or disability benefits to its employees with its own funds.

“This will reduce our overall exposure to some of the taxes and fees associated with the Affordable Care Act,” explained Brads. “That will save us quite a bit of money and hold employees harmless.”

Following the budget approval, school board member Elizabeth Hutchins complimented the recommendations.

“It covers areas that really hadn’t been for a long time and I appreciate the work on that,” said Hutchins.

During delegations before the vote, Matt Orman, an educator for 13 years in Culpeper and president of the Culpeper County Education Association, also applauded the recommended budget.

“I have some members with me tonight wearing red because I wanted them to stand out. It’s time to stop cuts and as you know red means stop,” explained Ortman. “I’ve seen cut after cut after cut year after year. And fortunately we have a budget that is supporting us now. Not just teachers, but nurses, bus drivers, and food services and we appreciate that.”

CCPS Finance Director Jeff Shomo shared that he’s still pleased with the lower diesel prices for buses. This year, the school division pays $3.31 per gallon and he predicts shelling out $2.86 a gallon next fiscal year, possibly saving $102,000 next school year.