Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump speaks at a recent event in Franklin. (Photo: Mark Zaleski / AP) Story Highlights There is economic and cultural angst accompanied by high anti-establishment fervor.

At the same time, Trump has been rightly condemned for lobbying verbal grenades into the debate.

However, there is too much black-and-white when our debates often are more nuanced.

Donald Trump has been rightly condemned for his call to temporarily ban all Muslims from entering the U.S.

But there seems to be an inverse relationship between what political and media elites say about him, and what ordinary Republicans feel about him. Sure enough, after his Muslim ban statement, his support climbed to over 40 percent in national polls.

Looking at him, I’m reminded of Bill Clinton’s 2002 assertion, “When people are insecure, they’d rather have somebody who’s strong and wrong than someone who’s weak and right.”

The common assessment of Trump is that he gives voice to the nativism, xenophobia and ignorance of a significant portion of the GOP base. That is probably accurate, but it doesn’t give the complete picture.

The reality is that he is also giving voice to the anxieties of many people across the political spectrum.

He says things about illegal immigration, national security, and Islamic terrorism that many independents and centrist Democrats are thinking and feeling.

They may not vote for him, and may not think as crudely as he does, but they are thinking in a more diluted fashion, if you will, along his lines.

The polls bear this out. As per Rasmussen polls, 46 percent of all voters and 30 percent of Democrats favor a temporary ban on Muslims entering the U.S.; a majority of Republicans and independents, and 42 percent of Democrats think it’s too easy to get into the U.S.

Buy Photo Saritha Prabhu (Photo: File / The Tennessean)

Further, as The Washington Post recently pointed out, even some Democrats and Hillary supporters found some things to broadly agree with Trump’s recent remarks.

That’s what he does: He says things that are outrageously extreme, which then seems to set the stage for people to air their anxieties in a more honest manner.

In my view, there are three phenomena happening simultaneously in the country.

One, there is economic and cultural anxiety accompanied by high anti-establishment fervor. The country is at the beginning stage of changing from WASP to non-WASP demographic makeup. Jobs are being lost due to globalization, technology and uncontrolled immigration. These are huge changes to handle.

Two, we live in extremely politically correct times. America is now more diverse than ever before, and Americans are divided by race, religion, ethnicity, and class.

The official line is that all this diversity makes us strong, which is broadly correct, but it also leads to fault lines which make it difficult to have the kind of honest debates that lead to solutions and more understanding.

For example, if you speak honestly about race, you are said to be race-baiting; if you say something about class it’s called class warfare; if you say anything somewhat critical about Islam, it’s reflexively called Islamophobia.

In this era of microaggressions and social media shaming, people are sometimes driven to airing their legitimate anxieties privately, and that is not healthy.

The third phenomenon is that our mainstream discourse has a kind of binary quality to it. For example, if you are against illegal immigration, you must be nativist; you can seemingly only be an Islamophobe or Islamophile with nothing in between.

It is no wonder that millions of voters can feel somewhat alienated from both the political and media establishments.

Into this scenario, Donald Trump has jumped in and lobbed his verbal hand grenades.

To be clear: I don’t agree with his “solutions,” for want of a better word. But I wonder if there is place in our discourse, without incurring “nativist” labels, to say: Yes, undocumented immigrants are hard-working people, but porous borders and uncontrolled immigration have got to stop.

Likewise, we should be able to say: millions of Muslims are peaceful, law-abiding people, but there is legitimate anxiety at some Muslim-American youth’s vulnerability to radicalization.

Yes, Trump has released some dark undercurrents of hatred, for sure, but he can also be seen as a pressure valve for the ways he’s giving voice to some legitimate anxieties.

Saritha Prabhu of Clarksville is a Tennessean columnist. Reach her at sprabhu@charter.net

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1OsaeW1