In this December 2009 photo, James T. Reynolds Sr., president of the Cancer Fund of America, looks at photos in Knoxville, Tennessee. Reynolds and his family used much of the $187 million they collected for cancer patients through charities such as the Cancer Fund of America to buy themselves cars, gym memberships and take luxury cruise vacations, federal officials alleged Tuesday. (Photo: AP PHOTOS)

Attorney General Buddy Caldwell announced last week he’s filed a federal lawsuit against four ‘‘phony cancer charities’’ and their operators, who allegedly scammed more than $187 million from consumers throughout the country.

The suit was filed in U.S. District Court in Arizona by Caldwell, 50 other attorneys general and the Federal Trade Commission.

It alleges Cancer Fund of America, Children’s Cancer Fund of America, Cancer Support Services and The Breast Cancer Society all lied about claims that consumers’ donations would provide direct support to cancer patients.

The charities hired telemarketers to collect $20 donations from people across the country, telling consumers that they provided financial aid and other support to cancer patients, including pain medication, transportation to chemotherapy visits and hospice care.

Anyone who donated money to these groups shouldn't expect a refund anytime soon.

While litigation against Reynolds Sr. and the Cancer Fund of America is ongoing, the settlement agreements with Reynolds' son, ex-wife and a long-time associate of the family — Kyle Effler — notes that much of the money has already been spent.

The agreement bans the three from fundraising and shuttered their organizations.

“It is downright despicable for any organization to exploit the plight of cancer patients to line their own pockets,” Caldwell said. “Well-meaning consumers from across the country need the assurance that their money is going to worthwhile causes, not to greedy con artists. That’s why I am glad to join in a cooperative effort with my state and federal colleagues to combat charity fraud.”

According to the lawsuit, the defendants billed themselves as legitimate charities with nationwide programs providing direct support to cancer patients, including children with cancer and those with breast cancer.

The defendants or their telemarketers often told donors that their contributions would be used to provide pain medication to children, transport patients to chemotherapy appointments, and/or pay for hospice care.

In reality, the overwhelming majority of consumers’ contributions were wasted or misused, providing benefits for only the defendants, their families and friends, and professional fundraisers, who often received 85 percent or more of every donation.

The sham charities spent more money on salaries than on the goods and services they provided to cancer patients.

In addition, the complaint alleges that the defendants spent donations on things like cruises, Jet Ski outings, concert tickets, and dating site memberships.

In conjunction with the lawsuit, Caldwell also announced settlements with five defendants, who have agreed to leave the charity business and stop fundraising. Those include Children’s Cancer Fund, The Breast Cancer Society, Rose Perkins, James Reynolds II and Kyle Effler.

Perkins, Reynolds Effler are all executives of the organizations. The settlements, which still must be approved by the Court, also reflect monetary judgments based on the amount consumers donated to the charities between 2008 and 2012.

Litigation against Cancer Fund of America, Cancer Support Services, and James Reynolds, Sr. is proceeding.

The FTC recommends that when considering a donation, look for a long-standing charity with a good reputation and avoid any group that uses high-pressure tactics or is reluctant to provide detailed documentation on how the money is spent.

— The Associated Press contributed to this article.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/news/watchdog/2015/05/23/ag-caldwell-ags-sue-sham-cancer-charities/27853719/