Starkweather & Shepley Insurance Brokerage Inc. in East Providence, Rhode Island, recently announced the following promotions.

David B. Soforenko has been promoted to sales manager of Starkweather & Shepley Insurance Brokerage. In this role, he will oversee all retail sales operations throughout the firm’s geographic footprint, including Commercial Lines, Employee Benefits, Surety, and Personal Lines divisions. Prior to this, Soforenko was the agency’s assistant sales manager, a position he has held since 2004. Soforenko has worked at Starkweather for more than 20 years. He is also a member of the agency’s board of directors and a senior vice president.

Andrew “Andy” J. Fotopulos has been promoted to president of Starkweather & Shepley Insurance Brokerage’s Massachusetts office. Fotopulos will manage the daily operations at the firm’s Westwood, Massachusetts, location, where he specializes in risk management services for the investment industry. Prior to this promotion, Fotopulos was managing director and senior vice president of the firm’s Investment Industry Practice Group. He joined Starkweather & Shepley in 2009 with over 20 years experience working in the insurance industry.

Starkweather Benefits Solutions, a division of Starkweather & Shepley Insurance Brokerage, promoted Joan Greenwell to director of client services. In addition to her current role of managing key accounts in the Employee Benefits arena, she will be driving key initiatives to enhance service levels for commercial clients. Additionally, she serves as a resource for clients for wellness initiatives, benefit communication strategies and on the implications of the Affordable Care Act. Greenwell joined the Employee Benefits division of Starkweather & Shepley in 2010.

Starkweather Benefits Solutions also promoted Kimberly A. Muldoon to senior benefits consultant from account executive. In her enhanced role, she will be providing services for establishing and maintaining employee benefit insurance programs for mid- to large-size commercial clients. Muldoon will also be educating and consulting with clients on the implications of the Affordable Care Act. Muldoon joined Starkweather in 1997 and has specialized in the Employee Benefits arena during her tenure.

In addition, Starkweather & Shepley Insurance Brokerage has hired Elizabeth Lowe as vice president and the leader of Starkweather Real Estate Solutions, an industry-specific practice group focused on assisting and providing risk management services to Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs), private equity investment firms, and other large real estate owners, managers and developers. Previously, Lowe was senior risk management consultant at Robert M. Currey & Associates of Boston, where she worked for over seven years.