Taxpayers have largely picked up the hospital tabs for victims of gun violence in the United States -- around 80 percent of their emergency department and inpatient care -- and funded more than half a billion dollars in medical care for firearm assault victims in 2010, according to a new study.

The victims, mostly young males and residents of low-income areas, are disproportionately more likely to be publicly insured or not have any insurance at all, while they are hospitalized more than twice the national average, according to the study by the Urban Institute, a nonpartisan think tank.

The cost of a stay for a firearm assault injury was nearly $14,000 more than the average inpatient stay, so the medical bills of gun violence victims amount to about $630 million a year, according to Embry Howell, author of the study and a senior fellow with the Urban Institute's Health Policy Center.

"Many hospitals get special federal subsidies for absorbing the cost of the uninsured," Howell told Al Jazeera.

"The hospital will likely bill the patient, but if the patient is poor he or she may not be able to pay for care. This becomes 'bad debt' for the hospital," which is paid for by taxpayers, she said

Kim Russell, outreach director for Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, an organization founded after the December 2012 massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., told Al Jazeera in an email that the public health care costs of gun violence could be curbed by stronger gun legislation.

"Background checks on every gun purchase would significantly help to prevent guns from getting into the wrong hands time and time again," she wrote. "This is absolutely a public health crisis, no doubt about it."

Howell also framed the issue as a "public health prevention issue" that reaches beyond the purview of the criminal justice system regulating gun legislation.

States with gun-friendly laws have higher rates of gun-related emergency care hospital visits, the study found. The South and Midwest have the highest rates of both emergency care visits and gun ownership, the study said.

Still, some gun rights advocates argue that guns make the nation safer. Yet in a study published Wednesday by The American Journal of Medicine, the authors say they have evidence that "debunks the widely quoted hyptothesis." The researchers concluded that there exists a strong link between the number of firearm-related deaths in the U.S. and the number of guns per capita, the highest in the world.

The National Association for Gun Rights declined to comment for this story. The National Rifle Association wasn't available for comment before publication.