It’s been no secret for a long time that nursing home care has been viewed in the U.S. as poor, even under the best circumstances. This perception may very well be one of the primary reasons why more seniors today are focused on remaining home, even when they have certain health and physical challenges that grow more significant with age.

Currently, due to a number of factors, not the least of which happens to be low pay, nurses are fleeing long-term care in droves. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that there are few qualified nurses or recent graduates of nursing programs even willing to work in these environments.

This is causing a crisis within the nursing home field that could have a direct impact on home health care as well.

Hilary Danklefs writes in the blog, Nurses leaving long-term care as elderly population rises, published by My Sanantonio on May 8, 2016:

“A crisis exists right now in nursing-home care, and it has been percolating for some time. Nurses are leaving long-term care — and there is no overflowing pipeline of nursing graduates waiting to care for our elderly. You don’t have to work in long-term care to understand what that means.”

Currently, the national average cost of nursing home care is approximately $75,000 per year while the average cost of full-time home care is about $42,000. This is one of the motivating factors for seniors to prefer to remain within the comfort of their home as they age, even when facing some major health challenges.

While not every senior would require a visiting nurse to come to their home, the more demand there is for home care, the more demand there will likely be for these visiting nurses. However, the same factors that are contributing to an exodus of nurses from nursing homes is in place with regard to in home care, and that all comes down to Medicare and Medicaid payments, or reimbursements.

The federal government in recent years has been adamant about the importance of home care for the future well-being of seniors and disabled adults, but at the same time cut Medicaid reimbursements for home care by 14 percent, to be completely rolled out by January, 2017. These cuts were made to help balance the budget for the Affordable Care Act passed in 2010.

As more seniors require care and increasing numbers prefer to ‘age in place,’ the nursing crisis for long-term care may very well hit home for in home care soon.