Photo

Personal Health Jane Brody on health and aging.

A major new study of smoking and death has banged more nails into the coffin of cigarette smoking, though chances are it will do little to persuade any of the 42 million American smokers to quit.

If current smokers have not already responded to the well-established links between smoking and 21 diseases that together cause 480,000 deaths each year, adding another five diseases and 60,000 deaths to this grisly total is unlikely to make a difference — at least not by itself.

“Health effects are not enough to decrease smoking rates,” said Brian D. Carter, public health specialist with the American Cancer Society and lead author of the new study.

However, he and his co-authors hope that publication of their study in the The New England Journal of Medicine will prompt more doctors to aggressively address smoking cessation with their patients.

Perhaps even more important, our elected officials need to add muscle and money to quit-smoking programs and do more to thwart the persistent efforts of the tobacco industry to hook new young smokers and to keep older ones at it.

Nine in 10 smokers start before age 19. Every day, nearly 3,900 adolescents try their first cigarette, a quarter of whom are destined to become daily smokers. Nearly one in three will ultimately die of a smoking-related disease. That means some 5.6 million youngsters now under 18 will die prematurely because they smoked.

Many experts worry that the aggressive marketing of e-cigarettes, the latest gimmick to create and maintain an addiction to nicotine, could ultimately assure a healthy market for real cigarettes decades hence. No data exist to establish the long-term safety of this nicotine delivery system, nor is there convincing evidence that e-cigarettes are helping current smokers abandon tobacco.

Adolescents could be easily enticed by many of the flavors of e-cigarettes, including chocolate, vanilla, banana, cherry and strawberry, which sounds a lot like the menu in my local frozen yogurt store.

Certainly, tremendous progress has been made in curbing cigarette smoking since the first Surgeon General’s Report on Smoking and Health in January 1964. At the time, 44 percent of adults smoked, and just about anywhere they pleased. We are now down to 18 percent of adults who smoke, and smoking is banned in many public buildings, workplaces, modes of transportation, and bars and restaurants.

But there has been a decided slowdown in smoking cessation rates in recent years, fueling a belief that getting the remaining hard core of smokers to quit will require new strategies.

For example, raising taxes on cigarettes is repeatedly proposed as an effective way to curb smoking, primarily by keeping young people from starting. Yet smoking rates are highest among the poor. While 17 percent of Americans at or above the poverty level smoke, the rate is nearly 28 percent among those living below the poverty level.

People with few pleasures in life often cite smoking as one for which they are willing to make sacrifices. Since 1997, the smoking rate for adults has fallen 27 percent, but just 15 percent among the poor.

The Affordable Care Act requires insurance providers to cover tobacco cessation services with no co-pay from patients. Fully covered are two cessation attempts a year, each involving four counseling sessions and access to all tobacco-cessation drugs, over-the-counter and prescription, approved by the Food and Drug Administration.

However, political resistance in some states to expanding Medicaid under the act to many more low-income residents will effectively prevent those most in need of smoking cessation programs and tools from getting them.

Furthermore, death is by no means the only consequence of smoking. Countless millions of Americans are living with chronic smoking-induced illnesses that can impair their productivity and greatly increase health care costs. While heart disease, stroke, diabetes, chronic lung disease and 12 kinds of cancer were previously tied to smoking, the new study added kidney failure, intestinal blood vessel blockage, hypertensive heart disease, infections, various respiratory diseases, breast cancer and prostate cancer to the list.

A study of this nature, which followed nearly one million men and women from 2000 through 2011, cannot prove that smoking causes these disorders, but the fact that the risk for each illness declined as the number of years since quitting smoking increased strongly suggests a cause-and-effect relationship.

“The additional 60,000 deaths a year associated with smoking is more than what results from car accidents, influenza and murders,” Mr. Carter said in an interview.

He added that the new findings “are not terribly surprising” given that tobacco smoke contains thousands of chemicals, many of which can impair immune function. Still, he said, “the morbidity associated with smoking is much greater than the mortality.”

While dying of a smoking-induced disease is a singular event, being chronically ill with one can have costly, debilitating effects for decades. Chronic kidney disease alone costs Medicare $57.5 billion a year.

“Smoking is the single worst thing people can do to their health,” Mr. Carter said. “People underestimate how efficiently addictive cigarettes are.” He cited his grandparents, who smoked for decades and failed repeated attempts to quit. Both were sick for years with congestive heart failure and emphysema before dying of the flu at 72.

“Smoking should be treated as a form of drug addiction,” Mr. Carter said. “It functions the same way as addiction to alcohol or heroin.”

For decades, the tobacco industry has managed to thwart public health efforts to depict smoking as the noxious, lethal activity that it is. It introduced flavors and filters, appealed to women’s status concerns and weight issues, and seduced youngsters by infiltrating movies popular with teens.

The F.D.A. now has the authority to regulate tobacco more strenuously, and should be using it to counter the industry’s efforts to make its product more palatable and seemingly less dangerous.