By Bill Poovey

bpoovey@scbiznews.com

Published Nov. 19, 2013

A Fitch Ratings report predicts hospitals in South Carolina will suffer financially from state political leaders shunning billions of federal Medicaid dollars from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Gov. Nikki Haley’s state Medicaid director disagrees.

In fact, Tony Keck says hospital revenues should be going up, and the government is giving South Carolina hospitals a 3% increase for charity care.

The act cuts Medicaid reimbursements to hospitals, a revenue hit that was to be offset by an expansion of the number of uninsured people enrolled in Medicaid. But, South Carolina opted not to expand Medicaid, leaving a 9-1 federal match of Medicaid dollars on the table.

“I don’t know how Fitch comes to that conclusion,” said Keck, director of the S.C. Department of Health and Human Services. “Overall, in every state in the country, hospitals are going to be doing much, much better everywhere, generally.”

Adam Kates, a director in Fitch’s public finance group, said in a statement about the report that “hospitals operating in states not expanding Medicaid, which usually have higher uninsured and poverty rates, will have to absorb the full impact of the ACA reimbursement cuts without the full benefit of increased insured volumes."

In Anderson, AnMed Health spokeswoman Kari Lutz said remaining solvent in the face of reduced reimbursements from Medicare and Medicaid is a challenge. Lutz in an email statement said AnMed, like other health systems, agreed to a lower reimbursement rate for Medicare, when promises were made that a Medicaid expansion would boost the number of patients.

“Although AnMed Health is nonprofit, it is important to remain solvent,” Lutz said. “In the short term, our only recourse is to continue cost shifting, but this is an unsustainable answer for the long term,” Lutz said. “Cost-shifting means the burden is moved from those who can’t pay to those who can. When it reaches a point where too few can pay the cost, the result will be a series of insolvent health care systems across the state.”

A report for the S.C. Hospital Association in December 2012 showed participating in the Affordable Care Act’s Medicaid expansion would generate up to $11.2 billion in federal funds for the state between 2014 and 2020. While South Carolinians are helping pay for the program nationally, the Haley administration and the Republican-led General Assembly have opted to not participate because the state would be obligated to cover up to 10% of the cost starting in 2017.

The Affordable Care Act assumed that expanding Medicaid would mean more adults getting coverage, so it reduced the payments that hospitals get for charity care, also known as disproportionate share funds, or DSH.

Georgia, Florida, Mississippi, Louisiana and Texas also are not expanding Medicaid and also have among the highest rates of uninsured and poor people and stringent Medicaid eligibility requirements. The Fitch report predicts hospitals in those states will also be particularly vulnerable to having their credit ratings lowered.

With hospitals required to see anyone who shows up seeking care in the emergency room, whether insured or not, they have advocated expanding the state’s Medicaid program that provides health care for about 1 million people. The U.S. Census Bureau reports that more than 800,000 South Carolinians, or about 18% of the state’s population, have no health insurance.

Rozalynn Goodwin, the S.C. Hospital Association’s director of policy research, said both Fitch and Moody’s ratings are important to hospitals.

“This is how they have assessed the environment for hospitals,” Goodwin said.

She said what Fitch and Moody’s says “will impact the interest we have to pay on debt. Their opinion of the environment under the Affordable Care Act is important for us to expand and improve our services to our communities.”

Goodwin said hospitals have concern that “they would have to pay more for bonds to borrow to increase services.”

The Greenville Health System did not reply to requests for comment about the Fitch Ratings report and how their finances and credit ratings stand to be affected by the state’s refusal to expand Medicaid.

AnMed’s Lutz said about 10% of the hospital’s patients in 2012 were uninsured and another 62% were covered by Medicare or Medicaid, which pays less than the actual cost of care. She said AnMed provided more than $67 million in charity care and another $139 million for patients who failed to fully pay. Lutz said the reduction in Medicare reimbursement alone means a $23.3 million revenue cut over six years for AnMed.

Keck said the Fitch report does not take into account financial gains that hospitals are realizing. He said a “snapshot” of South Carolina shows about 733,000 people uninsured at any given time. He said the government has been paying hospitals about 50 cents on each dollar of their charity or uncompensated cost and the pool of disproportionate share money this year in South Carolina is $464 million.

“Based on Census data we project that out of that 733,000 there are 433,000 who are eligible for an (insurance) exchange subsidy,” Keck said. “Another 60,000 are eligible for Medicaid who are not enrolled. When you add it all up, if everyone took advantage of the exchange subsidy or Medicaid, the number would be reduced by 71% in South Carolina.”

Keck said with that reduction in the number of uninsured, the $464 million provided for charity care has hospitals “moving from getting paid 50 cents on the dollar to 95 cents on the dollar and up to $1.50 on the dollar.”

“How Fitch says these hospitals will actually end up paying more for uncompensated care doesn’t make any sense to us,” Keck said. “We don’t understand how hospitals don’t come out ahead on this.”

Keck said he has flexibility in deciding where some money is spent. He said hospital executives and advocates in South Carolina don’t mention the 3% disproportionate share funds increase and “would rather just say my DSH is getting cut.” Keck said his message to business groups and bankers has been that “hospitals are going to end up with more for uncompensated care.”

Keck’s calculation presumes that everyone eligible for a subsidy or for Medicaid will enroll, and that won’t happen, the hospital association’s Goodwin said. She said hospitals appreciate the 3% increase in disproportionate share funds, but unlike Keck’s prediction of 100% enrollments the federal government “has set a goal of like 130,000 people in South Carolina. The enrollment won’t be anywhere close to what he said.”

Goodwin said hospitals enroll Medicaid-eligible patients who are not yet signed up.

Goodwin said there are more than 200,000 South Carolinians who will not have Medicaid coverage or access to subsidies to buy coverage in the health insurance marketplace. Over the next seven years, she said, hospitals in the state will see reductions in Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements of $2.7 billion.

Goodwin said enrollment in health coverage has been slowed by political opponents of the Affordable Care Act and a “lot of misinformation” about what is being offered in South Carolina. She said some political speeches “have confused some of our citizens who don’t even know they are eligible” for subsidies to help pay for health insurance.