MONTGOMERY, Ala. — The Alabama-based Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), through its “Teaching Tolerance” project, is promoting a Common Core-aligned “anti-bias” LGBT K-12 curriculum to be used in classrooms across the country.

The Teaching Tolerance project is in partnership with Perspectives for a Diverse America to design the curriculum, “Critical Practices for Anti-Bias Education.”

Teaching Tolerance‘s educational kits and magazine subscriptions, which are free, encourage the program’s resources to be shared with “classroom teachers, librarians, school counselors, school administrators, professors of education, youth directors at houses of worship and employees of youth-serving nonprofit organizations.”

Some of the program’s listed strategies include:

reflecting diversity, equity, and justice in classroom environments;

engaging families and communities in ways that are meaningful in culturally competent ways;

allowing and encouraging students to speak out against bias and injustice;

using anti-bias curricula as part of a community action, including the individual and schools;

supporting students’ identities and making it safe for them to fully be themselves; and

encouraging deep exploration of anti-bias themes that support divers learning styles using instructional materials and strategies.

Theresa Lucas-Hubbard, a board member of both the Alabamians United for Excellence in Education (AUEE) and Alabama Eagle Forum recently had first-hand experience with the curriculum, attending a promotional Teaching Tolerance Perspectives for a Diverse America session in July, sponsored by the Montgomery Public Schools.

“When I signed up, I chose grades K-2-appropriate reading texts, and then formulated a question pertinent to a classroom situation,” Lucas-Hubbard shared with Breitbart News. “The teacher has a list of essential questions to choose from, such as, “What identities do I share with my family? What identities do I have that are different from my family?”

Lucas-Hubbard said, using the most popular option on a drop-down menu the first story in the category was 10,000 Dresses by Marcus Ewert. Here is Amazon’s description of the book.

Every night, Bailey dreams about magical dresses: dresses made of crystals and rainbows, dresses made of flowers, dresses made of windows. … Unfortunately, when Bailey’s awake, no one wants to hear about these beautiful dreams. Quite the contrary. “You’re a BOY!” Mother and Father tell Bailey. “You shouldn’t be thinking about dresses at all.” Then Bailey meets Laurel, an older girl who is touched and inspired by Bailey’s imagination and courage. In friendship, the two of them begin making dresses together. And Bailey’s dreams come true! This gorgeous picture book–a modern fairy tale about becoming the person you feel you are inside—will delight people of all ages.

“Children are being indoctrinated into the LGBT agenda without ever realizing what is going on and parents may never know about this type of reading/activity going on in the classroom,” said Lucas-Hubbard. “This program/curriculum is about indoctrinating our children and reducing emphasis on family and solid moral values by emphasizing tolerance for all despite societal norms.”

“This SPLC-sponsored program incorporates the goals of Common Core with the goals of those who want to change our traditional American culture and accomplish fundamental change in America,” concluded Lucas-Hubbard.

Earlier this year, The Southern Poverty Law Center came under public scrutiny when adding GOP Presidential Candidate, Dr. Ben Carson, to its “extremist list.” The SPLC initially named his pro-traditional marriage stance, opposition to ObamaCare, and support for a flat tax as reasons for placing him on the list alongside members of the KKK, Neo-Nazis, and the Westboro Baptist Church.

Even just a few months ago, this “Civil Rights” group published the “Women Against Islam” list, targeting women who are outspoken against Islamic extremism.

Thanks for reading! Let me know what you think about this story on Twitter. — John James (@john_james_20) August 19, 2015