Shake Shack (SHAK) stock had been up as much as 7.4% Tuesday after crushing Q2 earnings estimates late Monday, but it reversed lower amid an overall market sell-off and some caution from analysts.

In a note Tuesday, Longbow Research maintained a neutral rating on the burger chain due to Shake Shack’s stock price but was still upbeat.

“While we still have concerns related to the valuation carried by SHAK, the company’s impressive comp acceleration reported over the last three quarters could set the stage for further comp upside in coming quarters, driven in large part by incremental rate pricing/mix,” said analyst Alton Stump, according to Benzinga.

Shake Shack closed down 2.9% on the stock market today.

The company raised its full-year revenue guidance above consensus late Monday and reported Q2 EPS and sales that easily beat estimates.

Meanwhile, shares of Red Robin Gourmet Burger (RRGB) fell more than 9% Tuesday after the company reported lower-than-expected Q2 revenue.

Earnings per share minus one-time items rose 14.7% to 78 cents in Q2, meeting views, on a 14.4% increase in revenue to $293 million, below estimates of $297.95 million. Comparable store revenue was up 2.9%.

CEO Stephen Carley said in an earnings call that industry data showed Red Robin’s in-store traffic was above the industry average in Q2 “in spite of aggressive discounting and the burger-centric menu and promotional activity of our competitors.”

Red Robin guided full-year revenue growth to “near 12%,” vs. analyst consensus for 12.1% growth.

Red Robin stock dropped below its 50-day average, but closed just above its 200-day line.

Mexican-themed fire-grilled chicken chain El Pollo Loco (LOCO) is slated to report Q2 earnings Thursday after the market closes. Shares of rival Chipotle Mexican Grill (CMG), anIBD 50 list stock, shot up nearly 8% on July 22 on a sound Q2 earnings beat the day before.

El Pollo Loco fell 2.6% Tuesday. Chipotle Mexican Grill, which is extended above a 728.07 flat base buy point, edged up fractionally.