Two Middlesex County men were arrested on various charges thanks to an alert off-duty Perth Amboy detective. (Photo: ~File photo)

An off-duty city detective observed two suspicious males in the area of Hebert Street and Smith Street near the 7-Eleven convience store wearing all black clothing and having their faces covered, Deputy Chief Larry Cattano said.

He said that on March 13 at approximately 12:15 a.m., Detective Jessica DeJesus noticed Raul Zarco, a city resident, and Pedro Ortiz, of Woodbridge, near the 7-Eleven.

Cattano said DeJesus immediately notified police headquarters and patrol units were quickly dispatched to the area. DeJesus continued to monitor the actions of the two individuals and updated headquarters of her observations.

Cattano said a quick response from patrol resulted in both men being stopped prior to their completion of a crime. Ortiz was noncompliant with directions from officers, police said. He began to physically resist the officers, they said.

During the struggle with police, Ortiz was found to be in possession of a weapon used in previous robberies, a BB gun.

Upon follow-up investigation by Investigative Division, police said, the pair was tied to seven robberies in Perth Amboy as well as neighboring towns over the past several months, police said.

"The actions of the off-duty detective, as well as all officers involved, exemplify the dedication and professionalism of the men and women of this department to keeping the citizens of this great city safe on a daily basis," Cattano said.

Zarco, 38, was charged with four counts of armed robbery, one count of criminal attempt (armed robbery), four counts of conspiracy, two counts of unlawful possession of a weapon, two counts of possession of a weapon for unlawful purpose and two counts of certain persons not to possess a firearm. His bail was set at $350,000, with no 10 percent cash option, by Municipal Court Judge Kenneth Gonzalez.

Ortiz 45, was charged with three counts of armed robbery, one count of criminal attempt (armed robbery) four counts of conspiracy, three counts of unlawful possession of a weapon, three counts of possession of a weapon for unlawful purpose and three counts of certain persons not to possess a firearm. His bail was $325,000, with no 10 percent cash option, by Gonzalez.

The investigation is continuing. Anyone with additional information is asked to contact Detective Jessica Dejesus at 732-324-3822.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1bc165B