Is the glass half-full or half-empty? That’s the economic question Democrats need to answer clearly and quickly.

President Harry Truman liked to tell a story about his frustration with White House economic advisers. When he asked those economists about the state of the economy, the answer would be of the "on one hand, but on the other hand" variety. Truman would then say that what he needed was a one-handed economist.

There was enough data in the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics December jobs report to support the glass-half-full and glass-half-empty sides of the debate. The good news was the report showed the economy had added 252,000 new jobs last month to bring the unemployment rate down to 5.6 percent. The bad news was wages barely kept pace with the rate of inflation. In the last five years, the number of jobs has grown by more than 10 percent, but the increase in wages adjusted for inflation is less than 1 percent. The economy is creating jobs, but working families still have a difficult time paying their bills every month.



[SEE: 2014: The Year in Cartoons]

If the U.S. doesn’t do something to soon to make life easier for hardworking families, their standard of living may not get much better. With unemployment decreasing, the Federal Reserve may increase interest rates to tighten the money supply. If the Fed does slow the economy up, we might end up with a recovery that helped wealthy Americans a lot and working families very little.

The answer to the question of whether the glass-half-full or glass-half-empty is the fault line within the Democratic Party. The centrist wing of the party emphasizes the positive argument about steady job growth. The populist side focuses on the failure of middle class families to improve their standard of living.

President Barack Obama's message during the midterm elections was that the economy was getting better, but working families were not reaping the rewards. The president’s pitch fell flat on its face during the 2014 campaign because there were few Americans who thought the economy was getting better. The economic recovery may be great for bankers and billionaires, but not for anybody else. The truth is the recovery hasn’t helped middle-class families who are still up to their armpits in debt.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

The senior senator from Massachusetts, Elizabeth Warren, is the champion of the populist wing of the Democratic Party. Warren has made it very clear that she will not run for president in 2016, but she still works hard to put income inequality on the national agenda, which will keep the Democratic Party in general, and Hillary Clinton in particular, on the straight and narrow populist path.

You rarely hear Warren sound upbeat about the economy. Instead, she talks about an economy that fat cats and plutocrats have rigged so they reap the rewards while working families continue to suffer.

Warren has the visibility and clout to keep the Democratic Party honest. The first-term senator has already secured a position on the Democratic Senate leadership team. And on Monday, Antonio Weiss, Obama’s nominee for undersecretary of the Treasury for domestic finance, withdrew from consideration for the job; Warren strongly opposed Weiss’ nomination because he had worked on Wall Street to advise companies how to avoid paying U.S. taxes by merging with foreign firms.



[READ: Don't Celebrate Quite Yet]