× Udall goes positive in new TV ad emphasizing western individualism

DENVER — A day after launching his campaign’s second TV ad attacking Republican Cory Gardner on personhood, Democratic U.S. Sen. Mark Udall is out with his third ad of the year Wednesday that offers a more positive message about his respect for Colorado’s independence and the rugged individualism of the American west.

Udall, who faces a tough reelection challenge this fall, is simultaneously trying to portray Gardner as unacceptable while positioning himself as the candidate who understands the state’s values.

“As a life-long Westerner and problem solver, I will always fight to do right by Colorado. I hold an unwavering belief in the promise of our state and our people, I respect Coloradans’ unique sense of independence and will always stand-up for their rights,” Udall said.

On Tuesday, Republicans criticized Udall for offering a “negative” message in his first two TV ads, both of which attacked Gardner on women’s health issues.

Gardner responded with a web video explaining his recent partial reversal on personhood (he no longer supports the Colorado ballot measure language but remains a co-sponsor of federal personhood legislation).

The third ad launches just as Republicans are trying to focus attention on Udall’s refusal to vote in favor of building the Keystone XL pipeline, a measure before the Senate Energy Committee on which Udall sits Wednesday.

Udall has indicated he will vote against the measure because he believes Congress should wait until the independent review process is completed before taking action, offering a process-based rationale for voting no while leaving the door open to eventually supporting the construction of the pipeline.

Gardner’s campaign Wednesday cited Udall’s support for the Affordable Care Act in an effort to push back against his claim that he respects the rights of Coloradans to make their own choices.

“If only Sen. Udall had read this script before he lied to Colorado and voted to take away Coloradans’ freedom to choose the doctors and health insurance plans that worked for their families,” Alex Siciliano, Gardner’s spokesman, told FOX31 Denver.