Adrian Reghitto, 10, stands at the microphone while he ponders the spelling of a word during the 5th Annual Thompson School District Elementary Spelling Bee on Saturday at Walt Clark Middle School. Adrian, a fifth-grader at Berthoud Elementary School, outlasted 26 other spellers onstage over 16 rounds of oral spelling to become champion. His championship word was "pancreas." ( Steve Stoner )

In an unprecedented move Saturday morning, this year's elementary school spellers worked their way through the regular list and another 21 words on a second list.

"This was truly, truly an epic spelling bee," said Lisa Paradise, spelling bee coordinator for Thompson School District. "To go into that many additional words shows their overall knowledge of words."

The 27 oral spellers took 16 rounds and nearly 1 3/4 hours to narrow down to the 2014 champion speller -- 10-year-old Adrian Reghitto of Berthoud Elementary School -- during the 5th Annual Thompson School District Elementary Spelling Bee at Walt Clark Middle School. The 17th annual middle school spelling was held that afternoon.

Adrian's championship word was "pancreas," which he spelled correctly, earning a first-place trophy to take home and a traveling trophy for his school to display for the next year.

"I've been practicing for a while, and I was confident," said the fifth-grader about going on stage with the belief he would win. "I just feel proud of myself. I achieved my goal, and I've done my best."

Second-place speller Avery Crockett, a fifth-grader at Ponderosa Elementary School, said her New Year's goal was to get in the top three, which she achieved through daily practice of her word list.

"I kind of felt like I could do it," the 10-year-old said.

Advertisement

Kaitlyn Ricks, also a fifth-grader at Ponderosa, didn't think she would get a high enough score on the written test of 50 words to make it to the stage. She was competing against more than 200 students from 20 elementary schools who took the 45-minute test.

"I actually wasn't expecting to be up here," Kaitlyn said. "Last year I was here, I didn't make it up here. I wasn't that confident. I'm more confident now."

The students spelled words from the Scripps-Howard lists that increased in difficulty with each round, including the more difficult words of panache, monochrome, quadrillion, sapphire, cumbersome and presumptuous.

Pronouncer Steve Hanna told the spellers they could ask him to repeat a word, use it in a sentence, state the definition or give its part of speech. As they spelled, preferably by stating the word, then saying each letter, three judges served as evaluators, John Bloomberg, Meredeth Neitenbach and Carol Swalley, to make sure there was agreement on any missed letters.

By the fifth round, nearly half, or 13, of the students were eliminated for spelling a word incorrectly.

In the 10th round, the top three spellers were left and all misspelled their words. They returned to the stage to spell some more.

Adrian won the 14th round, then Avery and Kaitlyn took two more rounds to determine their rankings with Avery spelling "tactically" correctly to place second.

The middle school spellers, who came from six schools, took a 75-word written test, then participated in an oral round to compete for first through sixth place, qualifying them for the state bee on March 8 in Denver. The next top four spellers will serve as alternates.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.