Buy Photo A man finds some private time for a call at The Hope Lutheran Church, one of a number of congregations in the area where the Freehold Clergy Association hosts homeless people overnight to keep them out of the cold. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer Asbury Park Press)Buy Photo

Bill Strong lost his retail job in the recession and, when his money ran out in September 2012, his apartment in Long Branch.

But the lifelong Monmouth County native was certain his luck would change by Christmas that year and he would once again be back on his feet.

Two years later, Strong is still homeless.

"You never think it'll happen to you," said the 59-year-old who spends his days looking for full-time work and picks up temporary jobs doing lawn care, gardening, light carpentry or painting when it's available. "It's like a disease. I'll never get that."

Strong said he would have been sleeping in the woods this Christmas holiday season if it weren't for a network of religious congregations in Freehold that, for more than a decade, have been shielding homeless men from winter's cold.

The Freehold Clergy Association Emergency Housing and Advocacy Program hosts up to a dozen homeless men each night from December through March, offering each warm beds, meals and, for many, services they need to once again rebuild their lives.

The cement mixer

The program was started in 2003 by a group who volunteered at what is now Open Door, a lunch program and food pantry, in Freehold.

The volunteers were hearing about the need for warm housing from those living in the woods and behind factories.

But the story that burned in the volunteers' minds came from a cement mixer.

A weekly newspaper wrote about homelessness in the Freehold area. With it was a photo of a man who had been sleeping in the drum of a cement mixer.

"Just to think of that kind of destitution, I couldn't sleep to think of people freezing outside when there is a nice warm unused space," said the Rev. Dr. Patricia "Pastor Pat" Medley, who was among the first religious leaders in western Monmouth County to open her church, Hope Lutheran Church in Freehold, to house homeless men a night a week.

The image caused people in Freehold to act, handing out blankets to those without shelter.

But the winter housing became what organizers called "the missing piece."

"How is anyone going to change their lives if they are missing housing and missing food?" said Joan Mandel, a licensed social worker who volunteers to help the men the Emergency Housing and Advocacy Program serves.

Mandel and Stan Rosenthal, then of Holmdel and other Open Door volunteers, reached out to about 16 member congregations of the Freehold Clergy Association to support the plan of hosting. Initially, the program started with three nights per week.

"One of the biggest things to overcome was the stereotype of what a homeless man was from the movies and TV where he was a going to hit you over the head and steal your shoes," Rosenthal said.

Mandel said, "People learned. We learned. Congregations learned."

Now six congregations open the doors to their buildings, allowing the men to spend every night of the week in warm shelter. Other member congregations of the clergy association support the program in other ways, providing volunteers, meals or supplies.

Each host congregation supplies volunteers who pick up the men at a central intake location and drives them to the house of worship, cook meals for the stay, spend the night and wash the linens for the next day.

The program is considered a "hospitality room" under New Jersey law, a distinction that makes it different from other area homeless shelters and limits it to housing a maximum of 12 men any given night.

It's first-come, first-serve with each person requiring a referral from another non-profit agency or church. Some stay a handful of nights, while others stay the entire winter.

Changing need

In the first few years, the program housed mostly illegal immigrants working as day laborers.

But as the economy sank, the population in the Emergency Housing and Advocacy Program changed, Mandel said. Many of the undocumented workers served by the program went back home, she said.

In their place came construction workers, professionals and a large increase in seniors.

They were men who became homeless after losing their jobs, saw marriages or relationships fall apart or suffered illness.

And over the years, the program itself saw the need to change.

Some of the men do have jobs or get benefits that would allow them to afford housing, but can't afford the security deposit for an apartment, Mandel said.

Others are eligible for social service assistance, but don't have the identification needed to apply.

Because of that, the program, which started off as a way to shelter homeless men from the cold, expanded to add year-round advocacy.

Mandel works with the men to get their identifications in order so they can apply for food stamps, housing assistance and Medicaid benefits. She also helps them with job searches.

The men in the program said her assistance is invaluable. Ask the men, many who didn't want to talk about their homelessness, how Mandel has helped and they rattle off a list: Clothing. Food. Bus tickets. Doctors. Dentists.

"She's not a social worker. She's a miracle worker," said one program participant who didn't want his named used because he did not want his friends to know he is homeless.

With the advocacy arm, the program has helped 11 men find permanent housing in the past year.

Small budget, big volunteers

The program operates on a shoestring budget of $15,000 funded entirely by private donations. No government dollars go to the program.

The organizers are working to replicate the program elsewhere. It's that volunteer foundation that is key to making the program work, said Rosenthal, one of the program's founders and organizers.

"It's not rocket science," he said. "And it couldn't be done without great, great volunteers."

Organizers estimated it takes about 70 volunteers a week during the winter months to run the program. And more hands are always welcome, especially younger volunteers to fill the ranks as the work becomes too much for older volunteers.

But the work is just as valuable for congregation members, said Medley, the Hope Lutheran Church pastor. She says it allows her parish members to live their faith.

"'There but for the grace of God goes I' becomes a real experience when people sit down to dinner with someone who is homeless and sleeping on an air mattress and discover how much alike we are," she said. "It builds your compassion."

The congregations

Six member congregations of the Freehold Clergy Association open their doors for the Emergency Housing and Advocacy Program. They include:

• St. Veronica's Roman Catholic Church in Howell

• Christian Science Church in Freehold

• St. Robert Bellarmine Roman Catholic Church in Freehold Township

• Hope Lutheran Church in Freehold Township

• Temple Shaari Emeth in Manalapan

• Jerseyville United Methodist Church in Howell

Other member congregations support the program with volunteers, funding or collecting clothing and toiletries for the men.

How to help

It costs $15,000 per year to run the Emergency Housing and Advocacy Program. Organizers estimate it costs $10 per night to house a homeless man. About 70 volunteers help each week with the program during the winter housing season.

• To donate, call Stan Rosenthal at 908-902-0769. Checks also can be sent to St. Robert Bellarmine Roman Catholic Church at 61 Georgia Road, Freehold, NJ 07728

• To volunteer, call program director George Lowe at 732-299-4320.

• Community member can also collect items for the men, including toiletries, hats, gloves, socks, jeans and boots.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1BdJcZd