With apologies to Judith Viorst, the nearly two weeks leading up to the July 4 weekend might be called President Obama’s wonderful, remarkable, not at all bad, very good fortnight.

It started in Congress on Wednesday, June 24, when enough Democrats joined Republican proponents to give the president sweeping “fast-track” authority to negotiate pacts with America’s Pacific Basin trading partners.

The next day, just across the street from the Capitol, the Supreme Court dispensed with the last serious constitutional challenge to Obamacare. The day after that, the court affirmed the administration’s legal position in a 5-4 decision establishing gay marriage as the law of the land.

When the marriage decision was announced, the president was in Charleston, S.C., at Emanuel A.M.E. Church where he gave an impassioned eulogy for nine murdered African-American parishioners before leading the congregation in a rendition of “Amazing Grace,” which he began a cappella.

It was an extraordinary scene, and reminded millions of Americans of the Barack Obama they voted for in 2008. Although one snarky former White House aide issued a snide tweet criticizing South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley for previously supporting the Confederate flag, Obama himself sat beside Haley in church and praised her from the pulpit for her leadership on the issue.

Obama returned home Friday night to see the White House bathed—per his orders—in the rainbow colors of the gay pride movement. Asked days later about his winning streak at an East Room press conference, Obama merely acknowledged his “gratifying” week, but mentioned other blessed weeks in his life, including the one in which he’d married Michelle—and the times when his daughters were born. Obama also playfully mentioned scoring 27 points in a high school basketball game, although he may have been poking fun at himself. Or not. But there was no denying his string of successes.

The American people noticed. Obama’s job approval rating in CNN’s poll topped 50 percent for the first time in a while. So why didn’t he spike the ball and do an end-zone dance? Several reasons, it seems to me.

First, if I may mix my sports metaphors, the president was heeding the advice of Crash Davis in “Bull Durham.” He didn’t mess with a winning streak. Republicans in Congress and the Supreme Court and in South Carolina had helped him, so why antagonize them?

(Well, then came Thursday in Wisconsin, when he delivered a weirdly partisan -- even for him -- speech mocking the 2016 GOP field and the entire Republican Party.)

Second, it became clear that Obama had no intention of resting on his laurels. Last Monday, he announced plans to unilaterally give an estimated 5 million Americans a pay raise by tweaking Labor Department rules about overtime pay. On Tuesday, he announced plans to open a U.S. Embassy in Cuba—and allow the Cubans to open one here. On Wednesday, he went to Nashville where he publicly lobbied Tennesseans to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. No less a local Republican personage than former Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist expressed support for Obama’s approach.

But there was another factor mitigating against presidential victory dances. In the middle of this run of success—on the same fateful Friday he spoke in Charleston and the high court upheld gay marriage—a frightful series of terrorist attacks rocked the world.

Islamic terrorists struck in France, Kuwait, and Tunisia on the same day. In France, an Islamic radical drove a delivery van into a U.S.-owned chemical plant while attempting to blow it up. He failed, but did decapitate the manager of a transportation company and unfurl two Islamic banners. A little while later, a suicide bomber in Kuwait blew up a Shiite mosque, killing 25 worshipers and wounding many more. In Tunisia, a gunman pulled an assault rifle from a beach umbrella and began shooting sunbathers indiscriminately. Thirty-eight people died, most of them from Great Britain.

Three attacks on three continents in a matter of hours. ISIS took credit for Tunisia and Kuwait; France appears to be a “lone wolf” attack, but this is becoming a distinction without a difference: If ISIS exhorts extremists around the world to launch such attacks—and these calls are heeded—it’s irrelevant to the victims whether the killers received direct operational support from ISIS. This was a lesson Americans learned in Charleston: Armed lunatics inspired by hate can be just as dangerous as organized terrorist groups.

ISIS punctuated its June 26 orgy of bloodletting by throwing four gay men in Iraq off a five-story rooftop to their deaths, perhaps in response to the U.S. Supreme Court decision on gay marriage.

Barack Obama ran for president wanting to reduce America’s military footprint in the world. He continues to believe that the original sin was George W. Bush’s decision to invade Iraq, a view shared by a majority of Americans. It also seems obvious that Obama’s decision to withdraw from that country was premature and that his dithering in Syria made things worse. But those mistakes are in the past. The only steps Obama can take now are ones that try to shape the future.

Even as administration officials worried about possible terrorist attacks against Americans on July 4, the Royal Air Force was flying home the bodies of the 30 Britons murdered in Tunisia. In the House of Commons, Prime Minister David Cameron termed the killings an act of war against the U.K. He’s right, but they were also an act of war against the civilized world.

Long before the latest atrocities, ISIS released videos boasting about machine-gunning Iraqi prisoners of war, beheading Western journalists and international aid workers, burning a Jordanian military pilot alive, executing dozens of Egyptian Christians working in Libya, and auctioning off ethnic Yazidi women as sex slaves.

This is a regime no government on earth wants to see survive. And Barack Obama is the only international leader with the cred and the military muscle to go to the United Nations and serve notice that his country will lead a global effort to rid the world of this scourge.

Last week, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie formally declared his presidential candidacy. One of 15 Republicans who would like to succeed Obama as commander-in-chief, Christie was asked by a reporter why his job approval rating in New Jersey is so low. In reply, Christie said his popularity had taken a hit because he’s made some tough decisions in Trenton, that he’d used his political capital to get things done. That’s not the whole answer, but it’s partially true—and instructive. It’s time for President Obama to do the same.