U.S. senator and prospective presidential candidate Rand Paul, R-Ky., visited Ames Saturday to catch the first half of the Iowa State men’s basketball team’s 75-38 rout of Texas Tech before swinging over to the Scheman Building to make a civil liberties-focused pitch to college students attending a watch party.

The event was organized by the ISU College Republicans and the activist nonprofit group Young Americans for Liberty, which was formed shortly after Paul’s father, then-Texas Congressman Ron Paul, ended his 2008 presidential bid.

About 40 people, plus another several local and national reporters, listened to Paul speak in a Scheman meeting room as the second half got under way on two projector screens, the Cyclones up 18.

“I think I’m bringing them good luck,” Paul joked, referring to the Cyclones’ shock loss to the Red Raiders Jan. 24. “Apparently, when you guys played Texas Tech last time, it didn’t turn out so good. Now it looks like they only brought their JVs with them this time.”

Paul’s speech focused on protecting the privacy of everyone from pot smokers and atheists to evangelical Christians from government intrusion into their privacy.

“The Bill of Rights is not for the prom queen,” Paul said. “The Bill of Rights isn’t for the high school quarterback. The Bill of Rights is for those who are unpopular. The Bill of Rights is for those who want to speak their mind. You can be a minority because of the color of your skin, or the shade of your ideology.”

The libertarian-leaning Kentucky senator discussed how he filed a class-action lawsuit a year ago this week against President Barack Obama and Attorney General Eric Holder over the National Security Agency’s widespread spying on U.S. citizens’ communications that was revealed the summer before by Edward Snowden (or, as Paul mistakenly said, “Eric Snowden”).

Paul said he opposed Obama’s nominee to succeed Holder when he retires, Loretta Lynch, over her support for civil asset forfeiture as U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of New York. The controversial practice has likely taken millions of dollars from people with minimal or no connection to crimes and is something Holder has recently attempted to reform.

“When you talk about these issues with college kids, social issues are something that they’re very concerned about,” said Elizabeth Hayes, a 21-year-old senior in political science at the University of Iowa and regional co-chair of YAL who supports Paul. “However, fiscal issues really hit home with them … when you talk about state tuition and Obamacare and how that directly affects them, it really gets them excited to get involved and support Rand.”

Paul is expected to make a decision on whether to run for president this spring. If he does, his father’s popular campaigns in the first-in-the-nation caucus state in 2008 and 2012 could bolster his prospects.

But others believe the unpopularity in GOP establishment circles of A.J. Spiker, an Ames real estate agent and former state party chairman who supported Ron Paul and now serves as a strategist for his son, could hamper the Kentucky senator’s grassroots outreach.

That didn’t appear to concern Paul, who told the Ames Tribune after his speech, “My goal has been, when I’ve been in politics, to really try to unite people, not to divide people. You wouldn’t find me debating the one point we disagree with; I’m trying to find the eight or nine out of 10 points we do agree with.”

Kevin Corbett, an independent-minded, 27-year-old senior in finance at ISU who didn’t see eye-to-eye with Paul on a question he asked him about student loan interest forgiveness, liked that consensus-building attitude.

“There’s so many issues that are equally important or have greater importance than this, and I feel like I agree with him on those,” Corbett said.