When the group Black Lives Matter 5280 scattered flyers in Denver’s Stapleton neighborhood recently to remind residents that “Your neighborhood, Stapleton, was named after KKKlansman #1,128 Benjamin Stapleton,” it wasn’t the first time this unpleasant association had been raised.

The Stapleton Development Corp. actually decided 13 years ago to phase out the name because of the former mayor’s KKK history, with The Denver Post predicting “the Stapleton name will fade into history.”

Not quite. Stapleton will survive the latest effort to purge its name, too. Still, it does raise the question of how far we should go in sanitizing place names and traditions in deference to modern values.

In the past few weeks alone, the Democratic Party in at least four states — Iowa, Connecticut, Missouri and Georgia — has decided to drop the names of former presidents Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson from its big annual dinner because of their ties to slavery and Jackson’s treatment of Indians. This prompted a Rutgers historian, Ross Baker, to wonder in USA Today, “Who could possibly get through the vetting process of the Democratic activists passionate about purging the party of any individual who could possibly be offensive to anyone? Franklin Roosevelt, who presided over the internment of Japanese Americans? Harry Truman, who used the atomic bomb on civilians? Woodrow Wilson, who acclaimed D.W. Griffith’s racist Birth of a Nation movie at a White House screening?”

Baker accused party activists of “presentism,” which “mercilessly subjects history and historical figures to contemporary social enlightenment. It is smug and self-satisfied … .”

He’s right about the insufferable smugness with regard to Jefferson and Jackson, given their remoteness to us.

Stapleton is a closer call.

In one sense Ben Stapleton was a man of his times, as the Klan was the most powerful political force in Colorado in the early 1920s and politicians curried its favor. But of course many Coloradans, particularly blacks, Catholics and Jews, had no illusions about the Klan’s vile nature. If pandering to the Klan had been Stapleton’s primary legacy and if he had not repudiated the organization later in his career, Black Lives Matter 5280 would have a better case.

The larger problem with revising place names and traditions to conform with modern sensibilities, however, is there is no end to it.

In Colorado, we have three counties named after slave-owning presidents, another named after George Armstrong Custer of Wounded Knee fame, and another, Montezuma, named for a ruler of one of the most cruel empires in history.

The town of Cortez is named for the ruthless conquistador who toppled Montezuma.

Even a great and visionary man like John Evans — Mount Evans, Evans Boulevard — is not above reproach. He was territorial governor at the time of the Sand Creek massacre, for which some scholars maintain he bears a measure of culpability.

Speaking of that massacre, it is the main stain on the reputation of the founder of the Rocky Mountain News, the incomparable William Byers, whose surname is scattered about the region. His newspaper’s reaction to the slaughter: “Bully for the Colorado boys.”

What are we make of the way so many people turn out to be imperfect? Accept it as a fact of human existence, perhaps?

Or perhaps we could take a page from 19th century Breckinridge, named after vice president John C. Breckinridge. When townsfolk in 1861 learned that Breckinridge had sided with the Confederates, they changed the spelling to Breckenridge.

The Stapelton neighborhood, anyone?

E-mail Vincent Carroll at vcarroll@denverpost.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.