Republican governor candidate Bruce Rauner acknowledged Wednesday he would have vetoed legislation expanding government-subsidized Medicaid to low-income people under President Barack Obama’s signature health care law, but does not support a rollback in coverage.

Rauner’s remarks come as Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn trumpets the first-year results of the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, in advance of a fundraising visit by the home-state president on Thursday. Quinn has said the federal government-paid expansion added 468,000 people to the Medicaid rolls, more than double what had initially been expected.

The Republican challenger was asked about Medicaid expansion under Obamacare at a campaign stop in Peoria.

“No, not at all. I would not have accepted expansion of Medicaid,” Rauner told reporters. “It's been done now and I'm not advocating a rollback. But what I am advocating and always have and always will is we've got to restructure Medicaid in Illinois. It is filled with waste and fraud.”

Quinn’s campaign seized on the Medicaid issue and used Rauner’s views to try to solicit cash from supporters in a fundraising email. After appearing before supportive members of the state AFL-CIO in suburban Rosemont, the governor called Rauner's comments “distressing.”

“He's got a lot of explaining to do,” said Quinn, who contended Rauner has a habit of “saying one thing behind closed doors and another thing out in public.”

“Ultimately, the truth comes out,” said Quinn, who in July 2013 signed the law that expanded Medicaid coverage in Illinois to 138 percent of the federal poverty line. Federal health care officials say that is about $16,105 for an individual or $32,914 for a family of four.

Many Republican governors opposed Medicaid expansion. The federal government is supposed to pay 100 percent of the costs of the expansion through the end of 2016. Its responsibility tapers to 90 percent by 2020, leaving states to pick up the balance.

Rauner’s comments on Wednesday that he would not advocate a rollback of the health care expansion clarifies his position on the issue. During a February endorsement session before the Tribune editorial board, Rauner noted the full federal funding for the expansion was “not going to last.”

“That’s going to end in a couple of years and when that ends, we’re going to look at each other and go, “Oh my goodness. What happens now?”’ Rauner said. “And we could blow a hole in our budget that could maybe dwarf our pension problem. So we got to get on it now, be proactive. I don’t know today what can be rolled back and what can be modified.”

A month later, after winning the GOP governor nomination, Rauner appeared at a campaign stop in Greektown and warned of the potential future costs to the state of the Medicaid expansion, but stopped short of saying whether he thought the program should be rolled back.

Tribune reporter Rick Pearson contributed.

mmanchir@tribune.com

mcgarcia@tribune.com