Kevin Spacey’s wicked Congressman, Frank Underwood, may be just the man the headless Republican Party needs at the moment in Washington DC. He can get people to do what they don’t want to do, and punishes resisters without leaving his fingerprints on the dagger.

House of Cards, the eagerly awaited second season of which was released last week on Netflix, is a story of revenge in motion, of politics as a series of plots in between bouts of idealism. With Underwood as the protagonist, it’s altogether more cynical than the original British series of the Nineties, which starred Ian Richardson as the chief whip and political schemer Francis Urquhart. But it is ideally suited to these dysfunctional times in America when nothing can get done. Unfortunately, Underwood’s skills aren’t in the repertoire of the titular leader of the Republican Party in the House, Speaker John Boehner.

Last autumn, Boehner was unable to stop the Pied Piper of the hard Right, the junior senator from Texas, Ted Cruz, from leading the entire Republican Party over the cliff. Cruz, the pin-up boy of the Tea Party, filibustered a shutdown of the entire US government in an attempt to undermine President Obama’s health programme. The public is not in love with Obamacare, but even less with the Congressional gridlocks that paralysed the country. The Republicans had to cave in on the shutdown, chastened by popular uproar.

People were beginning to forget that episode. They were beginning to wonder if the chaos of the Obamacare launch had sabotaged Hillary Clinton’s prospects for the White House, but then a scandal blew up that seems to have derailed the swaggering Republican presidential front-runner, New Jersey Governor Chris Christie. The outing of a plot from his camp to punish a Democratic mayor by causing a traffic snarl-up at the George Washington Bridge shows that he has none of Underwood’s finesse.

Frank Underwood’s habitual plotting is driven by his fury with the President, who didn’t keep a promise to make him Secretary of State. There is nothing more dangerous in transactional politics than a promise, the coin of the realm. There’s surely a well-thumbed copy of The Prince on the bedside table of everyone in office: a prince should not hesitate to break a promise if keeping it seriously damages him, but he must not do it needlessly and he must always strive to do it in a way that preserves the illusion of his good nature.

Machiavelli’s pragmatism is hard to remember in the excitement of political power. When rolling out Obamacare, President Obama said: you can keep your old health plan if you like it. But that proved not to be true. To say it once was risky; to repeat it a score or more times, as the President did, was astounding in a man renowned for prudence. The Republicans naturally portray him as dishonest. It’s the wrong charge, though: he believed it to be true when he said it. The more damaging truth is that Obama, a former community organiser, is not experienced at the art of getting things done at the executive level. He seems to believe inspiration takes precedence over execution.

The President does not have the instincts for, or the engagement with, the process of power that was exemplified by political maestro Bill Clinton, or the learned respect for it absorbed by Hillary, for that matter. He can fire up a crowd, but he lacks the taste or aptitude for the scrum of day-to-day politics, even with his own party.

He wanted economist egg head and former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers to succeed Ben Bernanke at the Federal Reserve, for example. But having insulted Bernanke by not even telling him he was to lose his job, he failed to square his choice of Summers with important Democrats.

It is inconceivable to imagine the former president, Lyndon Johnson, being so incompetent. LBJ would have fixed the votes. The Texan knew the personal interest – financial, sexual, political – of every member of the Senate. He reconciled people with diametrically opposing views by advancing inch by inch on what they could agree on. He pulled in one key vote for his historic civil rights legislation by appealing to a congressman’s black mistress. He had one of the best staffs and cabinets in presidential history. When all else failed, he’d grab a recalcitrant by both lapels and lean his 6ft 4in on them, talking nose to nose.

Political nous goes a long way. So does a political wife. But in this respect, House of Cards isn’t quite so accurate. Netflix is promoting this series with a slogan: “Behind every great man, there is a wife with blood on her hands.” Claire Underwood is an amoral life partner in every decision Frank takes. I reckon the same is true of the bond between Hillary and Bill – it used to be Bill and Hillary – but equal-power couples in DC today may be less prevalent than people imagine. Now women have their own jobs in their home state, they are less willing to join their husbands in DC, and most congressmen and senators leave their wives behind, fuelling the single-minded blood sport of a Washington uncivilised by shared social occasions. Not since Nancy Reagan have we seen a First Lady so dedicated, first and foremost, to her husband’s political triumph, playing the enforcer role while her husband charmed the nation and cracked the jokes.

These days, Washington resembles a Super Bowl final of men with padding running into each other, rather than a more civilised match at Lords. Extinction is swift. Al Gore, 500 butterfly votes from being the most powerful man on the planet back in 2000, was seen soon after the Supreme Court 5-4 vote against him pulling his wheelie bag through an airport. Asked where his Secret Service guard was, he remarked: “I’m not worth killing any more.”

Gore was unusual. After the George Washington Bridge scandal, Governor Christie of New Jersey is still hanging in there, still making defiant speeches and still hoping he can bluff his way to becoming the Republican nominee for president in 2016. Christie says he knew nothing of the scandalous traffic snarl-ups caused by his team — a defence that doesn’t sit well with the image he’s cultivated as a tough guy with as tight a grip on everyone’s collar as LBJ. Besides, the petty vindictiveness didn’t just hurt an opponent: it held up workers, schoolchildren, patients on the way to hospital.

The other Republican troublemaker, Ted Cruz, thinks he is a clever man. A Princeton and Harvard Law man, he has cast himself as the leader of the hard-Right Tea Party insurgents. Everyone thought he’d blundered before when he provoked the government shutdown, that he had recklessly misjudged the electorate. Last week, though, he redoubled his bet. He deliberately humiliated John Boehner, the hapless party leader, by forcing a Senate vote on raising the debt ceiling – just the thing the Republican establishment wanted to avoid. This was like something out of House of Cards but the effort failed because this time enough moderate Republicans put their country first. Cruz was just not cunning, or lucky, enough.

Which of these two Republican tough guys, Christie or Cruz, would the tactical maestro, Congressman Frank Underwood, back for the nomination? It looks like both of them could use a tutorial in House of Cards tactics. But whoever gets it may find they are up against a more sinuous power player even than Underwood: Hillary Rodham Clinton.

Sir Harold Evans is the author of 'The American Century’ and editor-at-large at Reuters