Emily Leigh hails from New Orleans but now lives and works in Tuscaloosa. She talked with Tusk this week about how her husband brought her to the Kentuck Festival in Tuscaloosa in 1985, which led to her current job.

Q: Who are you?

A: I am Emily Leigh, wife, mother of two and Kentuck employee, happily transplanted from New Orleans to Tuscaloosa. I am currently the assistant director at the Kentuck Museum Association. I came to Kentuck in 2009 as a co-interim director on a temporary basis, but I had so much fun that I decided to stay.

Q: Where are you from? What brought you to or keeps you in Tuscaloosa?

A: I am a native New Orleanian. After graduating from Tulane, I decided that it would be a great idea to move to Italy. It was a great idea, but I couldn't make enough money to be self-sufficient and came back to the States later that year. I came up to Tuscaloosa to visit my aunt and uncle and a college friend who lived here, and this guy named Jack Leigh picked me up at Cypress Inn (at lunch, not in the bar!) So, we got married and I moved to Tuscaloosa in 1986. One of the things he did while we were dating was to take me to the Kentuck Festival, so my first festival was in 1985.

Q: What do you tell people or friends who have never been here about living in Tuscaloosa?

A: I tell people that Tuscaloosa has so much to offer. Between the arts community and the university, we have had speakers such as Neil Gaiman, E.O. Wilson, all of the U.S. Supreme Court Justices, Gen. Tommy Franks and musicians such as Yo Yo Ma, Itzhak Perlman, the Avett Brothers and John Mayer. Derek Jeter and Chuck Leavell were at a friend's game day party last weekend. There are quirky bars, homegrown breweries, organic farms, a burlesque troupe, artist co-ops, a new cultural arts center, Shakespeare on the river, a bamboo park and a new tennis complex in the works.

Q: Where do you take visitors?

A: My husband and I like to take folks to 5 restaurant. It has a friendly atmosphere and just enough variety on its menu. From there, we can go to the Bama Theatre for all kinds of events or take in First Friday, especially at Grace Aberdeen's. I like to take houseguests to the Riverwalk for exercise, a beautiful view, breakfast or the farmers market. During certain months, you can take in an outdoor live performance of Shakespeare right on the river (by The Rude Mechanicals). The Tuscaloosa Amphitheater is a great addition to the area, as well as the temporary ice skating rink. I have friends who knit and needlepoint, and Serendipity Needleworks is a wonderful yarn shop. It's in a neat little shopping area where you can get anything from a great cheeseburger at Hooligans to a ball gown at Effie's. Of course, I take everyone to the Kentuck Art Center & Gallery Shop. There aren't many places you can watch potters or a blacksmith at work and buy their work. There's even a taxidermy shop down the street.

Q: What are your favorite places to eat?

A: It might seem odd, but my favorite thing is the steamed edamame at 5 restaurant. Evangeline's is great for a quieter evening, Hooligan's for a cheeseburger, Epiphany for farm to fork items (glazed carrots to die for), Mary's Cakes & Pastries for gelato and Edelweiss for coffee and cranberry/orange muffins.

Q: What are some of the best hangout locations?

A: The Kentuck Courtyard of Wonders is great. The Riverwalk has a bunch of benches and areas to hang around, and when it's hot out, there's a splash pad near the Sister Cities outdoor sculpture. The Alcove gets hopping on Friday afternoons. The bar at the Bama gets a lot of action because of all the different events there.

Q: What are some favorite activities?

A: The Kentuck Festival of the Arts! That happens the third week in October. There's always a musical performance to take in or something like a 3-D printing event to learn about. The (Mildred Westervelt Warner) Transportation Museum not only offers the ice skating, but also Friday night movies part of the year. The Bama has a wonderful, edgy Art House film series that is hugely popular. Egan's always seems to have some kind of dance party going. There's poker night at Willhagen's, the Maubilans Art Kollective sometimes pops up, there are holiday musical events like Hilaritas and the Holiday Sing-along (Dec. 7) coming up, as well as Dickens Downtown (Dec. 3).

Q: How do you urge people to get more involved?