DOBSON — Dobson commissioners opted to hire a full-time employee to meet an increasing need at Dobson Square Park.

At a planning retreat Wednesday, which began at 9 a.m. at Putters Patio and Grill, Town Manager Josh Smith explained a predicament in which Dobson had found itself.

Smith said there was an absolute need for somebody to oversee the maintenance and daily operations of the new park. The landscaping company, Holt Landscaping, had informed Smith it no longer wanted to provide landscaping services at the park.

“We have two options,” explained Smith. “We can increase hours for part-time personnel considerably, or we can hire a full-time employee.”

Smith said he was concerned an increase in part-time hours could drive the hours of those employees above 30 hours per week. Thus, the town would be required to offer healthcare coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

Smith said he had hoped to include the new employee proposal in the recommended budget for the next fiscal year, beginning July 1. However, the landscaper’s unwillingness to continue the maintenance contract at the park required the town to act more quickly.

“I think the money is there,” remarked Smith, explaining no further allocations would be necessary.

The town has seen an increase in both sales tax and franchise tax revenues. Additionally, Smith said the town will no longer have to pay $800 a month to Holt Landscaping, and Dobson had collected more than five times its $600 estimated revenue from picnic shelter rentals at the park.

With a consensus of the board, Smith will go ahead with hiring an individual for the position.

“I’d say if he’s got it (the available funding), then let him use it,” remarked Mayor Ricky Draughn.

The cost the town will incur with the addition to its ranks will be about $50,000 in salary and benefits, according to Smith. The employee will make a little more than $12 per hour.

• In an unrelated personnel matter, Police Chief Shawn Myers said his department is operating two officers below normal staffing.

Myers was allocated funding for an additional officer in the current fiscal year. However, after the off-duty traffic death of Officer Dave Wilmoth and another officer’s move to a department in Forsyth County, Myers said his ranks are now thin.

“We are always looking to hire qualified officers,” said Myers.

• The board also opted to change the town’s provider for computer and network support. Smith told commissioners he believed SouthData was better equipped to provide the service than the town’s current provider, Surry Telephone.

• Commissioners heard the funding requests from each of the town’s departments, which ranged from large capital items such as vehicles to smaller concerns such as swings at the park.

Smith also provided an update on the progress made in reaching goals set by the board a year prior, and commissioners outlined their goals for the town throughout the course of the next year.

Editor’s Notes: Budget requests for the 2016-17 fiscal year and the town’s goals both past and present will be reported in future editions of The News.

Dobson Town Manager Josh Smith discusses the town’s goals with commissioners at a retreat Wednesday. http://mtairynews.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/web1_DobsonRetreat1.jpg Dobson Town Manager Josh Smith discusses the town’s goals with commissioners at a retreat Wednesday. Andy Winemiller | The News Dobson Police Chief Shawn Myers, right, and Commissioner John Lawson look on as Town Manager Josh Smith asks commissioners for another full-time employee. http://mtairynews.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/web1_DobsonRetreat2.jpg Dobson Police Chief Shawn Myers, right, and Commissioner John Lawson look on as Town Manager Josh Smith asks commissioners for another full-time employee. Andy Winemiller | The News

By Andy Winemiller [email protected]

Andy is a staff writer and can be reached at 415-4698.

Andy is a staff writer and can be reached at 415-4698.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus