Pennsylvania's largest health insurer has requested a 36 percent premium hike for a plan sold on the Obamacare exchange, and another has requested a hike of up to 58 percent.

And around the country, requests for increases well into the double digits are making headlines, and fueling arguments the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, is making health insurance more expensive.

Yet a closer look at premium requests in Pennsylvania shows the situation isn't clearcut, and it's not certain people will have to pay dramatically more in 2016.

Many insurers selling plans in Pennsylvania are requesting only modest increases, and some are requesting decreases.

"In fact, the large majority of proposed rate filings request increases much less than ten percent," said Ron Ruman, a spokesman for the Pennsylvania Insurance Department, which is in the process of the reviewing requests, and could decide some are unwarranted.

However, Ruman also said, "An initial review of the filings does show that some companies paid out more than they received in premiums last year."

The requests can be viewed on the insurance department's website.

Among policies sold to individual customers, six proposed rate increases are for more than ten percent, while 11 are for less than ten percent, and one is for a rate decrease, according to Ruman. Among policies sold to small groups, two rate increase requests are for more than ten percent, while 14 are for less than ten percent, and two are for decreases.

Geisinger Health Plan drew national attention for its requested increase of up to 58 percent for a plan sold to individuals. Geisinger also requested an increase of up to 41 percent for a different plan for individuals.

Geisinger spokeswoman Amy Bowen attributed the need for hikes to sicker-than-expected customers who bought plans on the exchange, and used more services than expected.

"We didn't know who was going to buy them, how sick they would be, and what their usage would be," she said.

Yet it now appears Geisinger won't need such steep increases. At the time of the rate filing deadline, Bowen said, Geisinger hadn't received information related to a federal program which shifts money from insurers that overestimated risks and charged too much, to insurers that underestimated the risks and lost money.

As a result of receiving that "risk adjustment" information, Geisinger is submitting revised requests for lesser amounts, said Bowen, who couldn't immediately provide revised figures.

Bowen also said the number of new health insurance customers and their urgent need for medical care "could point to a need for the ACA."

Highmark submitted requests ranging from 13.5 percent to 36 percent for five plans, including one by Highmark-owned Keystone Health Plan West.

Similar to Geisinger, Highmark spokesman Leilyn Perri attributed the need for the hikes to sicker than expected people enrolling in Highmark plans. About half were new to Highmark, meaning Highmark knew nothing about their health and medical histories. Perri said many probably didn't have coverage previously, and had a "pent up" need for medical care.

Perri also noted some racked up more than $100,000 in claims, then canceled the coverage after a few months.

Substantial increases in Highmark plans could have a big impact, since the insurer sold exchange-based plans to 219,000 people -- nearly half the Pennsylvania residents who bought such plans, and more than any other insurer in the state.

Yet there are assorted uncertainties surrounding the requests. The publicly available information doesn't show 2015 prices for plans, making it impossible to calculate what the plan would cost after the increase. Nor does it show exact names of plans, how many people they cover, or the region where the increase would apply.

There's another wildcard pertaining to Highmark. In western Pennsylvania, a Highmark silver plan had some of the lowest premiums in the country. There's little doubt that's the result of the intense western Pennsylvania competition between Highmark and UPMC Health Plan, which also charged some of the lowest lowest premiums. That means the sharpest Highmark increases could be confined to western Pennsylvania.

UPMC, for its part, requested a 9.75 percent increase for one of its plan for individuals, and no increase for the other, according to the insurance department's website.

Meanwhile, requested increases for 31 other plans from an assortment of insurers, including Capital BlueCross, Independence Blue Cross, Aetna, United Health and UPMC, are for less than ten percent, and some are for considerably less.

For example, Keystone Health Plan Central requested a two percent decrease for a plan covering small groups, and Capital requested a 2.4 percent decrease for a small group plan. Keystone is owned by Capital, which is based in Dauphin County.

Nationally, an analysis by the non-partisan Kaiser Family Foundation concluded that, while there are assorted requests around the country for increases of well above ten percent, "these increases are not necessarily representative of the range of products from which consumers will be able to choose."

Kaiser looked at costs of the lowest and second-lowest silver plans in 11 major cities around the country and found an average increase of 4.4 percent from 2015. In Portland, Ore., the requested premium is 16.2 percent higher than in 2015. But in Seattle, Wash, the requested premium is 10.1 percent less than in 2015.

Advocates are stressing the situation shows consumers must be willing to shop around when the online marketplace, or exchange, reopens in November. That means they might have to switch plans to get a better price. The downside is if they switch plans, the new one might not have the same network, meaning they could lose access to their doctor or hospital.

The ACA requires reviews of all premium increase requests over 10 percent. Around the country, state regulators are reviewing the requests, so final numbers aren't known. The ACA also requires insurers to spend at least 80 percent of what they collect in premiums on medical care, in order to minimize expenditures on things like marketing, profit and other overhead.

Advocates are urging insurance regulators to look closely at the requests, to make sure they are justified, and further urging them to make sure the insurers are taking steps such as drawing in enough young healthy people to offset the cost of the sick, and aren't basing requests on previous "pent up demand" that is likely to level off.

Meanwhile, Ruman said Pennsylvania's health insurance market "remains vibrant," with 19 insurers selling individual plans, and 24 selling small group plans, including four new entries for 2016.

State Insurance Commissioner Theresa Miller said, "The requested rate changes and the fact that we are seeing large requested rate increases next to requested decreases only reinforces the importance of shopping on the marketplace."

If the premiums for the second lowest-priced silver plan in a given market goes up, so will the amount of the federal tax credit available to help cover premiums. In Pennsylvania, more than 80 percent of people who bought coverage on the exchange received a tax credit.

In Pennsylvania in 2015, the average monthly premium for the lowest priced silver plan for a 50-year-old non-smoker was about $295, up nine percent from 2014. That figure is before the tax credit.