Officer: 'She was elderly, it was cold out, and she shouldn't have to clean that up'

The week before Christmas, 78-year-old Alicia Richter woke up to find an unpleasant decoration on the wall of her 14th Street home.

"There was this ugly, red graffiti on my house," said Richter of the vandalism she found the morning of Dec. 19. "I didn't know what to do."

So Richter — who recently underwent heart bypass surgery and cannot drive right now — rounded up what cleaning supplies she had around her house and went out into the cold.

"I tried to clean it myself, but I had no idea how to do that," Richter said. "I armed myself with what I had and was working and working."

Richter said her attempts to clean the graffiti with household items were "fruitless."

Boulder police Officers Pam Gignac, left, and Colleen Wilcox clean up graffiti on Alicia Richter's Boulder home last week. (Courtesy Boulder Police Department)

But, just then, she was blessed with what she calls a "Christmas miracle."

Boulder police Officer Pam Gignac, a 20-year veteran of the department, happened to be getting off an overtime assignment in the area when she drove past the house and saw Richter in her alley scrubbing the wall.

"I had just been released and was on my way over to the annex to take a short break when I saw her scrubbing her garage trying to get the graffiti off," Gignac said. "She was elderly, it was cold out, and she shouldn't have to clean that up. It's not her fault some potatohead decided to spray her garage.

"I have a soft spot for the elderly, and I didn't want her in the elements doing that."

Advertisement

So Gignac went to the annex and found a can of graffiti remover that police use, and went back to the house to apply it.

"My goodness, I couldn't believe it, the graffiti was turning into liquid," Richter said. "(Gignac) was really helping me, scrubbing and washing. She did most of the work until it was dark and cold and raining."

Gignac said she ran out of graffiti remover before she could finish the job, and so she told Richter she would be back the following day. The next morning, Gignac went to McGuckin Hardware before the store even opened to buy more graffiti remover on her own dime.

Then Gignac recruited a fellow cop, Officer Colleen Wilcox, and went over to Richter's house to complete the job.

"They came in the morning and finished the wall and wished me a Merry Christmas," Richter said. "I had tears in my eyes. It was such a beautiful gift for me. I'm really grateful."

Gignac said that, for her, it wasn't a big deal.

"I was just helping out and doing the right thing," Gignac said. "It's how I was raised. And I have been here 20 years and what's nice is we try to hire officers who were raised to do the right thing for their neighbors or for her friends."

Boulder police spokeswoman Kim Kobel said officers like Gignac and Wilcox do little things every day for residents that don't always get talked about.

"Officers do a lot of good things quietly not looking for recognition, but because it's the right thing to do," Kobel said.

Gignac said she still wants to get some paint and touch up the wall once the weather improves.

"We all try to help out when and where we can," Gignac said.

It may not have been a big deal for the officers, but Richter — a 30-year- Boulder resident — made sure to send a letter to the Daily Camera describing what happened, and said the gesture saved her holidays.

"It was a miracle on Christmas for me," Richter said. "A human being displayed a very destructive and bad side and made it a sad Christmas for me, but then police turned it into something beautiful.

"In a way I got two Christmas gifts," Richter said. "Physically my house is clean. But human nature is what is important to me, and (the officers) showed me faith in humans.

"Sometimes good can win and bad can lose. That was important to me."

Mitchell Byars: 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars