The incoming Assembly speaker says he'll call a special session next week to renew the subpoena power of the panel investigating the George Washington Bridge lane closures.

Full coverage: Chris Christie and the GWB lane closure controversy



The chairman of the committee leading that investigation said this morning that he cannot issue any new subpoenas until his authority is renewed. It officially expires on Monday, the final day of the legislative session.



Hours later, Vincent Prieto, the Democratic assemblyman who takes over as speaker on Tuesday, issued a statement promising to renew the subpoena power in a special session on Thursday.



"The documents released this week related to the George Washington Bridge situation clearly show the need for a continued thorough investigation by the New Jersey General Assembly. Many questions remain unanswered about this threat to public safety and abuse of power," Prieto said.



The Assembly Transportation Committee has already issued several subpoenas forcing top officials at the Port Authority to turn over documents and to testify about the September closure of local lanes to the George Washington Bridge. The thousands of pages of documents released publicly yesterday were obtained through those subpoenas.



Prieto, D-Secaucus, had previously sidestepped the question of whether he will allow a vote to renew the committee's subpoena power. In an interview Wednesday, he said he would wait until he became speaker to assess "if there's a need" for a renewal.



Senate President Stephen Sweeney also "emphatically" supports reauthorizing subpoena power to the Assembly committee in the next legislative session, his spokesman, Chris Donnelly, said Friday.



Assemblyman John Wisniewski, D-Middlesex, the committee chairman who has been leading the investigation into the lane closures, was granted subpoena power last year to investigate finances at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the bistate agency that oversees the bridge. It's that authority he has used to look into the bridge controversy.



In his statement today, Prieto praised Wisniewski's work.



"Chairman Wisniewski has done an outstanding and professional job leading this investigation, and I look forward to working with him as he continues to lead our inquiry," Prieto said.