Photo

The slumping stock market this week and the weaker-than-expected retail sales report are blips.

What makes them dismaying is the political and economic backdrop. Lawmakers, most of them Republican, have steadfastly rejected policies to stimulate the economy and Federal Reserve officials have been trying to convince everyone, including themselves, that the economy is reliably on the upswing.

It’s not. Even before the wipeout in 2008, most Americans were treading water economically, or sinking, though their predicament was obscured by high levels of debt. Since then, growth has been lopsided, with virtually all of the income and wealth accruing to those at the top of the economic ladder.

Little has been done to counter that dynamic – Obamacare is a notable exception because health coverage reduces the threat of job loss and bankruptcy from poor health. But most policymaking, or lack thereof — including big and untimely federal budget cuts coupled with the continued erosion of labor standards — has reinforced lopsided growth.

It’s a wonder the economy has been as resilient as it has been. But given its structural inequality, it should come as no surprise when it falters and fails, time and again, to gain real momentum.

The stock market dive this week was chalked up to falling oil prices and lackluster retail sales. Low oil prices are a bad sign of economic weakness, but on the positive side, they were expected to free up money in family budgets for more spending. What appears to have happened instead is that freed-up cash has gone mostly to cover rising rents and other non-retail essentials, or, maybe, into savings. The pace of retail spending has actually been trending down for about a year and more rapidly of late. Why? Because the pace of job growth has been slowing and when that happens, spending tends to slow as well. And when spending is slow, especially around the holidays, job growth also tends to slow, and so on.

Rising prosperity for the few means undue hardship for the many. That is the economy’s underlying problem and it won’t be solved until policymakers face up to it.