Megyn Kelly slammed President Obama on Friday evening for going back on his word and granting amnesty from deportation for millions of illegal aliens.

As The Inquisitr previously reported, the president admitted publicly more than 20 times that he lacked the legal authority under the U.S. Constitution to bypass Congress and issue an executive order about undocumented workers.

The executive order has already prompted one lawsuit from “America’s toughest sheriff,” Arizona’s Joe Arpaio, with undoubtedly more to follow.

Under Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution, Congress — not the Executive Branch — is empowered to establish laws relating to immigration. In addition, Article 2, Section 3, indicates that the president “shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed…”

On Saturday, Obama denied that amnesty was the result of his executive action. “Amnesty is the immigration system we have today — millions of people living here without paying their taxes, or playing by the rules. And the actions I took this week will finally start fixing that,” he said.

In an exchange with Fox contributor Chris Stirewalt on The Kelly File, a fired-up Megyn Kelly — who was a practicing lawyer before going into the media — posed the following rhetorical questions (see embed below) about the Obama amnesty order:

How is anybody supposed to believe anything he tells us from this point forward … Doesn’t character matter, doesn’t integrity matter? Honesty? I realize politicians have to spin, and they can’t become president unless you’re a spinner. But this is a matter of integrity. Twenty-five times on camera; either the president was knowingly misstating things for political reasons–he knew he could do it but he wanted to stave off these folks who were pressuring him, so he just said he couldn’t. Or he’s done a complete 180 on his actual beliefs and just refuses to acknowledge that to the American people … Your word has to mean something, when you go back on it, you have to offer an explanation…”

On several recent broadcasts, Megyn Kelly has also blasted the administration over the Obamacare/GruberGate controversy in which one of the key architects of the Affordable Care Act repeatedly boasted on camera that the law passed in part due to the stupidity of the American public and lack of transparency in the way the measure was crafted.

Separately, when asked about the president’s executive action, potential presidential candidate Ben Carson, a retired neurosurgeon, expressed support for an organized guest worker program, but noted that illegal immigration is exacerbated by the U.S. as a welfare magnet. “You have to reverse the polarity of the magnet that is attracting people here. All the goodies, you just turn those off. Then, you seal the border,” Carson told Bloomberg Politics.

Whether you deem it amnesty or not, do you agree or disagree with Megyn Kelly that integrity is an issue with the illegal immigration executive order given the president’s past statements?

[image via Debby Wong / Shutterstock.com]