Counihan, in a conference call with reporters Friday, also said officials were working on getting corrected tax forms out to more than 800,000 Obamacare customers who had previously been sent forms that contained some incorrect information. But officials did not reveal how many of those corrected forms have been sent.

The forms are necessary for those tax filers to reconcile what they received in subsidies with what they are actually entitled to; 50,000 or so people who received the incorrect 1095-A forms had already filed their taxes at the time the error became public.

The grace period for signing up for a health plan this year is available to people who didn't have coverage last year and didn't know until this current tax season that there's a fine for not having such coverage. People using the special period also must not already be enrolled in an insurance plan for 2015. Those eligible for the grace period still have to pay any Obamacare penalty they are assessed for 2014.



The special enrollment period for customers of HealthCare.gov will run from Sunday through April 30. A top federal official said the grace period is a onetime deal: It will not be offered in future years.



Six other state-run insurance marketplaces, have already begun their own special enrollment period. Four others are starting such periods Sunday, and Connecticut is beginning its own special season on April 1.

Just three states, Colorado, Idaho and Massachusetts, are not having a special enrollment period.

Read MoreBig medical bills, too little cash



The decision to grant the special sign-up season reflects still-high levels of ignorance about Obamacare among uninsured Americans, and a lag in the timing of some of the law's provisions.

Beginning in 2014, most Americans were required to have some form of health coverage or pay a tax penalty equal to the higher of $95 per adult, or 1 percent of taxable household income. But that penalty is only being collected starting this year, with the filing of 2014 tax returns.

As a result, many people are becoming aware of that penalty only after the close of enrollment for 2015 health plans. If there were no special enrollment period available this year, some people would not only owe a penalty for 2014, they'd also next year would owe a penalty for failing to have insurance in 2015. The penalty for the 2015 tax season rises to the greater of $325 per adult or 2 percent of household income.

"We do know that there are people who still don't know about the fee," said Andy Slavitt, acting administrator of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the agency that oversees Obamacare.

Slavitt cited a McKinsey study from earlier this week that found that about 40 percent of uninsured people were aware of the Obamacare penalty.