Immigration How The President’s Executive Action On Immigration Could Spur Health Care Enrollment CREDIT: Shutterstock

One potential side effect of President Obama’s recent announcement to take executive action on deportation relief may be better health care for both legal immigrants and the estimated 1.2 million undocumented immigrants who could qualify for deferred action living in California. The state’s health care system currently extends coverage only to undocumented immigrants granted deferred action status. Obama’s executive action could mean not just that some affected undocumented immigrants would become eligible for health care, but also that more legal immigrants living in mixed-status families might be motivated to sign up.

Undocumented immigrants are prohibited from enrolling in the federal Affordable Care Act, including the Medicaid expansion. California’s Medi-Cal program authorizes coverage for “citizens and certain lawfully present immigrants” like low-income immigrants approved for the Deferred Action For Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program. If approved for Obama’s executive action, the state’s 1.2 million undocumented population could be conferred lawful presence (though in three-year increments) and could have health care access. Some undocumented immigrants already have access to limited Medi-Cal, which covers emergencies, prenatal, and long-term care. Others with social security numbers or identification cards issued by a foreign consulate can apply for private, but not state-based, health insurance, if they can afford it. Naturalized citizens have full access to the federal ACA and lawful permanent residents (LPR) are eligible for federal coverage, with some limitations.

The fear that personal information would be used to alert immigration officials to undocumented loved ones is one of the top reasons that some of the state’s legal immigrants did not previously apply for health care. As Lilian Saldana told the Los Angeles Times in early November, she turned down Obamacare coverage once before because her parents are undocumented, even as the president promised on Spanish airwaves earlier this year, “None of the information that is provided in order for you to obtain health insurance is in any way transferred to immigration services.” Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) also issued a memo last year ensuring immigrants that they would not use the information for immigration enforcement purposes.

State officials are spending $95 million on marketing and outreach for the Covered California exchange to create ads assuring immigrants that their information would stay private. But about 600,000 Latinos in California still remain uninsured, a population that has the strongest and most intimate connection to undocumented migration. At least for those whose family members how qualify for Deferred Action for Parental Accountability (DAPA), Obama’s executive action could be enough to build trust and spur more legal immigrants in mixed-status families sign up for health care.

Multiple studies show that providing health care to the undocumented population would be beneficial for all Californians. Studies estimate that the price of subsidizing health care for undocumented immigrants cost about $10.7 billion per year. Some low-income undocumented immigrants have specialized and chronic health needs, in part because poverty and social exclusion perpetuate unhealthy living habits like diabetes and obesity. One study found, “undocumented women without prenatal care were almost four times as likely to deliver a low birth weight baby and over seven times as likely to deliver prematurely compared with undocumented women with any prenatal care.” People who pursue quality preventative care early on use less care in their twilight years.

One state lawmaker is hoping to expand health care coverage to even more individuals. On Monday, State Sen. Richard Lara (D-CA) re-introduced his bill, the Health for All Act, which would “extend eligibility for Medi-Cal benefits to low-income undocumented California immigrants who would qualify for the assistance but for their immigration status,” a press release stated from earlier this year when the bill was introduced for the first time. If passed, the press release stated that the bill would create a new exchange program for low-income people, a move that could “improve the health of our entire community, limit the overcrowding of emergency rooms, and reduce the costs of healthcare in California.”