Citing declining enrollment and mounting deficits, the Diocese of Metuchen announced in late May that Cardinal McCarrick would close at the end of the 2014-15 academic year

Buy Photo Cardinal McCarrick cheerleader Sabrina Leff represents the now-defunct catholic school at Snapple Bowl XXII, Thursday, July 16, 2015, in Union, NJ. (Photo: Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Leff: “Even though I’m going to another school, my heart is always going to be at Cardinal McCarrick.”

With the 2010 closing of St. Peter’s in New Brunswick, and St. Pius X in Piscataway shutting its doors 20 years earlier, Middlesex County now has just two parochial high schools.

Cardinal McCarrick’s most notable graduates include former Major League Baseball managers Tom Kelly and Jack McKeon, who won World Series titles with the Minnesota Twins and Florida Marlins, respectively.

The Snapple Bowl has raised more than $485,000 over the past 21 years for Children’s Specialized Hospital in Mountainside and the Edison-based Lakeview School, a program of the New Jersey Institute for Disabilities.

As Sabrina Leff prepared to take the field for MyCentralJersey.com Snapple Bowl XXII, the former Cardinal McCarrick cheerleader realized she was going to be the last individual to represent the now-defunct 130-year-old high school at a public event.

The magnitude of that responsibility weighed heavily on Leff, a rising junior who this fall will attend Mater Dei High School in Middletown.

“I think it’s important to wear that (Cardinal McCarrick cheerleading) uniform,” Leff said prior to kickoff of the annual charity all-star football game between recently graduated seniors from Middlesex and Union counties at Kean University’s Alumni Stadium in Union on Thursday night.

“Even though I’m going to another school, my heart is always going to be at Cardinal McCarrick. No one is ever going to see a McCarrick uniform again after (the Snapple Bowl), so this is like the closing of Cardinal McCarrick pretty much for sports.”

Unlike the football players, who wore custom-made Nike uniforms in the game, the Snapple Bowl cheerleaders sported their distinctive high school uniforms, forming a kaleidoscope of colors while rallying the crowd from the sidelines and performing their halftime routine.

A South Amboy resident, Leff was clad in the school’s blue, gold and white uniform with Cardinal McCarrick High School’s initials — CMHS — emblazoned across the chest.

“I’m happy that Sabrina (had) a chance to represent the school one more time,” said former Cardinal McCarrick Athletics Director Gil Pritchard, who worked at the South Amboy-based parochial school since 1978.

“Certainly, it’s a little sad, but when you think about the history of the school, so many people have always helped us, so it’s great when our kids have the opportunity to give back to the community.”

Cheering in the Snapple Bowl, which has raised more than $485,000 over the past 21 years for Children’s Specialized Hospital in Mountainside and the Edison-based Lakeview School, a program of the New Jersey Institute for Disabilities, had added meaning for Leff, who visited the Lakeview students this week.

“Knowing I was picked to cheer in the game really means a lot to me,” said Leff, who is among the youngest cheerleaders to ever participate in the Snapple Bowl.

“She’s fabulous,” Middlesex County cheerleading coach Colleen Meyers said, noting Leff was a fitting candidate to represent Cardinal McCarrick. “She represents Middlesex County well, as all these girls do. I’m very happy that she’s our last Cardinal McCarrick representative because she really does embody all that is good about cheerleading.”

Marcus Borden, the game’s founder and director, who graduated in 1973 from Notre Dame High School, a catholic school in Utica, New York, called Thursday night “a sad day for McCarrick but a great day for Sabrina to be able to go out and be the last one to represent her school.”

Borden said he is all too familiar with the struggles of Catholic schools nationwide and locally.

“I can appreciate the circumstances with parochial schools closing,” Borden said. “Tuition and enrollment have always been an issue.”

With the 2010 closing of St. Peter’s in New Brunswick, and St. Pius X in Piscataway shutting its doors 20 years earlier, Middlesex County now has just two parochial high schools, both of which field football programs. Linebacker Alex Dawes and wide receiver Javon Hicks represented Bishop Ahr and St. Joseph, respectively, as Middlesex County parochial school players in Snapple Bowl XXII, while Bishop Ahr’s Titilayo Agbabiaka and Jenna Juarez both cheered Thursday night.

No parochial schools play football in Union County, where Catholic schools, such as reigning New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association (NJSIAA) Tournament of Champions winner Roselle Catholic and Union Catholic, are known more for their success on the basketball court. In Somerset County, Immaculata remains a Catholic school football power, having won four state championships in 27 NJSIAA playoff appearances.

Citing declining enrollment and mounting deficits, the Diocese of Metuchen announced in late May that Cardinal McCarrick would close at the end of the 2014-15 academic year. The high school, formerly known as St. Mary, had a rich athletics tradition.

Cardinal McCarrick’s most notable graduates include former Major League Baseball managers Tom Kelly and Jack McKeon, who won World Series titles with the Minnesota Twins and Florida Marlins, respectively, and former New York Yankee and Cleveland Indian Allie Clark, who won a World Series ring with each of those clubs as a player.

Most of Cardinal McCarrick’s boys basketball program, which won two Greater Middlesex Conference Tournament titles in the past 13 years and reached the finals one other time during that span, has transferred to Mater Dei, where former Eagles mentor Ben Gamble recently was hired as head coach.

“All my friends are going to be split up,” said Leff, noting that most former Cardinal McCarrick students will attend either Bishop Ahr in Edison or Mater Dei.

She said she remains concerned for those teachers and administrators who remain unemployed.

“It’s hard to know all the teachers don’t have jobs,” she said.

Pritchard is among those who remain under the Diocese of Metuchen’s employ. He recently was named principal of Sacred Heart Elementary School in South Amboy.

In addition to cheering for the Snapple Bowl’s beneficiaries, Leff said that she will in a way be cheering for all of Cardinal McCarrick’s former students and staff.

“It’s good to close it off with respect and spirit,” she said, “and to really show that McCarrick is a good school.”

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Mx5g4U