La Follette’s Weekly Magazine was one of the Progressive Era policy journals that regularly argued in favor of cities converting to an administrator or city manager system. (Photo: Screenshot/Google Books)

Most people who follow Wausau's local news probably have a pretty good idea of what led to the upcoming April 7 vote on whether the city should hire an administrator to manage its departments and see to the city's operations. The bungling of property acquisitions for the Thomas Street project between 2008 and 2011 caused the city to lose millions in state and federal aid, and it seemed to set off a series of governance problems: no-bid contracts, rigged bids, internal conflict among City Hall employees.

But the idea of bringing in a city manager, of improving local government by increasing efficiency and professionalism, has deep roots in the Progressive Era of 100 years ago — and to a surprising degree, the arguments we've heard for it in Wausau are the same today as they were then.

To understand why city managers were a Progressive idea, understand the insane levels of corruption and cronyism that characterized the patronage politics of 18th century political machines. These were personified by New York City's Boss Tweed, whose personal heft was a synecdoche for the city government he oversaw. But while Tweed was especially bad, his methods were more or less the standard mode of politics. Cronyism and corruption were a given.

Government posts were not given based on qualifications and certainly there was no idea that everyone should be treated fairly. You needed to vote for your guy because that was the only way to get things fixed in your neighborhood, to get your cousin a job as a street sweeper or whatever. "The spirit of graft and of lawlessness is the American spirit," wrote muckraking journalist Lincoln Steffens in his 1904 book "The Shame of Cities."

And so the Progressives, seeing in governments across the nation a bunch of Boss Tweed-fed hogs at the trough, set about to smash those entrenched bureaucracies with the power of data, professionalism and fairness. (In fact, broadly speaking, the idea of bringing expert opinion, empirical data and a scientific approach to government is one of the Progressives' lasting contributions to politics and government.)

Letter: Here's what a city administrator would do

Column: Spring Street example shows value of city administrator

In a report on a 1914 convention of city managers, New York's "The Independent" opined that the system embodied "honesty, system, fairness, harmony, expertness, abolition of rotten politics and consideration of every employee."

In Wisconsin, La Follette's Weekly Magazine on Dec. 21, 1912, reported an interview with Charles McCarthy, the Progressive wonk who was the author of the book "The Wisconsin Idea." Forgive the gendered language here and you have a pretty good encapsulation of some of the same arguments we heard Tuesday night at the forum put on by Daily Herald Media and the Wisconsin Institute for Public Policy and Service:

"The manager," McCarthy told La Follette's, "is a trained man who is named by the common council. He is responsible to them. The council, after deciding to adopt this plan advertises for a city manager. His qualifications are set by state law and the applicants must undergo an examination to determine their fitness. Some impartial board ... should examine the results and name the best man. This man would then be put in charge of all of the operations of city government. He is the executive of the city. His place is different from that of the present mayor, because he is directly responsible to the council for all that he does and they can oust him if they do not approve. And the council is responsible for the manager, because they name him. If the people do not approve of the manager, they can oust the council, or recall the manager.

"This is a plan which will suit the temper of the American people who wish an immediate control of their city government. It will satisfy the ideal of the new democracy — more democracy and more efficiency."

Politics looks different today from what it did in 1912, of course, and (to use a gross political generalization) talk of "efficiency" and streamlining government is probably more identified with political conservatives. But for what it's worth — and I suppose this could influence people in different ways, depending on their political leanings — the idea of designing local governments that work well, treat people fairly and make decisions based on data and expertise is one that comes to us directly from Wisconsin's liberal tradition.

Robert Mentzer is engagement editor for Gannett Central Wisconsin Media. Contact: rmentzer@gannett.com, 715-845-0604; on Twitter: @robertmentzer.

Recent columns by Robert Mentzer:

How we talk about a teen's death: column

Why Gov. Walker hopes Obamacare wins: column

Yes, Gov. Walker supported path to citizenship: column

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1MIpQ2N