More Video...

Vernon, FL---Willie Spears is returning to the high school sidelines as the new head football coach of the Yellow Jackets.

A day after the Class of 1996 Rutherford alumnus was named next in line at Vernon, the former Escambia head coach talked with NewsChannel 7 Sports about the opportunity.

"It's a sleeping giant, said Spears of his new squad. "I've taken over a few programs. I've never taken a program with a winning record. I've never taken up a program with such a strong team in the weight room. And following Bobby Johns is a great thing because he works the kids so hard, they're going to be used to work ethic. And that's something that I had to instill in the team. And that's one hurdle we won't have to jump."

The Vernon head job is Spears' fourth on the high school level, yet is the closest he's ever been to Panama City. After starting his coaching career as an assassinating his alma mater in 2002, he held the same position at Arnold.

His first job in charge came at Jefferson County in 2009, before moving to Suwannee for two years in 2010. In 2011, he went back to his other football home, serving as an assistant at Northwestern Oklahoma State for five months.

Spears returned to Northwest Florida in 2012 as the head coach at Escambia, spending two-and-a-half years with the Gators. The close of his tenure in Pensacola turned controversial, when allegations of recruiting violations surrounded six of his players on the 2014 team. Coach was initially suspended and then fired for insubordination regarding playing the Gators with eligibility in question by the Escambia County School Board in September.

The Washington County School Board handled the matter during Vernon's search.

"This is going to blow your mind: In the interview, Escambia never came up," said Spears. "They never asked about the insubordination, they never asked about recruiting, and I think the reason is they did their homework. Superintendent (Joseph) Taylor told me, 'I talked to your school board members, I talked to your superintendent, and I talked to your administration. And they all said that this thing got out of hand. (Taylor) asked the (them) the question: 'Would you hire Willie Spears?' And they said 'Yes we would'. It made it look like I was a cheater and it looked like I was a guy who disobeyed rules. And it was shocking to me, but I felt our students were being done wrong. People are always going to need good coaches, and I'm not the best coach in the world, but I can coach football and I'm going to work my butt off. I didn't think I'd be able to get a job as good as Vernon. This is a goldmine"

Spears served as a special teams coordinator this past fall with Florida A&M after departing from Escambia.