Chelsea Clinton showed up ready to get her hands dirty at a Palm Springs volunteer event Sunday where the mom of just four months looked impressively slim and self-assured in a close-fitting t-shirt, skinny jeans and an unmistakable pair of cowboy boots.

The former first daughter, 34, confidently strode in to do her hosting duties at the Clinton Foundation Day of Action in the desert city as temperatures hit 85 degrees.

She and her fellow volunteers were there to plant an orchard at the James O. Jessie Desert Highland Unity Center, paint benches and spruce up recreational equipment.

Scroll down for video

Wild West: A trim-looking Chelsea Clinton strode into a Palm Springs, California volunteer event Sunday wearing a pair of cowboy boots you simply couldn't miss. It was a slimmed-down departure from the Chelsea we saw just after the birth of her daughter Charlotte in September

Bill and Hillary's daughter appeared to clearly have shed any baby weight she may have put on while pregnant with daughter Charlotte.

She and her husband Marc Mezvinsky became parents for the first time in late September, when they welcomed Bill and Hill's first grandchild.

Along with several other speakers, the political scion addressed the crowd in the California desert afternoon heat but didn't break a sweat as she trumpeted the merits of Day of Action, which she founded in the wake of Hurricane Katrina as part of her family's Clinton Foundation.

Giving back: The former first daughter braved the desert city's 85 degree heat Sunday to take part in her Clinton Foundation Day of Action

Looking good: Clinton, who just gave birth four months ago, looked slim and confident as she addressed the crowd

Clinton spearheaded the Clinton Foundation's Day of Action, since she founded it in the wake of Hurricane Katrina

Sunday's events also included a health fair, dental screening and Affordable Care Act signup drive.

Per the Clinton Foundation's media release:

'The...Day of Action program seeks to create service opportunities and mobilize thousands of volunteers to give back to their communities.

'Since 2012, the Clinton Foundation has hosted 13 Days of Action in the U.S. and abroad, which have mobilized more than 4,100 volunteers donating more than 19,700 volunteer hours. In 2014, more than 1,600 volunteers participated in six Days of Action.'

Here, Chelsea Clinton is presented with a Proclamation from the City Of Palm Springs by the Mayor Steve Pougnet at the Desert Day Of Action at the James O. Jessie Desert Highland Unity Center on behalf of the Clinton Foundation Day Of Action

Read more:

Scenes From The 2015 Clinton Foundation Day of Action in the Coachella Valley