Police make arrest in Pembroke embezzlement case



PEMBROKE - After several weeks of investigation, police have made an arrest in a theft that depleted a local nonprofit of more than $13,000.



Lisa Wiggin, 46, the former treasurer and president of the Pembroke Friends of Football (PFOF), was arrested Friday and charged with one felony count of theft by embezzlement.



Officer Jacqueline Parker, who conducted the investigation, said evidence was compiled through an audit of bank records after members of the FOPF reported a cash shortage in February.



Parker said Wiggin has been cooperative throughout the investigation, and has confessed to the crime.



"Her cooperation was certainly appreciated," said Parker. "It definitely helped us out a great deal in terms of the investigation.



"I can tell you the money she took wasn't for vacations or diamond jewelry or anything like that," she added. "It appears the money was used solely for debts and past due bills."



Parker said some of the roughly $13,000 was returned, but explained she couldn't identify a specific amount because Wiggin apparently didn't keep records of the removal and restoration of funds.



Regardless of the amount Wiggin placed back in the bank account, Parker said the activity is still criminal in nature.



"If you took out $1,500 one day, and put $5,000 into the account tomorrow, it wouldn't matter, because legally, you have no right to that money," she said.



"The other big factor in this case is that the victims are the kids who may have to ultimately pay for the crime that was committed," Parker added. "Obviously, restitution is important here, and the main goal is for the league to function at a level similar to years past."



New Pembroke Friends of Football President Melissa Wallace said last week that the non-profit is attempting to mitigate the impact of the losses on Pembroke's youth football and cheerleading through increased fundraising efforts.



Wiggin was released on $10,000 personal recognizance bail and scheduled for an 8 a.m. arraignment in Hooksett District Court on March 31.



To improve the chance of seeing your comment posted here or published in the New Hampshire Union Leader:



Identify yourself. Accounts using fake or incomplete names are suspended regardless of the quality of posts.

Say something new, stay on topic, keep it short.

Links to outside URLs are discouraged, if used they should be on topic.

Avoid comments in bad taste, write well, avoid using all capital letters

Don't cite facts about individuals or businesses without providing a means to verify the claim

If you see an objectionable comment please click the "Report Abuse" button and be sure to tell us why.

Note: Comments are the opinion of the respective poster and not of the publisher.

Post a comment