According to a new poll, most Americans believe child migrants at the border should be allowed to stay in the U.S. if the government determines it’s not safe for them in Central America. The Public Religion Research Institute poll found that 70 percent of Americans agree the U.S. should provide food and shelter to minors while authorities determine the next course of action. Robert P. Jones, chief executive of the polling institute, said, “There is broad consistency for a policy offering support for the unaccompanied children and a determination process, not just an open door.”

Conversely, about a quarter, or 27 percent of respondents, favored deporting the children and treating them as “illegal immigrants.” While majorities of Democrats and Republicans want to treat the children as refugees, four in 10 Republicans believe child migrants should be immediately deported.

Those results fall in line with political rhetoric, where Republican lawmakers in the House have been the most vocal advocates of deportation. In their plan to address the border crisis, House Republicans proposed amendments Tuesday to a 2008 law that would expedite the deportation process. The law, aimed at anti-trafficking, currently gives special protections to child immigrants from outside Canada or Mexico, but Republicans hold that such protections make it harder to address the current influx of migrants. Speaking to reporters earlier this month, Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., said, “The only thing that’s going to stop these children from coming is if their parents see planeloads of them coming back to the country of origin.”

[SEE: Cartoons on Immigration]

The White House expressed disappointment with the Republican proposal, saying such a bill would place “arbitrary” deadlines on the deportation process. “That sort of inflexible approach only risks bottling up the system further,” said press secretary Josh Earnest.

The Democratic-controlled Senate has also criticized the House for its plan, which falls well short of the $2.7 billion already proposed by Senate leaders. In a political maneuver of its own, the Senate has threatened to attach its 2013 immigration reform plan to the House bill if it passes. “The only way any piece of the House proposal could become law is if it was conferenced with the Senate’s comprehensive immigration reform bill, which is something we’d certainly consider,” said a senior Democratic aide.

The number of migrant children who have crossed the border illegally has more than doubled since last year. Most of the more than 57,000 children are arriving from Central American countries such as Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala. A report from the United Nations Refugee Agency says the majority, 58 percent, of the children they interviewed in fiscal year 2013 fled their home countries in need of international protection.

So what do you think? Should the U.S. treat child migrants as refugees? Vote and comment below.