FRANKFORT, Ky. (AP) - In the Republican and Democratic primaries for Kentucky governor, 46 percent of voters cast their ballots for someone other than the two major party nominees.

Drew Curtis sees that as an opportunity.

The founder of the popular news aggregation website Fark.com launched his independent bid for governor on Monday, filing a petition bearing more than 9,000 signatures with the Secretary of State’s office.

Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes verified Monday afternoon that Curtis had at least 5,000 signatures needed to appear on the ballot in November.

Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear cannot seek re-election because of term limits, making Kentucky’s race for governor a rare odd-year election for an open seat one year before voters pick a new president. Public polling points to a close race between Republican nominee Matt Bevin and Democratic nominee Jack Conway, meaning Curtis could affect who wins in November.

“So far in this campaign we’ve heard no actual solutions and very little about Kentucky’s actual problems,” Curtis told reporters before filing his paperwork in Frankfort. “Jack Conway has yet to say no to any question beginning with the words ‘would you fund this’ and Matt Bevin can’t remember what his policy positions are 20 minutes after he’s said them.”

Curtis is from Kentucky and said he has run Fark.com out of his house for the past 16 years. His wife Heather is the company’s chief operating officer and his running mate, the second time in recent memory a husband and wife have teamed up to seek the governor’s mansion. Steven Maynard and his wife Bonnie unsuccessfully sought the Democratic nomination for governor in 1995.

“I think I’d do what I always do with him,” Heather Curtis said of her potential role in her husband’s administration. “Basically he moves mountains. But I’m there to ask is that the mountain you want to move?”

A registered Democrat until last year, Drew Curtis said he voted for President Barack Obama in 2008. He said he couldn’t remember who he voted for in 2012, but said it was most likely Mitt Romney. He said he would likely keep Kentucky’s expanded Medicaid program through 2017, but would be open to repealing it if by 2020 the state could not pay for it.

And Curtis said he would oppose legislation that could give flexibility to county clerks who object to issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples because of their religious beliefs.

Curtis rejected the suggestion that he could be a spoiler in the race, the way some people tell him third-party candidate Ralph Nader caused Democratic nominee Al Gore to lose the 2004 presidential election.

“All votes do not belong to the two parties by default,” Curtis said. “Al Gore did not carry (his home state of) Tennessee. Al Gore caused Al Gore to lose. So I am not the spoiler in the race. In fact I would actually pose this question to Kentucky: What if (Bevin and Conway) actually cause me not to win?”