Buy Photo Republican gubernatorial candidate, Matt Bevin, speaks at a Religious Freedom Rally in Frankfort, Ky., on Saturday, August 22, 2015. Photo by Mike Weaver (Photo: Mike Weaver/Special to The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

In politics, one needs to have the hide of a rhinoceros. Matt Bevin’s epidermis is an onion skin.

The list of journalists who regularly cover the race for governor that he will talk to is seemingly shorter now than the list of reporters with whom he won’t speak.

It feels a lot like sixth grade.

Though I mentioned it in passing in an earlier writing, I had not planned on devoting an entire column to this because, for some time, it was just me and former WAVE TV reporter Theo Keith to whom he gave the silent treatment. People interested in the governor’s race had plenty of places to go to get news and learn about the candidates.

But the list of those who Bevin won’t engage is growing, it seems exponentially, in recent weeks.

And when a candidate shuts out this much of the press corps, it’s you, the reader and the voter who pay.

Bevin likens himself to former Gov. John Y. Brown Jr., a Democrat, who was an outsider and a businessman when he was elected to the state’s highest office. Truth be told, he’s more like former Gov. Wallace Wilkinson, who was known for bristling when questioned by reporters; but unlike Bevin, Wilkinson relished in the back and forth with reporters and didn’t shut them out.

Journalists and voters are still trying to figure him out as he is still a mystery to many. And if the people who are covering the race can’t talk to him and ask him to explain his policy positions and his background, it’s the voters who suffer because that inhibits their ability to make an informed decision.

So, who won’t Bevin talk to?

Me. Nick Storm of CN|2. Sam Youngman of the Lexington Herald-Leader. Joe Sonka of Insider Louisville. Al Cross, who formerly sat in my chair but is now the director of the Institute for Rural Journalism and Community Issues at the University of Kentucky and writes columns for The Courier-Journal and also writes on a couple of blogs.

And then, there was Keith.

Storm and I committed the same offense. We both mentioned an incident during the 2014 U.S. Senate primary at a time when Bevin was dealing with the fallout from attending a pro-cockfighting rally. After a press conference, Bevin’s sister, unsolicited, piped up to defend him.

"He's always been very good to animals," Bevin's sister said. "I remember him rescuing a hummingbird and he got it to actually ride on his shoulder."

I can’t even find it now, but I tweeted something like, “I’m not making this up. Matt Bevin’s sister just said he taught a hummingbird to ride on his shoulder.”

Bevin called me on my cell phone a few days later to complain. That was the last I heard about it until last winter during a tea party rally at the Knob Creek Gun Range.

Throughout the several-hour long event, folks would pop inside where guns are sold to keep warm and I happened to be inside at the same time Bevin was there and I overheard him talking about a nephew who was suffering from brain cancer.

A great friend of mine who some of you may remember, former Courier-Journal reporter Mike Quinlan, died of brain cancer more than a decade ago.

I told him this and how sorry I was about what he and his family were going through. His response. “Thanks. His mother is my sister, the one you made fun of.” And he walked away.

Cross’ sin? In an interview with Hastings Wyman of the Southern Political Report he called Bevin “an arrogant jerk” who tends to alienate people. After it appeared in the internet, Cross said he realized that he shouldn’t have been so blunt and, unprompted, apologized to Bevin.

He said Bevin’s reaction to the apology was less than accepting.

I’m not sure what Bevin’s beef is with Youngman, but Youngman has needled him for his propensity to say one thing one day, say something completely different the next and to deny that he ever said what was reported earlier, despite video evidence.

Keith’s crime. He reported on some property tax delinquency issues on property Bevin owns out of state. Bevin refused to answer his questions and accused Keith of working for Democrat Jack Conway’s campaign.

Sonka said he doesn’t know what he did that caused Bevin to ignore his questions before the Kentucky Farm Bureau Ham Breakfast last month at the state fair.

After an event in Lexington last week, where he refused to answer questions from Cross and Youngman, a frustrated Youngman asked, “Are you only going to talk to reporters that you agree with what they write?”

“Anything else,” Bevin said, looking at another reporter who hasn’t yet drawn his wrath.

Saturday morning, a day after former Texas Gov. Rick Perry suspended his presidential campaign, MSNBC’s Joe Scarborough tweeted of Perry, “I was incredibly tough on him in 2012. He was incredibly gracious to me after.” It’s likely no reporter will ever tweet that about Bevin.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1F59gdY