LITTLE ROCK – The Little Rock Touchdown Club and Wright, Lindsey, Jennings LLP announced today that Colorado State University-Pueblo University senior defensive end Darius Allen (Pueblo, Colo.) has been chosen as the recipient of the 2014 Cliff Harris Award, which is presented annually to the nation's top small college defensive player.

Allen was chosen from a group of more than 5,000 defensive players representing almost 500 NCAA Division II, NCAA Division III and National National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) colleges and universities. Former Lindenwood University cornerback and current Cleveland Brown rookie Pierre Desir captured the inaugural award last season.

Also for the first time, the Cliff Harris Award will recognize the top vote recipients from all three divisions. Allen represents the overall winner of the award and Division II. Tyre Coleman, defensive end from Hobart and William Smith Colleges, received the most votes representing Division III. There was a tie for the top vote representing NAIA between Takari Johnson, linebacker from Concordia Ann Arbor, and Missouri Valley College defensive lineman Ty Phillips.

The award is named in honor of former Dallas Cowboy great Cliff Harris, an Arkansas native who was offered only one college scholarship to then-NAIA Ouachita Baptist University. Harris was passed over for the 1970 NFL draft. He signed a free agent contract with the Cowboys and then helped lead Dallas to five Super Bowl appearances during the next decade. The hard-hitting Harris played in six Pro Bowls and changed the way the position of free safety was played.

The presentation of the $3,000 Cliff Harris Award trophy will take place at the Little Rock Touchdown Club awards banquet in early February 2015. Cliff Harris will be on hand to present the trophy and former Dallas Cowboy and NFL Hall of Fame member Michael Irvin will be the featured speaker at the banquet.

"The impact of Darius Allen on the success of Colorado State-Pueblo's program and its outstanding national championship season is evident," Harris said. "We're proud to honor him as the nation's best small college defensive player of the year. I'm also very proud of Tyre, Takari and Ty, they all had tremendous seasons and careers as well. I also want to commend all of our finalists and nominees. They are proving that the best football isn't always played at the FBS and FCS level. Players from Division II, Division III and NAIA deserve their share of respect and recognition."

CSU-Pueblo senior corner C.J. Roberts (Boynton Beach, Fla.) was also a finalist for the award.

Allen has earned All-American accolades from four different outlets this season to highlight a long list of awards, including Associate Press Little All-America Team, Daktronics Ron Lenz National Player of the Year, Daktronics First-Team All America, Gene Upshaw Division II Lineman of the Year (second consecutive year), American Football Coaches Association All-America, Beyond Sports Network All-America First Team, BSN All-Super Region Four Defensive Player of the Year, BSN All-Super Region Four First Team, Daktronics All-Super Region Four Defensive Player of the Year, Daktronics All-Region First Team, Don Hansen Super Region Four Defensive Player of the Year and First Team Defense, National Footbal Foundation Colorado Chapter Defensive Player of the Year and All-NFFCC First Team, Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference Defensive Player of the Year and All-RMAC First Team Defense.

Allen finished the regular season with nine sacks (-42 yards) to rank second in the RMAC, while his 14 tackles for loss (-54 yards) ranked fifth in the league. He totaled 43 tackles (22 solo), forced three fumbles (T-2nd in RMAC) and recovered two fumbles (T-8th in RMAC). The senior also added a pass break-up. He totaled five or more tackles six times in 2014. Allen recorded 3.5 sacks (-11 yards) at Sam Houston State University and three sacks (-21 yards) at Colorado School of Mines. He guided a ThunderWolves defense to a top 10 finish nationally in scoring defense (4th – 13.0 ppg) and team sacks (6th – 3.5 spg). Allen was named RMAC Preseason Defensive Player of the Year and earned RMAC Defensive Player of the Week Sept. 15.

In four postseason games, Allen recorded 29 tackles (17 solo), nine tackles for loss (-47 yards), 6.5 sacks (-40 yards), two forced two fumbles and recovered a fumble.

CSU-Pueblo was crowned NCAA Division II National Champions Dec. 20 after defeating No. 1 Minnesota State University, Mankato 13-0 at Sporting Park in Kansas City, Kan. The ThunderWolves finished the regular season with a program record 14-1 mark. The Pack earned their fourth consecutive Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference championship in 2014 with an 8-1 record to share the honor with Colorado School of Mines. The ThunderWolves entered their fourth straight NCAA Playoff appearance as the No. 2 seed in Super Region Four.

After a first round bye, the Pack defeated No. 23 Angelo State University, 52-14. In the quarterfinals, CSU-Pueblo welcomed No. 9 Ohio Dominican University and used a fourth quarter punt return to record a 31-28 victory and advance to the NCAA Semifinals for the first time in program history and the first time a RMAC team had reached the semifinals in the NCAA Division II Playoffs. The Pack punched their ticket to the national championship game with a 10-7 victory versus No. 25 University of West Georgia.

The ThunderWolves finished the season with a perfect 6-0 record against nationally ranked opponents and finished the season No. 1 in the American Coaches Association Poll.