U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, D-Weston, has expressed confidence in the American health care system to handle cases of the Ebola virus that occur in the United States.

“I’m not at all worried, because if there is any place in the entire world that if you have to get a life-threatening illness like Ebola, and you want to make sure that it’s not going to spread, it’s the United States of America,” she said.

She responded to reporters’ questions on Thursday at the end of an event in Hollywood at which she urged people to sign up during the second round of open enrollment for health insurance under Obamacare.

Q: Is our health care system ready to deal with something like this?

Wasserman Schultz:

“Oh absolutely. We have the finest, most sophisticated health care system in the entire world. If there is any place that we don’t have to worry about an outbreak, it’s the United States of America.

“But it’s also important that Americans know the facts about Ebola spreads and how it doesn’t spread. Ebola is not a contagious disease that is transmitted through the air. So you can’t be near someone with Ebola and they breathed on you and get it. It is transmitted through contact with blood or bodily fluids. And even then it must be with someone who is visibly sick and has had the onset of symptoms with someone who has actually died from Ebola.

“President [Barack] Obama has met and been in good, constant contact with the Dr. [Tom] Frieden, the director of the Centers for Disease Control. This is a critical issue and we are focused on making sure that protocols are tightened, that we deploy our very advanced and significant health care system that ensures that the one case that we do have is contained and that people know what they need to do to be able to stop the spread of the disease, but like I said, I’m not at all worried, because if there is any place in the entire world that if you have to get a life-threatening illness like ebola, and you want to make sure that it’s not going to spread, it’s the United States of America.

(Anthony Man) (Anthony Man)

Q: Do you think there should be restrictions on air traffic to and from the mainly impacted countries?

Wasserman Schultz:

“I think that should be left to the experts. My understanding from conversations I’ve had with authorities in Washington is that at most right now I think they feel like they need to tighten the protocols for when people who have traveled to affected nations are coming to the United States. That we make sure that those protocols are followed, the questions are asked, that if isolation is necessary if the sense is that someone has been exposed and is at risk of actually having contracted Ebola that we take the necessary steps.

“But in the United States, going as far as cutting off access to our country and limiting people’s freedom of movement, that's a drastic stop and I think one that given how well prepared we are to deal with an illness like this that I think it’s best [left] to those experts who know at what stage that might be necessary if at all.”