Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee has signed a pledge to promote pro-life values as president and to de-fund the Planned Parenthood abortion business.

Huckabee, the pro-life former Arkansas governor and Republican presidential candidate is back with a second attempt to capture the GOP nomination for president. Huckabee launched his campaign earlier this month at a rally in Arkansas.

Now, Huckabee has put forward a pro-life “Pledge to the People” that he says is the only pledge he will sign as a candidate for president.

“I am hard at work on the campaign trail in Arizona this morning, but I wanted to send you a quick note to make sure you had seen my “Pledge to the People”. It is the only pledge I am signing as a candidate for President. This campaign is about you and this pledge is about you,” Huckabee said in an email to his supporters.

The pledge covers a host of political issues, including pro-life topics and opposing the pro-abortion Obamacare. Under the pledge, Huckabee promises:

* I will stand for the sanctity of all human life from the moment of conception until the grave. Taking this unequivocal stand includes fighting to defund Planned Parenthood.

* I will now, and will for the duration of my presidency, promote and sign all measures leading to Obamacare’s defunding, deauthorization, and repeal.

“Life begins at conception. This is not just a Biblical view — it is affirmed by modern science and every unique human DNA schedule, which is present at conception. Our value, and celebration, of every unique human life is the basic tenant of our freedom and should never be abandoned,” Huckabee says.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

“As Governor, I promoted and signed a fetal protection act. I imposed a ban on partial birth abortion, established waiting periods, created parental notification requirements, and passed a bill so mothers who brought a newborn to a hospital or fire station would not be prosecuted for child abandonment,” he continued. “As President, I will always stand for the sanctity of all human life from the moment of conception until the grave.”

“As President I will fight to end abortion,” he concludes.