Before December of last year, Gov. Robert Bentley closed, locked and barred the door to Medicaid expansion. Since then, he’s undone the deadbolts and turned the knob, without pulling it back.

Even if Gov. Robert Bentley wanted to expand Medicaid, could serve as an effective veto over him. (Photo: Melissa Golden/USA Today)

Bentley on Thursday appeared to signal a desire to crack the door, saying at a conference his office was "looking" at expansion. Friday, his office said nothing had changed. Jennifer Ardis, a spokeswoman for Bentley, said the governor remained focused on implementing regional care organizations (RCOs), aimed at changing Medicaid delivery from a fee-based model to one that rewards outcomes.

"The governor did not say publicly what he has not said before," she said. "The governor’s focus is on Medicaid transformation and making the system more efficient."

If the governor treads lightly on Medicaid expansion, it's because the issue is a fiery bed of coals for a southern politician. Medicaid expansion could bring public health benefits to Alabamians, and may be the only thing that keeps the state's rural hospitals open amid looming cuts to one of their major revenue sources. Danne Howard, executive vice president and chief policy officer for the Alabama Hospital Association, said Friday 70 percent of hospitals in the state operate in the red.

"If you start putting cuts on top of a negative operating margin, that’s a worst-case scenario," she said. "That could mean the difference between closing and staying open for a lot of our rural hospitals. That is not an understatement."

On the other side, Republican legislators say the state doesn't have the resources to expand what they consider a broken program.

“I think it‘s a bad policy to expand,” said Sen. Trip Pittman, R-Montrose, the incoming chairman of the Senate's General Fund committee, which oversees Medicaid funding. “I think the negative effects on work ethic outweigh any benefit people assign to Medicaid expansion.”

What are we talking about when we talk Medicaid expansion?

Alabama has some of the strictest Medicaid eligibility requirements in the nation. Childless adults almost never qualify. Parents with qualifying children can receive Medicaid if they make 18 percent or less of the federal poverty line. That equates to $2,867 a year for a family of two, and $4,365 a year for a family of four.

Despite the restrictions, the Alabama Medicaid Agency estimated 1,034,955 Alabamians – about 22 percent of the population – were eligible for Medicaid in June.

As envisioned in the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid expansion would extend Medicaid to anyone making 138 percent or less of the federal poverty level. That equates to about $16,243 for an individual, and $33,451 for a household of four.

How many Alabamians would see coverage?

A 2012 UAB study often cited by expansion supporters estimated that roughly 300,000 would enroll in Medicaid if the state expanded the program, with about 80 percent of those without insurance.

The Kaiser Family Foundation released a report in October that said about 139,000 Alabamians fell into a “coverage gap.” The ACA anticipated those making less than 138 percent of poverty line to qualify for Medicaid. But the U.S. Supreme Court in 2012 ruled the federal government could not force states to accept the Medicaid expansion. The group does not qualify for health insurance subsidies in the exchanges that offer ACA-type insurance, or Medicaid.

What would it cost?

The Medicaid expansion is paid for by the federal government until 2017, when the state share begins increasing. The share will never increase more than 10 percent of the total cost of expansion. Supporters say the state's share would equal about $200 million a year by 2020, when the 10 percent match takes effect. But studies in states that have expanded Medicaid suggest that expansion can end up relieving states of significant costs of relieving uninsurance (see below).

Supporters also suggest an impact of up to $1 billion a year on the state’s economy.

“I recently heard a hospital administrator say if NASA announced they planned a $1 billion investment in Alabama, we would be having a parade,” said Jim Carnes, policy director of Alabama Arise, a group that supports Medicaid expansion. “This is the equivalent in a different sector of the economy.”

How many states have expanded Medicaid, and what have the experience been?

Thirty-one states and the District of Columbia have expanded Medicaid. Data on health care outcomes is still coming in. Robin Rudowitz, associate director of the Kaiser Family Foundation Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, said the most obvious effect is a drop in the uninsured rate in states that have expanded.

“When you have health insurance, people who have health coverage and Medicaid coverage are just much more likely to have better access to care,” she said. “They’re much more likely to go to the doctor, much more likely to not postpone care they need. And they’re much more likely to find financial stability.”

Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear of Kentucky, who led efforts to expand Medicaid in that state, rolled out statistics Friday showing the state had cut obesity and improved access to preventive care since bringing out Medicaid expansion.

So, what’s Gov. Bentley’s position?

The governor told legislators 11 months ago he would be open to Medicaid expansion that would have a private insurance element, like a program pursued in Arkansas. Bentley also signaled an interest in an employment requirement. That would almost certainly go nowhere with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), the federal agency that administers Medicaid.

Bentley said little that was new on his position until Thursday, when he signaled more of an interest in expansion.

“I am concerned about the plight of the working poor,” Bentley said, according to The Associated Press. “If doctors are not paid for seeing those patients, doctors will not go to rural Alabama because you can’t expect a doctor to go to rural Alabama and lose money.”

But Bentley added that trying to find money to fund Medicaid expansion – which he estimated at $700 million over six years – could be difficult. Ardis said Friday the governor remained focused on RCO implementation.

"The governor is not going to expand a system that has traditionally been broken," she said. "That is what the Medicaid system has been for years. We are working to make that system better for patients enrolled in Medicaid. That process is not complete."

Can Bentley do it on his own?

No. He’ll need the Legislature, and to this point, the Republican-controlled bodies have said no. Last year, the Alabama Senate passed a resolution sponsored by Pittman opposing any expansion of Medicaid, which the resolution called a broken system. Pittman Friday said he remained “100 percent opposed” to expansion.

“I read the governor’s comments,” he said. “I still think he’s looking at other options. I don’t think that’s a decision he’s made yet. I would encourage him to think about it.”

Why does Bentley need the Legislature?

Legislators have two roles to play in Alabama. First, they have to approve the state’s share of the Medicaid expansion, which could rise as high as $200 million. Second, the Legislature would have to approve enabling legislation and the formal eligibility changes that would expand the program.

If expansion needs new revenues, it may be a hard sell. The Legislature this year largely rejected tax increases aimed at closing a $200 million gap in the state’s General Fund budget. The only major tax approved by both chambers, a 25 cent per pack increase in the cigarette tax, occurred after a six-month struggle that saw the Senate rejecting a number of tax proposals approved by the House.

House Ways and Means General Fund chairman Steve Clouse, R-Ozark, said Friday that experience soured many representatives on further tax bills.

“There’s not going to be any will in the vast majority of the people in the House to raise taxes for the next few years,” he said.

Democrats have made Medicaid expansion a priority, and have criticized Bentley for not acting.

“We keep kicking the can down the road,” said Senate Majority Leader Quinton Ross, D-Montgomery. “He keeps talking about studying the issue, and exploring the issue, but we still haven’t had any action.”

Supporters say the money coming into the state could provide an economic boost, and further revenues. A study released earlier this year by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation found that eight states that had expanded Medicaid – including Kentucky and Arkansas, the only two southern states to do so – had seen savings and revenue gains of $1.8 billion, due to enhanced matches for programs, more provider revenues and states seeing some costs absorbed by Medicaid.

Carnes and Howard said expansion could absorb many costs currently covered by the General Fund, helping free money there. The state would only pay 10 percent of the costs for a woman who became pregnant after enrolling in the Medicaid expansion, said Howard. The state would pay 32 percent of the costs for the same woman if she enrolled in traditional Medicaid.

“Similarly, for example, inmates who are hospitalized off site can be covered under Medicaid expansion, which would relieve that burden on the Corrections department,” Carnes said.

It's not an argument that moves Pittman.

"The last time I looked, the federal government was running a tremendous deficit," he said. "I’m of the camp that the states do have the responsibility to try and help the federal government manage the costs of the government they implement."

Are there consequences for not expanding?

The state’s hospitals rely on disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments, funds used to help defray the costs of treating low-income patients. The Affordable Care Act – which initially envisioned Medicaid expansion in all 50 states -- began reducing those payments in 2014 to reduce the uncompensated care burden. By 2018, the cuts will be significant, and that could have a major impact on hospitals, especially in rural areas.

"You get the cut whether you expand Medicaid or not," Howard said.

Radowitz said the Secretary of Health and Human Services could make a decision on the fate of DSH payments in 2018. “They didn’t anticipate there could be a lot of uninsured people in states because they didn’t expand Medicaid,” she said.

The Alabama Hospital Association is studying the impact of expansion on hospital patient volume, as well as the impact on the economy.

Clouse said the DSH issue was “above my pay grade,” but said the presidential election next year could change things.

“I think this battle has another year to go with presidential race and how that shakes out,” he said. “There may be a whole new approach to health care in January 2017."

Carnes said the state had done well overhauling Medicaid. Expansion, he said, was a logical step.

"We think it should be the Legislature’s priority to help folks get access to the health care they need," he said. "It’s a family values issue and it's an economic development issue."

By the numbers

31: Number of states (with the District of Columbia) that have expanded Medicaid.

70: Percentage of Alabama hospitals operating in the red, according to the Alabama Hospital Association.

300,000: Number of Alabamians estimated to be covered in a Medicaid expansion.

$200 million: Estimated annual cost to state after 10 percent state match kicks in 2020.

$1.8 billion: Estimated savings and revenue gains made by eight states that expanded Medicaid, according to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1NSRSeS