Fringe Factor

What kind of country are we living in when a baker can’t refuse to make a gay wedding cake without facing a lawsuit? If anyone should understand the need for guns in this country, it’s someone with a connection to the Holocaust. And Michigan lawmakers passed that rape insurance bill.

Baker Would Rather Go to Jail Than Make Gay Wedding Cake

It’s official, the gays have finally killed capitalism. And freedom. In a segment titled, “The Death of Free Enterprise,” Fox and Friends spotlighted the plight of one poor Colorado baker who was just told by a judge that his “religious freedom” does not give him the right to refuse to sell a cake to a same sex couple for their wedding. Masterpiece Cakeshop owner Jack Phillips was sued last year when he refused to sell Dave Mullins and Charlie Craig a wedding cake. Though Phillips insisted that he does not discriminate against gay customers in general and would gladly sell them any other baked goods, the presiding judge didn’t buy it, pointing out that “Only same-sex couples engage in same-sex weddings. Therefore, it makes little sense to argue that refusal to provide a cake to a same-sex couple for use at their wedding is not ‘because of’ their sexual orientation.” This is obviously an outrage and worthy of an entire Fox News segment. “This certainly could set precedent in terms of private businesses having to completely shed what they believe personally to offer something to a consumer,” warned host Elisabeth Hasselbeck. Phillips attorney, Nicolle Martin, went on to suggest that, “if the government can force you to violate your beliefs under the threat of a jail sentence there’s really no freedom they can’t take away.” Phillips has also said he’d be willing to go to jail before selling a wedding cake to a gay couple.

If a Descendent of Holocaust Survivors Doesn’t Get the Need for Guns, Who Will?

National Rifle Association board member Scott Bach is just totally perplexed by Jersey City Mayor Steven Fulop’s initiative to hold gun vendors accountable for who they sell to in order to encourage gun safety. Not only was Fulop in the Marines, his grandparents were in the Holocaust, “so you’ve got to wonder why he is not getting it,” Bach said during an interview with NRA News this week. The inaccurate Holocaust argument—that Germany’s strict gun control laws allowed for Hitler’s rise to power—is a favorite for gun rights advocates.

Kathleen Sebelius Is Like a (South) Korean Dictator

Republican Rep. John Shimkus really put his foot in his mouth during a House Energy & Commerce Health Subcommittee hearing this week. Getting heated over Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius’s argument that preventative services on health care premiums under Obamacare would not, as Shimkus suggested, increase health care expenses for beneficiaries, Shimkus tried to compare Sebelius to a North Korean dictator. But he fumbled his words and, instead, said that arguing with her was “like talking to the Republic of Korea or something.” The Republic of Korea is another name for South Korea, an American ally. North Korea is the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

A Personal Tale of Sexual Assault Doesn’t Appeal to Rape Insurance Proponents

Remember last week when we spotlighted a citizen-proposed law in Michigan that would require women to purchase separate insurance plans to cover abortions, even in cases of rape and incest, because those atrocities are like car accidents, for which every woman should always be prepared? Well, Michigan’s State Senate Minority Leader Gretchen Whitmer tried desperately to prevent the bill from passing, calling it “one of the most misogynistic proposals” and “truly despicable.” She even took to the Senate floor and tearfully revealed that she was raped 20 years ago. “As I was considering what to say in opposition to the rape insurance proposal in front of the Senate today, I made the decision to speak about my own story publicly for the first time every,” she said. “It’s something I’ve coped with privately for many years now, but I felt it was important for my Republican colleagues to see the face of the women they’re hurting with their actions today.” Unfortunately, Whitmer’s moving and brave statement was for naught: the bill was approved anyway.

Gays Just Want to Get Married for Better Benefits for Their AIDS Treatments