MORRISON — Swollen Bear Creek surged above normal levels here Friday, prompting the evacuation of four homes and causing town officials to keep a wary eye on Evergreen Dam some 11 miles upstream.

Police Chief Rudy Sandoval and others went door to door in the town of 490 with a bleak warning — if the dam were to break, sirens would sound and residents would have 13 to 15 minutes to get out.

Those fears were eased Friday afternoon when the Jefferson County Incident Management Team announced engineers had inspected the dam and deemed it structurally sound. By 2:30 p.m., the water level on Bear Creek in town had begun to recede, officials said.

Still, just the mention of the dam— and the inevitable rumors that followed — meant residents faced decisions about whether to stay or go, what to take and leave, and exit routes.

“With an evacuation, if you don’t go and it’s no big deal, I guess you’ve won,” said Mark Flanagan, owner of Red Rocks Cyclery on Bear Creek Avenue. “But if you stay behind and get stuck …”

Flanagan was considering loading up bikes and gear to ferry out. A half-hour later, his “Open” sign had gone dark.

Randy LaLene, 49, was awoken at 3 a.m. by police pounding on his door telling him to evacuate.

He lives in what locals call “The Morrison Compound” on the creek. Residents live communally, reaching decisions by committee.

While his neighbors chose to heed the voluntary evacuation order, LaLene stayed to deter burglars. He also marked a rock in the river at 3 a.m. to monitor the water’s rise. It had not risen any Friday.

“I don’t think they were jumping the gun at all,” LaLene said. “The river’s dangerous.”

As he spoke, a deep rumbling could be heard — boulders rolling like marbles at the bottom of the swollen creekbed.

Gus Chambers, a local surveyor, said officials were concerned that if the water continued to rise, debris might break a sewer pipe suspended below a bridge and send raw sewage into the creek.

Some downtown merchants closed as a precaution.

At Tony Rigatoni’s Italian Kitchen, patrons on a damp rooftop patio drank cans of Dale’s Pale Ale. Owner Reza Ardehali said he owed it to employees to stay open because they depend on their paychecks.

The sun was out. This worried Ardehali, who did not want to be lulled into feeling safe, not with the earlier warnings.

“It’s one of those days,” he said. “I’ve been here 23 years. We’ve never had anything like this. This is unimaginable.”

Eric Gorski: 303-954-1971, egorksi@denverpost.com or twitter.com/egorksi