Holman W. Jenkins, Jr. wrote an excellent column in last week’s Wall Street Journal titled “Germany Reinvents the Energy Crisis.” The headline suggests it is just about Germany, but it is not. It is about us, too.

Jenkins understands that global warming is just a temporary infatuation of the longer-lived environmental movement. That movement’s campaign against affordable energy began before global warming was perceived as a problem (or opportunity) and is deeply rooted in the movement’s Malthusian fear of resource depletion and naïve longing to return to a pre-capitalist utopia.

This is why, when global warming predictions and claims are exposed as being fraudulent, they simply say: ”Oh, whatever. It’s still a good idea to move away from fossil fuels.” It is, Jenkins writes, “an idea seemingly impervious to experience and part of the mental baggage of every politician likely to get elected in our world.”

Some of us are pondering what Jenkins refers to near the end of the article as “the big question”:

… how far will the political upheaval go when an entire elite is implicated in an unsatisfactory energy experiment, which inevitably has become wrapped up in public disappointment with another failed elite project …

Jenkins is referring to German politics and the European Union, but the domestic project that immediately comes to mind is Obamacare.

The high cost of Obama’s war on coal will soon become apparent, just as it has in Germany and the rest of Europe, and just as the high cost of Obamacare is penetrating the consciousness of the average guy. The backlash will be fierce, just as it has been against Obamacare. But in the case of Obamacare, only a small percentage of the public has been affected (yet). In the case of Obama’s energy policy, everyone will pay.

A GOP that understands that being pro-energy, pro-jobs, and pro-prosperity could win the Senate and the White House in 2016, riding a wave of dissatisfaction over energy and health policies. Democrats aren’t deaf or blind, and they will start peeling away from the President and the Baptists (environmentalists) and Bootleggers (renewable energy companies) who run his faction of their party.

Repeal of bad energy policy has already started in states with Republican governors. Those governors are the ones to watch, support, and root for in 2016.

Read the whole thing.