A wrap dress, trench coat, white shirt and a cashmere sweater — these are just some of the wardrobe staples that never go out of fashion. But how much should you spend on each piece?

Is a cheap and cheerful T-shirt costing a few pounds really a bargain? Are designer jeans on sale for £400 any better than High Street denims?

We asked fashion experts to lift the lid on when to save and when to spend . . .

SPLURGE: COAT, £300

Fashion experts agree it’s worth splurging on a classic style or lightweight trench that won’t date.

‘A coat that costs around £300, such as Jaeger’s double-breasted trench coat (£299), is guaranteed to be made from robust fabric,’ says personal stylist Alicia Kite of Alicia Kay Style.

To check the quality, grab a handful of the coat’s fabric and squeeze it hard for 20 seconds. If it looks like a crumpled paper bag when you let it go, this is how it’s likely to look after a long journey.

'Jaeger’s double-breasted trench coat (£299), is guaranteed to be made from robust fabric,’ says personal stylist Alicia Kite

Choose a neutral colour that flatters your skin tone. ‘Classic beige is a safe bet,’ says Alicia. ‘But there are many shades, from near white to toffee, which may be more flattering.

‘Whatever your shape, the coat should be tailored.’

Use a wooden coat hanger with wide-shaped shoulders. The natural wooden broad jacket hanger (£2.71, thehangerstore.co.uk) is perfect. When you put it in the wardrobe, do up the buttons and check the collar and lapels are sitting flat.

SCRIMP: SHIRT, £20

‘A white shirt only looks really good when it’s pristine,’ says fashion stylist and TV presenter Grace Woodward.

‘No matter how carefully you wash them, white shirts — even the most expensive ones — will start to grey and discolour under the arms fairly quickly, so it’s not worth spending a fortune.’

A mid-quality, tailored shirt from a reliable High Street brand such as M&S or Next can look smart.

‘A white shirt only looks really good when it’s pristine,’ says fashion stylist and TV presenter Grace Woodward

The M&S no peep easy-to-iron Dobby shirt (£18) or Next’s long- sleeve white stretch shirt (£20) are good options.

And the fit is all-important if you want it to look as if you’ve spent more than you have,’ says Alicia Kite.

‘Women with a large bust look best in a plain tailored shirt. Smaller-busted women suit shirts with detail on the bust, such as pockets, pintucks or embroidery.

‘Only wash it with other whites, and iron it with starch as soon as it has dried. Use a plastic hanger and make sure the top button is fastened when you put it in the wardrobe.’

SCRIMP: HEELS, £30

‘Think about how often you are going to wear the pair of heels you’re buying before you spend,’ says fashion stylist and businesswear designer Kay Davidson.

‘It’s worth investing a bit of money in a good-quality classic court shoe for everyday workwear. The nude Sybila court shoes (£170) from one of the Duchess of Cambridge’s favourite brands LK Bennett go with everything and will make your legs look longer.

Next’s colour-block double-strap sandals (£28) are affordable but look frivolous too

‘But if you need a pair of strappy heels for a special occasion, the cheaper High Street names are perfect. Brands such as New Look, Next and Primark produce fashion heels at budget prices.

‘You can afford something that looks frivolous, such as New Look’s orange snakeskin multi-strap shoes (£29.99) or Next’s colour-block double-strap sandals (£28).

SPLURGE: DRESS, £80

‘The wrap dress is a classic style and variations of it can look good on almost every figure, but don’t buy cheap,’ says Kay Davidson. ‘Most are made from a stretchy jersey fabric. Unfortunately, thin, cheap jersey can be unforgiving, revealing lumps and bumps.

A front-tying bow defines the opulent floral print dress by Alice Temperley (£130, John Lewis)

‘Heavyweight fabric and patterns disguise any flaws.’

Boden’s summer wrap dress (£79) comes in a thick material, three fittings (petite, regular and long), nine sizes and flattering colours and prints.

A front-tying bow defines the opulent floral print dress by Alice Temperley (£130, John Lewis).

SCRIMP: PUMPS, £12

There’s no need to spend a small fortune on ballet pumps, according to Alicia Kite.

‘Most of the High Street stores have lovely on-trend colours and styles.

Asos’s silver lily pad ballet flats (£12) are a great accessory for light coloured spring outfits

‘Cheap pumps can look expensive if you make sure they fit and treat them well. Keep them clean, polished and stored carefully.

‘Asos’s silver lily pad ballet flats (£12) and Dorothy Perkins’ wide-fit print detailed pumps (£28) will accessorise your spring outfits beautifully.’

SCRIMP: CASHMERE, £50

the experts say there’s no need to spend too much on cashmere.

‘A cashmere V-neck sweater from specialists Brora will set you back £240,’ says Alicia Kite. ‘But you can buy similar jumpers at Uniqlo and M&S from £50 to £80.’

M&S has a range of cashmere jumpers on offer in different colours and styles, costing between £50 and £80

The only drawback with cheaper cashmere can be an increased tendency to bobble.

Alicia suggests using a soft shoebrush to lightly brush the jumper every time you put it on.

And Julia Dee, founder of clothes storage and care emporium Total Wardrobe Care, says cashmere can be handwashed in cool water with a mild detergent. Store it on a knitwear hanger.

SPLURGE: JEANS, £100

‘if you like to dress up your denim, it’s well worth investing some money in a top quality pair,’ says Alicia Kite.

‘Apply the cost per wear sum — £100 might sound like a lot but, if you are wearing your jeans several times a week, it’s a sensible investment.’ But fashion stylist Grace Woodward warns against spending much more than £100.

Levi’s demi curve straight jeans (£90, John Lewis) are great for a pear-shaped figure

‘Some high-end brands cost upwards of £400, but there’s very little difference with a £100 pair.’

Dry-clean the first time they need cleaning to fix the colour. Then, says Grace Woodward, wash them inside out on a cold wash and hang them out to dry.

Levi’s demi curve straight jeans (£90, John Lewis) are great for a pear-shaped figure.

Slim legs will be elongated in Betty Barclay slim-leg five-pocket jeans (£100, John Lewis).

SPLURGE: T-SHIRT, £25

Unless you’re a whippet-thin teenager, says Alicia Kite, steer clear of super-cheap T-shirts.

‘Most of them are thin and don’t have the structure or shape to flatter a more mature figure.’

She recommends M&S and Uniqlo for good quality T-shirts between £8 and £10. ‘And Hobbs T-shirts cost £19 to £25, but are the perfect cut for a larger bust. Jigsaw also produce a great range, starting at £25.’