ALBANY, N.Y. (AP) — New York has added 1.1 million people to Medicaid since the state health exchange opened last year in the national effort to connect the uninsured with low-cost coverage.

More than 6.2 million New Yorkers are now enrolled, almost one-third of its 19 million people.

The exchange, which was designed to connect uninsured New Yorkers with commercial policies, had the effect of bringing a larger number of low-income residents to the government-funded program.

Elisabeth Benjamin, vice president for health initiatives at the Community Service Society of New York, said the expansion has succeeded in the goal of reducing state's uninsured, which was estimated at about 2.7 million people.

"It's working," she said.

New census data in September should show how many uninsured are left, Benjamin said.

Enrollment under the Affordable Care Act has surged beyond expectations in some states, raising concerns about costs straining budgets. At least seven states have increased their cost estimates for 2017, according to an Associated Press analysis.

While the overhaul pushed many states to expand Medicaid eligibility, New York was largely there already — it only had to raise the income threshold for single adults. That added almost 150,000 people — about twice as many as anticipated — though federal funds cover nearly that entire cost, according to budget officials.

At the same time, more than 525,000 other New Yorkers, already poor enough to qualify, enrolled. That was largely expected.

Also, the new computerized state-run system slowed the so-called "churn" that was annually kicking many eligible people out of Medicaid, often for months, Benjamin said.

Medicaid in New York costs about $63.5 billion this year, almost half the state budget. That's up from $52.1 billion five years ago.

However, the state's $22.5 billion share this year is flatter, up from $21.3 billion five years ago, according to budget officials. They cite higher federal reimbursements and frugal measures like a self-imposed spending cap and pushing patients into managed care.

Enrollment is projected to rise to almost 6.5 million in 2019 at a state cost of $24.9 billion.

A large segment of the remaining uninsured in New York are immigrants in the country without legal documentation, Benjamin said. They qualify under current law only for Medicaid's emergency coverage, she said.