To the editor:

Here we go again. In early November, the federal government will hit the debt ceiling. By that point, the Treasury Department will have exhausted all measures to keep our debt within its legal limit and won’t have enough revenue to reliably pay our bills. In response, Congress is likely to approve another increase in the debt limit without making meaningful progress toward addressing the root cause of our debt.

That cause is reckless spending — on foreign aid to countries that hate us, on unnecessary wars, on bailouts and on a bloated federal government. Even though Uncle Sam is collecting record amounts from American taxpayers, our annual federal deficit is still over $400 billion simply because of excessive spending. As a result, America depends on borrowing from foreign powers like China and Russia just to pay our bills.

This debt threatens the sustainability of our economy, the financial stability of every American and our national security. That is why in September 2011, then-Navy Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, admitted: “I’ve said many times that I believe the single, biggest threat to our national security is our debt, so I believe we have every responsibility to help eliminate that threat.”

At the time he made that statement, our national debt was $14 trillion. Just four years later, it has grown to over $18 trillion.

I am doing everything in my power to stem the tide of red ink that is drowning our nation. Over the last 11 years, I am the only member of Congress who has voted against every deficit-raising, debt-filled budget bill and against every increase in the debt limit. Over that time, I have also voted against more spending bills than all but one of my Republican colleagues. In addition, I have voted for every balanced budget amendment to the Constitution.

I also voted against the bailouts of Wall Street and Detroit, President Obama’s trillion dollar “stimulus” package and the two massive entitlements Congress has passed since the turn of the century — President Bush’s 2003 Medicare prescription drug bill and Obamacare; both add billions to the debt.

When Congress votes to increase the debt ceiling once again, you can count on me to vote against it. Instead of kicking the can down the line, borrowing more from the Chinese and sending the bill to our kids and grandkids, it is high time we stop our out-of-control spending before it is too late — before we become the next Greece or Japan.

U.S. Rep. Walter B. Jones

Farmville