KALAMAZOO, MI -- More than 6,000 people in Kalamazoo County have signed up so far for Healthy Michigan, Michigan's version of the Medicaid expansion created by the Affordable Care Act, according to state data released last week.

That's about 52 percent of the estimated 11,623 county residents eligible for the health insurance plan, which targets adults 19 to 64 years old with a household income 133 percent below the poverty line. That's about $15,500 for a single person.

Enrollment in Healthy Michigan began April 1. As of June 2, the plan has enrolled almost 277,000 residents statewide, about 60 percent of those eligible, according to data from the Michigan Department of Community Health, which oversees Healthy Michigan.

Healthy Michigan does not charge premiums for clients with an income below the federal poverty guidelines. Those between 100 and 133 percent of poverty guidelines will be charged a premium calculated at 2 percent of their income, which equates to about $25 a month for a single person earning $15,000.

Co-pays also are low: $2, for instance, for a doctor visit.

Plan coverage includes doctors' visits, lab tests, prescriptions, hospitalization and mental-health services. Depending on the plan chosen by clients, it also can include dental and vision coverage.

Healthy Michigan is specifically designed for adults with low-paying jobs that don't provide health-care coverage and who haven't qualified for Medicaid in the past, said Amy Terry, spokeswoman for Enroll Kalamazoo County.

A coalition of local health and social service agencies that includes Bronson Methodist Hospital and Borgess Medical Center, Enroll Kalamazoo County is spearheading a coordinated effect to get uninsured residents covered by insurance.

Enroll Kalamazoo County s in the midst of "strategic planning" to reach the 5,600 residents eligible for Healthy Michigan who haven't signed up yet, Terry said.

"How to do that is very difficult because they are mainly people who don't know they're eligible," Terry said. "They are people who work at restaurants and other other minimum-wage jobs and they haven't been eligible for anything in the past" in terms of government programs to help low-income households.

Terry said the enrollment process is fairly easy, and people can sign up online. The website for enrollment is www.michigan.gov/mibridges. People also can call 1-855-789-5610 to enroll.

Most receive immediate determination of eligibility.

"We still have a lot of issues to work through the ACA and Healthy Michigan," but there's no question that it's providing health-care coverage for people who have long been without it, Terry said. "It's a step in the right direction."

Terry says Kalamazoo-area residents with questions can call her office at 269-341-6104.

Online state database



Below is a database of county-by-county enrollment in the Healthy Michigan plan through June 2, based on a report from the Michigan Department of Community Health.

To create a top-to-bottom ranking of counties for the different counties, look up "all counties" and click at the top of the appropriate column.

Have questions about the database? Contact Julie Mack at 269-350-0277 or email at jmack1@mlive.com.