Lynn DeBruin, who previously worked for the Rocky Mountain News covering the Broncos, died early Saturday at age 51.

DeBruin died in Denver Hospice at Lowry, said her sister, Linda Luther-Veno, who was present along with friends. DeBruin had been battling cancer.

“Lynn truly was an exceptional journalist, a tough competitor in the Broncos’ locker room and the press box and on the golf course; and a real friend and a gentle woman,” Denver Post columnist Woody Paige said. “She missed the newspaper war in Denver, and the newspaper business in Denver sincerely misses her.”

Her professional career included coverage of the World Series, six Super Bowls and golf’s majors. She spent 10 years as an NFL beat writer, first in Arizona then with the Broncos for John Elway’s final Super Bowl. She had been in Utah since 2010 working for The Associated Press.

“The Broncos were ground zero during the newspaper war, and the competition was intense,” said Patrick Saunders, who covered the Broncos for The Denver Post from 1998-2004 and currently covers the Rockies. “But Lynn and I became good friends.

“My wife, Nancy, and I had Lynn over for dinner earlier this summer. It was obvious she was very sick, but she was so brave and talked about her life and her golf game. She was a wonderful lady and I will miss her.”

Luther-Veno said DeBruin’s other passions included travel and photography. She was also an avid golfer.

John Temple, former editor, publisher and president of the Rocky Mountain News, said: “Lynn was a person of courage and determination who never let her health challenges stand in her way. She was a terrific reporter and a human being with deep compassion. This is a very sad day.”

Barry Forbis, former Rocky Mountain News sports editor, hired DeBruin to cover the Broncos.

“Lynn was a fighter. It’s what I admired most about her,” he said. “It was heartbreaking to learn this morning that she had lost her fight with cancer. Lynn was a special person, and we’ll miss her greatly.”

Memorial services will be held in Denver at 2 p.m. Wednesday at Horan & McConaty Funeral Home, 1091 S. Colorado Blvd.; and in Pennsylvania on a date to be determined.

Along with Luther-Veno, DeBruin is survived by her mother, Mary Luther, and a brother, Stephen Luther.