Topics: broad city, CBS, comedy central, craig ferguson, james corden, Stephen Colbert, the daily dot, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot

Fans of The Late Late Show were in a tizzy this week as CBS finally prepared to name Craig Ferguson’s replacement—the brave, intrepid soul who will be replacing him when he departs (allegedly voluntarily) in 2015. Late-night comedy is a staple for those of us who are constantly up ‘til all hours courtesy of insomnia, and we count on it for our evening injection of humor and, truth be told, a reason to live. Before we had Twitter to help us survive the late-night hours, we had television, and that means we have a certain affection for the icons of late night. For the rest of us, there’s the occasional next day viral video from Jimmy Fallon to give a taste of what we missed.

But who would it be? Rumors swirled that perhaps CBS was finally willing to put a woman at the helm, exciting news indeed given that this is an absolutely incredible era for female comedians. From Comedy Central‘s Broad City to USA’s Playing House, women are all over the airwaves being painfully funny; they’re producing their own films, they’re rocking the standup scene, and they’re taking their acts on tour. While the female comedy scene is dominated, as is the male one, by straight white women, there are tons of queer women and women of color as well—we’re living in a rich, diverse time for women in comedy.

CBS is known for being a conservative network, so no one wanted to get too wild with the speculation, but perhaps they could replace a white guy with a white lady, in a daring act of progressivism. If they really mustered up their gumption, maybe they could choose a black woman, eh? Thus, we waited with bated breath for the grand announcement, while the Internet swirled with commentary—an illustration of how digital forces are influencing television networks.

Or are they? Because the grand reveal was that James Corden would be the replacement. Oh, look, another white guy comedian. He’s British, though, so I guess that gets him an extra diversity credit, right? Corden, an actor on Gavin & Stacey and Doctor Who, isn’t very well-known in the United States, although he’s appeared on a variety of U.K. shows. He has no late-night hosting credits in his repertoire, although he has hosted a couple of low-level awards shows in the U.K. His resume certainly isn’t as impressive as that of many of the women who could have replaced him—or even Chelsea Handler, who went to Netflix instead.

In fact, one might argue that his qualifications actually doesn’t speak that well of him. On Horne & Corden, his attempt at co-hosting a sketch show, ratings dipped fast after initial interest, which raises some questions about his writing chops and acting abilities. Corden actually admitted that his sketch writing skills were weak, which does not exactly inspire confidence among those who’d like to see a strong comedic presence on late night. Sketches are key to a successful late night show, and someone who can’t engage with that kind of humor is going to get into trouble fast.

The main thing going in his favor is his presence on Twitter, as he has approximately four million Twitter followers. CBS, notoriously laggy when it comes to digital culture, may have thought that hiring him would be a sharp, progressive move for getting ahead of the curve and drawing in a socially engaged audience. (Late night TV tends to perform better in older, middle-aged white dude audiences, while digital culture could appeal to a younger generation.)