Jody Siano is one of millions of Americans shopping for health insurance. Like most, she is looking at how much she will have to pay each month. But she said she probably won't choose the cheapest plan.

That's because after considering her options she realized that a more expensive plan from Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey covered a specific drug she needs for only $30. The cheaper plan required her to meet her deductible before paying for only half the $300 monthly cost.

Most people shopping on the exchange, the online marketplace created by the Affordable Care Act, are likely to look first at what they must spend each month, but there is so much more than premiums to consider when picking a plan from the exchange, insurance experts warn.

And many -- especially those shopping for insurance for the first time -- may not understand their options, said Linda Schwimmer, vice president of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute.

"We are really shifting decision-making to people and we have done nothing to educate them," she said. "People are not ready."

Siano, an East Windsor resident and self-employed real estate agent who voted for President Obama and supported the Affordable Care Act, said she has purchased insurance on the individual market for the past 12 years and considers herself pretty knowledgeable.

But even she did not expect enrolling under the Affordable Care Act to be this difficult, she said.

"I have spent endless hours on this and am rather intelligent," she said. "I can't imagine how difficult this must be for most people."

Many of the insurance plans on the exchange keep premium prices low by offering to cover a much higher percentage of the costs for doctors or hospitals who agree to be in a "Tier 1" group and accept lower rates. The insurance companies then keep premiums low because some doctors and hospitals have agreed to lower reimbursements.

"What's the fastest way to get prices lower," Schwimmer said. "Bring down the payment to the medical providers and so what the plans did is they went out to the hospitals and said this is going to be a very small group of people (on the exchange) but they are going to be very price sensitive."

Preferred networks have always been around but are taking on new importance under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. There is pressure to keep costs low to attract millions of new customers, said Ward Sanders, president of the New Jersey Association of Health Plans.

"To really control costs and drive enrollment in the individual market, you have to get the underlying claims cost under control," Sanders said.

For example, AmeriHealth New Jersey offers a Tier 1 silver plan. Plans on the exchange are organized by metallic tiers: platinum, gold, silver and bronze. AmeriHealth's Tier 1 silver plan has the lowest premiums of any silver plan. The plan steers patients toward certain hospitals.

For inpatient hospital services, one of the most expensive claims an insurance company must pay, AmeriHealth's Tier 1 plan will pay 90 percent of the costs once the deductible is met if a patient is in a Tier 1 hospital but only 50 percent if a patient is in a Tier 2 hospital. Practically, that means those who live in Morris County would pay a lot more for a stay at Morristown Memorial Hospital than at Saint Clare's in either Denville or Dover. And if you live in Newark, it will cost far more at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center or Hackensack University Medical Center in Mountainside than it will in Saint Michael's in Newark or Saint Mary's Hospital in Passaic.

"Tiered networks are an evolution to the right mix of cost, choice and access to result in an ideal suite of products to best serve the consumer," said Jill Roman, a spokeswoman for AmeriHealth.

Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield, which along with Health Republic and AmeriHealth offer plans on the new exchange, also has a tiered network. Customers living in Middlesex County, for example, will pay higher out of pocket costs if they go to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital than Raritan Bay Medical Center.

It sounds intuitive: the more expensive a plan, the more generous its benefits, but surveys continue to show that most Americans do not understand the trade-offs they are making when purchasing insurance.

Earlier this year, the Journal Health Economics published a report showing that only 14 percent of Americans who already had insurance could identify all four of these terms: deductible, co-pay, co-insurance and out-of-pocket maximum.

"Insurance plans incorporate all sorts of incentives designed to encourage customers to make specific types of decisions," said George Loewenstein, a professor at Carnegie Mellon University, who authored the report said in a press release. "What is the likelihood that they are going to respond to these incentives if they can't understand the most basic elements of plan design?"

Schwimmer compared the current situation where millions are taking more responsibility for purchasing health insurance to the shift that many employees dealt with when defined benefit plans gave way to 401(k) plans across the nation. All of a sudden, she said, employees were responsible for managing their own money and understanding complex financial investments that previously were left to their employers.

"We really left it to the marketplace to educate people on what is a good investment and what is not," she said. "That has had mixed success."