The Denver Pioneers’ path to making their fourth NCAA Final Four appearance in the past five years goes through Denver.

Sunday, preseason No. 1 DU received the No. 4 overall NCAA Tournament seed and will open against unseeded Brown next Sunday at DU’s Peter Barton Lacrosse Stadium (1 p.m., ESPNU).

If they extend their winning streak to 10 games, the Pioneers (13-2) will advance to a May 16 quarterfinal game at Sports Authority Field at Mile High against No. 5 Duke (12-5) or unseeded Ohio State (11-6). The Blue Devils host the Buckeyes on Saturday.

Brown (12-4) lost to Yale in the Ivy League Tournament semifinals Friday and was fortunate to receive one of eight at-large NCAA bids.

Brown is 7-1 on the road.

“We can’t do anything but concentrate on Brown, that’s for sure,” DU coach Bill Tierney said. “They’re kind of a relentless offensive team; they will play us very much like Ohio State. They’re going to take a lot of shots. It’s going to be a different game for us. But they really are an explosive group, and it’s so important that we don’t think past them.”

Duke is the two-time defending NCAA champion. The Blue Devils defeated DU 15-12 in the national semifinals last year, but the Pioneers won a rematch 17-13 in the Feb. 14 season opener in Kennesaw, Ga.

Ohio State is the last team to defeat DU, doing so 13-11 on March 14 in Columbus.

“Duke and Ohio State are teams we have great history with. They’re both very good lacrosse teams,” Tierney said. “But we have to keep an eye on Brown and really do our homework. That’s all that matters right now.”

Denver has a chance to host consecutive NCAA Tournament games for the first time. The Pioneers, who will host a first-round game for the third consecutive year and fourth overall, are making their sixth straight NCAA Tournament appearance and eighth overall.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers

NCAA tournament pairings

Wednesday’s play-in games

Bryant at Marist, 5 p.m.

High Point at Towson, 5:30 p.m.

Saturday’s games

Albany at No. 8 Cornell, 10 a.m.

Yale at No. 6 Maryland, 12:30 p.m.

Towson or High Point at No. 1 Notre Dame, 3 p.m.

Ohio State at No. 5 Duke, 5:30 p.m.

Sunday’s games

Johns Hopkins at No. 7 Virginia, 11 a.m.

Brown at No. 4 Denver, 1 p.m.

Colgate at No. 3 North Carolina, 3:15 p.m.

Marist or Bryant at No. 2 Syracuse, 5:30 p.m.