State funding would help Boulder campus add fifth wing with academic focus

Andrew Natale, a University of Colorado research assistant, works to cast gels for analyzing proteins inside a lab at the Jennie Smoly Caruthers Biotechnology building on the University of Colorado's East Campus in March 2013. This year, CU is requesting $20 million in state capital construction funds to add a fifth wing to the building. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

The University of Colorado is hoping to soon add a fifth wing to the biotechnology building on the East Campus with help from state capital construction funds.

CU is requesting $20 million in state funds for fiscal year 2015-2016 for the proposed fifth wing, which campus officials say is needed to provide classroom and learning space for growing numbers of biochemistry and engineering students on the Boulder campus.

The campus has said it will commit $8 million for the new 57,000-square-foot wing.

Gov. John Hickenlooper's current budget request includes $281.6 million for capital construction and information technology projects. If that request is approved by the Joint Budget Committee and then the Legislature in the spring, CU-Boulder's biotechnology wing likely would receive funding.

CU also is hopeful state funds will come through to continue a visual and performing arts project on the Colorado Springs campus.

"We would be thrilled if they funded the governor's request, which includes those two important projects for CU," said Todd Saliman, chief financial officer for the CU system.

Construction on the initial four-wing, 343,000-square-foot Jennie Smoly Caruthers Biotechnology Building on CU's East Campus finished in 2011 and was financed with $163 million in campus, federal and private donor funds.

In 2013-2014, the state allocated $6 million to complete shelled teaching labs, classrooms and unfinished laboratory and office areas in the building.

Advertisement

This year, the campus appropriated $4 million to design the proposed academic wing, which planners want to add to the northwest side of the building at Colorado Avenue and Innovation Drive.

Once completed, the biotechnology building will be a leader in expanding academic offerings on East Campus, CU officials said.

"As the university continues to develop East Campus, it's migrating from what used to be a research park to a true extension of the main campus," said Steve Thweatt, vice chancellor for administration. "The need for educational spaces on East Campus has become more and more apparent."

The academic wing is likely to house CU's biochemistry and chemical and biological engineering programs, which are located in aging and inadequate facilities on the main campus, according to planning documents.

A proposed "active learning classroom" will allow faculty and instructors to do more hands-on and interactive teaching, according to planning documents.

The biotechnology building currently houses the BioFrontiers Institute, a hub for interdisciplinary research in science, math and engineering led by Tom Cech, who shared the 1989 Nobel Prize in chemistry.

If state funding comes through, Thweatt said construction on the new wing could begin in the spring or summer of 2016.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta