Directors of the county’s health care agency for the poor have agreed to spend $10 million more annually on specialist doctors – and to bump the pay for two of the agency’s top executives.

Higher doctors’ rates, officials said, might keep physicians from dropping Medicaid patients.

The health insurer for nearly 500,000 low-income or senior Orange County residents, CalOptima, will soon be competing against commercial health plans created under the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. Also, Obamacare expands Medicaid (called Medi-Cal in California), which means an influx of patients who will need cardiologists, ophthalmologists and other such physicians.

“We think there’s going to be more competition to access these specialists,” said Javier Sanchez, CalOptima’s chief network officer.

Funding will come from an unexpected $13 million in Medi-Cal revenue at CalOptima, officials said.

Specialists will be reimbursed about 8 percent more – a bump that could possibly draw new physicians into the network and translate to shorter patient wait-times. Still, doctors will get less than under Medicare, the public insurance for seniors.

“There are too many doctors who are falling away from taking CalOptima and Medi-Cal rates because they cannot survive,” said Dr. Peter Anderson, the director of the emergency department at Fountain Valley Regional Hospital.

Anderson cautioned, though, the additional funding may not reach all the specialists. Healthcare networks can take the higher rate in aggregate, and then distribute it among doctors unevenly – more for specialists who are in higher demand, for instance.

“We want to make sure it gets to all the doctors in the network in a fair fashion,” he said.

Also Thursday, the CalOptima Board of Directors approved a $27,000 one-time bonus for Chief Executive Officer Michael Schrader, and an $8,000 raise for Chief Counsel Gary Crockett. Schrader’s annual base salary is $315,000 and Crockett’s was $206,000.

Former board members criticized Crockett during the past two years for mishandling legal questions regarding open meetings and conflicts of interest. Last year, the county Grand Jury wrote that CalOptima spent more than $500,000 on outside law firms and “consumed countless hours of staff time investigating these allegations.”

But all the directors who voted Thursday supported the two salary increases.

“We looked at it as a systemic issue, not a one-person issue,” said board member Michael Riley, who is also the director of the county Social Services Agency.

As of August, CalOptima had a $3.6 million operating surplus; its total budget is about $1.5 billion.

Contact the writer: mreicher@ocregister.com