Cincinnati residents that were served by a now-closed neighborhood health clinic are getting new help.

Cincinnati's deadline looms for $1.2M federal public... The clock is ticking for some health care centers in the Cincinnati area. And if the city is going to bail them out, it'll be doing so as it stares at a $22 million budget deficit. More

Cincinnati Primary Care was awarded a $1,323,000 grant from the Federal Health Resources Services Administration.

The grant will support comprehensive primary health care services for the service area formerly served by Neighborhood Health Care Inc. and includes: Walnut Hills, Evanston, Mt. Auburn, East End, and the surrounding areas of Norwood and Harrison.

The CCPC will partner with Crossroad Health Center who will serve as a sub-grantee.

The CCPC and Crossroad will use the grant resources to add providers and enhance access to health services for those in need. Many of these individuals have been without a permanent medical home since the sudden closure of Neighborhood Health Care Inc. on Dec. 31.

“This will position us well and allow the city to take full advantage of the Affordable Care Act. Those in need of care are the beneficiaries,” said Dr. Noble Maseru, Cincinnati Health Commissioner, in a news release.

“We want to recognize the great work being done by dedicated medical professionals in Cincinnati to ensure that those in need of care are getting it. These resources are much needed and will be put to use immediately. Another job well done.” Dr. Rick Schwen, Chair, Cincinnati Board of Health, said in a news release.

This grant will, at no additional cost to local taxpayers, ensure the provision of services for medically underserved populations, including thousands of local residents.

The target population includes individuals and families that face a number of health challenges, including high rates of chronic illness, poor birth outcomes and multiple barriers to accessing care. The target population exceeds national benchmarks in diabetes, obesity, hypertension and pneumonia rates and fares poorly in maternal health indicators.

“We are excited to team up with Crossroad and our many community partners throughout the region to enhance access to quality, affordable health care,” added Joyce Tate COE, CCPC, in the release.

Cincinnati Primary Care operates 5 health centers, one dental center, one STI center and 10 school based health centers throughout Cincinnati. Together they provide services to 34,000 children and adults.