KALAMAZOO, MI -- Housing Resources Inc.’s executive director Michelle Davis has a couple of goals for the non-profit organization in 2014.

The first is to reach their goal during the annual fundraiser Walking Home – A Walk to End Homelessness.

The walk, which will start at The Eleanor House at 9 a.m. on Saturday, March 22, is HRI’s primary fundraiser. Last year, HRI met its goal of $100,000, with several hundred walkers taking part.



Based on pledges as of early March this year, Davis said "it looks like we’re going to have more walkers than usual."

Proceeds from the walk will go towards HRI’s efforts at helping those in a housing crisis, whether they are in danger of losing their homes or they already have and need help getting permanent housing. They offer emergency shelter at the Eleanor House and affordable housing properties, such as the Rickman House. Housing stabilization services aim at keeping families in their home and include eviction diversion. One program, in conjunction with United Way and Good Will, tries to keep families with school-aged children housed so that the children don’t have to change schools.

“Housing someone and keeping them housed isn’t totally about housing, it’s about the overall success of the family,” said Davis.

Since beginning her work with HRI in November 2012, Davis said one thing that’s stood out to her are the people who seek the organization’s help.

“The faces of homelessness are those people who are currently housed but really are behind a month or two on rent or need a security deposit or are doubled up with family, and are just on the verge of needing to go into a shelter. And that’s where we’re trying to catch people so they never become homeless,” she said.

“There’s a myth that people in shelters aren’t working ... 67 percent of families that stay at a shelter, at least one member is employed,” Davis said. “They’re working, but they’re wages aren’t enough to afford housing.”

Davis also said that the Affordable Care Act has affected the number of hours people are working, leading them to need housing assistance.

“What we’ve seen is that people who are employed are ending up in a situation where their employers are reducing their hours. The result is not only do they not have healthcare through their employer, their income significantly decreases,” she said. “They may have been stably housed for a long time and now they’re facing housing crisis because employers are dropping their hours.”

Another HRI goal has for this year is to make their services more accessible. Davis said she hopes to take its Housing Hour, an informational meeting about housing solutions that’s held every Wednesday from 4 to 5 p.m., and make it mobile.

“We’re really invested in getting out to ministries or neighborhood centers ... Wherever people will have us to take our services to them,” Davis said.

“It’s also about awareness,” she said. “We do a lot of things, but people tend to know us for one thing. It’s about having people really have an understanding of everything we do.”

Pledges can be made at http://www.firstgiving.com/housingresourcesinc/2014-walking-home-for-the-homeless.

For more information on Walking Home: The Walk to End Homelessness 2014 and HRI, visit http://www.housingresourcesinc.org/