Medicare meaningful-use money is the subject of a criminal prosecution in Texas, where the chief financial officer of a hospital has been arrested for health fraud. The case underscores the high stakes of the electronic health record incentive program and the audits now underway of hospital and physician compliance with meaningful-use criteria.

CMS has doled out billions of dollars under this program and is taking money back from hospitals that don’t get it right, a compelling argument for them to assess certifications for every core measure and maintain a “book of evidence” to that effect.

Joe White, former CFO of Shelby Regional Medical Center in Center, Texas, was charged Feb. 6 with making false statements and identity theft in connection with $785,655 in Medicare meaningful use payments, the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Texas says. He pleaded not guilty (see story, p. 6). “If you alter your data to keep Medicare money, that’s a felony,” says Austin, Texas, attorney Brian Flood, who is with Husch Blackwell.

It’s a complicated environment, as electronic health records take center stage in quality reporting programs but are eyed suspiciously by the government because of their potential to generate meaningless documentation and upcode bills. When EHRs are not properly used and monitored, they could saddle hospitals with overpayment liability or worse, Flood says.

EHR Money Is All or Nothing

The most pressing recoupment risk is meaningful use because the government is spending a fortune to get the industry to adopt interoperable electronic health records. In 2012, for example, hospitals received $3.5 billion in meaningful-use incentive payments on top of $1.3 billion in 2011, according to the Government Accountability Office. CMS is taking an all-or-nothing approach to compliance. Unless auditors determine that hospitals met all meaningful use goals, they have to return their entire payment, which is often in the million-dollar range. “You don’t get partial credit,” Flood says.

To get incentive payments, hospitals have to sign an attestation that they will use certified EHR technology to accomplish meaningful use objectives (Stages 1, 2 and eventually 3). Hospitals must satisfy “core” and “menu” objectives. Stage 2 core objectives include using computerized provider order entry for medication, lab and radiology orders; recording demographics in the EHR; charting changes in certain vital signs; documenting smoking status; and using clinical decision support “to improve performance on high priority health conditions.” Menu objectives include imaging results; recording patient family history as structured data; and e-prescribing.

To evaluate meaningful-use compliance, CMS hired an auditor, Figliozzi and Company of Garden City, N.Y. The audits have been frustrating for some providers because any deficiencies will cost them their entire meaningful-use payment for the audit period, lawyers and consultants say.

Of course it’s possible to ace an audit. Kaleida Health in Buffalo, N.Y., got word in January that it satisfied Figliozzi auditors for Stage 1 meaningful use criteria, says Robert Trusiak, chief compliance officer and senior associate general counsel. “There will be no recoupment,” he says. It took its toll, however, to bring certified EHRs to life and monitor their compliance with meaningful use, Trusiak says. “This is not for the faint of heart,” he says. “It’s a lot of work.”

Here are four suggestions Trusiak has for improving and monitoring meaningful-use compliance:

(1) Review the certifications at the end of every core measure. Figure out where deficiencies are and fix them well before the end of the meaningful-use year. “Don’t accept the word of the certified EHR representative, which is not a critical comment on the rep. It’s a comment on the fact that core measures are fluid” and technology evolves, he says.

(2) Take good care of your “book of evidence,” which is proof the hospital satisfied every core measure. “You need a book of evidence to support the veracity of your attestations,” Trusiak says. Make sure the book of evidence contains both electronic and hard copy proof of every core measure. But don’t think of it as ordinary documentation. “The book of evidence is a dynamic document and not static or a snapshot of compliance during the course of the meaningful use period,” he says, because core measures may change during the attestation period and EHRs may be upgraded one or more times. Don’t throw anything out. Hospitals must be able to produce documentation to support “continuous compliance,” he says. Trusiak suggests keeping duplicate books of evidence in case one gets lost (e.g., an employee takes it home and his car is stolen).

(3) Test the operational aspect of the core measures. “It’s one thing for your meaningful use working group or steering committee to discuss compliance. It’s another thing to ensure the compliance is operationalized,” he says. That requires follow-up audits. For example, check whether the registration department is using software that’s different from the certified EHR, which could mean the gathering of demographic data is not meaningful-use compliant, Trusiak says.

(4) Be wary of foreign EHR platforms that detract from meaningful use requirements and create HIPAA concerns, Trusiak says. Certified EHRs are a one-size-fits-all technology, and hospitals or physicians may go off the reservation when they adapt it. Suppose physicians add a continuity-of-care tool to communicate patient needs between shifts (e.g., the patient in room 203 needs another CBC at 11 a.m. and make sure her white blood count isn’t spiking). But they install software that isn’t certified EHR. “That will impede the hospital’s ability to meet the meaningful-use threshold measure,” he says. It’s also a HIPAA risk because PHI is stored with a third-party vendor that may not be subject to a business associate agreement.

Other hospitals and physician groups are not faring as well as Kaleida in their audits, lawyers and consultants say. Richelle Beckman, an attorney with the Forbes Law Group in Overland Park, Kan., says auditors are finding meaningful-use deficiencies all over the map. Providers’ attestations have been audited for accuracy of numerators and denominators reported by the EHR for various measures, such as computerized order entry. Auditors have evaluated whether information is truly being entered as “structured data,” which some measures require. Each EHR product calculates structured data numerators and denominators differently; it is critical to understand how your product captures these values and ensure staff is entering data in a manner that will be captured on the EHR report or, alternatively, work with the vendor if certain data are not being captured when calculating numerators and denominators, Beckman says. “Even if you have met 14 out of 15 requirements, if you don’t meet one, they ask for the entire incentive payment back,” she says.

Beckman advises running reports for core measures for the periods they are attesting to and keeping them on hand. For example, if a measure, such as implementing drug-drug interactions, is a simple “yes” or “no” attestation, take screen shots demonstrating your system had set these functionalities. “You can set different levels of drug interactions,” she says. “Auditors want to see that your system will alert providers when certain prescriptions may interact with one another adversely.” Screen shots of the alerts, ideally showing the date the screenshot was taken, or screen shots of the drug-drug interaction settings within the system throughout your reporting period, will help support compliance with this and similar measures.

Chris Apgar, president of Apgar & Associates in Portland, Ore., says there is still some denial out there. “Providers think it can never happen to them. We are working with a four-physician specialty practice and it happened to them,” he says. A large health system has had several of its component hospitals audited for meaningful-use compliance. One organization attested to its compliance but never did a security-risk analysis, Apgar says. “If they are audited, they will fail because you can’t do it after the fact.”

Even in the absence of an audit, hospitals and physicians are at risk from meaningful use noncompliance, Flood says. Two laws — the Affordable Care Act and Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act (FERA) — together created reverse false claim liability, which makes it a false claim to knowingly retain an overpayment, he says. “If you start to stack up data that clearly show you are not meeting your core measures or maybe not measuring them at all, at some point in time, someone will realize it,” he says. “You are inching up to FERA liability for retaining money you should have given back.”

Meaningful use is not the only way EHRs are posing a risk to revenue and compliance. “The EHR realm is very dynamic and has oodles of moving parts and has to be linked together,” Flood says. “I don’t mentally divide them.” For example, the physician quality reporting system (PQRS) rewards “eligible professionals” for electronically submitting Part B quality data, with penalties after 2015 for failure to report. The next step is auditing the accuracy of the data submissions because they are the basis of Medicare PQRS incentive payments. “CMS is sending out PQRS 2014 notices for validation for reporting. You are supposed to be using the electronic system,” Flood says. “It’s another place for losing money.”

And then there are the government’s warnings about the abuse of EHRs and the risk that documentation shortcuts pose to billing and documentation integrity — which Flood says ties back to meaningful use and its core measures. Medicare administrative contractors are already downcoding claims when documentation has been subject to cloning or copy-paste, which means it hasn’t been updated by clinicians for the patient encounter. If physicians copy and paste to meet a core measure, “that is a production of a false record,” he says. For example, screening for clinical depression is a 2014 core measure. Suppose a patient presents at the emergency room, talking about suicide, and the physician documents everything appropriately. On subsequent visits, the physician uses “robodocumentation” instead of updating the patient encounter (e.g., medication changes, drug use). That would not be compliant with meaningful use, Flood says, “and if it comes up on audit and someone tries to change the documentation to fix it, you could be creating a felony.”

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a $150 discount on a subscription to Report on Medicare Compliance.