University California Los Angeles students stage a protest rally in a show of solidarity with protesters at the University of Missouri on Thursday. Nick Ut — The associated press

We’ve seen the future, and it is frightening.

On Thursday, students at some of America’s most prestigious colleges and universities staged a Million Student March to protest ballooning student debt, demand tuition-free higher education and call for a nationwide minimum wage of $15 an hour.

The Million Student March was also an expression of solidarity with their peers at the University of Missouri, who managed to force the resignation of school president Timothy M. Wolfe for his allegedly inadequate response to racially insensitive incidents in and around campus.

The Mizzou campus has been a hotbed of anger and agitation since the death of Michael Brown in nearby Ferguson, Missouri. A series of unrelated incidents snowballed into a major protest movement culminating in last week’s toppling of president Wolfe and the stepping down of Chancellor R. Bowen Loftin.

In his letter announcing the start of a hunger strike, UM student protester Jonathan Butler alluded to incidents he claims “dynamically disrupted the learning experience for marginalized (and) underrepresented students.”

“In the past 90 days alone we have seen the MSA (Missouri Students Association) President Payton Head being called the N-word on campus, graduate students being robbed of their health insurance, Planned Parenthood services being stripped from campus, #ConcernedStudent1950 peaceful demonstrators being threatened with pepper spray, and a matter of days ago a vile and disgusting act of hatred where a MU student drew a swastika in the Gateway residential hall with their own feces.”

The 1950 in Concerned Students 1950 is a reference to the year segregation ended at UM and the name of the group principally responsible for organizing the UM protests.

Earlier this year MU made headlines when students circulated a petition demanding the removal of a statue of Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson, of course, was an 18th century slave owner and that makes him persona non grata on a 21st century American university campus.

While the student debt crisis is as real as gridlock in the Sepulveda Pass and the minimum wage is always fair game for debate, the blatant racial demagoguery and class warfare that lead to the exits of President Wolfe and Chancellor Loftin should send a chill down the spine of every American.

Advertisement

The rhetoric and actions of UM students and faculty members make a mockery of every American value and the idea of higher education itself.

Melissa Klick, a journalism professor, actually shouted for “muscle” to prevent a student newspaper reporter from photographing protesters. Klick has subsequently resigned her journalism title but still teaches mass media courses, including a class on Lady Gaga.

I wonder if UM offers a degree in Kardashian?

Hunger-striker Butler launched his protest when UM dropped health care coverage for graduate students, a real problem for Jonathan because last year his dad only earned $8 million as an executive with the Union Pacific Railroad.

According to The Wall Street Journal, Mizzou dropped health insurance for grad students to comply with mandates under the Affordable Health Care Act, aka, Obamacare. So it appears the UM protesters toppled the wrong president.

Student Government President Payton Head didn’t help the cause when he tweeted that the Ku Klux Klan had infiltrated the UM campus with the intent of gunning down students in their dorm rooms, a complete fiction. Head has since apologized.

That the majority white student body at the University of Missouri elected Head, an African-American and gay to boot, as its leader counts for nothing. Head sees himself and fellow students of color as victims of systemic racism while engaging in the very racism they claim to deplore.

On Wednesday evening, KOMU-TV reported Concerned Student 1950 segregated protesters by race, banishing white protesters — who agreed with them — so black protesters could have a “safe space” to themselves.

Meanwhile, student government vice president Brenda Smith-Lezama appeared on MSNBC claiming, “The First Amendment creates a hostile and unsafe learning environment” for students at UM.

If this craziness doesn’t end UM officials won’t have to remove Thomas Jefferson’s statue; Jefferson will climb down from his pedestal and walk away in disgust.

Doug McIntyre’s column appears Sundays. Hear him weekdays, 5-9 on AM 790 KABC. He can be reached at: doug@kabc.com.