SHARE A Midwestern State nursing student practices taking blood pressure on a classmate. Stephanie Saenz/Special to the Times Record News Stephanie Saenz/Special to the Times Record News A Midwestern State nursing student practices taking blood pressure on a mannequin. Stephanie Saenz/Special to the Times Record News A Midwestern State nursing student practices checking a patient's pulse.

By Stephanie Saenz

The new school year for many college students is well underway. While there are numerous majors to choose from, a rise in the number of nursing and other health care majors is steadfast.

Before the 2014-15 school year, 33 percent of Midwestern State University enrollment was devoted to health care. That number has risen to 39 percent, said Dr. James Johnston, dean of the College of Health and Human Services. The increase, he added, is due to demand and stability.

Johnston explained that when the economy gets bad, people tend to look for a stable career.

Health care, Johnston said, traditionally fits that bill, since there is also always going to be a demand for health services, students feel comfortable making the decision to choose a major in that field.

“The Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) added anywhere between 30 (million) and 40 million people to insurance,” Johnston said, “which ultimately meant that more people were added to an already overburdened system.”

The “higher than usual demand” can be consequential to the number of people living in the baby boomer generation versus the “baby bust” generation.

“The smaller baby bust generation is nearly required to care for the larger group of now older people who have access to health care, well care, and have overcome chronic illnesses,” he said.

Since the numbers within the two generations can’t balance, demand for health services will nearly always be greater than supply.

Johnston said that every year, 180 students are accepted into the nursing program, more than 60 into the radiology program, and many more into other health care programs.

“Wichita Falls cannot support as many (students) that graduate each year, but the state and country can.”

This provides a sense of mobility and security among current students, and soon-to-be or recently graduated students.

Although the health care field has been primarily female students, more male students are making their way into this career field, as well. Men are joining the nursing and radiology programs more frequently than before.

The age of those studying health care varies greatly. However, there are more traditional students now.

Johnston reasons that “attending college depends on economic factors.” Many people are delayed in going to college but still have those dreams, which is where the smaller number of nontraditional students comes from.

The growth in health care studies, the dean stated, is very proportionate with the university as a whole.

“The increase is good for the university. It is not just a human services growth but a university growth as well,” adding that the College of Health and Human Services must grow proportionately with the university to be a success.