Above: President Obama attends a memorial service on Dec. 16, 2012, at Newtown High School in Newtown, Conn., for victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. Obama arrived in Newtown two days after the tragedy and as authorities were still trying to piece together a motive for the second-deadliest mass shooting in the United States. (Olivier Douliery via Bloomberg News)

The president paused, the thump of the helicopter’s blades filling the otherwise silent cabin. He had planned to tweet some statistics later that day comparing gun violence in the United States and other developed countries, but now he told his staff to cancel that.

Instead, in the Oval Office two days later, he seized upon something that seemed more important to him than any argument about gun control — an idea central to his political identity and his conviction that he could unify the divided nation.

“The essence of what is right about Christianity is embedded here,” he said of the families, according to notes taken during the meeting.

As Obama saw it, the parishioners and their families met the most demanding teachings of Christ. “They welcomed the stranger,” he said in the Oval Office meeting. “They forgave the worst violence.”

These were Obama’s thoughts as he prepared to deliver the eulogy for the Rev. Clementa Pinckney. He wanted to use the moment to talk about the example that the pastor, who was killed in the attack, his parishioners and their families had set for a country that had grown so suspicious and gridlocked over the course of his presidency.

“How do we conduct ourselves?” he asked. “Don’t we have to do something more than just praise how wonderful these folks were and then go about our daily lives?”

Obama did not grow up in a religious household and became a practicing Christian as an adult. He has written more extensively about his spiritual awakening than almost any other modern president, addressing it in two books before he was elected to the White House and in more than a dozen speeches since.