When former Hunter College biology professor Jason Dictenberg recently began looking for work to supplement his endeavors at his Manhattan biotech startup, he turned to Faculty Row.



Like a LinkedIn for academics, the Manhattan-based website lets members post profiles, find out about jobs both inside and outside universities, and exchange ideas. The neurobiologist says he's now looking into opportunities in online teaching and at an educational tech company and making contacts in the business world.



Mr. Dictenberg sees the site as playing an important role in a field where many academics have become free agents, without a home base at a single university. "It's helping to take the individual out of an isolated existence," he said.



Faculty Row's founder and CEO, Jeff Finder—a former institutional and retail stockbroker for Oppenheimer & Co. in Manhattan—aims to profit from helping professors make the most of their skills at a time when many universities, facing pressures to keep tuition down, are gravitating toward hiring low-paid adjuncts and using online-learning platforms.



"We feel the most valuable thing we can do is give academics access to jobs," Mr. Finder said. "It's important for them to monetize their knowledge as these changes take place."

Private industry calls

Faculty Row, which Mr. Finder launched in Manhattan in 2009, has partnered with jobs.ac.uk, a popular employment engine for academia in the U.K., and tapped other resources to list professional opportunities around the world. They range from full professorships to consulting gigs in private industry, where, Mr. Finder notes, there is a high demand for experts with backgrounds in quantitative science, biotechnology, engineering and medicine. Professors, who must be invited to join the site, pay membership fees that start at $199 for one year.



He faces plenty of competition from other social networks for academics. Academia.edu, based in San Francisco, lets professors share their research and get detailed analytics on how many people are reading it; it also offers a job board. Mendeley, a cloud-based tool for sharing academic papers and a social network for academics that's based in Manhattan and London, got snapped up by journal and book publisher Elsevier, headquartered in Amsterdam, this past spring, reportedly for more than $69 million.

76%—Percentage of university professors in nontenured full-time and adjunct roles

$3K—Median adjunct pay for teaching a bachelor's degree course at a private university

Source: American Association of University Professors



At the same time, open-source learning platforms like Udemy, based in San Francisco, are giving professors an option to find work outside institutions by teaching online courses for pay. "Experts' whole mindset has changed," said Saad Alam, founder of ed-tech firm Citelighter, which was recently lured to Baltimore from New York by a Maryland state incentive program for startups in this niche.



So far, Faculty Row has about 25,000 active members, including professors at Columbia and New York universities, according to Mr. Finder, who intensified his recruiting about 15 months ago. He says it is on track for about $500,000 in revenue for 2013 and is profitable. To help members raise their profiles, he promotes prominent experts as "super professors" on the site's homepage, sends out press releases touting their ideas and enables members to post their research, add videos and do live broadcasts.

Cross-pollinating ideas

The site is also attracting academic experts interested in a cross-disciplinary approach to research. Featured as one of its "super professors," Frank Ravitch, a professor and the Walter H. Stowers Chair at Michigan State University College of Law who speaks frequently at law schools and conferences in New York, said that one draw has been hearing from researchers in fields such as the sciences who are interested in his work on law and religion. "In some cases," he said, "it was people who were producing data that could be useful to me."

Get Crain's Small Business Alert Sign up for our FREE weekly Small Business Alert email newsletter. An essential summary of the week's top headlines selected for small businesses. More Newsletters ›

Comments