Three major medical groups will join Medicare Shared Savings Program under the umbrella of Amarillo Legacy Medical Accountable Care Organization.

The addition of medical groups BSA Harrington Physicians, BSA Physicians Group and BSA Amarillo Diagnostic Clinic will help physicians have real-time access to patient records and help better coordinate patient care, a BSA official said Monday.

Now, 82 physicians, nurse practitioners and physician assistants in BSA Health System’s physician groups will participate in the Medicare Shared Savings Program with 120 current providers. BSA’s clinic locations include BSA Urgent Care, BSA Family Medical Clinic, BSA Amarillo Diagnostic Clinic, BSA Panhandle Ear Nose and Throat, BSA Amarillo Surgical Group and BSA Harrington Physicians.

“The primary benefit to the patient comes in the form of better care coordination at the point of service, at the point of contact for each of the providers,” said Lance Gatlin, vice president of physician service at BSA. “It’s primarily through better use of the patient information, better communication.”

In the past, sharing patient information between physicians involved lots of paperwork, and not having quick access to patient records increased the likelihood of duplicated services.

“The best possible thing for me as a patient is for that physician to be as up-to-date and aware of my medical condition as a possible, so having access to all those records at the point of service quickly is a benefit to the patient,” he said. “In having access to those records, it creates an opportunity to eliminate any duplication of tests or redundancy.”

Gatlin said, for example, that by sharing information between physicians, doctors may not need to order a follow-up test for a patient, possibly saving the patient from paying another co-pay or other health care expenses.

“There is potential for the patients to actually realize some savings if the participants in the (accountable care organization) are better able to coordinate care and reduce duplication,” he said. “If I had a CT done recently and I’m going to another physician appointment, and they are able to use the previous one instead of ordering another one, I may, as the patient, realize some savings in co-pays or deductibles and costs associated with maybe some reduction or elimination of any duplication of tests.”

The Affordable Care Act established accountable care organizations as a way to identify gaps in care and community trends, as well as to reduce waste and duplication of services, according to U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Amarillo Legacy Medical ACO, or ALMA, is the Amarillo area’s only accountable care organization and has participated in the Medicare Shared Savings Program since last year.

ALMA is a partnership between multiple independent medical practices designed to improve care for Medicare beneficiaries and the community, and to lower health care costs.

Amarillo Legacy Medical ACO also includes Amarillo Medical Specialists, Amarillo Family Physicians, Family Medicine Center of Amarillo, Family Medicine Center of Canyon, FMC Clinics (including CareXpress and Living Well Express Care), Panhandle Pediatric Group, Dr. Cindy Hutson, Southwest Neuroscience and Spine Center, Panhandle Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Cardiology Center of Amarillo.

ALMA generated costs of almost $4.9 million last year, about half of which was returned to the organization as an incentive to participate in Medicare savings programs.

Dr. William Biggs, CEO and Medical Director of ALMA, said accountable care organizations such as ALMA need a strong network of primary care doctors and specialists to better manage health care.

“The addition of the BSA medical groups to our Medicare Shared Savings Program panel is designed to improve care coordination, enhance primary care delivery, and reduce wasteful duplicate services,” he said in a statement.

Accountable care organization providers must meet quality standards to ensure that savings are achieved through improving care coordination and providing care that is appropriate, safe and timely, according to information from BSA. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services established 33 quality measures on care coordination and patient safety, appropriate use of preventive health services, improved care for at-risk populations and patient and caregiver experience of care.

Federal savings from this initiative are up to $940 million over four years. More than 14,300 Medicare patients in the Amarillo area receive care through primary care doctors who participate in Amarillo Legacy Medical ACO.