UCR Health to Host Coachella Valley Health Fair and Health Exchange Sign-Up Event March 21

Certified Counselors will provide face-to-face enrollment alongside health resources from a range of Coachella Valley cities and organizations

Share this article:

The signatures of President Barack Obama, Vice President Joe Biden, and Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi on the health insurance reform bill signed in the East Room of the White House, March 23, 2010. Photo credit: Wikimedia Commons.

MEDIA ADVISORY: There will be a press conference associated with this event at 11 a.m. in the Building B Auditorium at the UCR Palm Desert Campus. Present will be: Assembly Member V. Manual Perez; Edith Lara-Trad, regional information officer, Covered California; G. Richard Olds, dean of the UCR School of Medicine; Kathy Greco, CEO of the Desert Healthcare District; and Gary Honts, CEO of JFK Memorial Hospital.

By Kathy Barton

PALM DESERT, Calif. – UCR Health will host a free health resource fair and sign-up event on Friday, March 21, to assist community members interested in enrolling in Covered California, the state health insurance exchange established in response to the federal Affordable Care Act.

The event is scheduled from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. at the UCR Palm Desert Center, Building B Auditorium, 75-080 Frank Sinatra Dr. in Palm Desert. Parking will be free.

In addition to Covered California enrollment assistance, the event will include free basic health screenings by UCR Health physicians and Medi-Cal application assistance. English- and Spanish-speaking certified enrollment counselors will be available to assist with enrollment in Covered California health plans. The application process may take up to 90 minutes.

In order to enroll in a Covered California health plan, individuals should bring:

Proof of California Residency (California Driver’s License or California Identification Card or proof of citizenship/immigration status)

Social Security Number

Total monthly income

Number of persons in the household

Appointments are available by calling 1-866-893-8446.

The event is supported by several cities and community-based organizations in the Coachella Valley. In addition to UCR Health, the clinical arm of the UC Riverside School of Medicine, the event is being organized in partnership with Covered California, the Desert Healthcare Foundation, and the Path to Health Program of Desert Regional Medical Center and JFK Memorial Hospital. Path to Health is a campaign by JFK Memorial Hospital and Desert Regional Medical Center that offers educational materials and resources for navigating the insurance exchanges and the ACA.

Archived under: Health, Affordable Care Act, Covered California, healthcare reform, Palm Desert Center, press release, School of Medicine, UCR Health

Top of Page