Morning lineup:



Meet The Press: Sen. Dick Durbin (D-IL); Rep. Peter King (R-NY); Rep. Donna Edwards (D-MD); Others TBD. Face The Nation: Sen. Jack Reed (D-RI); Watergate Journalist Bob Woodward & Carl Bernstein; Former Ambassador to Iraq James Jeffrey; Assistant Director-General for Health Security at the WHO Dr. Keiji Fukuda. This Week: Army Gen. Carter Ham (Ret.); Medical Missionary Dr. Frank Glover, Jr.; Former Ambassador to Republic of the Congo and Nigeria Robin Sanders; Roundtable : Cokie Roberts (ABC News), Republican Strategist Matthew Dowd, LZ Granderson (ESPN) and Sharyl Attkisson (Formerly of CBS News) Fox News Sunday: Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC); Sen. Ben Cardin (D-MD); Sen. Chris Coons (D-DE); Former Michigan Gov. John Engler (R); Roundtable : George Will (Washington Post), Jackie Kucinich (Washington Post), Radio Host Laura Ingraham and Ron Fournier (National Journal). State of the Union: Sen. John McCain (R-AZ); Former National Security Adviser Gen. Jim Jones; Former Ambassador to Iraq Zalmay Khalilzad; Roundtable : Former Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli (R), Former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland (D), Democratic Strategist Stephanie Cutter and Republican Strategist Kevin Madden.

60 Minutes will feature: an interview with Anthony Bosch, the MLB's chief witness in the doping case against Alex Rodriguez (preview); and, a report on GoPro, one of the world's best-selling cameras that's revolutionizing video production (preview).

Evening lineup:

On Comedy Central...

Jon Stewart examined Sen. Rand Paul's unwavering support for foreign aid to Israel. (08/07)

And Stephen Colbert went retro for a look back at Richard Nixon's resignation. (08/04)

Note: The Daily Show and The Colbert Report will be airing reruns this week.

Elsewhere...

Donald Trump used Twitter to show off his compassionate conservatism.

Continuing his Twitter rant started on Friday, demanding that American healthcare workers infected with the Ebola virus not be allowed back into the country for treatment, bombastic businessman Donald Trump tweeted that healthcare workers "must suffer the consequences," for their humanitarian impulses. The U.S. cannot allow EBOLA infected people back. People that go to far away places to help out are great-but must suffer the consequences!

And he wasn't alone...

Christian crusader Ann Coulter joined Trump's lack-of-pity party.

In her syndicated column Wednesday, conservative columnist Ann Coulter called the American doctor infected with Ebola and now receiving treatment in Atlanta a prime example of "Christian narcissism." In the column, titled "Ebola Doc's Condition Downgraded To 'Idiotic,'" Coulter called Dr. Kent Brantly's humanitarian work in Liberia nothing more than the efforts of an ego-driven Christian and "the first real-world demonstration of the economics of Obamacare." [...] She suggested American Christians are simply tired of fighting the "culture war" in the U.S., which is why they "go on 'mission trips' to disease-ridden cesspools."

Meanwhile...

Dr. Ben Carson tried (read: failed) to inject some sanity into the discussion.

Carson said Americans should educate themselves on the virus but said government health policy should be to protect the country against a "worst-case scenario." An example of that scenario involved a hospital lab worker being bribed $1 million for access to urine that contains Ebola. "Someone comes up to a lab worker," Carson hypothesized, "He knows he's got the urine; 'How would you like to have a million dollars?' A little transaction there…" "Such things have been known to happen," he said.

We're all gonna fucking die!

- Trix