NORFOLK — It was a 6-year-old's question during the Presidents' Run at a Nationals baseball game in Washington that brought Jennifer Smith, her daughter Eleanor and their friends to Hillary Clinton's final pre-Super Tuesday rally at Lake Taylor High School.

As the bobble-headed presidential impersonators gamboled around the bases, Eleanor said "Where are the ladies?" Smith recalled as she, Eleanor, their friends Laura O'Reilly and 6-year-old Susie patiently started a four-hour wait.

"I said, 'Well, there weren't any,'" Smith, a Suffolk resident, recalled. That was when Eleanor decided who her candidate would be – and when she heard Clinton was coming to Norfolk, insisted on coming to see.

In a fiery half hour speech, Clinton made her bid to be the first woman president, appealing to Virginians for support in Tuesday's primary.

Republicans, she said, "don't believe in raising the minimum wage, they don't believe in equal pay – they believe we should go back to the failed snake-oil policy of trickle-down economics."

Video: Hillary Clinton in Norfolk Presidential Candidate Hillary Clinton visit Lake Taylor High School in Norfolk. Presidential Candidate Hillary Clinton visit Lake Taylor High School in Norfolk. See more videos

Clinton promised to promote universal pre-K programs, push for immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship and work on international coalitions to combat terrorism.

"I will do everything I can to keep our men and women in uniform safe," she said.

She hit another issue important in Hampton Roads, saying she would take action, including deploying a half billion solar panels, to attack climate change. Clean energy, she said, would generate millions of jobs for Americans.

Clinton also promised to protect the Affordable Care Act, saying that while Republicans in Congress have voted more than 60 times to repeal it, "they won't even tell you what they will put in its place, because they know you won't like it."

Clinton at Lake Taylor Aileen Devlin / Daily Press Presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks to the crowd at Lake Taylor High School in Norfolk on Monday, Feb. 29, 2016. No Mags, No Sales, No Internet, No TV Presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks to the crowd at Lake Taylor High School in Norfolk on Monday, Feb. 29, 2016. No Mags, No Sales, No Internet, No TV (Aileen Devlin / Daily Press)

The former first lady contrasted her stands on guns and on higher education with those of her competitor for the Democratic nomination, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders.

Shes said Sanders voted for immunity for gun makers and dealers against lawsuits seeking damages while she opposed it during her time as a senator from New York.

And while detailing a proposal to refinance student debt and reduce the burden of college on families, she said Sanders' proposal for free education at public universities was unrealistic and would mean middle class taxpayers would subsidize education for the wealthy.

For the 1,500 at the rally, the idea that brought Smith and O'Reilly and their 6-year-olds – that it is past time for a woman president – resonated strongly.

"It's a question of equity," said Mordecai L. Smith, no relation to Jennifer. He said Clinton's promises to do better by vets and to keep steering the course on criminal justice and foreign policy that President Barack Obama has set had won him over.

"My heart's with Bernie, but my head's with Hillary," said William Massie, of Virginia Beach. For him, electability was the deciding issue.

It was Clinton's last stop before Super Tuesday, when Democrats from Virginia to American Samoa will vote on who they want the party's nominee to be.

Clinton started the day in Massachusetts, where Sanders is pressing hard, and stopped in vote-rich Northern Virginia before heading over to Lake Taylor High School.

Clinton has a strong lead in the polls in most Super Tuesday states, but political scientists believe if Sanders can win at least 40 percent of Virginia's vote, it will signal a long battle for the party's nomination.

Ress can be reached by telephone at 757-247-4535.