Maybe it’s time to fess up, ladies. All these years, every day, you’ve been using recreational drugs. Should you tell your kids? Should you admit that on your next job application?

Before you protest that you have never, ever indulged in any kind of substance abuse, let me point out who’s accusing you. It’s the American Life League, a purportedly Catholic organization that wants you to know the “truth” about the impact of the Supreme Court’s ruling that Hobby Lobby and similar organizations can refuse to provide coverage for birth control in their employee benefits program.

On its website and in widely distributed media releases, the League states, “The birth control pill and its progeny do not treat a medical condition, but rather are promoted as a way for women to avoid pregnancy. Therefore, these pills are not actual medical services but are, in fact, recreational drugs.”

Soooo, those of you who used The Pill anytime since its development in the ‘60s are classified by them as recreational drug users. Of course, the guys who use Viagra are treating “a medical condition” and the cost of their pills is covered by employer-paid and government insurances. When sexually active women try to prevent an unwanted pregnancy, they’re just having fun. And the guys using the little blue pills aren’t?

By the way, the American Life League’s website will also help you “identify sex education funding streams and other programs you must fight” in case you also want to prevent schools and social agencies from teaching children anything about what used to be cutely called the “facts of life.” I wonder if these folks who want to eliminate sex education and limit access to birth control are the same crowd howling with outrage about their tax money being used to assist struggling single moms and neglected children.

Note thousands of women are prescribed contraceptives for dozens of health reasons, such as endometriosis, having nothing to do with birth control. But all that is almost beside the point. The ruling is actually about more than women and sex.

Justice Samuel Alito wrote in the majority opinion that its decision “should not be understood that an insurance coverage mandate must necessarily fall if it conflicts with an employer’s religious beliefs.” Then he went on to say there are other means by which women can obtain birth control and abortions without violating an employer’s religious freedom. He may be right about that.

But what about an employer who doesn’t believe in other things? Can he refuse to provide coverage for employees who do believe in them and need them? Parents with unusual but strongly held religious beliefs who refuse to get appropriate medical treatment for their children often have their parental rights taken away by a court. So why is it okay for an employer to say “I don’t believe in this or that, so I won’t help you or your kids get it no matter how serious an issue it is for you.”?

In a blistering 35-page dissenting opinion Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg asked whether the ruling would extend to employers with religiously grounded objections to blood transfusions (Jehovah’s Witnesses); antidepressants (Scientologists); medications derived from pigs, including anesthesia, intravenous fluids, and pills coated with gelatin (certain Muslims, Jews, and Hindus); and vaccinations.

The Affordable Care Act was not intended to force any person to do anything that violates their religious beliefs, but when major for-profit corporations claim personhood so they can inflict the owner’s belief on others, that’s just plain wrong.

Justice Ginsburg concluded, “The Court, I fear, has ventured into a minefield.”

EDITOR’S NOTE: A former state assemblywoman from Jersey City, Joan Quigley is the president and CEO of the North Hudson Community Action Corp. in Union City. Her column appears in The Jersey Journal every Tuesday.