By Marc Heller

April 3 — The Senate Finance Committee approved by voice vote a two-year extension of tax provisions that expired at the end of 2013, leaving the extenders to become part of a broader discussion on tax changes Congress will mull through the next year or more.

Lawmakers made a few adjustments at the April 3 hearing, including making the tax credit for research and experimentation available to small businesses that have no income tax liability, and updating standards for some energy efficiency tax benefits.

By and large, the committee left key provisions intact rather than weed out or heavily revise those that many Republican senators say should be changed or eliminated. The wind production tax credit survived, as did bonus depreciation, which has endured since its birth as an economic stimulus tool in 2008. The committee kept the seven-year depreciation period for motorsports facilities and retained expensing rules for the film and television industry— expanding them to live theater as well.

The package, called the EXPIRE Act, includes look-through treatment of certain payments between controlled foreign corporations, which was left out of an earlier version, as well as an enhanced tax benefit for donation of conservation easements on property that remains farmland.

A committee aide said two of the more than 50 expired provisions weren't renewed: partial expensing of refinery property and the credit for energy-efficient appliances, although energy efficiency tax incentives for commercial buildings under tax code Section 179D were extended and updated to reflect higher efficiency standards.

Floor Fights to Come

With committee passage, the measure can move to the Senate floor. There, renewed debate over the wind production tax credit, bonus depreciation and tax issues not directly tied to extenders could surface.

The House is on a somewhat slower schedule. Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp (R-Mich.) has said he wants to review all the expired tax provisions with the goal of making some permanent and letting the rest expire for good. Camp has scheduled a committee hearing on business-related tax extenders for April 8.

Finance Committee Chairman Ron Wyden (D-Ore.) said he wants this package to be the last temporary extension of the provision, an assertion that won praise from Sen. Pat Toomey (R-Pa.) and other Republican lawmakers. The tax extenders “are intended to be springboard for broader reform,” Wyden told reporters after the markup.

R&D, Other Amendments OK'd

The committee approved eight amendments to the package, including the enhanced research and development credit sponsored by Sen. Charles Schumer (D-N.Y.), Pat Roberts (R-Kan.) and others; extension of the Health Care Tax Credit in Sections 35 and 7527 for displaced workers; a two-year extension of Empowerment Zone tax incentives, sponsored by Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.); and increasing the expensing and phaseout limits for expensing under Section 179, tying them to inflation.

Schumer also pushed through a provision to add bikeshare programs to the fringe benefit for commuting expenses under Section 132(f). The overall bill from Wyden restores parity for mass transit and parking benefits, another top priority for Schumer.

The committee approved an amendment from Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio) to create a new incentive called the Manufacturing Communities Tax Credit, which would be paid for with unused tax credits from the New Markets Tax Credit. The new credit would be for communities that have suffered a decline in manufacturing.

“What you saw today was the product of a bipartisan negotiation,” Wyden said. “The Democratic staff and the Republican staff were here until the wee hours last night, and yes, what you are trying to do is trying to deal with complicated tax issues in trying to build bipartisan support.”

Schumer Boosts Research

Schumer's adjustments to the research and experimentation tax credit in tax code Section 41, which lawmakers often call the research and development credit, address some small startup businesses' inability to use the incentive, the senator said. The change would remove a restriction that businesses can only use the credit when they have an income tax liability, by tying the credit to employment taxes rather than income taxes.

The change would apply to businesses less than 5 years old, with less than $5 million in gross receipts, Schumer's office said.

Device Tax Repeal Dumped

The committee cast aside, on procedural grounds, an effort to repeal the medical device tax from the Affordable Care Act. Proponents of repeal sought a procedural roll call vote, which failed on a straight party line of 9-13.

All the components in Wyden's proposal, minus the amendments, would cost about $85.3 billion in forgone revenue from fiscal years 2014 through 2024, according to a Joint Committee on Taxation estimate. Most amendments included cost offsets or had no estimated cost, lawmakers said.

Amendments rejected or withdrawn on procedural grounds could foreshadow discussions to come, either when the measure reaches the Senate floor or when lawmakers try to attach them to other legislation.

Solar Benefit: Another Day

Wyden promised future discussions on several of those issues, including repeal of the medical device tax; renewal of the Internet Tax Freedom Act, which prohibits taxes on Internet access; tax relief for victims of Superstorm Sandy and other disasters; and allowing solar energy producers to qualify for an investment tax credit based on when construction of a facility begins, rather than production.

On the solar issue, Wyden said he shares sponsors' desire for parity among energy sources. Wind energy already benefits from a construction-based timeframe, through the production tax credit.

“This is not the last word on the subject,” Wyden said at the markup.

Advanced Energy Economy, an association of companies including Johnson Controls Inc. and Johns Manville Corp., urged senators in a news release to support the change for solar energy and praised lawmakers for supporting alternative energy tax credits.

“Business needs stability in tax treatment, and the expiration of vital advanced energy tax credits at the end of last year was disruptive to the marketplace,” AEE's vice president for federal policy, Todd Keller, said in a news release. “This legislation goes a long way toward providing the certainty needed to drive the innovation and deployment of advanced energy technologies and services that make our nation's energy more secure, clean and affordable.”

Software companies praised the extension of the R&D credit.

“The R&D credit is a proven and effective incentive that encourages software companies to locate software R&D jobs in the U.S. Software companies must conduct R&D in order to compete; the only question is in which country they will conduct their R&D,” Mark Nebergall, president of the Software Finance and Tax Executives Council, said in a news release.

With assistance from Casey Wooten and Aaron E. Lorenzo in Washington

To contact the reporter on this story: Marc Heller in Washington at mheller@bna.com

To contact the editor responsible for this story: Cheryl Saenz at csaenz@bna.com