Will Hill quietly made his way out of the Giants locker room on Monday afternoon and walked into the uncertainty of the team’s bye-week. Idle time and the fact he’s playing on an NFL team based so close to his Jersey City connections haven’t been a good mix for the second-year safety.

Football keeps him busy and away from his old neighborhood, where his past constantly tugs at him. The resulting stress and a case of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder have resulted in him self-medicating with marijuana, which helps calm him.

At the start of the season, Hill paid the price for his marijuana use, serving a four-game suspension for violating the NFL’s drug use policy.

As a result, Hill knows he can’t afford another misstep and he needs to get away from the negative influences threatening to derail his career. So that’s exactly what he intends to do.

“I’m taking my kids out to California and go to Disney World,” he said with a huge grin. “Just kind of relax.”

Hill can use the down time. Since returning from his suspension, he has worked non-stop and energized the Giants secondary with his speed, aggressiveness and ball-hawking ability. He earned his first career start and had his first career interception in the team’s 15-7 victory over the Eagles last Sunday.

“He’s made a strong contribution,” coach Tom Coughlin said. “He’s worked hard and he has tried to go about his business the right way. In other words, to prove the quality of person that he is, rather than talk about it. He’s not one to volunteer a lot of verbal, but he loves football and he’s a very good football player.

“He’s gone about his business and we’ll stand by him and we encourage him. I think he feels a great deal of responsibility to his teammates now and hopefully that’ll just continue to grow.”

With two strikes, Hill, a former St. Peter’s Prep star, knows this is his final chance with the Giants. He was suspended four games during his rookie season for using a performance-enhancing drug, which he said was the attention deficit drug Adderall.

“I want to repay the Giants for everything they’ve done for me,” said Hill, who also had off-the-field issues in college at Florida. “It’s been awesome to be able to play and help the team. I want to keep up the progress that I’ve made. I want to be consistent and show the Giants I’m ready to be the player they think I can be.”

Talent has never been the problem with Hill. At 6-1, 207 pounds, he’s rangy, fast, aggressive, instinctive and has man-to-man coverage skills despite playing safety. In fact, he played some nickel as a rookie, covering speedy slot receivers.

In four games, Hill has 25 tackles, including a career-high 11 in his first game back against the Eagles on Oct. 6th, and the interception in the second Eagles game. His versatility gives the Giants options in the secondary such as playing three safeties or moving safety Antrel Rolle to nickel. Hill replaced starter Ryan Mundy in the second Eagles game, and played all 61 defensive snaps.

“I like to hit people,” Hill said. “The quicker you get to the ball, the quicker you can unload.”