Olivia Harris/AP Photo

Dick Cheney is not a man who minces words. The controversial former vice president is known for his blunt, unapologetic rhetoric - and love it or hate it, his comments typically draw headlines. ABC's George Stephanopoulos will interview Cheney on "This Week" on Sunday. In preparation for the interview, here's a look back at some of the former vice president's most memorable lines.

On Iraq

"I believe very deeply in the proposition that what we did in Iraq was the right thing to do," Cheney told ABC's Jonathan Karl in an interview on "This Week" in 2010. "It was hard to do. It took a long time. There were significant costs involved. But we got rid of one of the worst dictators of the 20th century."

On enhanced interrogation techniques

"I was a big supporter of waterboarding," Cheney told ABC's Jonathan Karl in 2010 in response to a question about battles won and lost within Bush administration's second term. "I was a big supporter of the enhanced interrogation techniques that…" "And you opposed the administration's actions of doing away with waterboarding?" Karl asked. "Yes," Cheney replied.

On Barack Obama

"I think he's been one of our weakest presidents," Cheney told ABC's Jonathan Karl in an interview for "Nightline" in July 2012. "I just fundamentally disagree with him philosophically. I would be hard put to find any Democratic president that I've disagreed with more."

On Sarah Palin

"I like Governor Palin," Cheney told Karl in that same interview. "I've met her. I know her. She-attractive candidate. But based on her background, she had only been governor for what, two years. I don't think she passed that test…. And I think that was a mistake."

On same-sex marriage

"Well, I think that freedom means freedom for everyone," Cheney said in response to a question fielded to him at the Gerald Ford Foundation journalism awards in 2009. "As many of you know, one of my daughters is gay and it is something that, uh, we have lived with for a long time, in our family. I think people ought to be free to enter into any kind of union they wish. Any kind of arrangement they wish. The question of whether or not there ought to be a federal statute that governs this, I don't support. I do believe that historically the way marriage has been regulated is at the state level. It has always been a state issue, and I think that's the way it ought to be handled today, that is on a state-by-state basis. Different states will make different decisions. But I don't have any problem with that. I think people ought to get a shot at that."

On his heart transplant

"When you emerge from that gift of life itself, there's a tremendous feeling of emotion, but it's very positive," Cheney told Dr. Sanjay Gupta in a recent interview for CBS's "60 Minutes." "I think my first words when I came out from under the anesthetic and they said it had worked great was, 'hot damn.' Literally."

Like "This Week" on Facebook here . You can also follow the show on Twitter here .

Go here to find out when "This Week" is on in your area.