The synod document, a concrete reflection of the Francis papacy, in effect takes the weapons out of the hands of the hierarchical culture warriors. One might measure its significance in the pushback by groups who in the past prided themselves on their orthodoxy and adherence to papal and hierarchical teaching. They are in a fury and are not hiding their disappointment and rejection of the synod's thinking. Voice of the Family, which identifies itself as a coalition of 15 international pro-family Catholic groups, termed the document “nothing short of a ‘betrayal’ of Catholic and family values. And the blog Rorate Caeli, an extreme conservative Catholic site, described the document as a “heresy, the homoheresy,” and in contradiction of the Gospel and Catholic tradition.

The reaction against changing Catholic practice, particularly the eligibility of divorced and remarried Catholics to receive communion, began well before the synod and was engaged not in blogs but in official circles. The conservative publishing house Ignatius Press produced at least three books prior to the synod containing essays and other writings by members of the hierarchy responding to German Cardinal Walter Kasper, who has advocated a change in church law prohibiting divorced Catholics who have remarried without receiving a church annulment from receiving communion. Kasper is generally viewed by Vatican watchers as being in line with the thinking of Pope Francis.

Such open dispute among members of the hierarchy was almost unheard of in recent decades and may just be another sign of changing times. For more than 30 years and two papacies, Catholics have been told that there were certain things they could not think about, certain discussions they could not have, certain questions that were forbidden.

This synod—indeed, the whole of Francis’ 19-month papacy—appears to be a reversal of that approach.

What practically results from this document? Perhaps bishops will not be so quick to turn away from their schools the children of gay parents or to fire gays and lesbians involved in ministry because they are living openly with or married to a partner. Perhaps they will consider the “concrete circumstances,” as the document suggests, of people divorced and remarried and welcome them to the communion table.

A key term in Francis’s papacy from the start has been “mercy.” Application of the law and of doctrine, he preaches, must be tempered by mercy. In an earlier meditation, he said he wished the church to be “the place of God’s mercy and love, where everyone can feel themselves welcomed, loved, forgiven and encouraged to live according to the good life of the Gospel.” That is not a recipe for cheap grace. The good life of the Gospel places some extraordinary demands on the believer.

The approach is clearly disorienting, however, to those who believe that the church must be a place where teaching and practice are absolute and immutable, where the dividing line must be clear between those who are in and those who are out.

Such open debate and contentious questions were not well received during the papacies of John Paul II or Benedict XVI. Francis has not only allowed it but, in effect, demanded it. His opening charge to the bishops was to speak boldly and listen with humility. He wanted the full debate, and he's getting it.