LANSING, MI -- Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette on Thursday said the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling in favor of Affordable Care Act subsidies was harmful.

"The Affordable Care Act violated the very first principle of medicine: Do no harm. The Court's ruling today continues the harm inflicted by Obamacare," Schuette said.

The high court issued a 6-3 decision Thursday that the tax credits would stand for federally run exchanges.

Schuette had authored an opinion piece about what course of action state and federal leaders should take if the court had struck down the subsidies.

Schuette's stance elicited a strong reaction from U.S. Rep. Dan Kildee, D-Mich.

It's a shame that Atty. Gen. Bill Schuette pushed this partisan attack on #KingvBurwell in the first place. Waste of time & taxpayer money. — Rep. Dan Kildee (@RepDanKildee) June 25, 2015

The case is also one of the areas where Schuette and Gov. Rick Snyder disagree. Snyder said in a statement that regardless of feelings about the Affordable Care Act, he appreciated that the court had resolved a "deep uncertainty" on the issue. It also removes one complication to the state's Health Michigan Medicaid program getting a federal waiver.

"Our focus can now center on securing the second waiver for our Healthy Michigan Plan, which has been an outstanding success," Snyder said in a statement. "Today, nearly 600,000 Michiganders of all ages have health care through Healthy Michigan, translating into 152,920 primary care visits, 414,724 preventive care visits, 46,347 mammograms and 23,817 colonoscopies or colon cancer screenings. Our citizens are able to take steps to live healthier, more productive lives – and that benefits us all."

The issue before the Supreme Court was whether citizens in states with federal marketplaces could still get tax credits, which in the Affordable Care Act apply to health care plans purchased through an "exchange established by the state."

But state exchanges proved difficult to get through Republican legislatures nationally, and Michigan was among the states that went for a partnership model with the federal government instead of establishing its own exchange.

Chief Justice John G. Roberts authored the majority opinion. He was joined by Justices Anthony Kennedy, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan.

The court decided that the Internal Revenue Service had correctly promulgated a rule to give tax credits to people purchasing health insurance on "exchanges," not just state exchanges.

The state and federal exchanges have identical requirements, the court ruled, and in context, the Affordable Care Act refers to exchanges without differentiating them.

"In this instance, the context and structure of the Act compel us to depart from what would otherwise be the most natural reading of the pertinent statutory phrase," reads the majority opinion.

The dissenting opinion, authored by Justice Antonin Scalia, disagreed strongly.

"Words no longer have meaning if an Exchange that is not established by a State is 'established by the State,'" the dissenting opinion read.

Scalia was joined in his opinion by Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Anthony Alito.

In Michigan, interest groups reacted to the ruling.

The Michigan Association of Health Plans praised the court's decision, saying it would keep about 280,000 Michiganders covered through the subsidies.

"This is a positive development for those of us who know access to health insurance is a necessary precursor to access to health care for virtually everyone in our state," said MAHP Executive Director Rick Murdock in a statement.

Michigan League for Public Policy Vice President Karen Holcomb-Merrill said the ruling was a relief for Michiganders who rely on the subsidy.

Turn to MLive for more reaction and coverage as this story unfolds.