ROB VARELA/THE STAR Camarillo Springs homeowner association President Barbara Williams uses the handle of a broken rake as she tries to remove debris from a catch basin in a flood-control channel below a fence installed to control debris flows from the hillside above Gitana Avenue on Tuesday morning.

When Mother Nature came bearing a pitchfork last week, Barbara Williams armed herself with the handle of a broken rake.

Fire and rain have bedeviled Williams' Camarillo Springs neighborhood since May 2013. First came the monster Springs blaze that burned from the Conejo Grade to the sea.

Then, with the vegetation that anchored the hillside above the homes reduced to ash, rainfall sent rocks and mud thundering down onto the community, rendering some homes uninhabitable.

While one homeowner's red easy chair swept out of his living room and still upright on his driveway symbolized the community's battle with nature's might, little has been easy for the affected.

Yet, the resilience of residents has been inspiring. With more rain forecast, many more of our neighbors just may need that.

On Wednesday, the first El Niño storm system of 2016 was testing debris barriers installed to prevent another massive slide. Williams and other volunteers were scouting for signs of trouble.

It was then Williams, president of the homeowners association, spotted vegetation clogging a portion of one storm channel. She called for help from a crew on duty to clear debris, and then took action herself.

"The two ladies who live there had just got back into their homes. I had to try something," Williams told me on Friday.

Susan Spann, who only recently moved back into her home severely damaged in the December 2014 slide, handed Williams the handle.

A video on vcstar.com shows the 62-year-old Williams, feet planted, working to unstop the drain. Eventually a crew arrived to clear the debris.

Later that day after hours of deluge, muddy water rushed down the hill. An L.A. television station cut away to its reporter stationed in the neighborhood. To the eye unaccustomed to the fury these hills can unleash, it looked bad.

But for Williams and others who had lived with this looming threat, it was a sign of success. The barriers held the rocks and let only water run down the channel.

"We didn't expect for it all to come down at once like that, though," Williams told me with a slight chuckle.

Williams' home is not in the danger zone, but Spann's is. The Star reporter Cheri Carlson's coverage of the neighborhood's struggles to recover is a study in human resilience.

Spann, who provided Williams with that rake handle, was awakened by deputies in the wee hours of Dec. 12, 2014, to the news "the mountain's on the move." Spann, who then had a broken leg, rolled herself out in a wheelchair just ahead of the mud and debris flow. She stayed with nearby family while she worked to get permits to rebuild her yellow-tagged home.

And in an affirmation of optimism, she began gardening again in hopes of someday living in the house — which happened just days before last week's storms.

For Williams, some of the heaviest lifting she has done is not on storm drains but at the podium in Camarillo City Council chambers, bringing the neighborhood's concerns to city officials.

"I'm a little bit outspoken," confesses Williams, a retired civilian contractor at Naval Base Ventura County.

She promises to serve as an advocate for her neighbors as long as they want her to do it.

This is not the first or toughest fight to befall her. Williams lost her husband, Tom, in December 2011 to an automobile crash prosecutors described as an act of road rage. The driver whose car clipped Tom's SUV causing it to roll repeatedly across Highway 101 was convicted of misdemeanor vehicular manslaughter in 2014.

The couple had been married for 35 years and the term soul mate, she told me, doesn't begin to describe how close they were.

Through that devastating loss her friends kept her going, and Williams knows the importance of being there for those visited by disaster.

Disaster is coming the way of more neighbors as nature's forces test Ventura County. They will challenge our businesses, our technology and our civic resolve. They are going to test the will to say "no" to building in areas that are too risky for the terrain. They are going to test us as neighbors willing to help each other.

"It will be coming," Williams said. "With Mother Nature you don't know when, where and how much. But it will happen."

So you never know when a rake handle could help our neighbors and ourselves to stand our ground, even as some of it slips downhill.

Email Colleen Cason at casonpoint101@gmail.com.