On a grassy airfield at the end of a bumpy gravel road minutes from Delaware Bay, the magnificent young men in their flying machines take to the sky bearing messages.

It's "Will you marry me?'' and "Happy Anniversary Mom and Dad,'' hot deals from cell phone providers and cable networks, promotions from Shore towns and tourist boards, even appeals from hospitals and health care plans.

And however would you learn about the two-for-one drink specials at the local tiki bar without the help of banner pilots?

If you're on the beach, anyway.

"You hear a noise; the natural inclination us to look up, see what's making the sound,'' says Barbara Tomalino, president/owner of Paramount Air Service.

Advertising doesn't get any more old-school than this. No digital or neon or flashing lights, nothing you can access on your laptop or smart phone, just a plane towing a sign, back and forth above the beach.

Last year, one of Tomalino's pilots, John Kauffman, made and flew his own banner. "Date This Pilot,'' read the message, which included his phone number.

"He got lots of calls; nothing significant came of it,'' banner pilot Tom Hiltner says with a laugh.

The Margate resident is one of a dozen banner pilots at Paramount, located in a town you've never heard of - Green Creek. Good luck finding the operation, because there's no sign anywhere.

But this is the nation's oldest and largest aerial advertising firm. Tomalino's dad, Andre, a likeable, outgoing sort - "he was the one everyone invited to the party,'' his daughter recalls - formed Paramount in 1945 after his stint as a glider pilot in WW2.

Andre Tomalino and his brother-in-law bought a surplus plane for $650, flying banners over the Jersey Shore in summer, over Philadelphia Eagles and University of

Pennsylvania games in the fall, and Florida beaches in the winter.



In one memorable photo, Tomalino pilots an Autogiro, a kooky cross between a cropduster and helicopter, over a Jersey beach, a Noxema suntan lotion banner trailing behind.

Tomalino's initial territory was Cape May to Sea Isle, but he later bought out other banner firms, and his reach extended to Atlantic City.

Today, Paramount flies from Cape May to Sandy Hook, its pilots picking up and dropping banners on a grassy airfield framed by trees, the Piper G3s, PA-12s and Super Cubs kept in an tin-roofed hangar.

The entire operation looks like something out of the backwoods of North Carolina, not minutes from Cape May and Wildwood.

Jim Dahlen, Barb's husband, is the wise-cracking manager of the ground operation. He hires and trains the pilots, and makes sure everything's in order down at the field.

"'I train all these nitwits,'' he says, big smile on his face. "They come out of college with all kinds of degrees, they don't know how to fly.''

You don't get to fly Paramount banners until Jim says so. The pilots this particular day include three Jersey guys - Hiltner, Ryan Kennedy of Caldwell, and Devon Wittig of Ocean City - plus Tom Windom of Corvallis, Ore. The two Toms are 23 - turns out they were born on the same day - while Kennedy is 25. Wittig is the old man, at 29.

"Everything we know we owe to him,'' says Windom, pointing to Kennedy.

"Which is why we don't know much,'' Hiltner says, laughing.

Banner flying is a great way to earn flight time; many banner pilots dream of becoming commercial or cargo pilots. But it's not for everyone; pilots snag banners off the ground with hooks in a maneuver that looks more at home in an aerial acrobatics show.

"This is a safe operation, but we're coming down from 300 feet and dive bombing eight to ten feet from the ground (to pick up a banner),'' Wittig explains. "That's something you won't encounter in any other flying operation.''

No wonder that friends think banner pilots "are a little nuts,'' he adds.

The pay's good, though. A Paramount banner pilot will fly 350-400 hours a season; a first-year banner pilot earns $22 an hour, a second-year banner pilot $25 an hour and a third-year banner pilot $30 an hour. There's a bonus for working through the Labor Day weekend. And you can't put a price on all that air time.

Essential skills for a banner pilot? "Motor skills, decision making, good reflexes,'' Dahlen replies. He smiles. "'Once you get the hang of it, it's pretty easy.''

The Pipers weigh a mere 1,200 pounds or so, causing Wittig to describe the planes as "just an engine and some fabric.''

It's not been a great summer for banner work; there have been ten rainout days already, and this day will be another. Kennedy, Windom, Hiltner and Wittig all picked up banners under an overcast sky, but soon returned as the weather worsened.

Wittig looks at a weather map on his tablet; there are angry red and orange splotches everywhere.

"Anything besides this,'' he says, point to the green areas on the screen, "we have no business being out.''

Banners are made in a shed on the property. They come in two types - letter banners ("Will You Marry Me?'') and full-color billboard-type banners for all those bars and restaurants and cable companies trying to get your attention.

How much does a billboard banner cost? Depends on the size, how many islands or

towns you want to fly over, and flight frequency. A banner flown every day all summer from Cape May to Highlands will cost about $1,300 per flight weekdays, about $1,400 on weekends.

"For me, it's an easy sell,'' Barb Tomalino says in her office. "I don't have to convince people they should put their messages up there.''

Her dad, the founder of Paramount, passed away last year. Her mom, Lois, who's 90, still works in the office.

Memorable messages over the years besides "Date This Pilot''? The makers of the TV show "Weeds'' commissioned a banner featuring a giant marijuana leaf. Customers have ordered banners for lost pets. In the 70s, banners from parents looking for runaway kids were not uncommon.

Several years ago, a Canadian man ordered a banner to locate his brother, who was vacationing in an unknown campground near Cape May.

The message had sunbathers on the beach puzzled: "Jean Paul Call Guy.''

But the Canadian customer knew exactly what he wanted to say. His name was Jean Paul, his brother's, Guy.