News Release: CA$H Prosperity Campaign

April 15, 2015

VALDOSTA, Ga. -- The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program will be offering tax preparation services today, April 15, from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. at 601 North Lee Street, Valdosta, GA 31601.

Citizens are encouraged to take advantage of this final opportunity to have taxes prepared for free by IRS trained and certified volunteers.

This is the seventh consecutive year that the CA$H Prosperity Campaign, a nonprofit organization designed to educate the public about financial literary and empowerment, has offered this service. During today’s session, Affordable Care Act Navigators with Spring Creek Health Cooperative will be on site from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. to answer questions and assist with enrollment.

Taxpayers receiving this free service will be assisted on a first-come, first-served basis. While visiting this free tax preparation site, taxpayers should bring photo identification, social security cards for all persons filed on the tax return, documents relating to income and expenses including form 1095-A if they received health insurance through the marketplace, as well as a copy of last year's tax return, if applicable.

During each session, CA$H volunteers and interns will assist with answering questions, preparing tax returns and filing returns electronically. Student volunteers will receive credit for training hours and time spent with clients. Certified public accountants and Enrolled Agents volunteer during these sessions to check returns and assist students in responding to questions.

Citizens also have to option to file their returns for free electronically through a self-preparation service that is also available at myfreetaxes.com for both Federal and State for household incomes of $60,000.00 or less. Note: Myfreetaxes is an H&R Block Product; therefore, if a taxpayer prepared taxes last year using this product they will have to create a new login and password in order to use the product for free.

For more information on this service, contact the CA$H Prosperity Campaign at 229-234-2364 or email cashpcampaign@gmail.com.