Buy Photo Charlie O’Reilly (Photo: News-Leader file photo)Buy Photo

To date, 29 states have chosen to expand health coverage through Medicaid for their citizens. Missouri lawmakers should quickly follow suit and take advantage of this important opportunity for the state to improve the health and productivity of its families and workforce while saving state budget dollars and bringing our federal tax dollars home to work for Missourians. Legislators can do what’s right for Missouri by passing legislation to expand eligibility for Medicaid to 138 percent of the federal poverty level as called for in the Affordable Care Act.

Nearly 300,000 Missourians would gain access to health care through this Medicaid expansion. These Missourians currently fall in the “coverage gap” — unable to access federal tax credits to purchase insurance, but ineligible for Missouri’s existing Medicaid program. Closing this gap so that hardworking Missourians could access health care would create a more stable workforce. Healthier employees are more reliable, take fewer sick days, and are more productive.

What’s more, Missouri can expand Medicaid without costing the state a dime in the end. In fact, Missouri taxpayers would actually see a net savings of about $100 million a year — $100 million a year that could be put towards other services like K-12 or higher education.

Missouri is currently paying for many health services that it wouldn’t have to pay for under Medicaid expansion. For instance, the state now pays 100 percent of the cost for mental health services for about 50,000 Missourians. Under expansion, the federal government would pay 90 percent of those costs, and the state would pay 10 percent. The same is true for many other health services currently provided. As a result of the federal government picking up 90 percent of the costs, the state actually will still save money — to the tune of about $1 billion over the next eight years — even after paying its share of Medicaid expansion.

Bringing our federal tax dollars home helps save Missouri tax dollars and make Missourians healthier. But it doesn’t damage our federal economic well-being either. Medicaid expansion at the federal level is paid for as part of the Affordable Care Act, which is estimated to lower the deficit by almost $120 billion by 2019. The Affordable Care Act included cost savings throughout the health care system that both pay for Medicaid expansion and reign in the deficit.

And bringing these dollars home will help grow our state’s economy, creating jobs in health care, construction, and service industries. That in turn, will create new state revenue for education and infrastructure.

So, we have a proposal that is supported by the Missouri and Springfield Chambers of Commerce, and hospitals and patient advocates statewide. That makes Missouri families healthier and more productive. That puts Missourians’ federal tax dollars to work here at home in Missouri, all while saving and creating new state tax dollars.

Medicaid expansion makes business sense. It makes fiscal sense. And it improves health.

Charlie O’Reilly lives in Nixa

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1MKHbZ2