McCaskill still undecided on Iran deal

Sen. Claire McCaskill doesn’t know whether she’ll vote for President Barack Obama’s nuclear deal with Iran.

“I don’t know that I’m voting for” the agreement, the Missouri Democrat said Tuesday on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.”

Story Continued Below

McCaskill, who has endorsed former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s presidential bid, said she is trying to find out what will happen if America pulls out of the deal. Right now, she believes that’s not clear.

“The analysis I’m doing is pretty simple,” she said. “It’s not a perfect deal, there’s a lot of things about this deal that are bad, but what is the new status quo if we walk away?”

Secretary of State John Kerry said Monday in a briefing with regional newspapers that he respected McCaskill’s deliberative approach to her decision.

“I admire those that are genuinely looking at the agreement, rather than those who oppose it without even knowing what the agreement does,” he said, according to the St. Louis Post Dispatch.

Kerry’s comments suggest a softer approach for the administration after last week’s sharp breach with Democratic New York Sen. Chuck Schumer.

Last week, after Schumer, the likely incoming minority leader, came out against the Iran deal, the White House suggested he might pay a price with the Democratic Caucus in the Senate — while former Obama administration officials attacked Schumer in more aggressive terms.

“I wouldn’t be surprised” if senators factored Schumer’s Iran position into their vote on the next minority leader, White House press secretary Josh Earnest said Friday.

“Chuck Schumer, who said it was a mistake to pass Obamacare, now comes out against the Iran Deal. This is our next Senate leader?” tweeted former Obama speechwriter Jon Favreau.

“Facts are facts, and politics is politics. Schumer made a decision based on politics, not fact,” tweeted former White House senior adviser David Axelrod.

“Senator Schumer siding with the GOP against Obama, [Hillary] Clinton and most Democrats will make it hard for him to lead the Dems in ’16,” tweeted Dan Pfeiffer, a former top White House communications aide, adding in a subsequent tweet: “The base won’t support a leader who thought Obamacare was a mistake and wants War with Iran.”

But McCaskill said that no matter what she decides, Schumer’s decision won’t affect her support of him as Sen. Harry Reid’s successor.

“Every senator is going to make their decision based on their analysis of this, and I think that Chuck Schumer has done that; I will do that,” she said.

Republicans’ insistence on having 60 days to review the deal — a period of time that may allow more opposition to develop — has been the only thing that has disappointed her about the debate, she said. “It appeared to me that most of them made up their mind in about five minutes.”