BALTIMORE - A brain infection killed Deamonte Driver, but the circumstances that led to his death had many upset over how preventable it was.

In 2007, the 12-year-old from Prince George's County died after a tooth infection spread to his brain. The Driver family's Medicaid coverage had lapsed, but the boy needed to have his tooth pulled.

He never did.

But Deamonte's death triggered reforms in Maryland to address dental care access, which led to dramatic improvements for those in need, said Dr. Harry Goodman, director of Maryland's Office of Oral Health.

"I think for years and years and years, we've been trying to fight the battle that the mouth and the head are connected to the rest of the body," Goodman said. "Sometimes, it takes a tragedy."

Statistics indicate that tooth decay, a common ailment, is even more common in poor children.

According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about half of all children, and two-thirds of adolescents ages 12-19 from lower-income families, have had tooth decay.

Goodman's office recently conducted a study of school-age children in Maryland, survey students at more than 50 schools. The study found that untreated tooth decay had been reduced by 41 percent.

To view the study, click here.

The year of Deamonte's death, then-Gov. Martin O'Malley created the Oral Health Safety Net Program, which brought public health dental clinics to all counties in Maryland. Most local health departments now employ dental hygienists who go into area schools to screen students for tooth decay and other oral ailments, and since 2009, pediatricians are paid by Medicaid to provide fluoride varnish to young patients' teeth.

The Deamonte Driver Dental Project, formed by a group of Prince George's County dentists, provides basic dental services to low-income students in Prince George's and Montgomery County schools.

The Medicaid reimbursement rate for dentists was also increased, and now about 30 percent of eligible dentists accept it, Goodman said. It was previously under 20 percent.

Margie Donohue, executive director of the Maryland Dental Action Coalition, which was created in response to Deamonte's death, said improvements are being made on the national level as well. The federal Affordable Care Act included a mandate that all children have access to good oral care, she said.

"We have made tremendous strides in providing coverage to all children," Donohue said. "We've seen a lot of progress in inserting oral health back into the conversation. It had kind of been siloed."

But Donohue said more work needs to done to provide access to oral care to all adults as well.

"All the success we've had with children, we can have that with adults, too," she said. "We've proven we can do this. We just need to prove it again."

Dr. Hazel Glasper, a Marriottsville dentist, is an advocate for comprehensive dentistry, or treating oral health as vital to overall health.

Glasper says dental decay and gum disease, a problem for the majority of both children and adults, can trigger myriad health problems, including lung disease, emphysema, bronchitis, premature births and low birth weight, among others.

"It causes major health problems," Glasper said.

RELATED: Dentist ensures all receive comprehensive care

The Deamonte Driver case is a perfect example, said Dr. Norman Tinanoff, a professor of

pediatric dentistry at the University of Maryland School of Dentistry.

"It can be very painful, and it can spread and cause further complications," Tinanoff said. "Fortunately, most of the kids that are in pain, their families take them to the emergency room, or to the dentist. In Deamonte Driver's case-that wasn't the case."

Tinanoff said the clearest link between poor oral health and other health problems is the connection between gum and tooth infections and diabetes.

"If you have infections in your mouth, that can affect your diabetes, and people who have diabetes have other problems with oral care, so that goes both ways," Tinanoff said.