The morning starts out all wrong for one of my children. “Who left just two sips of juice in the container? What kind of person does that? I don’t like any of our cereal. Why can’t you buy the cereal we like? Move over! You’re in my way!”

After school, another child slams the door as he enters the car. “Please, just go!” he demands. As soon as we round the corner, he bursts into tears. “It was terrible! I totally messed up and froze on the stage, and I didn’t get called back.”

Later, a third child leans in for a hug, her body wracked with sobs. She grieves for a friend who struggles with depression. “I don’t know who he is anymore! I don’t know how to reach him, and I miss him.”

All parents want their children to be happy. Nevertheless, we will at times be confronted with the reality of having to guide our children through turbulent emotions.

We may wish we could shield our children or bear the pain on their behalf. Our job, however, is to help them gain independence in navigating the negative feelings that are very much their own. How do we do that?

Offer a consistent haven. Children need to feel safe enough to express their feelings. It may take time to find words to convey what they are feeling. Pressuring our children to talk too soon about their intense and personal emotions may backfire, so it’s important to give them room to spend some time absorbing their thoughts alone.

Listen. Part of being a safe haven includes biting our tongues and holding our advice until we have heard the full story from the child’s point of view and given them time to reach their own conclusions and possible solutions.

Initiate conversations in non-threatening environments. Many parents find that car rides offer the ideal setting for meaningful conversations. While driving, parents can offer full attention without the pressure of eye contact. Others find taking a walk or participating in a joint activity can provide the best opportunity for conversations to naturally occur.

Offer comfort through touch. When young children hurt, we instinctively pick them up. Even older children long for physical affection. A hug, a back rub or simply holding hands can go a long way. Older children and teenagers need us to continue the physical connections they crave.

Make use of time outs — for the parents. We have deep connections to our children that may make it difficult for us to remain objective. At times our emotional interactions become a struggle for control. One way to avoid falling into the trap is to say, “I have said everything I am going to say and I will not argue about this.”

—Merete Kropp is a child development specialist.