Doris Candelarie, principal at Sanchez International Elementary School in Lafayette, recently was named Colorado's elementary principal of the year. (CLIFF GRASSMICK / Daily Camera)

Six years ago, Lafayette's Sanchez Elementary was a low-performing, high poverty school that the Boulder Valley School District was looking to turn around.

The district hired Doris Candelarie as the principal, and the school began making changes that included the school's staff electing teachers to a "dream team" to research school reform models and came up with a plan that included extended learning time for students. Sanchez also became an International Baccalaureate, or IB, school.

To support students, she hired both a full-time counselor, along with a full-time family resource coordinator to help families and address attendance issues. She also established a "Friends of Sanchez" group, comprised of more than 200 individuals and organizations, to support the school's efforts.

Now, said Boulder Valley assistant superintendent Sandy Ripplinger, the school is "a vibrant environment for learning."

"She brought energy, excitement for learning and a deep commitment to transforming the school so that all students would achieve at high levels," Ripplinger said. "Doris is a courageous leader. She clearly articulates that the students aren't failing; the school is failing the students."

Candelarie's success at Sanchez recently earned her the title of 2014 Colorado National Distinguished Principal of the Year. The award, given by the Colorado Association of Elementary School Principals, honors elementary principals who have exhibited "extraordinary leadership, commitment to their students and staff, service to the communities, and contributions to the overall profession."

Advertisement

Sanchez PTA President Annette Thull nominated Candelarie for the award on the behalf of the PTA.

"She is creative, responsible, passionate, generous and absolutely professional," Thull said. "She has created an amazing team of educators and her leadership is truly inspiring."

When Candelarie was hired at Sanchez, the school was is "priority improvement" status — the state's second lowest accreditation status based on test scores. Under her leadership, the school's status improved to "performance" because of high academic growth for at-risk students and improved achievement on state tests in all subject areas.

The most dramatic improvement was on third-grade state reading tests, up from about 25 percent of students scoring proficient to about half scoring that well.

Candelarie said she's most proud of the collaborative culture that's been created at Sanchez, with teachers sharing in the leadership of the school.

"The staff, parents and community collaborate together for the benefit of the students," she said. "It's what makes Sanchez so very special. People tell me all the time how they can feel the energy of Sanchez when they walk in our building. I love that."

Teacher Bev Sanders described the changes the school has made "impressive" and said she likes how teachers share in decision making and shaping the direction of the school.

"Her whole intention is to make it not just her decisions," she said. "She comes to teachers with really great ideas, and we talk about it. We can be really honest."

She said Candelarie has created a dynamic learning community at the school, with teachers focused on continuing to improve.

"We always want to know what we're going to do to make it better," she said.

Candelarie said she plans to use her platform as principal of the year to advocate for the need for better state funding for schools and to educate about the importance of supporting the whole child, including a child's social-emotional and mental health needs.

"I hope to reach out to principals who are trying to make changes in similar schools and share ideas, as well as provide collegial support," she said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com