Collaborating with classmates to construct a robot is Licia Lamb’s bailiwick. “I get to work on robots — not many kids get to do that — and I get to just do what I do best and rock it,” said the freshman from STEM High and Academy in Highlands Ranch.

Lamb was among more than 300 students from across Colorado who took part in the Rocky Mountain BEST Robotics Competition at the Auraria Campus Event Center on Saturday. BEST stands for Boosting Engineering, Science and Technology.

Twenty-six teams from middle schools and high schools took part in the competition, in which they attempt to make their robots perform tasks such as moving plastic clothes hangers.

The event, hosted by Metropolitan State University of Denver, gives students hands-on experience in engineering and scientific methodology.

“This helps students bring classroom learning to real-world applications,” said Kathy Geise, president of Rocky Mountain BEST, one of several chapters of the nationwide nonprofit. “Students are motivated by the competition to apply the classroom skills they learn in engineering, programming and math, and bring it to life with robots.”

For six weeks, students designed, built and tested their robots.

Metro State professors in aviation and aerospace science, engineering technology, industrial design and marketing donated their time as mentors and judges.

“There’s all kinds of learning involved, from teamwork to team building, and even marketing and presentation skills,” Geise said.

Six teams from Saturday’s competition will advance to a regional competition in Arkansas.

“We worked together on this twice a week for just a short amount of time,” said Nicholas Redhorse, an eighth-grader at The Manning School in Jefferson County.

The robots — each with a student acting as driver — picked up dowels and put them in buckets, as well as picked up clothes hangers and placed them on hooks.

“This (competition) has been something to look forward to after working hard on it,” Redhorse said.

The Manning team, made up of 17 students, led all schools in scoring on Saturday, so Redhorse was optimistic they would make it to regionals.

Lamb said her team reached regionals in 2012.

“I really hope we can make it back,” she said. “I just want to keep working on our robot and improving it.”

Kurtis Lee: 303-954-1655, klee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kurtisalee