Estes Park took a step closer to normality Saturday as Rocky Mountain National Park temporarily reopened.

On Oct, 1, five days after it reopened in the wake of Colorado’s floods, the park closed its gates because of the partial federal shutdown.

“We were just getting things back open again in September when we had to close again because of something human-caused, and that was the lack of appropriations,” said Rich Fedorchak, chief of interpretation and education at Rocky Mountain National Park.

Fedorchak was one of about 50 federal employees who returned to work Saturday. Their paychecks are being financed by the state for at least 10 days under a $362,700 agreement Gov. John Hickenlooper struck with the Department of the Interior on Friday.

Estes Park rejoiced in the return of the town’s economic driver.

“I already see a significant difference today,” Gary Bien said by phone as he watched people stroll the main drag in front of his son’s store, Kirks Flyshop and Mountain Adventures.

He could hardly spare a second between customers on Saturday — a massive improvement. The Estes Park shop’s sales had dropped off 75 percent in the last 30 days compared with 2012.

Fishing and backpacking tours can resume in the park now that it’s open.

The fishing has been outstanding along the Big Thompson River in town, Bien said. Most years, two people on a trip catch about 12 fish, he said. Since the flood washed fish from stocked lakes down the river, Bien said his tours have been catching 45-50 fish, and he expects even bigger hauls inside the park.

The park’s closure compounded the economic impact that flooding brought Estes Park in mid-September, according to Brooke Burnham, communications director at Visit Estes Park. Potential visitors were put off by confusion over whether the park and town were open and how to get there, she said.

At least 90 percent of the town’s roughly 1,000 businesses have reopened since the flood, Burnham said, but have not returned to pre-flood numbers because the park was closed.

The tourism industry, two-thirds of Estes Park business, has taken a hard hit in the absence of the town’s next-door natural playground.

“That’s the main reason people come to Estes Park,” Burnham said.

The park closed for 13 days because of the flood and 11 days because of the shutdown. The reopening came just in time for fall leaf colors, Burnham said.

Fedorchak said he passed a herd of at least 90 elk on his way to work Saturday morning. Two were grunting the species’ mating call — bugling, an annual rite that attracts thousands of people to the park each fall.

“The weather finally cleared up, the elk are bugling, the aspens are golden. It’s just such a nice day to have the park open again,” Fedorchak said.

U.S. 34 and U.S. 36, the typical routes into Estes Park, remain closed north of Boulder. The town is accessible by driving west on Colorado 119, then north on Peak to Peak, Colorado 72 and 7.

Trail Ridge Road, which runs east-west across the Continental Divide, reopened Saturday on the west end up to Colorado River Trailhead and on the east end to Many Parks Curve, but is not open in its entirety. The road will close for winter on Oct. 24.

Alison Noon: 303-954-1223, anoon@denverpost.com or twitter.com/alisonnoon