Doctors Fear Oregon May Be Blindsided by Flu

The current influenza vaccine has been ineffective at preventing the kinds of viruses responsible for more than 98 percent of the confirmed flu cases tested by Oregon Public Health officials this season, causing doctors to fear the state could find itself blindsided by a particularly devastating outbreak.

“I’m fearful that this year might be worse than usual.” Dr. Paul Cieslak, the medical director of Communicable Disease Prevention for the Oregon Health Authority, said. “It looks like flu activity is definitely picking up.”

Cieslak said that in the three counties surrounding Portland, 17 flu patients were hospitalized last week — up from 14 cases the previous week.

A total of 71 flu patients in the Portland have been hospitalized since Oct. 1, according to Ceislak, who added that this is an increase from this time last year.

Since the flu season officially began in October, Oregon has fared better than most states, according to data from the Center for Disease Control. However, the state’s public health division stated that the flu typically arrives in Oregon later than it does in most of the country.

“The flu surprises us every year,” Ceislak said. “We do this pattern — the flu seems to start in the Southeast and then it comes our way.”

Approximately 67.4 percent of flu cases recorded around the U.S. this season are known as Influenza A, H3N2 — a strain of the virus associated with more severe illnesses and higher mortality rates. In Oregon, the state public health lab has reviewed 114 confirmed cases of influenza and 112 of them have been H3N2, according to the Oregon Health Authority.

However, this year's vaccine was designed with different viruses in mind than the new strain of H3N2, which doesn't currently have a widely available vaccine, according to the World Health Organization.

Vulnerability

The the elderly are most susceptible to the current strain of the flu, according to Ceislak. Elderly patients who contract H3N2 have had a higher mortality rate than elderly patients who came down with a different strain of the virus, Cieslak said.

“It’s not our happiest strain to have,” Cieslak said. “For the older (patients), it tends to be the straw that breaks the camel’s back.”

Young children are also especially susceptible to this year’s flu, acording to CDC data.

The CDC's latest weekly flu surveillance report stated that influenza been responsible for 15 pediatric deaths across the country this season, with none so far in Oregon, Cieslak confirmed. The state's public health authority also tracks the statistic.

Preventing an outbreak

There's no data on whether any of Oregon’s flu patients fell ill after being vaccinated. However, there have been some media reports of people contracting the flu despite getting being vaccinated.

“Flu vaccines are not 100 percent perfect,” Ceislak said.

The state won’t know how effective the vaccine was in combatting this year’s flu until the season ends in Spring. However, people should still get their flu shot, as there is some overlap between different strains of the virus, Ceislak said.

To combat the reduced effectiveness of immunization, the CDC recommended that individuals who are at a high risk and patients who have been hospitalized for their flu symptoms use antiviral drugs as a second line of defense against the illness.

“Influenza vaccination still offers the best way to prevent seasonal flu,” CDC spokesman Jason McDonald said.

There are a number of personal preventative measures people can take to reduce their risk that don’t involve antiviral drugs.

“By all means, stay home when you’re sick,” Ceislak said. “Especially this year, when the vaccine isn’t working so well.”

Ceislak also said everyone - even healthy people - should be washing their hands on a frequent basis, as patients carrying the virus can be contagious before showing any symptoms.

“With a lot of these respiratory illnesses, we’re seeing that a lot of times patheogens are spread, not by our cough, but by covering our cough with our hands,” Ceislak said. “Hand washing is important, especially this season since the vaccine isn’t working so well.”

Related Slideshow: Slideshow: 14 Biggest Healthcare Stories of 2014

Check out GoLocalPDX's list of top healthcare stories of 2014. Prev Next Restaurants Violate Health Code Nearly Four Times More Than Food Carts Between July 1, 2013 and Aug. 4, 2014, Multnomah County Health Department staff conducted 9,065 restaurant inspections and handed out 20,375 citations to restaurants. During the same period, the county conducted 2,424 food cart inspections and cited 1,438 violations. It almost seems counterintuitive that food carts, often operated by young, firsttime business people, would have fewer health violations than established restaurants — but that is the case. Read More Prev Next Number of Oregonians Without Health Insurance Falls by 63 Percent According to researchers at Oregon Health & Science University and the Oregon Health Authority, the number of uninsured in the state fell by 63 percent over the twelve-month period from June 30, 2013 to June 30, 2014. The study, which was aimed at estimating the number of uninsured individuals in Oregon as a result of changes that came in with the Affordable Care Act, estimated that in June 2013, that number stood at 550,000, or 14 percent of Oregonians. That number declined to roughly 202,000 in June of this year, which correlates to just over five percent of the population. Read More Prev Next Salem Hospital Makes List of Top Orthopedic Programs Salem Hospital was named one of 125 "hospitals and health systems with great orthopedic programs" by a leading national publication. Becker's Hospital Review has put Salem Hospital on the list with Mayo Clinic, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and Cleveland Clinic, to reflect its "excellence in orthopedics, quality of service, outstanding local and national reputations and high volume of orthopedic cases." It's the only Oregon hospital to make the list. Read More Prev Next Gates Foundation Awards $420,000 to OHSU for Women’s Nutrition and Wellness Summit The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation awarded nearly $420,000 to the Moore Institute for Nutrition and Wellnessat Oregon Health and Science University to develop and host The International Summit on the Nutrition of Adolescent Girls and Young Women. The summit will be held in Portland, May 14-17 2015. Over 60 global leaders in nutritional science and nutrition intervention programs will be invited to participate in the summit, which will work to address how food availability and choices among young women and girls can be improved, and international policies that would benefit the status of women across the globe and improve their access to nutritious food, according to OHSU. Read More Prev Next SLIDES: 30 Oregon Nursing Homes With the Most Deficiencies Oregon nursing homes have been hit with $225,000 in fines for violations of federal health and safety standards over the last four years, national data shows. In Oregon, a dozen nursing homes had serious deficiencies. Read More Prev Next Suicide: Leading Cause of Death for Oregonians 15 to 54 Years Old Suicide was the leading cause of death for Oregonians aged 15 through 54 in 2012, according to a report issued last month by the Center for Disease Control. The total number of suicides in the state increased to 716 deaths in 2012, up from 656 the year before. More often than not, Oregon’s suicide rate for a given year is higher than the national average. Oregon’s rate was four percentage points higher than the national average in 2012. Read More Prev Next Oregon Emergency Room Wait Times 17th Worst in the Nation It takes about 30 minutes for patients at Oregon emergency rooms to see a doctor, making the state the 17th worst in the nation for wait times, according to federal data. Within Oregon, average wait times vary considerably. The longest wait is at Providence St Vincent Medical Center in Portland, where patients can expect to wait a whopping 118 minutes on average. The shortest wait is at Harney District Hospital in Burns, where patients only have to wait five minutes on average. Read More Prev Next SLIDES: 10 Worst Emergency Room Wait Times in Oregon Check out this slideshow to see some of the longest hospital wait times people experience throughout the state of Oregon. Did your hospital of choice make the list? Read More Prev Next PSU Virus Discovery Could Impact HIV Drug Research New discoveries of a virus could lead to better drugs for treating HIV, Portland State University research revealed. Researchers unlocked the structure of a virus that only lives in volcanic hot springs and is similar to HIV, according to PSU. Read More Prev Next SLIDES: Portland, 2nd Best U.S. City for Living an Active Lifestyle Portland is the 2nd best city in the U.S. for living an active lifestyle, according to a study by WalletHub. The study ranked the 100 most populated cities in the U.S. based on how well they accommodate or encourage an active lifestyle. WalletHub analyzed 25 key metrics for each city, from the average monthly fitness club fee to the number of sports clubs per capita. Read More Prev Next Eugene Among Top 10 Best U.S. Cities For Work-Life Balance Eugene, Ore. ranks No. 8 on this year's list of the top 10 cities for healthy work-life balance, according to a study by the finance site NerdWallet. The study ranked 536 U.S. cities based on the mean hours worked per week by an average employee, the mean daily commute time, as well as the mean earnings for full-time, year-round workers, and the median gross rent in each city. Read More Prev Next Beaverton-area High School Football Concussions Nearly Double National Average The concussion rates of high school football players at some Portland-area high schools were nearly twice as high as the national average in 2013. Players at Aloha High school sustained 24 diagnosed concussions during the 2013 season, according to data released to GoLocalPDX by the Beaverton School District. Other Metro League schools also recorded double-digit tallies of traumatic brain injuries. Beaverton High School reported 22 concussions, while Sunset High School reported 21, according to school district data. Read More Prev Next Study Identifies New Autism Genetic Risks Twenty seven new genes have been identified that, if mutated, will cause or contribute to the risk of autism, a new study headed by a faculty member of OHSU revealed. As well as identifying the 27 risk genes, the study showed de novo mutations contributed to 25 percent of male autism and 45 percent of female diagnoses of the participants. Read More Prev Next As Nursing Crisis Looms, Ore. Schools Turn Away 2,071 Nursing Applicants Overcapacity Oregon universities turned away 2,071 qualified applicants last year, at the same time the state anticipates a huge new demand for nurses as the baby boom generation continues to age, according to a study by the American Association of Colleges of Nurses Oregon is already starting to see the effect of a nurse shortage. In Oregon, 906,954 people live in areas with a shortage of health professionals, geographic or demographic groups that the U.S. Department of Health and Services have determined have too few primary care providers, high infant mortality, high poverty or a high elderly population compared to health care providers. Read More Prev





















































Next

Related Articles

Enjoy this post? Share it with others.