Bag piper Justin Duran from Colorado Springs leads Saturday's Walk for Hope, followed by Cancer Champions in tan T-shirts making the first morning lap to the applause of the crowd. At 2:30 p.m., balloons containing the names of cancer champions were released: white for those who have passed on, and lavender for the living. ( D.C. Spencer / Daily Record )

Andres Abalos of Cañon City enjoys breakfast at Saturday's Walk for Hope in Veterans Park. Servers, Aryana Walter, 11, (center) and Zoey Starika, 10, made sure coffee cups were full. (D.C. Spencer / Daily Record)

Fremont County residents proved once again that giving is a renewable resource and community is contagious. Just ask Sandi Allen, co-founder of Orchard of Hope, which celebrated its Million Dollar Year Saturday at Veteran's Park with the 14th annual Walk for Hope.

"If we're giving away $1 million, that means this community contributed $1 million," Allen said. "We didn't get any grants."

Fourteen years ago, Allen, her husband, Bud, and two other couples planted a fragile seed of hope in the hearts of residents facing the dreaded C word personally or for loved ones. That seed grew into the locally supported nonprofit organization, Orchard of Hope. This weekend, 14 years of contributions from area residents reached the $1 million mark, and every dime went back to the community into the hands and homes of cancer battlers, Allen said.

Funds meet travel expenses and gasoline, insurance co-payments, mortgages, rent, car payments, even heating fuel for homes. Most anything constituting a need will be addressed by the foundation, aside from auto repair expenses, Allen said, though the organization has paid for tires.

Those seeking aid must file an application form, show a driver's license to prove Fremont County residency, and present a pathology report indicating the type of cancer impacting themselves or a family member. The five-person board then distributes the funding.

Current board member Bill Beard became keenly aware of cancer and its fallout when his 22-year-old daughter was diagnosed with the disease.

Advertisement

"Everybody knows somebody that's been affected by cancer," Beard said. "Every family is different. Everybody's needs are different.

The foundation goes beyond what insurance does, he added.

Beard, the other board members and Allen are all volunteers, he added. "No paid employees."

Another father at Saturday's event has missed only one Walk for Hope in the foundation's 14-year history. Allen's grandson, Cory Simmons, grew up volunteering with Orchard of Hope. Today, he has children of his own, and his young family was on hand at the park.

"It's pretty much been a lifelong thing for me," Simmons said.

He said he's stayed with the program because he gets an inside look at how people are affected by the financial assistance.

"The people that come into the office — you see their face. They say 'thank you.' That's all it takes," Simmons said. "You get the fever."

Former board member Butch Anderson this year manned one of the 35 vendor/team booths, C of Hope, named for his mother-in-law, Cecilia, whom he and his wife lost to cancer in her 60s.

"It's probably the best organization I've ever been involved with—between the organization and the community," Anderson said. "The only money they have to give away is the money the community gives to them. This community just keeps giving and giving and giving."

That giving often manifests itself in extremely different forms, Anderson said. One adult gave $100,000 over a few years. Three little girls donated $7.20 from their lemonade stand.

"Which is the most?" Anderson asked.

Saturday's walk was a culmination of one year's worth of funding, with the 35 teams in "friendly competition to raise the most money," said TerriBeth Rohr with the St. Thomas More Hospital team.

The winning team, Guardian Angel (McCasland Glass and All Star pets), raised $10,000 over the past year, and Spirit Skywalkers (the Doxtater family) raised $5,000, Allen reported Sunday morning. Altogether, more than $64,000 was raised since last July 1. The final report will be generated June 30, 2014.

Teams do more than walk in the annual Walk for Hope, Allen said. Most of them work year-round raising contributions for the foundation.

Orchard of Hope offices are located at 111 North Orchard Ave. in Cañon City. For more information, call 275-0089, Monday, Tuesday and Friday from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m.