1. Here’s the latest from Cannes: WPP has teamed up with The Daily Mail and Snapchat to launch a digital content creation agency, known as Truffle Pig. Holding company chiefs Martin Sorrell and Maurice Levy talked about attracting talent and working for the greater good. PR Lions winners will be announced this afternoon.



2. Walmart and Sears will pull Confederate flag apparel from their shelves after South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley said at a Monday press conference that it’s time to remove the banner from the State House grounds. A top Mississippi politician said Monday that his state should consider altering its own state flag to remove the Confederate emblem from one corner. Haley’s announcement has ramifications for the 2016 race, as well.

Confederate flag "does not represent the future of our great state," Nikki Haley says: http://t.co/70nbTRC1a3 pic.twitter.com/LExkNaa2uM — The Situation Room (@CNNSitRoom) June 22, 2015



3. Some believe Apple got an earned media boost from U-turning on its model for paying artists featured on its new music platform. The company has not yet disclosed some details about how it plans to pay musicians when their work is featured on Apple Music.



4. Sunshine Sachs has been accused in The New York Times of playing fast and loose with Wikipedia’s rules to brush up the page of client Naomi Campbell. Founder Ken Sunshine said his firm will stay within the guidelines moving forward.



5. Super Bowl MVP Tom Brady will appeal his four-game suspension on Tuesday. NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell will hear the appeal.



6. Campbell Brown is launching a news website focused on education called The Seventy Four. It won’t shy away from advocating for educational issues, the former CNN anchor turned education-reform advocate said.



7. The Supreme Court could deal President Barack Obama’s legacy on healthcare a fatal blow this week, when it is expected to rule again on the Affordable Care Act. It is most likely the final significant legal challenge to the healthcare-reform law.