Hillary Clinton, in Syracuse, Pushes Jobs, Education

Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton, speaking in Syracuse Friday, promised to revitalize industry, fight for higher wages, make college more affordable and protect Obamacare.

Clinton was the first candidate to appear upstate in advance of New York's April 19 primary. She spoke to a crowd of supporters at the Central New York Regional Market, near Destiny USA.

Though Clinton is leading Vermont senator Bernie Sanders in delegates over all, Sanders is leading in Wisconsin, the only state that votes before New York. A Sanders victory there would up the stakes for Clinton in New York, where she'll be expected to do well in order to maintain her position as the clear front-runner.

The most recent poll shows Clinton leading Sanders in New York by 12 points.

Clinton started with a salute to Syracuse University's men's and women's basketball teams, both of which are playing in the NCAA Final Four this weekend.

"We've got the grit, the resilience, the determination," she said, and then pivoted to her campaign. "That's what our country needs right now, don't you think?"

Clinton promised to help revive manufacturing in upstate New York, while chiding Sanders - "I'm not going to make promises I can't keep."

She said she would push a "zero debt" plan for college educations, in which repayment would be income-based and "after 20 years you're done."

And she restated her promise to not raise taxes on the middle class, while pledging to raise taxes on "the wealthy and the super rich."

A number of people from the north country attended the rally.

"Certainly a first-class lady and much different than some candidates on the other side have conducted themselves," said Ron McDougall, Gouverneur mayor.

"She's talking about quality jobs, things a lot of us have hoped for for many, many years," said Ron Cole, Jefferson County Democratic Committee chair.



And it was a mix of all ages, including Watertown High School sophomore Cory Rutherford.



"I came down because I'm really interested in politics and I thought it would be cool to see the first woman to ever run for president because of the historical aspect of it," said Rutherford.

Clinton reserved her toughest talk for the Republican candidates for president: Republicans are "after every civil right we've got."

"I will defend a woman's right to make her own health care decisions. I will defend Planned Parenthood against all the attacks. I will defend marriage equality and work to end descrimination. I will also defend voter rights," she said.

She said she will "defend the Affordable Care Act" and will "go after the drug companies to get their costs under control."

On foreign policy, Clinton said "When I listen to Trump and Cruz, it's not just offensive what they say, it's dangerous."

"They sound like they're in over their heads."