Association contends outside observer necessary to ensure due process

David Barnett

A faculty group is concerned that David Barnett, the tenured University of Colorado philosophy professor fighting for his job, will not be allowed to have an outside observer at his dismissal hearing next week.

Barnett and the Colorado conference of the American Association of University Professors sought to have one of the group's members watch a closed-door faculty hearing in Barnett's dismissal case.

University policy, however, says that only a handful of specific people may attend dismissal hearings. Two professors involved in faculty grievance cases, including Laurie Gaspar, who is expected to oversee Barnett's hearing in front of his peers, denied the requests, according to the association.

Don Eron, a member of the AAUP's national academic freedom and tenure committee, said CU is ignoring the association's recommendation that a "representative of a responsible educational association" be permitted to attend faculty dismissal hearings.

Advertisement

"This institution has a history of disregard of due process procedures," said Eron, who recently retired from teaching on the Boulder campus. "I have no reason to think (Barnett's) not going to have a fair hearing, but the actions taken by CU to this point lend themselves to skepticism. It's just one more thing, one more way in which they're denying him the rights to which he's entitled, according to the standards of the profession."

Barnett and his attorney declined to comment for this story.

The association, founded in 1915, works to advance academic freedom, promote the economic security of faculty and define the standards of the profession, according to its mission statement.

CU policy states that a select group may attend dismissal hearings conducted by members of the university's privilege and tenure committee, a group that hears faculty grievances.

They include: the six faculty members who will hear the case and issue a written report with findings, conclusions and recommendations; a lawyer to advise that group; a professional court reporter; a witness only when testifying; and both parties and their attorneys, which in this case means Barnett and representatives of the university administration.

A court reporter will produce a full transcript of Barnett's hearing, which will become the official record of the case, wrote CU's chief legal officer Patrick O'Rourke in a letter to the association.

O'Rourke disagreed with assertions that the university does not provide due process to faculty members. In many cases, university policy "exceeds the standards of due process" recommended by the association, he wrote.

"The University of Colorado provides extraordinary due process to its faculty members using rules that have been approved by its faculty senate," he wrote. "I am confident that Dr. Gaspar, with the assistance of independent legal counsel, will apply these mutually agreed upon procedures fairly and consistently with due process in the upcoming hearing."

Any recommendations made by the faculty panel are non-binding, as CU President Bruce Benson and the Board of Regents ultimately will decide Barnett's future.

The university began the process of firing Barnett this summer. He is accused of retaliating against a female graduate student who reported being sexually assaulted by a fellow student. The university paid the woman an $825,000 settlement in August.

Barnett denies those accusations and is seeking $2 million from CU for defamation.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta