On Tuesday, a Georgia House Subcommittee held a hearing about a bill that would take a first step against NDAA indefinite detention in the state.

House Bill 74 (HB74) was introduced last month by State Reps. Scot Turner (R-21), David Stover (R-71), Steve Tarvin (R-2), Jason Spencer (R-180), Michael Caldwell (R-20) and Kevin Cooke (R-16). It would prohibit any state agency in Georgia from cooperating with the U.S. armed forces if they attempt to indefinitely detain a U.S. citizen without due process.

According to Turner, HB74 fared well during its first subcommittee hearing. A similar bill wasn’t even given a hearing in last year’s legislative session, so this is seen as a “step forward.”

The subcommittee is exploring amendments to strengthen it ensuring that HB74 wasn’t just limited to indefinite detention powers under the NDAA, but any federal act that purports to authorize such power.

Other possible changes to the bill may include the addition of penalties for state-level officials who assist federal indefinite detention, Rep. Turner said. Subcommittee members were generally familiarized with the anti-commandeering doctrine, as they passed a bill based on the doctrine in response to Obamacare last year. As that idea catches on throughout the country, important measures such as HB74 gain legitimacy and are more likely to receive a fair shake in state legislatures.

If the bill can make it through this subcommittee assignment successfully, it will be referred to the House Judiciary Committee. If it can pass through that committee successfully, the bill will then receive a full house vote.

It may seem like a long process, but HB74 could receive its next subcommittee hearing as early as next week. That is why it is so important to act now, and spread the word about this important legislation that can preserve our bedmark freedoms from one of the most egregiously unconstitutional federal acts in American history.

ACTION ITEMS

For Georgia: Support this bill by following all the action steps at THIS LINK.

For other states: Take steps to fight back against NDAA indefinite detention HERE.

Related posts