That's one way to flush out a joker.

While President Obama’s top aides were gambling the Senate Foreign Relations Committee would back a military strike on Syria, Sen. John McCain was playing poker on his iPhone.

The Arizona Republican, who has pushed hard for the United States to take military action, appeared more interested in making straights than listening to Secretary of State Kerry make the case for punishing Syrian despot Bashar Assad.

This screengrab shows the Washington Post LiveBlog during the Senate hearing on Tuesday, when a photographer caught Sen. John McCain red-handed playing poker on his smartphone. Melina Mara/The Washington Post)

“This is not the time for armchair isolationism,” an impassioned Kerry told the committee Tuesday. “This is not the time to be spectators to a slaughter . . . We have spoken up against unspeakable horror. Now we must stand up and act.”

But Kerry’s strong words may have been lost on McCain, who was so engrossed in his game he failed to notice the Washington Post photographer who caught him in the act.

Sen. John McCain acknowledges playing a game on his phone during a Senate hearing Sept. 3. @SenJohnMcCain via Twitter)

That may also explain why McCain, a Vietnam War hero and one of the most respected members of the committee, barely questioned Kerry when it was his turn to grill the committee’s main witness. Perhaps he was more focused on five-card stud than Syria’s stash of Scud missiles.

McCain, when alerted that his poker playing had gone viral, tried to joke it off.

As the U.S. moves closer to launching a limited attack on Syria, each side is likely counting their bullets. (New York Daily News; AP Photos)

“Scandal!” he tweeted. “Caught playing iPhone game at 3+ hour Senate hearing — worst of all I lost!”

Later, McCain made another cringeworthy admission, saying “that as much as I like to listen in rapt attention, occasionally I get a wee bit bored.”

The Arrow 3 may serve a critical purpose if Syria intends to retaliate after a probable U.S. strike. (New York Daily News; Photo by Israeli Aerospace Industries/EPA)

McCain, the GOP’s presidential candidate in 2008, then repeated his earlier joke, saying “the worst thing is I lost thousands of dollars,” albeit fake dollars.

McCain’s off-hand remarks came after a three-hour hearing in which Senate colleagues like Bob Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat, said the decision to attack Syria “will be one of the most difficult any of us will be asked to make,” adding: “It is a moment for a profile in courage and to do what one knows is right.”

President Barack Obama talks with bipartisan congressional leaders in the Cabinet Room at the White House on Tuesday. Obama said there’d be no ‘boots on the ground.’ (LARRY DOWNING/REUTERS)

“I know that everybody is going to be taking that decision very, very seriously,” said Sen. Robert Corker (R-Tenn.).

Following the hearing, Corker and Menendez hammered out a draft resolution that would authorize Obama to use military force against the Assad regime but with strict caveats. The proposal would prohibit American boots on the ground in Syria and limit military action to 60 days. The full Senate Foreign Relations Committee is expected to approve the resolution Wednesday following a closed-door meeting to hear classified intelligence on the Assad regime’s alleged use of chemical weapons.

An Arrow missile is launched at an undisclosed location in Israel. Israel and the U.S. conducted a joint missile test over the Mediterranean on Tuesday that was said to be unrelated to Syria. (Israel Aircraft Industries/AP)

Two new polls were released Tuesday showing that Obama has his work cut out to sell the American people on attacking Assad for gassing his own people.

Obama says Assad is responsible for killing 1,400 people, including more than 400 children, in the deadliest chemical weapons attack in the world in 25 years.

Secretary of State Kerry (left) and Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel put their heads together at Senate hearing on probable Syria attack. (Mark Wilson/Getty Images)

Almost six in 10 Americans oppose American military strikes against Syria, according to a new ABC/Washington Post poll.

The latest Pew Research Center for the People and the Press survey found that 48% of Americans oppose air strikes and 29% support them.

A protester waves signs in opposition of an attack on Syria during Senate Foreign Relations Committee. (JOSHUA ROBERTS/REUTERS)

Obama tried to reassure war-weary Americans that any action on Syria “does not involve boots on the ground.”

“This is not Iraq, and this is not Afghanistan,” Obama said. “This is a limited, proportional step that will send a clear message not only to the Assad regime but also to other countries that may be interested in testing some of these international norms that there are consequences.”

Syrian Ministers attend a cabinet meeting on Tuesday in Damascus. More than 1,400 people died in an apparent gas attack on Aug. 21 on the outskirts of Damascus. (SANA/AFP/Getty Images)

During a Senate hearing interrupted several times by anti-war protesters, Kerry told lawmakers to ignore the polls. “President Obama is not asking America to go to war,” he said, but is seeking “authorization to degrade and deter Assad’s ability to use chemical weapons.”

While there were some pointed questions from skeptical senators, even strident opponents like Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) conceded that Obama would likely get the green light from lawmakers. “You’re probably going to win,” Paul said.

President Obama has been gaining support top congressional leaders, including Speaker John Boehner. (Carolyn Kaster/AP)

Obama also got a nod of approval from Hillary Clinton, his former secretary of state, who had not weighed in until Tuesday. “Secretary Clinton supports the President’s effort to enlist the Congress in pursuing a strong and targeted response to the Assad regime’s horrific use of chemical weapons,” a Clinton aide told Politico.

Earlier, Obama won the backing of House Speaker John Boehner and House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, two Republican leaders who have opposed the President on everything from Obamacare to gun control.

Free Syrian Army fighters in Aleppo investigate a bombed-out building Tuesday. (Hamid Khatib/REUTERS)

But the New York delegation is not marching in lockstep with the President.

While Sen. Chuck Schumer and Rep. Pete King (R-L.I.) are ready to authorize military action, Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand has not made up her mind, and Rep. Charles Rangel (D-N.Y.) is opposed.

Obama made his pitch as the U.S. and Israel gave the Syrians something to ponder by conducting a joint missile test over the Mediterranean Sea.

Neither the Pentagon nor Jerusalem gave any warning that it would be testing the Arrow 3.

Uzi Rubin, former head of the Arrow system, said the test was “completely technical. Nothing connected to Syria.”

With James Warren and News Wire Services

csiemaszko@nydailynews.com

On a mobile device? Click here to watch first video.

Click here to watch second video.

Click here to watch third video.