A section of the St. Vrain Greenway trail is washed out near Sandstone Ranch Park. Parts of the Greenway could take as long as three years to repair or rebuild. ( Matthew Jonas )

LONGMONT -- Bringing back the St. Vrain Greenway from the flood of 2013 won't be a sprint. More like a marathon.

It could take two years before the Greenway can once again be traveled from end to end, according to Kim Shugar, the city's natural resources manager. And it'll likely take another year on top of that before it looks like it once did, with its landscaping once again in place.

"It took 20 years to build," Shugar said. "Even though the river destroyed it in a couple of hours, we are going to get it back open as soon as possible."

Parts of it won't have to wait that long; the first re-opened stretches are expected to be done by mid-January. But a lot depends on how much has to be done. The city's plans show three phases of work:

Phase 1: Repair the trail, areas where the concrete needs to be fixed, but the underlying base is in decent shape. This is the "low-hanging fruit" that has the mid-January date.

Phase 2: Rebuild the trail. These are the harder parts, where the base itself was destroyed in the flood. That work will be bid in December and may be done by March or April.

Phase 3: Redesign the trail. These are the places where the river cut a completely new course, so that either the river or the trail must be moved. This is where the two-year timeframe comes into play, and even that's a guess, since it depends on what the Army Corps of Engineers decides.

"Until we get direction from the Army Corps of Engineers, we can't begin design," Shugar said.

Advertisement

Even Phase 1 areas may be challenging to travel for a while, she said, because higher-than-normal water levels are making underpasses temporarily unusable -- the agricultural ditches that normally shunted off some of the river water have been severed, and the ground is so saturated that even a light rain can still push it past capacity. So, for example, those using the Greenway at Hover Street may have to surface, cross the street at the traffic light, and then descend again.

So what can be traveled when? Going from west to east, the work looks like this:

South Airport Road to Roger's Grove: Phase 1, usable by mid-January.

Roger's Grove to South Pratt Parkway: Mostly Phase 3, likely two years out.

South Pratt Parkway to South Main Street: Phase 1, usable by mid-January. A short stretch east of Main is Phase 2, slated for a March or April re-opening.

Main Street to the Harvest Junction shopping center: Mostly Phase 2, to open next spring, but the part between Main and Martin streets that's planned to be Dickens Farm Park is Phase 3. A trail behind Harvest Junction is usable.

From Ken Pratt Boulevard to 119th Street, and 119th to Sandstone Ranch: Phase 3, likely two years out.

The Left Hand Greenway should be generally open by mid-January, except for a piece between Main Street and the Longmont Recreation Center. That's a mix of phases 2 and 3; the river moved, Shugar said, but because of where it is, she's confident the city will get permission to put it back.

"There isn't a lot of room (for alternatives), because of the development on both sides," she said.

Those wanting to stay posted can check an interactive map on the city's website, ci.longmont.co.us. A link can be found after clicking on the link for flood information. The map includes "thumbtacks" that can be clicked to show a photo of the area, its current condition and the work that needs to be done.

The fences blocking off parts of the trail need to be respected, Shugar said; some people have been trying to go around or through into areas that still aren't safe.

"Be patient," she said. "We really are working on it."

Scott Rochat can be reached at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com