By Shauna Johnson in News | September 26, 2014 at 12:23PM

WHITE SULPHUR SPRINGS, W.Va. — The healthcare industry is in transition because of the Affordable Care Act and talk of that rapidly changing environment dominated the West Virginia Hospital Association’s 89th Annual Meeting this week at The Greenbrier Resort.

“We know that changes have to be made. It’s not business as usual,” said Joseph Letnaunchyn, president and CEO of the West Virginia Hospital Association.

“There’s more services being shifted from inpatient to outpatient. We have a different payer mix. We have a changing demographic of the population. We have a reduced payment stream coming in from Medicare and Medicaid. We see more of that coming. We have a lot of payment reductions coming in (from the Affordable Care Act).”

Dan Lauffer, chief operating officer and executive vice president of Thomas Health System, deals with healthcare’s shifting ground every day.

“We’re having to take a look at our services, look at how our delivery of services are going to change going forward,” Lauffer said. “When patients become more accountable, in terms of understanding the costs (of health care), they’re certainly going to be more concerned about the quality and the accessibility.”

Both Letnaunchyn and Lauffer were guests on Friday’s MetroNews “Talkline” which originated from The Greenbrier Resort.

On Friday, Hoppy Kercheval facilitated a panel discussion, focused on healthcare, with the Congressional candidates HOSPAC, the West Virginia Hospital Political Action Committee, has endorsed ahead of the November general election.

Those attending were Republican Congresswoman Shelley Moore Capito for U.S. Senate, Republican Congressman David McKinley in the 1st House District, Democrat Nick Casey in the 2nd House District and Republican state Senator Evan Jenkins in the 3rd House District.

Other speakers at the event included Dr. Roni Zeiger, former chief health strategist for Google, Frank Wojcik, senior portfolio manager for Fifth Third Bank and James Orlikoff, president of Orlikoff & Associates.

The West Virginia Hospital Association provides health care advocacy, education, information and technical assistance to hospitals and medical centers throughout the Mountain State.