There's been some very good news this month for low-income Michiganders needing health insurance.

That's also bad news for people convinced that Obamacare is an abject failure and will collapse any day now.

The state of Michigan reports that 323,022 Michigan residents have enrolled in Medicaid in less than four months.

The program's expansion is an optional part of Obamacare, as ruled by the U.S. Supreme Court. Unlike many Republicans, Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder admirably led the fight to bring the expansion here, arguing it would save the state millions.

What's remarkable is that only 322,000 Michiganders were expected to sign up in the first year.

At this rate, the state will soon surpass the 477,000 enrollment projected by the end of 2015.

Who does the expansion affect? It's mainly the working poor -- those who have jobs but they rarely provide insurance. That makes health care out of reach for many.

The Medicaid expansion opens the program up to adults with incomes up to 133 percent of the poverty level. That's roughly $15,000 annually for one person (about what a minimum-wage job pays) or $30,000 for a family of four.

Clearly, there was a lot of pent-up demand, and Michigan isn't alone. Many states like Washington, Nevada and West Virginia all saw their Medicaid rates soar.

Nationally, more than 10 million are estimated to enroll in Medicaid, thanks to Obamacare. But only 27 states have expanded the program, which leaves millions out of luck -- particularly in the south and west, most notably in big states like Texas and Florida.

This isn't the only way Obamacare has exceeded expectations. More than 8 million have enrolled in health exchanges (a Travelocity-like system for buying insurance on the open market), outpacing the White House's estimate.

ACASignups.net, the work of Bloomfield Hills website designer Charles Gaba, pegs Obamacare's total enrollment between 24 million and 28 million people.

The uninsured rate has plummeted to 13.4 percent, its lowest level on record. More insurance plans will be offered on the exchange next year.

And Obamacare will cost $104 billion less in the first year than the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office originally projected.

That's not a bad record. And what seems to get lost in the high-pitched political rhetoric is that however flawed and unwieldy (as government initiatives inevitably are), Obamacare is tangibly helping people get access to affordable medical care.

The quality of policies has improved, as well, as Obamacare requires prescriptions, preventative care, pregnancy and maternity care, pediatric care and laboratory services to be covered.

With medical bills representing the No. 1 cause of bankruptcy in this country, that's some pretty important progress.

Of course, Republicans' attacks on Obamacare are still going strong, despite its strong showing.

It's a signature issue in Michigan, as an NBC/Marist poll still shows 44 percent of voters strongly believe the health care law was a bad idea.

Clearly, Republicans have won the messaging war so far, which could propel them to key victories in the November election.

Terri Lynn Land, the Republican running for U.S. Senate against U.S. Rep. Gary Peters (D-Bloomfield Twp.), is campaigning hard against Obamacare, as are dozens of Republicans gunning for the state Legislature.

And many of those candidates have hammered the Medicaid expansion, despite the awkward fact that it was championed by a GOP governor and passed by a Republican-led Legislature. (Snyder's actions have essentially taken Obamacare off the table in the governor's race).

Obamacare is still riling up Republican voters this year. But if it continues to help more people get insured and keep costs in check, it's hard to see it being the GOP's magic bullet in 2016.

Susan J. Demas is Publisher and Editor of Inside Michigan Politics, a nationally acclaimed, biweekly political newsletter. She can be reached at susan@sjdemas.com. Follow her on Twitter here.