KALAMAZOO, MI – Depending on which classes they've signed up for, students at Kalamazoo Valley Community College this fall could see a tuition increase of as little as $9 or as much as $1,274, per class.

In April, the community college's Board of Trustees voted to change the way students are billed from per credit hour to per contact hour — a move increasingly common among Michigan's community colleges. KVCC is the 19th of the state's 28 community college to make the switch to contact hours.

"More and more community colleges are going this way all the time," said Mike Hansen, president of the Michigan Community College Association. Billing by contact hour "reflects more accurately contact with instructors and the college. Everyone is moving away from the traditional credit hour. The traditional credit hour is going away."

The reason for the change at KVCC, college administrators said, is to "more fairly" bill students for the classes they are taking. Under the new system, highly intensive courses, such as in nursing, dental hygiene and automotive programs, which are more expensive to deliver, will cost more. Courses without labs, such as English, math, history, accounting and political science will remain largely unchanged. And, they say, even with changes, the community college's rates remain among the least expensive in Southwest Michigan.

"Community colleges have three major funding sources: property taxes, state aid and tuition and fees. Fluctuations in state aid and property taxes in recent years have impacted revenue here," said Linda Depta, director of college relations, in an email. "Prior to any changes in tuition and fees, Kalamazoo Valley Community College carefully weighs the impact that tuition increases will have on the budgets of its students. Charging by contact hour more fairly distributes tuition costs to students who receive extra instruction."

But some students, faced with increases of more than 100 percent for one class, say they are reeling from sticker shock and allege that the extent of the increases was not communicated clearly by the administration this spring.

Faculty have expressed concerns about the potential financial impact on their students, as well as the possibility of further drop-offs in enrollment after a winter semester when the community college saw its head count drop by 13 percent.

"They never explained what an 'intensive contact hour' was," said Maria Catherino, a KVCC student from Marquette who has launched a campaign to alert students to the changes. "We didn't know, until that small print appeared on the tuition website, that some classes were going to have really severe increases."

Catherino, who is transferring to Cornell College in Iowa this fall and has one more class at KVCC, said she found out about the extent of the increases after a friend signed up for a class and the cost was twice as high as expected.

"I said, 'That doesn't sound right — that sounds like a mistake,'" Catherino said.

She and others interviewed said they are concerned that many students won't fully be apprised of the scope of the changes until they check their accounts in August. She said she is most concerned about financial aid students whose aid might not cover the new totals.

"I don't think a lot of students have picked up on it, to be honest," said Keith Kroll, an instructor of English who has taught at KVCC for 28 years. "I don't think the Board of Trustees and the college have been very clear."

Students planning protest

Catherino said that she is organizing a student protest for the next Board of Trustees meeting June 10.

"We just want to raise awareness and let students know that a contact hour and a credit hour aren't the same thing," she said.

The college sent out a letter to the campus after the vote, saying that "the increased tuition rate will cost the average in-district student taking a full course load about $90 more a year. A full-year course load consists of about 30 credit hours. For such a student, the cost of tuition at KVCC will be approximately $2,790 per year, which includes a $30 per semester registration fee. The cost of certain contact hour intensive courses will be greater."

An analysis by the Kalamazoo Gazette shows that the amount of the tuition increase will vary greatly, depending on a student's course of study.

According to KVCC's conversion chart, nursing and dental hygiene programs saw some of the greatest dollar increases in individual classes. For example, two respiratory care seminars now will be billed at 23 contact hours, up from 9 credits — or $2,093, as opposed to $891 under the old credit system. (All classes are calculated using the in-district rate of $91 per contact hour approved by the Board in April. Out-of district and out-of-state rates would be higher.) A welding course went from 10 credits to 22 contact hours, or from $910 to $2,002. The Gazette found 18 courses that increased by between 120 and 200 percent from the old model to the new model.

Some majors unaffected

However, 11 majors — including accounting, music, communications, history, philosophy, foreign languages, psychology, sociology, economics and law enforcement -- saw no changes to their billing under the new system. For English majors, only one of the 33 courses offered for the fall has seen an increase, switching from four credit hours to five contact hours. The same is true of mathematics, which has one course increasing from three credit hours to five contact hours.

The situation looks very different for students in art, nursing, dental hygiene, automotive, welding and engineering courses, as well as for graphic design, illustration and animation students at the Center for New Media.

The Center, whose new curriculum was approved in November, saw the cost of 34 of 41 classes listed for the fall go up, according to the conversion chart. Of those, 24 went from three credit hours to seven contact hours, from $273 to $637 – an increase of more than 100 percent.

Nursing and dental hygiene programs are very expensive to operate, Hansen said, and under the credit-hour model community colleges typically lose money on those classes.

'English majors subsidizing the nursing majors'

"Right now, the English majors are subsidizing the nursing majors," Hansen said. "I understand those kind of increases are hard. Try to recognize that programs that have high costs arguably have a higher payout."

In Michigan, he said, nursing programs have more than a 90 percent placement rate and a community college nursing program, even when billed by the contact hour, is "still about one-third the cost" of a four-year program.

One art student found out about the change after signing up for a class and seeing her bill go from an expected $273, plus $75 for materials, to $637.

"I thought it was a mistake — perhaps they had my residency listed wrong, or some other error," said Heather Smalley in an email. "This morning, I discovered it was because of the change from 'credit hour' billing to one determined by 'contact hours.'"

Smalley said she's not opposed on principle to the idea of billing by contact hours and said that, in certain cases, it makes sense.

"The contact hour plan makes sense on the surface. For some classes, such as science classes, the extra lab time is indeed 'instructional' time, and it makes sense that the students are billed for the time that is spent receiving instruction. Yet there are serious flaws in the way this is being implemented," Smalley said.

"The ceramics classes do include lab time, and are now being billed at 7 contact hours. However, the 'open lab' time is specifically stated to be 'uninstructed' working time," she said. "While there is an instructor present during these open lab times, they are there not to instruct, but to ensure that the lab and equipment are not left unattended. Yes, the instructors are usually happy to answer questions during these times, but charging students for this as 'instructional time' is akin to increasing tuition because an instructor has scheduled office hours, or billing extra for having the option to phone or email with questions."

Smalley said she plans to switch to the Kalamazoo Institute of Arts, where ceramics classes will now cost less than at KVCC.

What about online courses?

Smalley also pointed to three online business courses she took, which have gone from 1 credit hour to three contact hours, as examples of courses with limited contact with an instructor, at best.

"They are self-taught, and there is usually no contact with the instructor at all. There are two lab assistants available for consultation, but their expertise with the courses and software is very limited. I sought help on several occasions for these classes; each time the assistants had no idea how to help," she said. "I have spoken to several people who needed help that the assistants could not provide; when they attempted to email the instructor for assistance, they received no response whatsoever. Yet, despite the complete absence of instruction for these courses, they are now being billed at 3 contact hours for each class — a 200% increase in the tuition cost ... That is simply ridiculous for a class that the student is expected to learn on their own."

Some faculty members have expressed concern that increased costs in certain programs might mean more students like Smalley will look elsewhere for their education, said Jeff Shouldice, the president of KVCC's Faculty Association.

"That's certainly something a number of faculty have expressed concern over," Shouldice said. "We're already experiencing a bit of a downturn in enrollment. If this goes through in full-fledged capacity, will it have a further negative impact on enrollment?"

They also have expressed concern that the increases in costs might mean delayed graduation or students unable to continue in their programs.

"Our No. 1 concern is the potential impact on students," said Shouldice, an instructor of law-enforcement and criminal justice.

"I think the most vulnerable students are the ones who are going to be hurt the most," said Kroll, the English instructor.

Instructors' salaries will not be altered under the new model, Shouldice said.

"I think it's important to note it doesn't change any compensation for faculty. It's strictly a tuition issue," Shouldice said.

That said, he added, "It's something other community colleges and colleges have done. I understand the need to cover expenditures and increase revenue for increased costs on these lab courses."

When the labs teach more than the lectures

In highly technical programs, Shouldice said, sometimes more learning occurs during labs than in the classroom.

"If you take Automotive, for instance, they're heavily lab-based. It will have a huge impact on the accounting on that. A lot of their learning occurs in those labs," he said.

In that case, "the classroom lecture serves as a prelude — if you're learning to change a brake system or something like that, doing it is critical."

In those classes, though, the tuition increase "certainly is going to be a day-and-night situation," Shouldice said. "I'm not certain how those individual situations are going to play out.

"It's a tough one," he added. "I come from a business background. I understand the college needs to be responsible in terms of cost and revenues. Obviously, when there's change, there's going to be people impacted by that."

'Pricing students out of getting an education'

Kroll said that he is concerned that those who will be most affected will be those who can least afford it. He cited the "disinvestment" in higher education by the state and the nation as what he sees as the underlying reason behind the change.

"Tuition is going way up; funding is going way down. So students are carrying more and more of the burden. Of all the students in higher education, community college students can afford it the least," he said. "We're pricing students out of getting an education or they're going more into debt."

Catherino said her KVCC education was well worth it. But she wonders if that will be the case for future students in the programs most affected by the changes.

"I got a great education there," she said. "It was affordable and I absolutely loved it. That's why I'm feeling blindsided, because I loved it there."

Yvonne Zipp is a staff writer at the Kalamazoo Gazette. Email her at yzipp@mlive.com or follow her on Twitter.