Healthcare wonk Sarah Kliff looks at Obamacare premium hikes for 2016 at Vox, and asks whether it will be the new norm for the program. Easy answer, yes, because that's what private insurance premiums do. Note that we're talking an estimated 7.5 percent hike in premiums for 2016, as opposed to the low 2 percent for 2015.

Insurance markets are complicated. But the story of Obamacare's 2016 premium increase is actually pretty simple: Many health plans — even those with decades of experience selling insurance — underestimated how sick health law enrollees would be. This meant that in 2014, many insurers spent more paying out medical bills than members paid in premiums. Premera Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alaska lost $9 million covering just under 8,000 Obamacare enrollees that year. In Colorado, Rocky Mountain HMO found medical bills to be about 36 percent higher than premiums. Now insurers are raising their rates to make sure premiums do cover claims. In some states, that means double-digit rate hikes.

Why health insurers were so bad at predicting their markets isn't certain. But chances are they weren't totally bad at it but instead were sucking customers in with low premiums to begin with, maximizing their customer base knowing that they'd likely hang onto those people in the future. Giving them the benefit of the doubt, though, perhaps they didn't know how unhealthy and expensive the people they would be covering were, and how much they were going to cost. They know that now that the people most in need of health insurance—the sick people—have signed up. Hence, the premium increases. The good news is that new enrollments—and there are a lot of new enrollments—brings what's likely to be a healthier population, hinting at more stability in premiums going forward.

There are a lot of things to keep in mind when talking about Obamacare premium increases, though. One is how politics has contributed to hikes, and how specifically Sen. Marco Rubio succeeded in shutting down risk corridors, the plan to help even out the costs to insurers of bringing on new, unhealthy customers. Without the cushion of the risk corridor to fall back on, insurers will resort to higher premiums.

It's also worth keeping in mind that before Obamacare, private health plans had big premium hikes, growing more than 10 percent on average in 2008-2010. Even before the great recession, premiums regularly increased by as much as 10 percent annually. Obamacare was not enough of a disruptor in our private healthcare system to reverse that growth, though it has helped to slow the rate of growth down.

The other thing to remember in this, on the consumer side, is that most Obamacare enrollees won't bear the full brunt of premium increases because they get tax credits in the form of premium subsidies. That's on the customer side, though. The larger question for health economists is whether lots of insurers are going to stay in the market, and 2016 could be the year that determines that.