The best way to think about what the Nuggets may do in the NBA draft June 25 may be to eschew convention.

Open your mind. To anything.

So, yes, if you think they will try to move up in the first round, that may happen. In fact, that’s probably the preferred scenario for a team looking to get as close to the top as it can in order to draft a true “star” player. The Nuggets, like most NBA teams, are fans of D’Angelo Russell and Emmanuel Mudiay, the two top point guards available in the draft.

But don’t rule out a move that would give the Nuggets an additional pick in the lottery that might be just below theirs at No. 7. In that scenario, the Nuggets could use the original pick to draft the most talented player on their board, then use the other to add another intriguing young player who might be more of a specialist — such as a pure shooter or big-time shot blocker.

The goal, if the Nuggets can pull it off, is to get as much talent as they can acquire to begin dramatically transforming their team.

Detroit, in the No. 8 slot, reportedly is open to shopping its pick. The Pistons, who recently traded for Milwaukee “stretch 4” Ersan Ilyasova, could use additional help at small forward. The Nuggets have options to at least broach a conversation there. Drafting in the seventh and eighth slots would be an enticing scenario, because some really good talent will be available in the No. 6 through No. 11 slots in the lottery.

The Nuggets have brought in some of the top players in the country for predraft workouts. And they recently traveled to see the newest sensation, Latvian power forward Kristaps Porzingis, in a workout in Las Vegas attended by NBA general managers, scouts, coaches and other executives.

Porzingis’ stock is rising, which is good for the Nuggets. If he jumps into the top four, it means more good talent will be pushed down to the Nuggets at No. 7.

The Nuggets have brought in just one highly regarded point guard — Notre Dame’s Jerian Grant — but that is going to change quickly. Murray State point guard Cameron Payne, who is shooting up draft boards, is expected to work out Monday. Another interesting prospect, Serbian point guard Nikola Radicevic, also will come to Denver on Monday, according to his agent. The Nuggets are working on getting a visit from Mudiay too.

So much of this is geared toward what we know will happen with this team over the next couple of seasons: wholesale changes. If the Nuggets’ 2014-15 season and the success of former Denver players in this year’s playoffs have taught us anything, it’s that the Nuggets probably were on the right track even in the face of their 2013 first-round playoff defeat to the Golden State Warriors.

The building blocks of that Denver roster — athleticism, quickness, energy and rebounding — can be recreated with a team that is young and hungry, and has more than just a couple of players capable of growing into elite talent.

But to get there means doing whatever it takes, starting now.

As fans, experts and observers, it means tossing away thoughts of the, say, one or two things that could happen and understand that the variables are multiple, and that the roads to acquiring the best talent the Nuggets can during the draft are many.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey @denverpost.com or twitter.com/ dempseypost