Topics: a. o. scott, Better Living Through Criticism, Books, Film, Media, Movies, New York Times, Entertainment News

Anyone expecting critics to be rigid autocrats will be a bit thrown by the new book by New York Times writer A.O. Scott. “Better Living Through Criticism” is as much about self-doubt and ambivalence as it is about a critic’s certainty, but it manages to be thrilling and grimly funny at times as well. Built around six chapters and four dialogues, the book considers film criticism – Scott’s specialty – as well as music, books, painting, and personal history.

Scott is one of the best and most respected critics in the press today, but it didn’t keep him from being attacked by Samuel L. Jackson after a tough review of “Avengers: Age of Ultron.” “ # Avengers fans,NY Times critic AO Scott needs a new job! Let’s help him find one! One he can ACTUALLY do!” tweeted Jackson.

Jackson’s criticism of his performance aside, Scott remains an idealist about culture. “Time travel is impossible,” he writes. “But you can go anywhere, to any period in history, in the pages of a book or sitting in front of a screen, and acquire a more intimate, richer sense of what I found there than you would through classroom study or organized travel.”

We spoke to Scott from New York. The interview has been lightly edited for clarity.

You begin and end the book with Q&A sections: Are those to show that criticism is about paradox and self-doubt as much as anything?

Yeah – there are a couple more in the middle, too. It’s partly to suggest that criticism is an unfinished conversation and is always about argument and dispute and the impossibility of a last word. It’s a conceit I borrowed from Oscar Wilde… And it’s a way of getting antithetical ideas out there at the same time. Without having to go, “On the one hand, on the other hand.”

And I found it was a way to open up and lighten the discussion a bit. Some of those chapters get fairly dense and abstract. It seemed like that a slightly more informal, almost tongue-in-cheek, way of writing could leaven that.

Why are critics so often portrayed as failed artists or snobs? When did they get reputations as killjoys?

I set out to find that, and I never found the origins. There was an amazing passage I found in Aristotle’s “Poetics” – I don’t even know who the critics were he was talking about. But you can go all the way back to the ancient Greeks.

Killjoys… I came to think that had less to do with the personalities of critics as with the suspicion of criticism. So I think that these critics – Addison DeWitt [from “All About Eve”] or Anton Ego [from “Ratatouille”] – are monsters of ego. So it’s about the discomfort people feel about judgment, about the expression of strong opinions, about the not-niceness of being honest about things. It seems much better to seem supportive, to be affirmative, to be generous.

There’s a feeling artists work so hard on these things and critics come along and trash them. Of course just as often, critics come along and celebrate them. And support them, and do the hard work of understanding them. But we all feel vulnerable to judgment. And scapegoating critics is a way we express that vulnerability. And reading my book’s reviews, I’m seeing that from the other side.

Speaking of judgment: Did Samuel Jackson’s attack on you for your review of “The Avengers” sequel – tweeting that you should be fired — take you by surprise? That was a little strange, wasn’t it?

In a way, of course, people do say that. But most are too polite or diplomatic to call it out.

And it was startling to have a movie star of Samuel Jackson’s fame, and of his caliber, to do that. He didn’t Tweet at me – I just saw all the “Avengers” fan taking up the cause, and showing up in my timeline about what an idiot I was.