Topics: Andy Harris, appropriations, D.C., Decriminalization, GOP, House, marijuana, marijuana decriminalization, Pot, Republicans, Washington, Politics News

When the Washington, D.C., council passed a marijuana decriminalization bill and Mayor Vince Gray signed it into law this spring, the only question was, which terrible GOP House member will consider this his business and use his congressional power to block it?

Wednesday, we got our answer: Maryland Rep. Andy Harris. Of course, of course, it’s Andy Harris.

The decriminalization law, set to take effect this summer, would eliminate most criminal penalties for possession of small amounts of marijuana while leaving in their place a small fine of $25. For those who think it’s ludicrous that people (typically people of color) are thrown in jail for marijuana possession, this law is a good thing.

But since this is Washington, D.C., Congress has to give final approval on money that the District spends — even though it raises it on its own. And so Harris, elected during the 2010 Tea Party wave and representing Maryland’s Eastern Shore, proposed an amendment during a House Appropriations Committee meeting Wednesday that would “preclude D.C. from spending any of its locally generated tax revenue to implement the new law.” It passed, mostly along party lines, 28-21. The law’s fate now is likely in the hands of House and Senate budget negotiators.

Harris’ rationale is that he is a DOCTOR and his DOCTOR opinion is that drugs are bad, especially for the children.

“As a physician, I have read study after study on the devastating effects of marijuana use, especially on developing brains of teenagers,” Harris said in a statement after the vote. “Congress has the authority to stop irresponsible actions by local officials, and I am glad we did for the health and safety of children throughout the District.”

It’s great that he cares so much about the children throughout the District. He doesn’t care about them quite enough to keep their parents out of jail for possessing a little bit of weed, but he cares. He really does.

Harris was even getting into it on Twitter with Mayor Gray.

Ironic that a representative from a state that has decriminalized marijuana would interject himself into DC's decision to do the same. — Vincent C. Gray (@mayorvincegray) June 25, 2014

@mayorvincegray I opposed it in MD too. Decriminalizing marijuana will harm kids. U don't have to be a dr to know that - though I am. — Rep. Andy Harris, MD (@RepAndyHarrisMD) June 25, 2014

.@RepAndyHarrisMD You have a right to your views. But I ask you to respect the decision of the elected reps of the 640K+ residents of DC. — Vincent C. Gray (@mayorvincegray) June 25, 2014

“Though I am.” This guy is the worst.

On the national level, Harris is probably most famous for an incident during congressional orientation in late 2010. Harris, like many Republicans that year (and the next cycle … and the current cycle …) had run hard against the Affordable Care Act. As soon as he’d won, however, he “surprised fellow freshmen at a Monday orientation session by demanding to know why his government-subsidized health care plan takes a month to kick in.”

Before that, Harris was a state senator in Maryland. And it was in Annapolis that he honed his talent for pulling off obnoxious culture-war stunts like the one in the House Appropriations Committee.