Buy Photo Register columnist Rekha Basu. (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

A hospital in Oregon was asking for blood donations Thursday for the three seriously injured shooting victims in its care. The women were among the seven wounded survivors of the Umpqua Community College massacre in Roseburg that left 10 dead.

With that report on TV as background, I watched the online video of an Iowa House debate from the spring. Legislators discussed a package of measures relaxing state gun laws. One bill would allow children of any age to shoot handguns with adult supervision. Another would let Iowans buy firearm suppressors to silence a shooting. The bill was a compromise to get recalcitrant senators on board, stripped of a provision making handgun purchase permits optional.

But some House Democrats weren’t convinced. “I don’t believe that it’s prudent to have children, who think everything is a toy, handle guns,” said Rep. Marti Anderson of Des Moines. Suppressors, she said, “give a murderer more time to kill.”

On TV, Umpqua Community College student Melody Boqua was telling Wolf Blitzer about a different kind of silencer. She’d put her phone in silence mode while hiding under a desk for an hour, praying.

Iowa House Rep. Mary Mascher, D-Johnson, asked Rep. Matt Windschitl, R-Harrison, who helped craft the amended bill, why there should be no age limits. “It’s a constitutional right,” he replied, saying government had no business telling parents what their child could do.

“We did a mandatory seat belt law because parents were not buckling up their children,” refuted Mascher. “We can set guidelines in place to protect children from bad parenting.”

Rep. Deb Berry, D-Black Hawk, asked Windschitl why allow suppressors. “Because 39 states allow it,” he replied.

On TV, a frustrated President Barack Obama, speaking from the James S. Brady room, was decrying Congress' failure to enact meaningful reforms in the face of mass shootings. “When Americans are killed in mine disasters, we work to make mines safer,” he said. “When Americans are killed in floods and hurricanes, we make communities safer.”

“Sometimes we make it easy for individuals that were not criminals to become criminals," argued Rep. Ako Abdul-Samad, D-Des Moines. “...We’re not offering legislation that says you must have training. … We’re not educating the parents.... I agree we should not tell parents what to do, but we have individuals that walk into a school and shoot innocent people.”

Replied Windschitl: “We should not be restricting good parents based on what bad parents do.”

At times it seemed different languages were being spoken.

The U.S. has less than 5 percent of the world’s population, but 35 percent to 50 percent of the world’s civilian-owned guns, according to the Small Arms Survey in Geneva, Switzerland. More than 1,500 gun-control bills were introduced in state legislatures in 2013 in the aftermath of a mass shooting; only 145 passed.

We could take steps to be safer, but they'd require us to quit being selfish and put public safety first. An ATF official has said six weapons were recovered at the college and linked to Thursday's shooter, and seven more were found at his home. All were bought legally by the shooter or members of his family.One was reported to be an AR 15-style assault weapon. It's likely if he didn't have them, 10 people would still be alive.

But for the gun lobby, any restriction is too many. Sen. Brad Zaun, R-Urbandale, wants Iowa to nullify any new federal gun regulations. He pledges to support any expansion of gun rights. At least six pro-gun groups rallied in Iowa this spring to fight proposed limits, including a ban on ammunition for AR-15 rifles. Iowa Gun Owners boasts of its ability to force legislators’ hands by ensuring they “pay a price for their behavior,” if they don’t support its agenda. It claimed it cost Iowa Sen. Daryl Beall, a 12-year, pro-gun safety Democratic senator, his seat.

Its claims may be inflated, but politics at its crudest works like legal bribery. The group and its leader, Aaron Dorr, have given $24,250 to 33 office seekers over three years, according to FollowtheMoney.org. Open Secrets reported that U.S. Rep. Rod Blum got $7,000 from the National Association for Gun Rights in 2014. Pete Brownell, a vice president and member of the NRA board of directors, who owns a firearms supply company, donated nearly $40,000 to Gov. Terry Branstad, a Progress Iowa report from last year showed.

The gun lobby contends responsible people take precautions. But nobody needs an assault weapon for hunting or safety, and even responsible people can snap. Someone feels mistreated, maybe there's an undiagnosed mental condition or they stopped taking medicine. That could happen anywhere but our ready access to guns makes it 20 times more likely someone will be killed by guns in America than in countries of comparable size and wealth, according to the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence.

We can change that. Since background checks became law, the Brady Campaign says 2 million attempts to purchase firearms have been blocked, half of those by felons. But those cover only about 60 percent of gun sales, it says, not the ones online or at gun shows.

The bill stripping Iowa gun restrictions last April passed the House 73 to 25. But it didn’t make it through the Senate, so it’s still not legal for a 5-year-old to fire a weapon — at least not yet. In this climate, even holding the line counts as victory. But to stop the insanity, sensible reformers need the same fervor, money and organization that the gun lobby boasts.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1RnCV3K