Buy Photo Kentucky State Capitol. (Photo: C-J file photo)

The Kentucky Democratic Party benefited from a jolt of new out-of-state contributors in May – 14 executives of AT&T who combined gave $12,550 to the party in this crucial gubernatorial election year.

AT&T has lobbied the Kentucky General Assembly hard for years for a deregulation bill that would it to abandon land lines in urban areas and to no longer string lines and offer basic land-line services to new customers in rural areas. The bill passed this year with the endorsement of Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear who said the measure is crucial to his effort to connect economically depressed rural areas with fiber optic cables.

The company has said the measure frees it to make increased technological investment in Kentucky and that it doesn't have any plans to end landline service to any customers.

A report filed Saturday by the Kentucky Democratic Party with the Federal Election Commission lists AT&T Chairman and CEO Randall Stephenson, of Dallas, and 13 other AT&T executives as contributors in May.

(Those contributions: Xavier Williams, Southlake, Texas, $500; Jose Gutierrez, Dallas, $300; April Rodewald Fout, Dallas, $500; John Oconnor, Atlanta, $1,000; Lori Lee, Dallas, $1,000; Randall L. Stephenson, Dallas, $1,000; William L. Smith, Dallas, $1,000; John M. Donovan, Dallas, $1,000; John J. Stephens, Dallas, $1,000; John T. Stankey, Dallas, $1,000; Stephen McGaw, Dallas, $250; Lori A. Fink, Dallas, $1,000; Timothy P. Leahy, Dallas, $1,000; Wayne Watts, Boerne, Texas, $2,000.)

The AT&T contributions were part of $193,100 in contributions the party reported in May. The party reported it had $122,170 in cash on hand as of May 31.

The report also shows 57 officials and employees of the Beshear administration contributed $250 each during May for a total of $14,250.

Bundles from AT&T and state employees aside, most of the party's money in May came from 13 big regular party donors. Here are the names of those contributors who each gave the maximum $10,000 allowed by law:

Cornelia Bonnie, Prospect, retired

Samuel A. Boone, Lexington, Wimbelton Farms, general contractor

Mark P. Bryant, Paducah, attorney

Leslie A. Combs, Pikeville, state representative

Clay M. Corman, Nicholasville, CMC Construction

Sarah Mahurin, New Haven, Yale University graduate student instructor

John A. Stovall, Greenville, Road Builders Inc., president

Angela W. Stovall, Greenville, homemaker

Chester Milton Thomas, Hanson, Green River Collieries

Matthew Thornton, Louisville

Fran Thornton, Louisville, homemaker

William T. Young Jr., Lexington, W.T. Young LLC

Joseph C. Zwierzynski, South Bend, DLZ Corp., engineer

The Kentucky Democratic Party files monthly reports with the FEC. The Republican Party of Kentucky files semi-annual reports. The names of contributors to the RPK for the first six months of 2015 will not be disclosed until late July.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1LngCea