Unanswered questions play a huge part of every spring training. For perennial losers such as the Rockies, unanswered questions become the very essence of spring training.

Where to start with the 2016 club? Here are a few of the most compelling questions:

Who will play shortstop? The question used to be whether Troy Tulowitzki could stay healthy. That’s been replaced by the legal status of Jose Reyes, along with concerns about his glaring lack of productivity.

Reyes is scheduled to go to trial April 4, the day the Rockies open the regular season at Arizona. Reyes was arrested Oct. 31 for allegedly assaulting his wife in their hotel room in Wailea, Hawaii. Regardless of what is decided in a court of law, commissioner Rob Manfred likely will hand down a suspension under baseball’s new domestic violence policy.

If Reyes is suspended for any length of time, does that open the door for prospect Trevor Story to break camp with the Rockies? And what kind of player will Reyes be in 2016? He turns 33 in June, is making $22 million per year and his offensive numbers have declined, annually, in nearly every category. His defensive range and arm strength pale in comparison with Tulo’s.

Unless Reyes rebounds, the question will become, “Why didn’t the Rockies trade him, even if they would have had to eat a chunk of his salary?”

Can Tyler Matzek bounce back? First a confession: I’m a big Matzek fan. He’s smart, competitive and has great stuff. His willingness to open up to me about his battle with performance anxiety left me rooting for the left-hander to find his way back. If he can, the Rockies’ rotation will get a bonus boost. If he struggles this spring, his career will be in jeopardy.

Did the Corey Dickerson trade make sense? We will get a better feel as spring training progresses. On the surface, it seems like a win for Tampa Bay. The Rays got a wonderful talent in Dickerson, a player I believe is capable of hitting .290 to .300 with 30 homers. What’s more, he is under the Rays’ control for four years.

In return the Rockies received left-handed reliever Jake McGee, who becomes a free agent after the 2017 season. He will be paid $4.8 million in 2016, up from the $3.55 million he earned in his injury-shortened 2015 season.

If McGee emerges from spring training as the Rockies’ closer, I might not be as skeptical. He does strike out a lot of batters, fanning 32 percent of the hitters he has faced in each of the past four seasons, good enough for 14th in the majors.

Then again, perhaps McGee becomes trade bait at the deadline when relievers are a hot commodity. I’m still scratching my head over this deal.

How good is Jeff Hoffman? Forget Reyes for a minute. The real centerpiece of the Tulo deal with Toronto was Hoffman, a powerful right-handed starter. Though not on the Rockies’ 40-man roster, he did get an invitation to spring training, so we will at least get a peek.

Hoffman underwent Tommy John surgery in 2014, a month before the Blue Jays drafted him ninth overall. The Rockies are very high on him, but we don’t know how soon we will see him pitch in the big leagues.

“I’m not going to tell you exactly what our plan would be,” general manager Jeff Bridich said last month. “I think we have to sit down with Jeff in spring training and make sure that everybody is on the same page. But we all look forward to Jeff pitching for us and hopefully advancing his career at the highest levels here.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or @psaundersdp