As of Sunday morning, the Arizona Wildcats had yet to announce a new defensive coordinator, but another piece of the puzzle fell into place.

Arizona announced that Donte' Williams, the secondary coach at San Jose State, has joined the staff.

"He is a bright, young coach that is an outstanding evaluator of talent and someone who has shown he can develop players," coach Rich Rodriguez said in a press release. "He will bring an energy on and off the field that will have an immediate impact on our program."

In an interview with TucsonNewsNow.com this month, Rodriguez identified the ability to recruit as the foremost quality he was looking for in new defensive assistants.

"In order for our program to grow, we have to be better at recruiting," Rodriguez said. "You're not going to be on the staff unless you can recruit."

Williams definitely checks that box.

In a story from the San Jose Mercury News in December, Williams is described as an "ace recruiter" and claims that "Williams' work on the recruiting trail has made him a hot name in the coaching circle..."

According to 247Sports, Williams ranked as the Mountain West's second-best recruiter in 2014 and 2015 and was leading that category this season.

Williams, 33, has been at San Jose State for the past three seasons, coaching cornerbacks in 2013 and the entire secondary for the past two years. He also held the title of recruiting coordinator last season.

He was a Washington graduate assistant in 2011 and 2012, and Nevada's assistant linebackers coach in 2010.

Williams began his coaching career as the secondary coach at Los Angeles Harbor College in 2007, held the same job at El Camino College a year later and then was secondary coach at Mount San Antonio College in 2009.

As it turned out, Rodriguez is in the midst of replacing his full defensive staff.

He let go of coordinator/linebackers coach Jeff Casteel, defensive line coach Bill Kirelawich and cornerbacks coach David Lockwood. Safeties coach Matt Caponi accepted an assistant coaching job with West Virginia last week.

Rodriguez already promoted Jahmile Addae from the administrative staff to cornerbacks coach. Addae, 33, is another young coach who should be a force on the recruiting trail.

The coordinator search has centered on Boise State defensive coordinator Marcel Yates, who is 38 and especially focused on recruiting in the Los Angeles area.

Williams, originally from the L.A. area, was a defensive back at Pasadena Community College, played for Syracuse in 2003 and then spend his final two seasons at Idaho State.