Workers are designing central public plaza and completing restoration work on the Feed & Grain building

The Loveland Feed and Grain Building is being restored as part of the Artspace Loveland Arts Campus. The exterior is also being painted to reflect what it might have looked like in 1917. ( Trevor L Davis/ Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The Artspace Loveland Lofts are complete but construction continues on the Feed & Grain building and the public plaza between the two buildings.

"Much of the remaining work on the area will be completed in the next six weeks," said Felicia Harmon, local liaison for Artspace Loveland.

She said in an email that the concrete pad west of the Feed & Grain was a receiving pit for the granary, where farmers brought first their wagons and later their trucks, full of grain to be dumped into grain chutes.

By the numbers Feed & Grain stabilization budget: $493,000, with $200,000 from the State Historical Fund and remainder from ArtPlace America and other grants. Feed & Grain EDA Grant: Artspace was awarded $862,557 by the Economic Development Administration of the U.S. Department of Commerce for the creation of a Creative Sector Business Incubator, which will also be used to rehabilitate first floor of Feed & Grain building and some other exterior work. Artspace Loveland Lofts: The project to build 30 apartment units for low-income families involved in creative pursuits was approximately $8.4 million. About $900,000 came from private sources and $5.3 million is coming from an allocation of Low Income Housing Tax Credits via the Colorado Housing and Finance Authority. The project received a $300,000 loan with a 30-year term and a 1.75 percent interest rate from the city of Loveland. Other funding is coming from various public sources. Advertisement

That concrete area will become a performance and gathering space to be used by the residents at the Lofts and also for public events. Landscaping will fill in around that area and the Lofts, which should be done by mid-August.

She said the current stabilization project of the exterior of the building at the Feed & Grain is being wrapped up. The original 1892 building got a new steel corrugated metal roof, reconstructed dormers, reconstructed wooden cornice and box gutter and masonry work on the second floor.

The second floor has been repainted a barn red and eventually, the entire exterior will be painted as well.

"We had paint analysis done of the building which showed what the color of the Feed & Grain was in 1917, the period of significance we are working with," Harmon said. "We've matched the current color and color scheme with what the analysis indicated."

The construction involving the $862,557 grant from the Economic Development Administration of the U.S. Department of Commerce will rehabilitate the first floor for use as a Creative Sector Business Incubator. This will provide affordable studios, exhibition/performance space and a curriculum of creative business training programs for tenants selected to be part of the program. The Feed & Grain organizers will also lease space to other creative sector commercial and nonprofit organizations focused on the arts, Harmon said.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.