1st Congressional District candidates Republican Andy Tobin , left and Democrat Ann Kirkpatrick, center take part in a debate moderated by Ted Simons, right, at the Eight, Arizona PBS studios Wednesday, Sept. 24, 2014 in Phoenix, Ariz (Photo: David KadlubowskI/The Republic) Story Highlights U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., isn't backing down on signature Democratic issues as she seeks reelection to a swing seat Republicans believe is one of the best opportunities to expand their majority in the House this year.

Kirkpatrick clashed face-to-face with her Republican challenger Andy Tobin for the first time on Wednesday.

On her party's signature issues %u2014 such as the Affordable Care Act, comprehensive-immigration reform and corporate taxes %u2014 Kirkpatrick held firm.

U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., isn't backing down on signature Democratic issues as she seeks re-election to a swing seat Republicans believe is one of the best opportunities to expand their majority in the House this year.

Kirkpatrick clashed face-to-face with her Republican challenger, Andy Tobin, for the first time on Wednesday.

She emphasized a string of bipartisan victories on issues important to residents of the rural 1st District, chief among them a bill aiming to open a copper mine and create jobs.

But on her party's signature issues — such as the Affordable Care Act, comprehensive-immigration reform and corporate taxes — Kirkpatrick held firm.

It is a contrast with many vulnerable Democratic candidates in Arizona and across the country who, recognizing the challenging political currents for the party, have softened their stances on the controversial topics.

At the same time, Tobin hewed to traditional Republican points of view during the pair's meeting with The Arizona Republic editorial board and in a live debate on the public television show "Horizon."

RELATED: Tobin to face Kirkpatrick in District 1

"I think it's clear Congresswoman Kirkpatrick stands with President Obama," Tobin said. "That's part of the critical crisis we're going through in rural Arizona today."

Kirkpatrick argued that her challenger, as leader of the Arizona House of Representatives, had taken positions that hurt the state.

Tobin supported budgets that cut $1 billion from education and slashed funding for child welfare services, while shepherding through a bill that many argued would have legalized discrimination against gays. That bill, Senate Bill 1062, threatened to cost the state the 2015 Super Bowl.

Tobin doesn't understand the district, she said.

In an awkward moment, Kirkpatrick swung her leg onto the television studio table to show off her boots. She has featured the footwear in television ads and at other meetings, as a symbol of her roots in the district.

"I want viewers to see: These are actually the real thing," she said. "My opponent unfortunately is one of the few candidates in Arizona who can't vote for himself because he doesn't live in the district. That's not representation."

Kirkpatrick and Tobin are competing for the sprawling 1st Congressional District that includes Flagstaff, Show Low and Casa Grande. Tobin lives in Paulden, a short drive from the district line.

Democrats have a sizable voter advantage, making up about 37 percent of the district's registered voters compared with 29 percent who are Republicans.

Most of the remaining voters are independents.

But the GOP typically turns out in greater numbers during midterm elections. And with President Barack Obama's approval ratings lagging, this election presents even greater challenges for Democrats.

Republicans have a better chance of picking up House seats in Arizona than anywhere in the nation, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy said at a fundraiser in Phoenix on Wednesday.

The race has become the second-most expensive in the country in terms of spending by outside political groups. Interest groups have poured more than $2.5 million into the race, according to the nonpartisan D.C.-based Cook Political Report. More money is set to flow into the race as the Nov. 4 election approaches.

Kirkpatrick made her strongest stand on Democratic policies as the candidates debated health-care policy.

She said she voted for Obama's signature Affordable Care Act because it helps thousands of her constituents who qualify for public health-care programs. The law also made federal funding permanent for Indian Health Services, which provides care for many residents of the district.

"I talk to people almost on a daily basis who now have coverage they never had before," she said. "Thank heavens."

Though Kirkpatrick said some changes to the law are needed, she didn't offer details on specific ideas. Last year, she voted with Democrats to oppose a string of modifications that Republicans had proposed.

Tobin said he is proud to oppose "Obamacare."

"I make no bones about it," he said.

Tobin said that the law is making it harder to find a doctor and that health-care costs have increased. The solution is not to require all people to carry health insurance, Tobin said, because healthy people aren't bankrupting the system.

Instead, the problem is services for people with cancer, diabetes, heart disease, Alzheimer's and organ transplants, he said. Those costly patients should participate in insurance pools reserved for them, he said.

Kirkpatrick said she has bucked her party on environmental regulations.

The Environmental Protection Agency plans to enforce strict air-quality standards that could force coal-fired power plants in the district to shut down parts of their facilities. The regulations would likely lead to job cuts at coal mines that supply fuel for the plant.

Kirkpatrick touted statements from utility officials praising her efforts to roll back "burdensome regulations."

"I've been fighting with the EPA since 2009, saying, 'Back off,' " she said.

But Tobin questioned why, if that's the case, Kirkpatrick voted against Republican bills to reverse the regulations. And he wondered why Kirkpatrick has introduced no legislative fixes of her own.

"Why would you come to Page, Arizona, and invest there (in a business), if you think they're closing down one-third of that coal mine?" he asked.

Kirkpatrick said she has voted against some of the energy bills because they would have repealed all environmental regulations, which is not the right balance, she said.

On immigration, Tobin and Kirkpatrick took sharply different stances, again largely along partisan lines.

Kirkpatrick said House Speaker John Boehner should let the lower chamber vote on the Senate's bipartisan immigration plan. The overhaul would tighten border security while creating jobs, she said.

But Tobin said he does not support the legislation. Tobin said he would oppose a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants until measures are taken to ensure border security.

But when it was pointed out that the Senate bill requires border-security triggers before a 13-year citizenship process could begin, he said he didn't trust the Obama administration to follow through.

But Tobin did take a more moderate view on immigration than some of his fellow Republicans. He said he would allow the millions of undocumented immigrants already in the U.S. to stay as long as they went through a legalization process that fell short of citizenship.

Tobin also criticized the GOP's tactics last year that shut down the federal government in an attempt to repeal the Affordable Care Act. "I don't believe in shutting the government down. I never have," he said in the televised debate.

However, that's not what Tobin told The Republic at the time of the shutdown.

"I don't think (Republicans are) being extreme on this issue," he said in October. The strategy "was very appropriate."

The Arizona Republic/azcentral politics 2014 Voters' Guide is back.

We've updated races to reflect the results of ­August's primary, added information about ballot measures and propositions and asked new questions of the candidates. Browse detailed information on more than 90 congressional, statewide, legislative, county and municipal races. Before you vote, visit azvotes.azcentral.com.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 12 News political reporter Brahm Resnik takes you inside Arizona's political scene with a look at the latest attacks on Doug Ducey and an update on the citizenship challenge .

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1pe4YmK