For 2014, the penalty for failing to get such coverage was the higher of $95 per adult and $47.50 per child, or 1 percent of taxable household income. In 2015, the penalty rises to the higher of $325 per adult and $162.50 per child, or 2 percent of household income. Next year, the penalties jump to $695 for adults, $347.50 for kids, or 2 ½ percent of household incomes.

Intuit on Thursday said the average Obamacare tax penalty for the 2014 filing year will be $301. But that will increase to $588 next year, according to the company, which cited internal data from customers as well as a Congressional Budget Office report for its estimates.

However, there are a slew of exemptions to the tax that are available. They include being a member of a Native American tribe, and "hardships" such as having filed for bankruptcy, been homeless, been a victim of domestic violence, being sent a notice threatening to shut off utilities or having medical expenses that you can't afford to pay off.

But Sacha Adam, ACA product leader for TurboTax, said, "Many of the exemptions exist because of income thresholds" that allow people to avoid the tax. Those exemptions include having income below the amount required to file a tax return, or having an income that is too high to qualify for Medicaid in your state, but too low to qualify for federal subsidies to buy insurance on Obamacare exchanges.

"For those that have hardships, they'll need to indicate which hardships they have and provide supporting documentation to their [Obamacare] marketplace," Adam said.

Intuit said about 55 percent of people who used the company's online TurboTax exemption check turned out to qualify for an exemption.

Read MoreSigns of less health-cost stress



But getting most of the people nationally who would qualify for an exemption to actually seek one is likely to be a challenge, because many of them may be unaware that is even an option.

"I think the main issue for Americans here is awareness," said Adam.

The tax issues surrounding Obamacare are adding a new level of complexity this filing season. All filers are being required to disclose this year for the first time whether they had health coverage during the year.