It's a seasonably mild Wednesday on Capitol Hill, a week before Congress takes its Independence Day break, and Chris Gibson is running late.

It's irksome for the 51-year-old congressman from the Hudson Valley, but almost inevitable for a 4:30 meeting. He rolled up his sleeves as he entered a cramped conference room, facing the dozen high school students — all of whom were Hispanic, and none of whom live in his district — whose remaining energy was eaten up during the 20 minutes they spent chatting with a pair of Gibson's aides.

“Given this late arrival here, why don't I just let you guys drive?” Gibson said. “I'm Chris Gibson. I live in Kinderhook. I was an Army guy for a long time, until about five years ago or so — 29 years or so in the military, and now I'm in Congress. So what questions do you have?”

A young woman in a black blouse asked him if he supported the Dream Act. Gibson called the immigration system “broken,” and said “we are at once a nation of laws and immigrants.”

He also said his preference is for a “comprehensive solution.”

The kids looked back at him blankly, hearing a “no” even though he hadn't quite said it.

“I can read body language and I can tell you're not really connecting with me right now,” Gibson replied. “But if you're not interested in enforcing the law, why change it? Does anybody have a response to that?”

It's an interesting time for Gibson, who announced after taking his oath of office in January that he would not seek a fourth term representing the 19th District, which covers the Catskill Mountains and Hudson Valley between Kingston and Troy. It gives him another 18 months in a six-year stint in Congress, which comes after 24 years of active duty. Days after Gov. Andrew Cuomo was inaugurated for his second term, Gibson said he was looking into a statewide run in 2018.

It would prove more daunting than any test Gibson has faced.

While he easily dispatched Sean Eldridge, his deep-pocketed, 28-year-old Democratic challenger in 2014, it’s been two decades since any Republican beat a sitting or incumbent Democrat to win statewide.The electorate has only grown bluer, and even the strongest G.O.P. candidate has to overcome the presumed-loser label to gather the funds and support required for victory. The last Republican elected was George Pataki, a pro-choice, pro-death penalty state legislator from Peekskill, who toppled Mario Cuomo in 1994 by siphoning support from independent and Democratic voters.

Gibson's political biography begins in 2010. He retired as a full colonel in the 82nd Airborne Division that February, and bought a house in Kinderhook around the corner from where he grew up. Republicans were still stinging after the special election win of Scott Murphy, a venture capitalist, who slid into the Hudson Valley seat left open when Kirsten Gillibrand was appointed to the U.S. Senate. Gibson began to talk about a run during his last days in the Army, reaching out to John Faso, a former assemblyman who he met during a legislative internship in 1986. Faso began talking up Gibson among local Republican leaders and helped connect him with party machers who helped him raise money and choked off support for other would-be candidates, allowing Gibson to skip a primary. He proved to be a vigorous campaigner, and even now, in his lame-duck term, has tended to pack district days with a half-dozen events in multiple counties.

Gibson beat Murphy solidly, part of the Tea Party-fueled Republican wave that swept Democrats from Congress. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee tried to pigeonhole Gibson as a Tea Party believer — he campaigned on eliminating the federal departments of education and homeland security, and thinks pistol permits should be reciprocally recognized among states the same way a driver's license is — but he stiff-armed the label. He did not join Rep. Michele Bachmann's Tea Party caucus. He broke with party leadership to authorize funding for National Public Radio and to oppose warrantless wiretaps under the Patriot Act, preferred the Cooper-LaTourette budget framework over Paul Ryan's Republican plan, and earlier this year voted against John Boehner for speaker.

The National Journal named Gibson the most liberal Republican in the House based on his 2012 voting record.

He wants to repeal and defund Obamacare, but made it clear in 2013 that he wouldn't hold either position if it meant shutting down the federal government. (“The congressman's position is recognizing reality. Shutting down the government is not in the best interests of his constituents. Being ideological to a fault is not reasonable,” Gibson's chief of staff, Stephanie Valle, said at the time.)

He signed an Americans for Prosperity pledge promising to oppose carbon taxes in 2010, and in 2011 voted to open the continental shelf to oil drilling. He supports the construction of natural gas pipelines, and voted for the Keystone XL project.

On the issue of hydrofracking in New York, Gibson supported the Cuomo administration's seemingly interminable study, welcomed its conclusion, but said he would be open to permitting fracking in the future if technology improves.

He said he supports a woman's right to have an abortion, but has voted to defund Planned Parenthood and to ban abortions after 20 weeks, a statutory definition of viability that many physicians place around 24 weeks.

Rep. Peter King, the senior member of New York's Republican delegation, called Gibson a “very unique guy.”

“What you see is what you get,” King said by phone. “He's, first of all, a real friendly guy, but almost a total iconoclast. There's no easy way to categorize Chris in terms of where he's going to come from: he could be liberal on one issue, conservative on a another.”

Issue advocates are less enthusiastic about Gibson’s attempts to defy labeling.

“Actions speak louder than words,” said Kelli Owens, vice president of Planned Parenthood Advocates of New York. “Chris Gibson has consistently taken votes to undermine and threaten women’s health and to limit access to affordable reproductive health care for low-income women.”

Gibson explains the coherence in his positions, even when it's not readily apparent, with a Gibson-constructionist view of the Constitution. It often takes paragraphs to unspool a position on a given bill.

Here’s how he explained a vote to support the EPA’s right to regulate air pollution: “The consensus of the founders was, we don't want no government, we want limited but effective government. Among the chartered responsibilities of the federal government were, in those areas where appropriate—such as facilitating interstate commerce, to provide for justice and domestic tranquility, the common defense and to secure the blessings of liberty. I have two basic votes before I vote: is it constitutional, and is it in the interests of my people. If the answer is yes to both of them, then I vote for it, and I don't care who authored it.”

The porch of his house in Kinderhook, an 18th century crossroads amid Columbia County's corn, dairy and apple farms overlooks a quiet street where kids can walk to the village library. He was the eldest of four children, raised by a stay-at-home mother while his father worked as an elevator mechanic. His children go to the same school, Ichabod Crane, where he played on the varsity basketball team.

On June 24, his first meeting after a hearing of the House Agriculture Committee was with Hannah Sell, a 17-year-old from Otsego County who was schooled at home and won the congressional art competition with an acrylic painting of troop-laden vehicle returning to base. She has 11 siblings and lives on a farm. Gibson called her “a model young American.”

The next meeting was a huddle with the School Administrators Association, and it quickly turned into a gripefest about the Common Core standards and testing that “has got off the rails.” Gibson carries a bill that he said would roll back testing requirements to before the 2001 passage of No Child Left Behind.

“We are meant to be self-governing and people are very frustrated,” Gibson said. “Opting out is just frustration manifesting into action to get the attention of our government.”

Gibson has enjoyed more labor support than many Republicans, and was endorsed in 2014 by New York State United Teachers. Gibson's position on testing puts him closer to the union (which is fighting to keep testing-based evaluations of its members) than many Democrats — including Cuomo — and NYSUT president Karen Magee told the New York Times that Gibson would have a “good chance” at winning it in a statewide run. Cuomo has pushed for an evaluation system that he believes will hold teachers “accountable.” Gibson, in an interview, likened the governor to a bully.

“I think he's doubled down on a very top-down, driven approach that is heavily reliant on intimidation and fear. It's an approach of demonizing teachers, and he thinks it's an approach that is going to lead to excellence,” Gibson said. “Leaders who can bring folks together have a better chance of achieving excellence.”

No matter the forum, it rarely takes Gibson more than a minute to reference his military service. He enlisted in the Army National Guard after he graduated from high school, and earned an ROTC commission while studying history at Siena College, just north of Albany. He began an active duty career in 1986 that including deployments to Kuwait in the Persian Gulf War, Kosovo, three tours in Iraq and a peacekeeping mission to Haiti after an earthquake in January 2010. He has won four bronze stars and a purple heart, earned a Ph.D. from Cornell and taught at West Point. He's run 10 marathons, including two within two weeks when, he says, he was upset that he couldn't break his four-hour benchmark.

His office is decorated with patches from the 82nd Airborne's Second Brigade, the Falcons, which was his final command. A corner desk is kept neat and cleared daily; a whiteboard to his right lists legislative priorities. There are also hints that the office doubles, at night, as Gibson's living quarters: a folding bed (an “upgrade” from the air mattress he used in his first two terms) hides in a coat cabinet between the desk and a private bathroom, and five suits and several Oxford shirts hang from a coatrack above the black leather chair where the congressman sat to receive visitors. He often took meetings without staff present; they referred to him as Chris when they were included.

Gibson says he keeps the same schedule as in the Army — about five hours of sleep per night, jogging at least two mornings a week — and shows a bit of boyish enthusiasm when around other veterans or military personnel.

The military experience colors Gibson's demeanor and, particularly on foreign policy, his positions. It's also been a key political asset, granting a measure of outsider status in the electoral sphere and making it hard for opponents to land attacks.

The first to try was Murphy, who was booed two weeks before the election when he said Gibson was a “flip-flopper” who “lied” about a small-business lending bill, and then suggested Gibson would support Republican policies to encourage outsourcing.

“The only thing that I've shipped overseas in the last few years has been myself and my paratroopers to fight for this country,” Gibson said.

Julian Schreibman, a Kingston lawyer who was the Democratic candidate in 2012, picked at Gibson's record on abortion and other traditional partisan cleavages, hoping that presidential year turnout would help Democrats down the line. His nagging tagline on Gibson — “He's not a moderate when it matters” — didn't stick.

Schreibman said he was proud of his campaign, but referenced Oliver North to argue that military commanders are given a presumption of truth-telling that has translated in Gibson's favor.

“From a partisan standpoint, he's an extremely hard target,” Schreibman said. “If you don't have data, his word will always be taken. And even if you do have data, sometimes his word will be taken. To me, unquestionably, he was not being truthful, but you can’t call him out for that without risking greater harm to yourself. Either he didn't have any particularly strong beliefs, or he did have strong beliefs and he kept them to himself because it didn't help him.”

“Hoo-ahh!” the congressman called to two young men in camo. It was the opening afternoon of the Columbia County Fair in Chatham — seven miles east of Gibson's house, and a ripe moment for retail politicking in the heart of his home turf. Gibson had just circled the exhibition building, chatting with a town judge about the need for more drug rehab beds and buying half a pound of fudge for his wife, Mary Jo, and their three children.

Most of the exhibitors recognized Gibson (the soldiers were an exception) and some people he greeted by name. He had an awkward near-interaction with Frank Serpico, the famous NYPD whistleblower, who is involved in a quixotic town board campaign in nearby Stuyvesant. The two passed within a dozen feet of each other, but did not speak.

“I wanted to know if he voted for party or for country,” said Serpico, who was trailed by a reporter and photographer for the New York Times.

“I don't know enough about it. I heard he's the former actor, is that right?” Gibson said later, when asked. “I think there's a headline somewhere today. I've just got to read it.”

The congressman headed toward the dairy barn, returning a salute from one farmer, shaking hands with teenage girls who were waiting to show their holsteins and chatting with George (Doc) Beneke, a retired veterinarian. Gibson sits on the House Agriculture Committee, and explained to a reporter that he went through “dairy boot camp” after his Army discharge, learning how to feed, tend and milk cows. Beneke said he reached out soon after.

“I'm not a big politico,” Beneke said. “He hasn't always voted exactly the way I would have wanted, but I sent him to Congress to do the best he could. He hasn't disappointed.”

Gibson’s political future will depend less on New York’s Doc Benekes and more on its Frank Serpicos. Bruce Gyory, an adviser to three Democratic governors and an adjunct professor of political science at the University at Albany, said the conservative base in New York accounts for between 30 to 35 percent of the electorate, and any successful Republican candidate has to address several gaps to have a shot at victory.

For five consecutive elections, Gyory noted, the Republican candidate has not carried more than a third of female voters — who account for 53 percent of the electorate. Cuomo, sensing this, created a Women's Equality Party in 2014 and campaigned on an abortion bill that sputtered in the State Legislature. Black, Hispanic and biracial voters could comprise a third of the electorate in 2018, but Democrats sweep those voters by a nearly 5:1 margin.

Gyory also sees an emerging “climate change gap,” where the right Republican can make inroads.

“Any Republican has to find issues and outreach to split the Democratic coalition,” he said. “Anybody who believes in the two-party system should be rooting for a moderate — and perhaps it's Chris Gibson — to be adept at doing this. That's what the challenge is for Gibson. Can he pick some issues that reach out to the middle without endangering the base that's the root of the Republican, conservative coalition?”

Gibson has already begun touring the state to try and make this happen. King said he introduced his colleague to Joe Mondello, chairman of the Nassau County Republican Committee, earlier this year. Gibson also made an appearance at the Queens County Republican dinner, and visited Buffalo.

Carl Paladino, the 2010 GOP standard bearer and a reflection of the conservative base, called Gibson “an extraordinary guy” who he admired for keeping his word on term limits and returning his Army pension.

Tom Reynolds, a lobbyist and former House majority leader, called Gibson “battle-tested in human life experences, well-educated and now he's battle-tested in elections in a multi-county district.”

Gibson's aides like to point out that while Barack Obama won 55 percent of the vote in Columbia County in 2012, Gibson prevailed with 52.35 percent. But he so far hasn't embraced many of the cross-cutting issues Gyory described.

Speaking to the high school students on June 24, he said he would support a federal minimum wage of around $8.50 or $9 — the same level as New York law now prescribes. He said he opposed recreational marijuana, and spoke at length about his approach to curbing urban gun violence, which would include investments in mental health treatment and “deterrence” of rational criminals who would realize their marks could be armed.

“What else is on your mind? What about foreign policy, what's on your mind there?” he said, turning back to immigration. “On the first issue you guys raised, I would tell you, your voices matter.”

Gibson’s initial questioner asked how he would feel, to be young and not allowed to take advantage of opportunities because of his immigration status.

“I would keep clawing away, that's what I would do,” Gibson said.

This article appears in the new issue of POLITICO New York magazine.