The Affordable Care Act offers many opportunities and challenges for employers.

As we enter a new calendar year with health resolutions, businesses of all sizes should consider a range of internal communications, as well as program outreach to help manage health/wellness quality ? and therefore productivity ? of their greatest asset: their employees.

The legislation requires health insurance plans to cover 10 essential health benefits, including preventative care. Employees who may have postponed these services because of fear of cost or missing work should be encouraged by employers to schedule these screenings. Early detection leads to better treatment options and more successful outcomes.

Health insurance doesn't equal healthcare access. Many East Tennessee employees commute from rural counties. More than likely, those employees access primary care in their home counties, creating a burden on themselves and their employers.

If those counties experience a physician shortage (with one physician per 3,500 citizens or more, which is not uncommon), patients have little flexibility in scheduling medical appointments, creating conflicts for both employee and employer.

Larger employers should consider partnering with a health system to establish an onsite clinic staffed by an advanced practice nurse or a physician assistant.

These providers can help monitor chronic diseases such as diabetes or hypertension in a more cost-efficient manner. By offering an onsite clinic, employers can save time and money in lost productivity.

Smaller employers have to be more creative. Perhaps scheduling a provider to be onsite once a week is more feasible.

The overall health and wellness of your workforce should not be overlooked.

Researchers from the Health Enhancement Research Organization (HERO), Brigham Young University and the Center for Health Research at Healthways found that absenteeism is 27 percent lower for employees who eat well and exercise.

Offering healthy choices in employee cafeterias and encouraging healthy eating habits for company-sponsored events creates a culture of positive behaviors and a sustainable, healthy community.

Encourage employees to get moving. Exercise enables our bodies to fight illnesses and disease. Exercise also relieves stress and clears our minds. Employees who exercise 30 minutes a day are 15 percent more productive.

Let your employees know how much you value their health so they may continue to make significant contributions to the company.

With more than 10 years' experience in healthcare operations and an MBA in healthcare management from Lipscomb University, Jackie Cavnar serves as managing director for Alcoa-based Mary Beth West Communications. She is a member of the Public Relations Society of America, which coordinates this column.