Bradley Roby’s journey to the Broncos began in high school. He starred at Peachtree Ridge in Suwanee, Ga. As a punt returner, wide receiver and cornerback, he helped his team reach the 2009 state quarterfinals. He redshirted as a freshman at Ohio State, and focusing on cornerback for the first time, his career took off. He started the next 37 games. A first-team All-Big Ten performance as a junior placed him firmly on the Broncos’ radar. Impressed with his athleticism and football IQ, the Broncos drafted Roby in the first round with the 31st overall pick. He has excelled in nickel coverage with the Broncos this season, producing interceptions in back-to-back games against the Patriots and Raiders. He answers questions each Thursday during the remainder of the season, and says he’s open to “anything, not just football-related stuff.” Here’s the fourth installment:

What type of movies do you like? What are some of your favorites?

— Diana

Roby: I like all types of movies. I can’t just settle on one. Here’s the top three that come to mind. “Troy” with Brad Pitt. “Next Friday.” Really all the “Fridays.” And I liked “Inception” a lot. I like movies that make you think. There was a cool twist at the end. I don’t know if those are my top three of all time, but those are the ones off the top of my head.

Everyone is talking about Odell Beckham Jr.’s catch. What is the best catch you have ever made?

— Keith

Roby: It was in high school when I was playing receiver. We were in the state playoffs. I was on a fade route. I was running and the ball was behind me. I really should have just opened up and caught it off to my side. But I leaned back to find the ball and then dove and caught it over my shoulder. That was definitely the best catch I ever had. The best I’ve seen? Probably Antonio Cromartie’s one-handed interception (against Peyton Manning when he was with the Colts). I was happy for Odell and that catch he made. I met him at the draft. That was an unbelievable catch, and it was a touchdown, which makes it even better.

If you could have dinner with famous people, who would it be?

— Isaac

Roby: Kanye West, Tupac, Bruce Lee, LeBron James, Kobe Bryant and Bob Marley. Those are the guys I’d like to have a conversation with around the table. Just to talk to them. I like all their personalities. I look up to all those guys for different reasons. They are tough competitors. I feel like I am. I like the self confidence of Kanye, Tupac and Marley. They speak from their heart and have a message. I just started watching stuff on Bruce Lee last year on YouTube. He’s a great dude. A global icon. I like his “Be Water My Friend” inspirational saying. (Lee’s quote: “You must be shapeless, formless, like water. When you pour water in a cup, it becomes the cup. When you pour water in a bottle, it becomes the bottle. When you pour water in a teapot, it becomes the teapot. Water can drip and it can crash. Become like water my friend.”)

How did you end up with No. 29 with the Broncos? I heard there was a story behind it.

— Brandon

Roby: I had to take a number in the 20s. I might change my number someday. If I can make 29 stick, I’ll keep it. It’s all about whether you make plays or not. I am not going to have a necklace with No. 29. It’s not like that. I want to make it mine. The number 24 was available. I remember asking (general manager John) Elway when I first got here if I could have 24. He was like, “I will have to think about that.” I realized right then I needed to prove myself first. And now that I have been here, met Champ, gone to his retirement ceremony and seen first-hand how much he meant to this organization, I would never wear it. I knew he was great. I just wanted a number other than 29. What Champ did here, nobody will ever match. His number will be retired here.

Who is the fastest guy on the team?

— Brian

Roby: We have a lot of fast guys. I can’t even say. I would be close, but I feel like I am getting slower. Maybe my legs are just tired. I ran a 4.38 40 (leading up to the draft) so I would be up there. Emmanuel (Sanders) might be the guy. Kayvon (Webster). Omar (Bolden). Bubba (Caldwell). The only way we’d find out is if we’d race, and that would probably never happen.