One of the largest barriers to economic growth is the cost of health care. Between 2008 and 2013, the median average family insurance premium rose 34.6 percent, placing additional financial burdens on employers who offer insurance benefits. Nationally, health care spending has increased to 17 percent of the gross domestic product.



A way to create health care cost savings in Michigan is by allowing nurse practitioners full practice authority. At least 20 studies from other states demonstrate the cost-effectiveness of nurse practitioners who are able to practice to the fullest extent of their education, training and national certification.



Rand Health reviewed options for cost savings in Massachusetts and estimates a $4.2 billion to $8.4 billion savings over 10 years from increased use of nurse practitioners. In Texas, the Perryman Report suggests an increase to nurse practitioners' scope could raise the state's economic input by $8 billion yearly.





By 2020, the Association of American Medical Colleges estimates that many states, if they are not facing one already, will face a shortage of primary care physicians. This is due to an aging baby boomer population, an aging physician workforce and the millions of millennials who will be newly insured through the Affordable Care Act.A way to meet the primary care demand is by allowing nurse practitioners the ability to diagnose and treat patients without direct physician supervision. Advanced practice registered nurses would also have limited independent prescriptive authority after being in a four-year mentorship program. Nineteen states and the District of Columbia have enacted into law and implemented full practice authority for nurse practitioners.The Michigan Senate has passed a bill allowing nurse practitioners to practice according to their education and experience. Senate Bill 2 has been stalled in the House Health Policy Committee for over a year, and there is speculation the committee has enough votes to pass the bill out onto the chamber floor.Opponents of the bill argue it will decrease the number of primary care physicians in the state. When looking at eight states (Arizona, Colorado, Hawaii, North Dakota, Oregon, Vermont, Washington and Wyoming) that allowed a wider scope of practice for nurse practitioners, we found no adverse relationship between the population of nurse practitioners and primary care physicians practicing in those states. What is clear in those states is that the number of primary care practitioners increased.Passing SB 2 also allows Michigan to keep its nurses in the state. It assures nurses the chance to advance their education and careers without moving elsewhere. We need to retain and grow this highly skilled workforce in Michigan.Michigan's health care purchasers have a great opportunity to make a difference in their bottom line. Passing SB 2 will contribute to the continued growth of Michigan's economy, keep health care costs in check and increase primary care options.