Timothy Jost

October 9, 2015

Implementing Health Reform. In late September 2015, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) released its Quality Rating System (QRS) and Quality Health Plan (QHP) Enrollee Experience Survey: Technical Guidance for 2016 as well as its 2016 QRS Measure Technical Specifications.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to develop a quality rating system and enrollee satisfaction survey program for qualified health plans. Based on this authority, CMS issued a regulation in 2014 that established standards and requirements for QHP issuer data collection and public reporting of quality and satisfaction rating information. In the fall of 2014, CMS released a technical guidance establishing a beta test of a QRS and enrollee satisfaction survey system to be conducted during 2015.

The 2016 Technical Guidance sets out the framework for the actual collection of QRS and enrollees satisfaction survey data during 2016 for display on marketplace websites and in QHP marketing material for the 2017 open enrollment period. QHP issuers with more than 500 enrollees in a particular product type (EPO, HMO, PPO, or POS) must submit validated enrollee satisfaction survey data for each product type, collected by an HHS-approved QHP enrollee survey vendor by May 25, 2016 and validated QRS clinical measure data by June 15, 2016. QHP issuers must submit data for 43 QRS measures (described in detail in the Technical Specifications document).

QHP insurers are required to submit QRS data beginning in their second year of QHP certification, but are not eligible to receive QRS scores and ratings until they have been operating in the marketplace for three consecutive years. Thus a QHP insurer would not receive a QRS score and rating for 2016 unless it had been operating in the marketplace since 2014.

As in 2015, however, only 28 of the measures will actually be used for scoring (29 measures were collected in 2015). Scores will be calculated according to a process set out in the Guidance for compiling star ratings for plans, which will be displayed on the marketplace websites and can be used by plans for marketing (subject to restrictions and disclaimers set out in the guidance.)

HHS has not yet completed analysis of the 2015 Beta test. The guidance notes that a revised version of the 2016 technical guidance containing refinements in the rating methodology and additional information regarding the preview and display of rating information will be issued once analysis of the 2015 Beta test is completed.

October 13, 2015 update: In a slideshow dated September 17 found at its REGTAP website, CMS provided more information about the QHP Enrollee Survey and QHS beta test. QHP Insurers submitted beta test data in the second quarter of 2015.

The 2015 QHP Enrollee Survey beta test, administered by HHS-approved QHP Enrollee Survey vendors and based on the Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPSâ) Health Plan 5.0 survey, featured 75 questions, including composite measures addressing:

Getting care quickly,

Getting needed care,

How well doctors communicate,

Getting information in a needed language or format,

How well doctors coordinate care and keep patients informed,

Getting information about the health plan and costs of care, and

Health plan customer service.

The beta test also provided four global rankings:

Overall rating of health care,

Overall rating of health plan,

Overall rating of personal doctor, and

Overall rating of specialist consumer saw most often.

The QRS measure set for the beta test included 31 clinical measures and 12 survey measures drawn from the QHP Enrollee Survey. QHP insurers were required to submit validated data for 17 clinical quality measures and the 12 survey measures.

Clinical measure data and Enrollee Survey data were submitted by 298 of 300 eligible QHP reporting units. The QHS preview report of 2015 beta test ratings were made available on October 5 to QHP insurers, state-based marketplaces, states performing plan management in the FFM, and the Office of Personnel Management with respect to multistate plans.

Insurers were expected to use the results to identify strengths and weaknesses and give feedback to providers. QHP insurers are not supposed to use the beta test results for marketing purposes.

In other developments, Healthcare.gov CEO Kevin Counihan posted on The CMS Blog on October 9, 2015, information on a new privacy manager tool that is now available on the Healthcare.gov website. The privacy manager allows Healthcare.gov users to opt out of the gathering of their information by CMS and of CMS using their information to analyze how the website is being used, to improve the website, and to provide “advertising” information in the form of announcements, alerts, or reminders.

In addition, Healthcare.gov will automatically observe preferences related to digital advertising for consumers that have Do Not Track enabled in their browsers. More information is provided on the Healthcare.gov privacy notice.

Also on October 9, 2015, CMS announced that it will be making an early partial payment under the transitional reinsurance program for 2015 claims in March of 2016. The reinsurance program covers part of the cost of high cost claims for insurers in the individual market. The early payment is possible because of surplus reinsurance funds collected for the 2014 benefit year, additional collections for the 2015 benefit year, and greater experience with loading claims by insurers that qualify for reinsurance payments.

The early payments will be available for 2015 claims loaded by February 1, 2016. For the 2015 benefit year, reinsurance funds are available for claims that exceed $45,000 up to a cap of $250,000. The early payment will cover 25 percent of claims within this range. Additional payments will be made later in 2016, at a final coinsurance rate estimated to be 50 percent for 2015 claims submitted by April 30, 2016, reduced by the amount of any early payments. The early reinsurance payments may help stabilize premium increases for 2017 and possibly assist insurers who were disappointed by the shortfall in risk corridor payments for 2014.