WASHINGTON — Dwayne Stovall, a Republican primary candidate for Senate, will drive across Texas to tell you he’s more conservative than Sen. John Cornyn and tighter with the tea party than Rep. Steve Stockman.

A former oilfield worker and business owner from Cleveland, Texas, Stovall is one of seven primary challengers for Cornyn’s seat. With just a few weeks until the March 4 primary, he’s crisscrossing the state and reaching out online, having some success raising funds and gaining supporters.

While the outspoken Stockman has claimed the title of the tea party candidate, some tea party groups are going with Stovall, who is much more actively campaigning than the congressman. On Feb. 6, Grassroots America-We the People, a statewide tea party group based in Tyler, endorsed Stovall.

The group’s executive director, JoAnn Fleming, said Stovall’s constitutional conservative values and opposition to things like Obamacare align perfectly with the group.

“As far as we’re concerned, he’s the only viable candidate in the race,” Fleming said. She said the group didn’t even consider Stockman, citing questions about his campaign finances and tendency to pull provocative stunts.

Some local groups are also enthusiastic about Stovall.

Ray Myers, chairman of the Kaufman County Tea Party, says his group has also endorsed Stovall.

“Stovall didn’t just pop into the scene,” Myers said, contrasting him to Stockman. “He started working with us five or six months ago. We were having a meeting at my house, and there was a knock on the door. I go to the door, and it’s Dwayne Stovall. He drove 200 miles one way. How many times would you see John Cornyn do that?”

Even that dedication and the attention it gets from political groups is likely to leave Stovall far short of what he needs to compete with Cornyn. The incumbent has millions of dollars to work with — Stovall had just $28,000 at last count — along with broad name recognition and the backing of key Republicans around the state.

Still, Stovall strikes a chord with some frustrated Texans. Will Kuhn, 29, a restaurant owner in Addison, is a supporter.

“Washington has become so out of touch with America that it needs everyday, hardworking people, who own businesses or who have worked real jobs,” Kuhn said. “Mr. Stovall represents that.”

A large Stovall sign covers the back of Kuhn’s pickup, which he parks on a busy route outside his restaurant.

Kuhn shrugs off Stockman as out of touch and says he used to support Cornyn but feels he no longer represents conservative values.

Stovall has scheduled appearances at more than a dozen events in the month of February from Arlington to San Antonio to The Woodlands. These events aren’t huge — they tend to draw about 100 people, Myers said — but Stovall is doing a lot of them.

“The last six months I’ve spoken to thousands of people,” he said recently. “The grassroots movement is absolutely there.”

A relative newcomer to politics, Stovall lost a GOP primary for the state House in 2012 by nearly 5,000 votes. The only elected position he’s held is on his local school board.

Even Stovall’s supporters admit he has a tough road ahead.

“We know he has a big race, an uphill climb ahead of him,” Fleming said. “But we want to encourage people of his stature to enter races like this.”

On Twitter:

@nswartsell