The University of Denver confirmed on Saturday that all of its study-abroad in France and elsewhere in Europe are safe after the Friday terrorist attacks in Paris.

The university has 29 students studying now in France and 412 students studying throughout Europe, according to a University of Denver news release.

“We now know that all DU students studying in Paris and in France are safe, and also that our students that were reported as traveling to Paris this weekend — either by registering their travel or as indicated through their friends or parents —are safe as well,” said Luc Beaudoin, associate provost at the Office of Internationalization at the University of Denver.

“While we are encouraged, it is not yet possible to know if any other students who might have traveled to Paris for the weekend were impacted by the violence,” Beaudoin added.

Beaudoin said the university continues to monitor email, social media and other news.

Five out of five University of Colorado Boulder students studying abroad in Paris have also been accounted for, according to The Daily Camera.

DU community members in Paris are asked to reach the Office of International Education at duabroad@du.edu. The Office of International Education has also set up a Facebook page where students can check in.

“DU Health and Counseling is also providing 24/7 care and support to those who need it,” Beaudoin said. “As we all know, one of the risks of sending students abroad is that they may find themselves in harm’s way. We are proud of our students who navigate stressful and unexpected situations and emerge well-prepared for life as global citizens.”

DU community members who have concerns about travel or transit to and from Paris can utilize International SOS, DU’s health and safety service, Beaudoin said. DU’s membership ID is 11BSGC000067.

The State Department has asked that U.S. citizens in Paris who are safe call their families and that those Americans in France needing assistance should call 1-202-501-4444. Americans concerned about loved ones in Paris should call 1-888-407-4747.

The DU Twitter page will continue to update people about the university’s students in Paris.

Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-954-1223, ehernandez@denverpost.com or @ehernandez