Marcey DiCaro thought she just couldn't lose that extra belly flab.

But unbeknownst to her, a 47-pound tumor was hard at work, ravaging her insides.

DiCaro, based in Tucson, went to get some pain on her right side checked out in 2011. The doctors found a sarcoma pressing against her vena cava, the body's largest vein that transports blood to the heart. But because DiCaro didn't have an insurance plan that would cover the surgery, she had to live with the massive growth for three years.

On Jan. 1, DiCaro obtained coverage through the Affordable Care Act. In April, after a 10-hour procedure, Dr. Tun Jie and his colleagues at the University of Arizona Medical Center were able to remove the 47-pound sarcoma. Because her tumor had expanded in the three years she initially sought care, now reaching behind her liver, the doctors also had to remove her right kidney.

"The first time I woke up, I looked down and I thought, 'Oh my God, I don't have that huge belly anymore," DiCaro told the Daily News.

Doctors at the University of Arizona Medical Center were able to remove the 47-pound tumor from DiCaro's stomach in a 10-hour surgery. (UAMC)

Dr. Jie — who performs this type of procedure one or two times a year — said that he had to rethink his surgical plan upon opening DiCaro up because she had a blood clot in her vena cava. The surgery was so extensive that when the tumor was taken out, DiCaro went into cardiac arrest on the operating table.

"It was a tense moment, but we had full confidence," Dr. Jie said. He and his team resuscitated her during the procedure.

Pre- and post-operation, DiCaro relied on alternative energy healing techniques like Reiki and quantum healing to keep her calm.

"I just connected to that place of peace where I knew I would be taken care of," she said. She stayed in the hospital for two weeks after the operation, during which many of her friends also well versed in energy healing would come visit and use their techniques on her.

One of DiCaro's doctors told her she's never had a patient recover so quickly.

DiCaro said she was thankful to President Obama for "standing by" his Affordable Care Act because it saved her life.

"If it wasn't in place and I was still waiting to have the surgery, I was told it wouldn't have been much longer before this had taken my life," she said. "I'm very grateful to be alive."

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE.

mengel@nydailynews.com