Burbank, CA, April 19, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Burbank, CA -- April 19, 2016 -- Extreme Reach’s payroll company, PES Payroll, announced today that Sukhi Pabla and Linda Schildkraut have joined its leadership team in the roles of Director of Health Services and Technology, and Director of Sales, respectively. Pabla comes to PES from Entertainment Partners where he served as Manager of ACA Compliance. Schildkraut joins PES from parent company Extreme Reach, where she was VP of Sales & Marketing.

Pabla brings to PES more than 10 years of client relations, contract review, and entertainment payroll experience, specifically relating to the California Division of Labor Standards Enforcement (DLSE) on motion picture industry related matters. As a Certified Healthcare Reform Specialist and licensed Life, Accident and Health Insurance Agent, Pabla has been working with clients in the entertainment sector to broaden their understanding of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), with an emphasis on the Employer Mandate, and its practical application for their business. Prior to his role at Entertainment Partners, he served as Business Affairs and ACA Compliance Supervisor for Media Services.

With nearly 30 years of experience as an Advertising Industry Executive, Schildkraut brings an array of strengths to her new role at PES. During her seven years at Talent Partners, which was acquired by Extreme Reach in 2015, Schildkraut held senior roles in Business Development, Sales and Marketing. She evaluated new and existing revenue, generating profitable opportunities for the company. With strengths in business development, sales management, leveraging relationships to expand an international presence, strategic planning, and contract negotiations, Schildkraut will play a critical role in driving the success of PES.

“Sukhi and Linda bring deep expertise in their fields and we couldn’t be happier to have them on our team,” said PES Payroll Managing Director, JP Fiorentino. “As one of the top ACA compliance and benefits subject matter experts in our industry, Sukhi is a catalyst for the development of PES's newly formed Health Services Division. Linda is a well known pro in the industry and will have an immediate impact on our growing sales organization and expanding base of clients.”

Pabla works out of PES Payroll’s Burbank office. Schildkraut is based in New York. They both report to Fiorentino.

About PES Payroll

For over 20 years, Professional Entertainment Services (PES) Payroll has been an industry leader in Employer of Record payroll services, innovative technology solutions & personalized customer service. PES assumes the role of employer of record for temporary and contract workers in the entertainment industry such as cast, crew, and support departments. As an Employer of Record (EOR) PES is responsible for administrative obligations such as complex payroll calculation, issuance of paychecks, benefits management, and the submission and management of worker’s compensation, unemployment and general liability insurance. The Company addresses payroll paperwork, taxes, deductions and crew and performer union benefits contributions in all 50 states and Canada. PES is owned by Extreme Reach, the largest EOR in the advertising industry, worldwide, and the third largest Employer of Record overall. For more information visit pespayroll.com.

About Extreme Reach

Extreme Reach is a cloud-based enterprise platform for the brand advertising ecosystem with core technology essential for seamless activation of TV and Video campaigns and the management of talent and rights. Thousands of brands and agencies, including all of the Ad Age 100, look to Extreme Reach to activate, measure and optimize TV and video advertising campaigns in one platform. The Extreme Reach platform connects and simplifies workflows and unifies analytics. Extreme Reach is headquartered in Needham, Mass., with offices in 20 cities worldwide. For more information, visit extremereach.com.





http://www.globenewswire.com/NewsRoom/AttachmentNg/f4a31fbb-55f5-4858-a37f-2ded17c5bb42 http://www.globenewswire.com/NewsRoom/AttachmentNg/9c1a5749-3247-4137-a79e-ba31c5a3b696http://www.globenewswire.com/NewsRoom/AttachmentNg/3346d4ae-0fa0-4f73-a518-5a6b77e8a683

Sandy Drayton, sandy.drayton@extremereach.com