The day Megan Rothbauer’s heart stopped beating, she racked up more than $250,000 in hospital bills.

The Madison, Wisconsin woman is fighting off bankruptcy after being sent to the wrong emergency room - one out of her insurance network - when she collapsed at work last year, according to a WISC-TV report.

Her heart tremored for nearly an hour as paramedics took Rothbauer to St. Mary’s Hospital instead of Meriter, which is only three blocks away.

She spent 10 days at St. Mary’s in a medically-induced coma and then nearly a week in the cardiac unit recovering from her near-death experience.

Megan Rothbauer is stuck with thousands of dollars in hospital bills because she was taken to a hopsitla not in her network of medical insurance. (channel3000.com)

“I owe part of my life to the doctors and nurses at St. Mary’s Hospital,” Rothbauer told WSIC-TV. “I was in a coma. I couldn’t very well say, ‘Hey, take me to the next hospital.’”

The bill would have only been $1,500, but because of balanced billing through the Affordable Care Act, the 30-year-old owes at least $50,000. Her insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield, took care of $156,000 to cover her 16-day hospitalization. St. Mary’s also reduced her bill by $90,000, the TV station reported.

But that didn’t stop an onslaught of bills from doctors, the ambulance ride to St. Mary’s and physical therapy.

Her bills are the product of balance billing through the Affordable Care Act that have Megan Rothbauer facing possible bankruptcy over hospital bills. (channel3000.com)

Her soon-to-be fiancé chose his words carefully when he described the situation to the Madison TV station before a table stacked with bills.

“Well, I’m pissed off,” Ben Johnsen said.

The couple is planning to get engaged, but her potential declaration of bankruptcy over the bills would make that impossible for them.

“I think my hardest issue is I had no control and I still have no control over what is my future,” Rothbauer added.

nhensley@nydailynews.com