The last time the Broncos faced the Colts in a playoff game, Peyton Manning donned a blue and white jersey and turned in one of the finest postseason performances of his career.

Twenty-seven completions in 33 attempts, 458 passing yards, four passing touchdowns, one rushing touchdown and a 145.7 rating.

Now he’s on the other side, staring down the quarterback who replaced him in Indy while leading his new team and its new-look offense down another road in the playoffs, one the Broncos hope leads back to the Super Bowl.

With the Colts’ 26-10 victory over the Bengals in their wild-card matchup Sunday, the Broncos will host Andrew Luck & Co. next Sunday, Jan. 11 (2:40 p.m.), in a divisional playoff game at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

The Broncos, who secured a bye for the first round of the postseason, could have faced the Colts, Bengals or Steelers in the second round. But Pittsburgh fell to Baltimore on Saturday night, setting up a preferred scenario for Denver.

Led by Manning, the Broncos defeated the Colts, 31-24, in their season-opener at Sports Authority Field in September. The Broncos’ quarterback threw a trio of first-half touchdown passes, all to Julius Thomas, and staved off a late rally by Luck and the Colts to preserve the victory.

Pretty? No. A blueprint for their playoff matchup? Definitely not.

This isn’t the same Broncos team that opened the season. This isn’t the same Manning-led offense that so many have become accustomed to seeing.

In his first two seasons in Denver, the passing game accounted for nearly 75 percent of the Broncos’ total offense and 77.7 percent of their touchdowns. But since November, the Broncos have relied heavily on their their running game, thanks to C.J. Anderson.

Denver compiled 753 rushing yards (3.66 per game) in its first seven games of the season; it racked up 1,032 (4.35) in its final eight. Anderson, the AFC player of the week in the final week of the regular season, ranked No. 10 among NFL rushers in yards per attempt (4.7) and tied for No. 8 in rushing touchdowns (eight).

Meanwhile, Manning — who at this point last year had just capped a historic season with 5,477 passing yards and 55 touchdowns — has slowed a bit this season (4,727 yards, 39 touchdowns). In the Broncos’ penultimate regular-season game, against the Bengals in Cincinnati, Manning threw four interceptions, the last of which was returned for a touchdown to seal the Bengals’ victory.

But while much has been made of the Broncos’ shifts on offense, a lot can be said about its changes on defense. The shaky defense the Colts saw in Week 1 blossomed into the league’s third-best defense in net yards allowed per game (305.2) and second-best against the run (79.8 per game), a stark improvement over last season’s No. 19 ranking in total defense.

And with a vintage Von Miller lining up alongside DeMarcus Ware, the Broncos boast a sack duo that together totaled 24 sacks (14 from Miller, 10 from Ware), short of their preseason goal of 32, but enough to rank them both among the NFL’s top 15.

Their jobs won’t be easy Sunday. Luck ranks No. 3 in total passing yards (4.761), behind veterans Drew Brees and Ben Roethlisberger. Per Pro Football Focus, Luck graded out as the ninth-best starting QB on the season,one place above Manning.

A lot has changed for the Broncos. And Manning. And the Colts. But Sunday’s playoff game will, again, be a must-see.

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or a twitter.com/nickijhabvala