Reuters

Welcome to BitBeat, your daily dose of crypto-current events, written by Paul Vigna and Michael J. Casey.

Bitcoin Latest Price: $367.11, up 4.06% (via CoinDesk)

Crossing Our Desk:

–So far, it has been a good venture-capital fundraising week for bitcoin.

Thursday brought the news that bitcoin mining company BitFury has raised $20 million in new funding. That followed Tuesday’s announcements that wallet provider Blockchain had pulled in over $30 million in venture-capital seed funding, and bitcoin derivatives provider SolidX had raised $3 million. That’s $53 million in three days. Not bad for businesses associated with a currency for which the headlines have this past month been about a plunging price.

BitFury makes high-powered bitcoin mining rigs that use its proprietary ASIC (application-specific integrated circuit) chips, and also runs what it describes as one of the world’s largest mining operations out of Finland, Iceland and the Republic of Georgia. Rather than describing itself as a bitcoin mining company, however, BitFury identifies itself as a “leading Bitcoin infrastructure provider and Bitcoin transition processing company.”

The company said the funding round was led by venture capitalist Bill Tai, former VeriFone CFO and Flextronics President Bob Dykes, and Google Maps co-founder Lars Rasmussen. It also received more funding from the $6 billion privately-run Georgian Co-Investment Fund, an existing BitFury investor.

It said it would use the funds to increase the capacity at its data centers to 100 megawatts, “allowing the company to cement our reputation as the Bitcoin industry leader.”

That large electricity consumption underscores how big the business of bitcoin mining has become. As costs and competitive challenges rise, profit margins on the bitcoins that miners earn for processing transactions have shrunk, which means there’s a race toward large-scale, highly efficient, high-volume operations. BitFury’s approach is said to typify that trend.

On its web site, BitFury says that some 40% of all bitcoins are mined with rigs that use its chips. (Michael Casey)

–Trying to explain bitcoin’s volatile price moves is a fool’s errand – even more so trying to predict its future.

About the only thing that can be said with any certainty after the past week’s gyrations is that volatility will continue — it’s ingrained into a market with thin volumes and an absence of fundamental information with which to gauge the worth of its participants’ all-or-nothing bets on bitcoin’s future.

Nonetheless, an analysis of the past week’s price movements and, in particular, of the sell-order that it started it all is instructive. While there’s nothing to say that another big shock could in the days and weeks ahead set off another slide in the price, the way things have transpired could suggest that there’s at least a base of support around the $300 level.

In an analysis of the 30,000-coin sell order that was first placed at Slovenia-based exchange BitStamp on Sunday morning, Pantera Capital showed in a report released late Wednesday that 24,580 coins were sold from that order. And whereas some had speculated that the giant order was part of an effort to manipulate the price lower by a big player such as an exchange, the bitcoin investment firm concluded that the coins originated from a relatively early adopter’s bitcoin address where bitcoins originated on April 3, 2013.

What’s interesting is that despite the pain it inflicted on the market and the accompanying panicked sales that it triggered from other investors, the sell order — which was twice as big as BitStamp’s average daily volume — was almost entirely bought by the market. That could suggest that a decent floor of demand exists at the $300 level around which most of the sales took place. Tellingly, we’ve seen the price come back significantly since Monday. After Thursday’s 3.66% gain, bitcoin is now up 27% from the intraday low of $286 it hit on Sunday.

Pantera noted that the original single sell order exceeded the size of the 29,656 coins that the U.S. Marshals auctioned in June but whereas the latter came with a two-week warning , “Sunday’s 30,000 BTC sell wall was brought down in a single evening.” It further suggests there’s a decent pool of buyers who think that $300 represents good value for bitcoin. (Michael Casey)

–Here’s a real-world effect of the sharp drop in bitcoin’s price this year: Sean’s Outpost, the Pensacola, Fla., homeless shelter that was founded by Jason King in March 2013 and takes donation in bitcoin, has lost so much money because of the price drop that the group took to its Facebook page to ask for donations.

“It’s not often you will hear us asking outright for donations, but we could really use them right now. The recent price drop in BTC has played havoc with our finances and we are down to the bone.”

The group says it has served more than 120,000 meals since its inception, and serves 2,000 meals a week to the homeless, “regardless of the price of bitcoin.” (Paul Vigna)

Contacts: paul.vigna@wsj.com, @paulvigna / michael.casey@wsj.com, @mikejcasey