C of O Dean of Character Education Sue Head, back row right, Coby Dolloff and Haley Jones recite the pledge of allegiance along with School of the Ozarks kindergartners.

School of the Ozarks student Cecelia Corbin ends the convocation with a benediction. In the background is College of the Ozarks President Jerry Davis.

Charles Krauthammer pauses during a speech at C of O Wednesday night.

Posted: Friday, October 17, 2014 5:30 pm |

Washington Post columnist Charles Krauthammer spoke at a College of the Ozarks convocation Wednesday and his main message was clear: Good times are ahead for the right-wing party.

Krauthammer is a Pulitzer Prize winner for his columns and has been named the most influential commentator in America by “The Financial Times.” He is a contributing editor to “The Weekly Standard,” and is also a contributor on a Fox News Channel program, “Special Report with Bret Baier.”

“I’ve been asked many times to compare what I do as a political analyst in Washington (D.C.) with what I used to do as a psychiatrist in Boston,” Krauthammer said. “I tell people that it really isn’t that different.

“In both lines of work I deal every day with people who suffer from paranoia and delusions of grandeur. The only difference is that the paranoid in Washington have access to nuclear weapons — makes the stakes a little higher.”

In the last few years, Krauthammer said there is a big debate that usually happens once a generation in every generation.

“To put it more blandly, what is the nature of the American’s social contract between the citizen and the state,” Krauthammer said. “Six years ago, we elected a president who laid down an ideological challenge to the nation ... My second proposition is that (President) Barrack Obama is not an ordinary liberal. Now, ya’ll know what a liberal is?”

A liberal, as Krauthammer explained, is someone who doesn’t care what someone “does as long as it’s mandatory.”

“I like to let that one settle in,” he said as many in the audience laughed.

Krauthammer went on to say that Obama’s policies reflect the European model.

“In Europe, it’s end zone to end zone,” Krauthammer said. “In Europe, you have real fascist parties, real communist parties on the left and the game is played all over the place.

“Here we have a center-right party, the Republicans, the center-left party, the Democrats, and we’re fighting between the 40-yard lines.”

Krauthammer said he has a problem with Obama because the president is trying to push the boundaries of the 40-yard line.

“Obama is, in my view, a social Democrat on the European model,” he said. “When he came into office, he was sort of a chameleon.

“When he came into office, he revealed this ideological agenda, quite remarkably, quite openly and honestly, I would say.”

Obama failed to reform education and energy; however, he succeeded in reforming healthcare through the Affordable Care Act, Krauthammer said.

“Ever since that day, he has not passed a single significant bill of ideological legislation like Obamacare,” Krauthammer said.

Although Obama has used executive order to get several actions passed, Krauthammer said the crowd should not to worry.

“But remember, executive orders are reversible by the next office holder in the White House,” Krauthammer said as many in the audience applauded. “The result has been four years of gridlock.”

Krauthammer continues to believe in American exceptionalism, he said.

“Decline is a choice,” Krauthammer said. “People pretend America’s in decline.

“That’s total rubbish ... things are out of control because we have let the world go in Syria, in Iraq, even Ebola.

“You can’t blame Ebola on Obama; I mean, if anyone can do it, I can,” he shrugged.

Krauthammer believes a shift is coming.

“I think that will lead to a surge in the conservative party in 2016,” Krauthammer said. “I will sum it up in one sentence:

“God looks after children, drunkards, idiots and the United States of America.

Circuit judge candidate Laura Johnson attended the convocation.

“His analysis is right on point,” Johnson said. “Our country needs to be more patriotic. It needs to go back to its center-right roots and we always need smaller and less-intrusive government.”