After nearly two years of discussion, the Utah Health Reform Task Force voted to recommend two options of Medicaid expansion, not including the governor's Healthy Utah plan.

SALT LAKE CITY — Utah's Health Reform Task Force stopped short of reforming anything Thursday, recommending that the Legislature consider a Medicaid expansion plan that would extend health care coverage only to the state's "most vulnerable" — up to one-fifth of the Utahns in need of coverage.

With the recommendation, lawmakers essentially turned their backs on Gov. Gary Herbert and his Healthy Utah plan, which has been vetted with the federal government through multiple meetings over the past year.

"We only have a certain amount of money, and we're trying to get it to the most vulnerable adults out there," said Sen. Allen Christensen, R-North Ogden, co-chairman of the task force. "We don't have enough money to cover everyone. We would like it to go to the place where it will be best spent."

Christensen said the state's "huge charity care safety net" would continue to provide care for most of Utah's uninsured, but for the medically frail who fall below the federal poverty level, their needs are often too specialized.

The recommended plans cost more per enrollee but address the greatest need, according to Christensen.

He proposed a bill that recommends two expansion options to the body of the Legislature, each the lowest anticipated cost of five models presented to the task force, including Herbert's plan.

The governor's office disagreed with the task force move Thursday, issuing a statement saying the two proposals set forth "cost the Utah taxpayer more money per person covered, while covering far fewer people than the Healthy Utah plan would, all while leaving hundreds of millions of Utah taxpayer dollars in Washington, D.C."

"This is a nonbinding vote, and the governor fully expects the Healthy Utah plan to be debated by the full Legislature while providing the opportunity for public input," said Herbert's spokesman, Marty Carpenter. "He will continue to work with legislators to that end."

Sen. Brian Shiozawa, R-Cottonwood Heights, a physician who is not an official member of the task force but attends and participates in the discussion, said Utah's charity care network, though vast and giving, "is not sufficient" for the state's growing population.

"We've tried this for decades. It's wonderful, but it is not enough," Shiozawa said.

The task force has met almost monthly for years, discussing Utah's robust health care market, among other things. In the past 18 months or more, it has set out to determine the best path for Utah going forward with various provisions of the Affordable Care Act, which aims to make health insurance available to all Americans.

Each state is given flexibility to provide additional coverage through Medicaid, specifically whether to expand coverage up to 138 percent of the poverty level. Utah remains one of the last states to make a move, as officials have carefully considered everything across the gamut — from doing nothing to full Medicaid expansion.

Task force member Rep. Rebecca Chavez-Houck, D-Salt Lake City, said she'd like to at least meet the needs of people under 100 percent of the federal poverty level.

"We've heard from a lot of working families and working moms and dads. I have great concern and heartburn over not covering them," she said.

Rep. Jim Dunnigan, R-Taylorsville, said the options recommended by the task force do reach "those who need help the most," based on their health care needs.

"Isn't that who we need to help?" Dunnigan asked, adding that overall, the lowest-cost plans are sustainable for the state.

Healthy Utah, he said, relies on federal funds coming back to the state and has a provision for the state to stop funding it after three years of implementation and cancel benefits if the plan isn't working.

Dunnigan, who participated in negotiations for Utah reform, expressed disappointment with the federal government, as it won't provide funding for anything less than expansion to people who fall below 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

"We need to be measured in our approach," he said. "This is a changing platform."

Care for the right subset of people, Dunnigan said, could provide the support they need to lift themselves out of poverty, and decrease recidivism rates.

Republican lawmakers on the task force joined in support of the recommendations and the need to balance a budget.

Chavez-Houck, however, worried the governor's negotiations at the federal level were "done in vain."

"I am pained by excluding many folks within the coverage gap with the first two options," she said.

The first option would cover up to 10,300 medically frail people (those needing treatment for mental illness, substance abuse or for various disabilities) at a cost of $28 million for the state. It would extend coverage to 1 in 8 people below 100 percent of the federal poverty level.

The second option would provide coverage to up to 22,800 people, or 1 in 3 individuals below the poverty line, at an annual cost to the state of $56 million.

The governor's plan aims to cover up to 146,000 Utahns, up to 138 percent of the poverty level, at a cost to the state of $136 million. It qualifies for the maximum federal match of funds.

Sen. Gene Davis, D-Salt Lake City, said the task force owed it to Utahns to keep the Healthy Utah option on the table. He said he would draft a bill opting for full Medicaid expansion, as set forth by the Affordable Care Act.

"We haven't really addressed what this task force was put into place for," said Davis, a member of the task force. "We have not accomplished what our task here has been about."

Christensen said, "There has to be a limit.

"We cannot provide everything for everyone," he said. "Hopefully people can see this as a glass-half-full situation, where we provide for the most needy."

Email: wleonard@deseretnews.com, Twitter: wendyleonards