There are things not associated with young, learning basketball teams, and coming through in the clutch is near the top of the list.

Yet executing at winning time has largely not been a problem for the young Nuggets this season. Not by a long shot.

When the games get close, the Nuggets have been at their best, and Saturday night’s 104-101 over the Detroit Pistons at the Pepsi Center was no different.

The Nuggets are 8-3 in games decided by three points or less this season. So almost half of their victories have come under these cirumstances. When the pressure is turned up, the Nuggets have made the plays.

Like these four, all in the closing seconds against the Pistons:

– Danilo Gallinari nailing a long jump shot with 23.8 seconds to play, putting the Nuggets up 102-101 at the time.

– The Nuggets forcing two missed layups on the ensuing Pistons possession, then getting the rebound.

– Nikola Jokic nearly blocking the Pistons’ last-gasp layup attempt by Reggie Jackson with 3.9 seconds to play.

– Emmanuel Mudiay hitting two free throws with 0.3 seconds to go to push the lead to the final margin.

Why have the Nuggets been so good in these situations?

“I think it’s great coaching,” said Nuggets coach Michael Malone, smiling. “What else could it be?”

Danilo Gallinari couldn’t put a finger on it.

“I wish I knew,” Gallinari said. “I don’t know.”

Whatever it is, the Nuggets wouldn’t mind bottling it up and repeating it the rest of the season. Malone readily admits his team isn’t the kind that is going to get blowouts, so being able to navigate the turbulent waters of close games is a must.

Getting to closing time on Saturday night was a roller coaster ride.

The first order of business was figuring out a strategy against, the biggest, baddest inside force in the NBA — Detroit behemoth Andre Drummond.

To do it, they simply small-balled the 6-foot-11, 280-pound Drummond out of the game.

Foul trouble did the trick early on. Drummond played two minutes before picking up two fouls. Still, early in his absence, Detroit played like a well-oiled machine. The Pistons had 22 of their first 41 points in the paint, largely without Drummond. They dominated the boards early, 24-9, also without Drummond on the court.

So there was considerable work to do for the Nuggets.

The first course of action was getting Drummond away from the basket, making him guard Nuggets rookie center Nikola Jokic, who took — and made — jump shots to make it happen. It was part of a big third quarter.

That third quarter was one of the best the Nuggets have put together this season, and it began with the starters. Emmanuel Mudiay made his first five shots of the third, and he and Jokic combined to score 19 of the Nuggets’ first 26 points in the period.

Guard Gary Harris got in the act, too, making all three of his shots en route to seven points in the third. The Nuggets, who trailed 54-45 at halftime, hit the Pistons with a 20-8 start in third, outscored the Pistons 39-20 overall and turned that deficit into a 10-point lead going into the fourth.

“We just got stops and we started running,” Mudiay said. “We’re not the best half court team, so we’ve got to get stops. But when it’s a running game we’re one of the best in the league because we’re so young, so athletic.”

But the reserves couldn’t hold it.

It took the Pistons 4 ½ minutes to erase the entire lead, and they outscored the Nuggets 18-5 before Malone was forced to put starters back in the game a little earlier than normal.

The Pistons’ run became 20-5 before the Nuggets had four starters back in, and then Jokic’s insertion into the game with just under seven minutes meant all five were back — but with a lot of time to burn to get to the finish line.

Aron Baynes hit a layup with 48.3 seconds to play to put the Pistons up 101-100.

But the Nuggets weren’t done. On the next possession, Danilo Gallinari got the ball, faced up Pistons defender Marcus Morris and hit a step-back jumper as the shot clock ran out, and with 23.8 seconds to play to put the Nuggets up 102-101.

“When I caught the ball I saw there was like four seconds on the clock,” Gallinari said. “I thought I had to make a move. It was not easy, I was in a tough spot, but it went in.”

Gallinari led the Nuggets with 30 points. Mudiay had one of his best games of the season, scoring 18 points, adding four assists and four rebounds.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost