BY: Follow @JoeSchoffstall



Premium rates within Obamacare are set to increase in several states next year, with rates in one city predicted to increase by as much as 22.8 percent, according to a recent study.

The study, released by the Kaiser Family Foundation, consists of an analysis of premium rates for the second-lowest-cost silver plan. This plan is used by 68 percent of people currently enrolled in the federal health insurance marketplace.

The study looked at the most readily available data of premium filings from insurers to state insurance departments and includes major cities in 12 states and Washington, D.C. Comprehensive data was not fully available for numerous other states, excluding them from the analysis.

According to the data, nine of the 13 cities included within the study will see an increase in their 2016 premium rates.

Portland, Ore., is predicted to see the biggest jump between this year and next year, increasing by as much as 22.8 percent in 2016. This is not the first time the city has seen a jump in insurance costs: rates spiked by 6.1 percent compared to their 2014 rates.

“That’s a massive hit to the bottom line of a family,” wrote Kristina Ribali of the Foundation for Government Accountability. “Seeing a health insurance bill that is nearly a quarter larger than it was in 2015 means that many families would have to cut back on other needed spending in order to cover those increased health care costs.”

Portland is not the only city that could see a double digit jump in their premium rates. Albuquerque, N.M., which saw a decrease of -11.8 percent in their 2015 rates, could see their premiums climb to 11 percent next year.

Other states that are predicted to see a bump in their premium rates for 2016 include: Burlington, Vt., with an increase of 7.3 percent in 2016; Richmond, Va., with an increase of 6.3 percent in 2016; Baltimore, Md., which will see rates go up 5.8 percent next year; Washington, D.C., with a 2.8 percent jump; Providence, R.I, which will see rates go up 1.0 percent; and Portland, Maine, up 0.8 percent.

Only four cities will see a decrease in their premiums rates, according to the analysis: Detroit, Los Angeles, Seattle, and Hartford, Ct.

“This news is further proof of President Obama’s broken healthcare promises. The president promised that his healthcare plan would save families $2,500 per year,” Curtis Kalin, spokesman for Citizens Against Government Waste, told the Washington Free Beacon in an emailed statement.

“Reality has proven otherwise. Additionally, millions of Americans have not been able to keep the doctor they like or the healthcare plan they like. This kind of bait and switch does tremendous damage to the president’s credibility and reveals the foolishness of the federal government’s entire healthcare takeover.”