Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Patrons of Village 8 Theatres shared their thoughts about the closing of the movie theater by the end of 2016. By Philip Andrews/Special to the CJ

Buy Photo Moviegoers buy popcorn, soda and other refreshments before a Saturday matinee at Village 8 Theatres, which is closing by the end of 2016. (Photo: By Philip Andrews/Special to the CJ)Buy Photo

Despite 70-degree weather, the parking lot of Village 8 Theatres in St. Matthews was nearly full by 1 p.m. Saturday. Locals lined up to get their tickets and popcorn before settling into one of its eight theaters.

"I think I've seen everything here because I've been going for so long," said Angela French-Coles with a laugh.

French-Coles was one of several Saturday movie-goers that expressed their disappointment when learning the theater will close by the end of the year.

"I think it’s going to hurt the community," she said, noting the tickets' affordability. For any show before 6 p.m., Village 8 charges customers $3. After 6 p.m., adults pay $4 and senior citizens and children pay $3.

Buy Photo Angela French-Coles and her grandson before their movie at the Village 8. (Photo: By Philip Andrews/Special to the CJ)

But it's not just the tickets that are cheap, said Louisville resident Barbara Dunne, who also loves how inexpensive refreshments are compared to other theaters. An extra large popcorn sells for $5.50 and a kids meal – drink and candy included – goes for $3.

Dunne said she recently saw a movie in Cincinnati and came out spending almost $50 for tickets and food between three people.

"(The pricing) allows a lot of people to go to the movies who wouldn’t normally be able to," Dunne said. "... I think this will have a huge impact on people."

The theater must close by no later than January 2017, the owner of the 6.5-acre Village Center said Tuesday. Owner Metts Co. has a contract to sell the strip center to KentuckyOne Health, which hasn't indicated what it will do with the property. The group has other nearby land holdings.

Buy Photo Christopher Tyra, left, with his parents, Tom and Rebecca Tyra, before a Saturday matinee at the Village 8 Theatres. (Photo: By Philip Andrews/Special to the CJ)

The Village 8 cinema complex opened in 1975 and was acquired by Apex in 1996.

Other movie-goers reflected on their favorite memories of the theater. Tom and Rebecca Tyra, along with son Christopher, decided to visit Village 8 because they hadn't in several years and wanted to while it is still open.

Tom Tyra said he took his wife on dates at the theater before they got married 22 years ago.

"There are lots of movie options around town," Tom Tyra said. "But this place is kind of nostalgic."

Reporter Lexy Gross can be reached at 502-582-4087, or via email at lgross@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1XEv1pM