About a third of U.S. adults use some form of alternative medicine, and most of them likely pay for it out of their own pocket. Alternative methods – from supplements to acupuncture – are used in preventive care as well as the treatment of chronic and acute conditions, but they often aren’t covered by health insurance.

There isn’t one reason why people choose alternative approaches over traditional medicine. One study published in Social Science & Medicine found that patients who choose a homeopath over a general practitioner are likely to do so because of “disenchantment with, and bad experiences of, traditional medical practitioners.” Another in the Journal of the Medical Association suggested that people were motivated more by personal values, beliefs and philosophical attitudes about health.

Regardless of these findings, one thing is clear: Americans aren’t flocking to alternative medicine to save money.

The Cost of Alternative Medicine

Americans spent more than $33.9 billion out of pocket on alternative and complementary medicine in 2007, the latest year for which comprehensive federal data are available. That amount includes visits to providers such as chiropractors and massage therapists, as well as products like supplements. While alternative medicine accounts for only about 1.5 percent of total health care spending in the U.S., it comprises 11.2 percent of total out-of-pocket health care spending, according to the 2007 National Health Interview Survey.

There's a perception is that alternative medicine is growing in popularity, with numerous websites dedicated to “natural health” and home remedies. But the research disputes this. According to an analysis of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey from 2002 to 2008, the use of alternative medicine and spending on these services plateaued – something blamed in part on the higher proportion of out-of-pocket costs.

Alternative Medicine and Insurance Coverage

When considering reimbursement, the Affordable Care Act mandates that insurers not discriminate against licensed health care providers, including those who practice alternative medicine, such as naturopaths, massage therapists and acupuncturists. But that isn’t the same as requiring coverage.

Health insurers can limit coverage they deem experimental or not medically necessary, and they often do. Aetna, for example, says it considers alternative interventions medically necessary only “if they are supported by adequate evidence of safety and effectiveness in the peer-reviewed published medical literature.”

So while such things as acupuncture, biofeedback, chiropractic care and electronic stimulation may be covered under their policies, music therapy, aromatherapy, therapeutic touch massage and a long list of other interventions are not.

Even when services are covered by an insurance plan, the insurer may require a statement of medical necessity or prescription from a primary care doctor. The coverage may also provided limited visits or cover only some of the services the provider offers.