President Barack Obama, in California this weekend for fundraisers in San Francisco and Los Angeles plus a stop in San Diego, is more popular now with Golden State voters than at any other time since the start of his second term, the Field Poll reports.

Sixty percent of the state's registered voters approve of Obama's performance in office while 33 percent disapprove, according to the poll of 1,002 voters conducted Sept. 17 through Oct. 4. That's up from his 53 percent approval rating in May, and far better than his 45 percent approval from September 2014.

President Barack Obama walks to Air Force One at Andrews Air Force Base Oct. 9, 2015, in Maryland. Obama is traveling to Oregon to visit with shooting victims' loved ones before traveling to California Democratic fundraisers. (Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images)

"He's letting his hair down and voters here like that -- it's a very Democratic state," Field Poll Director Mark DiCamillo said. "This year he has gone back to his Democratic roots. In earlier years, he was trying to take compromise positions and get things through the Congress by working with the Republican side. I think voters here didn't like the positions he was taking."

Obama wishes he could have such numbers nationwide -- 45 percent of Americans approve of his job performance while 50 percent disapprove, according to the latest averages of nationwide polls compiled by Real Clear Politics.

Advertisement

The Field Poll also found more Californians approve than disapprove of the president's handling of both the nation's economy -- 58 percent to 36 percent -- and foreign policy, 49 percent to 42 percent. Unsurprisingly, Democrats are overwhelmingly supportive while Republicans are overwhelmingly opposed.

Regionally, the Bay Area holds Obama in the highest esteem, with a 72 percent approval rating; he's least popular in the Central Valley, at 48 percent. He also fares better among younger voters, minority voters and female voters.

The poll's margin of error is 3.2 percentage points.

Obama arrived in San Francisco on Friday night for a Democratic National Committee fundraiser. He'll hold another DNC fundraiser Saturday morning with rapper Kanye West at the city's Warfield Theater before heading down to Los Angeles and San Diego.

Josh Richman covers politics. Follow him at Twitter.com/Josh_Richman. Read the Political Blotter at IBAbuzz.com/politics.