The 10th and 11th congressional districts cover most of Western North Carolina. (Photo: Courtesy N.C. General Assembly)

Several candidates for the two U.S. House seats representing Western North Carolina seem to have the same motto: If at first you don't succeed, try, try again.

And try and try and try, at least one could say. Mountain voters' choices in the June 7 primary will include a 79-year-old who lives on the North Carolina coast who is making his seventh run for Congress, the candidate who got only 37 percent of the vote when he ran against 11th District U.S. Rep. Mark Meadows in 2014 and others who have made unsuccessful bids for public office in previous elections.

Candidates first filed for office in December 2015, but the state's district lines for House seats were struck down by federal judges Feb. 5. The General Assembly redrew the district map later in the month and set a new filing period.

The Republican primary in the 10th House District features four candidates, including incumbent U.S. Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-Lincoln. Andy Millard, a financial planner from Tryon, is the only Democrat seeking the job.

Two Democrats are running in the 11th District, where incumbent U.S. Rep. Mark Meadows, R-Jackson, has no primary opposition.

The incumbents are considered the favorites in both districts. The 10th and 11th both tend to vote Republican and McHenry and Meadows have significant leads in fundraising name recognition over competitors.

Here's a quick look at the candidates in both June 7 primaries:

10th District

--Jeffrey Baker, 54, is a private investigator who lives in Mount Holly. He filed to run for sheriff in Gaston County in 2014, but ended the bid before the Republican primary, saying he did not have enough time to campaign. He is an Army veteran and worked 13 years for the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department.

Jeffrey Baker (Photo: Courtesy Jeffrey Baker)

Baker said he is "definitely an outsider. ... I've been inspired by Donald Trump and Ted Cruz."

He said he support McHenry in the past and made calls on his behalf two years ago "but he's really disappointed me." He faulted McHenry for voting for a federal spending bill last year that included money to continue the Affordable Care Act.

Baker favors taking acting to tighten trade restrictions and encourage job creation. "This whole area has been built on textiles and manufacturing. Those jobs are gone," he said.

Baker wants the government to improve veterans health care and wants a tighter border, saying, "Without a border you don't have a country."

--Jeff Gregory, 57, is a retired postmaster who lives outside Shelby in Cleveland County. He was Democrats' nominee for 10th District U.S. House in 2010 but got only 29 percent of the vote in his loss to McHenry. He has also lost races for Cleveland County commissioner and school board.

Jeff Gregory (Photo: Courtesy Jeff Gregory)

"God, family and country, that's my platform," he said.

Gregory said he wants to see voters turn "career politicians" like McHenry out of office. The incumbent "says he's against raising the debt but he votes to raise the debt," Gregory said. "On so many issues, he says he's against it and he goes and votes for it."

He said he would work to stop illegal immigration -- "We have to be a sovereign nation and protect our people." -- and beef up the armed forces.

"Our military has been downsized to the extent that they can't do their job," Gregory said.

--Dr. Albert Wiley Jr., 79, is a physician and a former professor of oncology and radiology at the University of Wisconsin and East Carolina University.

Dr. Albert Wiley Jr. (Photo: Courtesy Dr. Albert Wiley Jr.)

He is making his seventh bid for a U.S. House seat and also ran twice for governor -- once as a Democrat -- but has never been elected. He lives in the coastal community of Indian Beach, more than 280 air miles west of his family home in Forest City.

Congressmen must live in the state where their district is located but there is no requirement that they live in the district itself. Wiley said he visits the 10th frequently and chose to run to represent it because, "Of all the districts in North Carolina, it's the one I'm most comfortable in, know more friends in."

Wiley, who spent much of his childhood in Canton, said he would move back to the district if he wins, but said it is "an uphill battle convincing people I'm not being opportunistic" by running in the 10th.

He says he wants to build a wall along the border with Mexico and balance the federal budget. "The Congress has been, I think, irresponsible, especially the last 10 or 15 years in running up a huge debt for our children and grandchildren," he said.

Wiley says he would be a stronger candidate than McHenry: "I think he may have a hard time for a number of reasons, especially this year where incumbents are not well thought of."

--McHenry, 40, could not be reached for comment. He's seeking his seventh, two-year term in the House and has risen in the chamber's Republican leadership to chief deputy majority whip.

U.S. Rep. Patrick McHenry (Photo: Courtesy office of U.S. Rep. Patrick McHenry)

He is vice chairman of the House Financial Services Committee and has worked on laws to enable crowd funding and other alternative ways of financing businesses.

When he first filed for re-election in December, he said, "Seven years of President Obama's failed leadership has led to stagnant wages at home and weakened our nation's standing abroad."

He said then that he is "committed to advancing common-sense, conservative reforms which will reduce the size of government, empower the middle class, and ensure everyone in Western North Carolina has the opportunity to succeed."

After voting for a 2015-16 spending bill in December that opponents are criticizing him over, McHenry said in a statement that the bill "will help grow our economy and keep Americans safe."

He touted the bill's repeal of a ban on exporting oil, provisions to restrict "out of control federal bureaucrats at the IRS and EPA by freezing funding and staffing levels," increased funding for the military and provisions he said would strengthen review of people entering the country.

"While not perfect, this bill keeps our government funded and allows Congress to return to regular order in the new year," he said.

11th District

--Rick Bryson, 72, is a Bryson City alderman and a semi-retired technical writer.

Rick Bryson (Photo: Courtesy Rick Bryson)

He said he's running because, "Three years ago, I got made when Mark Meadows shut down the government. It hurt this part of North Carolina to the tune of $23 million." Meadows was a leader in the unsuccessful Republican effort to close down the federal government to force the de-funding of the Affordable Care Act.

Bryson said he "finally decided that I needed to stand up and object to that kind of representation."

He has made boosting the regional economy a focus of his campaign, saying he would help direct investment funds to the region to help young businesses grow and improve the odds that mountain young people will be able to stay in WNC.

He said he would want to protect Social Security, health care for veterans and women's rights if elected.

--Tom Hill, 78, holds a Ph.D. in physics and is retired after a career in aerospace jobs with the federal government and private industry. He lives in Zirconia in Henderson County.

Tom Hill (Photo: Courtesy Tom Hill)

He first ran for U.S. House in 2012 but lost in the Democratic primary, then lost to Meadows as the Democratic nominee in 2014 with 37 percent of the vote.

He said he is running again "because so many people encouraged me to do so."

"I have in place a much stronger organization than I had in 2014 ... (and) I am greatly encouraged by the shifts I have seen this year in voter responses," Hill said in an email.

He declined to discuss his positions on issues for this story, instead referring a reporter to his campaign website.

It says Hill "will work to close offshore and other tax loopholes that are robbing our country of just revenues" and "fight to support means for keeping Hispanic workers available for Western North Carolina's agriculture."

What's my district?

The 10th House District comprises Polk, Rutherford, Cleveland, Gaston and Lincoln counties, almost all of Catawba County, a tiny slice of Iredell County and most of Asheville and the southeastern quadrant of Buncombe County. The district line cuts through West and North Asheville with those living in neighborhoods closer to downtown in the 10th and those farther away in the 11th.

The 11th District stretches from east of Lenoir to west of Murphy. It includes Caldwell, Burke, McDowell, Mitchell and Yancey counties in the foothills and northern mountains; Madison and Henderson counties and the portion of Buncombe not in the 10th and all counties in the state west of there. The legislature shifted Avery County from the 11th District to the 5th in February.

Detailed maps are available at www.ncleg.net by clicking on the "Redistricting" shortcut.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1NffNGN