Psychiatric News recently asked several early-career psychiatrists (ECPs) from different backgrounds and different parts of the United States to gaze into their “crystal balls” and predict what American psychiatry will look like during the next five or 10 years.

They all see big changes coming, largely driven by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), they said.

For example, “because of Medicaid expansion and health insurance exchanges created under the ACA, there is going to be a huge population of people who suddenly have health care coverage,” Sharat Parameswaran, M.D., of the James J. Peters Veterans Administration (VA) Medical Center in New York City, anticipated. “That means that they are going to be able to access primary care and mental health care in the outpatient setting, rather than showing up in the emergency room or having to be hospitalized. This means that we will need more primary care doctors as well as more psychiatrists to treat this huge influx of people.”

“I think there will be an emphasis on creating teams to care for such populations,” Christina Mangurian, M.D., an assistant professor of clinical psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco, predicted. “I think there will also be much more emphasis on working collaboratively with other disciplines as well as with other mental health professionals.”

It will still be possible to have a solo psychiatry practice, Andres Barkil-Oteo, M.D., an assistant professor of psychiatry at Yale University, believes, but doing so will be harder than today because of pressures exerted by the transformation in the system to get physicians to participate in larger group practices. For example, physicians are being encouraged to join accountable care organizations, which are multidisciplinary systems built on principles of patient-centered medicine and coordination of care and on financial rewards derived from cost savings and demonstration of quality performance (Psychiatric News, January 7).

“Actually, I think that at some point we will have two types of collaborative care in which patients with common mental health problems will be seen at primary care clinics in consultation with psychiatrists, and patients with more severe mental illnesses will be seen at specialty mental health clinics with primary care doctors as consultants,” Barkil-Oteo said.

“Yes, integration between psychiatrists and primary care doctors will be very important,” Matthew Erlich, M.D., an assistant professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia University, agreed. “But to integrate, we have to ask, where did we segregate before? We need to recognize that mental illnesses, behavioral illnesses, and substance abuse are intricately connected with medical illnesses. That is an insight that will be driving much of 21st-century psychiatry.”