Wayne County Executive Warren Evans speaks about the Wayne County debt crisis with the Detroit Free Press editorial board on Thursday February 5, 2015 at the Detroit Free Press office in downtown Detroit. (Photo: Ryan Garza)

Wayne County retirees who sued after their health care benefits were slashed in 2009 have agreed to cuts that will save the county about $20 million a year, Executive Warren Evans said this morning.

The latest savings is the largest in a string of spending cuts to help the county deal with a $52-million annual operating deficit. The retirees affected retired before 2007. The county is still negotiating with active employees on health care and other issues.

Ending the county's five-year court battle with the retirees, today's settlement provides monthly stipends of $130 for each retiree, and $130 for each retiree's spouse, in lieu of health-care benefits, Warren said. The payments, totaling about $2,160 a year, will compensate retirees for the cost of buying their own health-care coverage in addition to government-provided Medicare and Affordable Care Act coverages, he said.

About 80% of the retirees are eligible for Medicare; the others are either too young to be eligible or don't qualify for other reasons.

"Nobody gets everything they want in a settlement like this. You had retirees on one end saying 'we're entitled to health care,' and people on our end saying 'we don't have to give you anything.' I think the county had a very strong case, but it would've taken four or five more years (in court)," with added legal costs in the millions of dollars, he said.

Had the county lost the case, it would've owed the retirees tens of millions in past benefits "and probably hundreds of millions in future costs," he said. While employed by the county, the retirees were members of 14 labor unions, mainly AFSCME – the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees.

"Many of them will qualify for federal tax credits in the purchase of health-care benefits," said Evans, speaking in a 30th floor conference room at the county's Guardian Building in downtown Detroit. In seeking other savings for county taxpayers, Evans confirmed that the building is for sale but that selling the iconic building is not a top priority.

"If the right deal comes along, we'd look at that" and put any gain into further reducing the deficit; "but selling this building is not something we can build a budget around," he said.

The Guardian Building, praised as a prime example of historic Art Deco design, is inconvenient for people visiting on county business, Evans added.

"Who likes to come downtown, look for valet parking and try to find your way up here? If we moved, we would look for a much more user-friendly location," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1S4uzi8