On Friday the National Weather Service didn’t believe there would be the need to issue a winter weather advisory for North Texas for Sunday. That thinking has since changed: One was issued this morning that takes effect tomorrow morning at 6 a.m. and, for now, lasts till 9 p.m. Sunday.

The reason: The cold front just to our north is potent — temperatures in Nebraska are in the single digits — and it’s now scheduled to arrive well before the Pacific front that drenched California Friday. That means bridges and overpasses will have plenty of time to cool down before the precipitation arrives, mainly in the form of freezing rain. So, yes, it’ll be warm again today, with highs once more around 80. But that won’t mean much in, say, 24 hours.

“We’ve been so warm the last couple of days it’s unlikely to be a big ice event,” says Dennis Cavanaugh, meteorologist with the National Weather Service. “But bridges and overpasses will cool below freezing, and a few hours below freezing should do it, so it won’t take much to get ice. And if it sleets, they’ll freeze.”

Here’s the timing at present: Cavanaugh says the cold front should arrive around 6-7 a.m. Sunday, maybe a little earlier. You’ll notice it: Winds will kick up; temperatures will plummet, from the 50s to the freezing mark in a matter of hours. There could be some light precipitation accompanying the front as well, as it’s warm and humid here thanks to Gulf moisture.

Around midday is when the upper-level Pacific system is due in North Texas, and, says Cavanaugh, “That brings the bulk of whatever precipitation falls. Unfortunately, we are expected to be well behind the cold front at that time.”

He says we’re mainly looking at freezing rain, which falls as a liquid then becomes the temperature of whatever it lands on. So, yes, the neighborhood streets could stay above freezing thanks to two days’ worth of springlike temperatures. But, as always, look out for those bridges and overpasses … especially if we see some sleet, which is also possible.

“The difference between freezing rain and sleet is a small change in the temperature at ground level,” Cavanaugh says. “Right now we’re thinking freezing rain is most likely, but it wouldn’t take much to turn it into sleet. It’ll be interesting.”