Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Family, Income inequality, Marriage, millennials, Thomas Piketty, News

When the two of us applied to college, we walked into the SATs without having gone through intensive SAT prep or having read any books on how to ace college testing. We received very little college counseling, and decided on our list of schools by ourselves. We then each wrote our own college essays, and we didn’t share them with anyone other than the college admission counselors. Thirty years later, our five children all took some form of SAT prep tutoring. We spent lots of time reviewing their choices of colleges and then even more time reviewing their college applications. Naomi even hired college coaches to help steer her children through the process. June relied on an undergraduate professor friend who had just navigated her own children through the process. We both found the experience daunting.

In late 2012, New York Times journalist Jason DeParle documented what happened to three women who graduated from the same high school, one of the few in Texas ranked “academically unacceptable.” Angelica, whose mother became a citizen after illegally immigrating from Mexico and acknowledged that her daughter essentially raised herself, enrolled in Emory University; a second became a freshman at Texas State University; and the third began her studies at a community college. But, four years later, none “has a four-year degree. Only one is still studying full time, and two have crushing debts. Angelica, who left Emory owing more than $60,000, earns just above minimum wage in a Galveston furniture store.”

In contrast, most of our friends’ children who started college finished, though many only after intensive parental involvement arranging a switch of majors when the children, like Angelica, hit a rough patch academically, needed a semester in rehab, or simply had trouble leaving home or breaking up with a high school sweetheart. The new generation of “helicopter” parents does not let go, as our parents did, when children go off to college. Instead, one of our children chastised us because, unlike some other parents, we did not call every day by cellphone, and another felt betrayed when we suggested that he could figure out how to get from the airport to campus without a fifty-dollar cab ride.

The change in families is not just a change in family form. It’s a change in the quality and quantity of resources available to children that is associated with family income. The results affect children’s stimulation and cognitive development in early childhood, their attachment to and support from the adults in their lives, their feelings of trust and isolation, and their school achievement and community participation. A half-century ago, society marginalized a small group at the bottom that included many African Americans, the rural and urban poor, and other isolated communities. Today, the destruction of community and familial bonds affects a much larger portion of American society and increases the gaps between the top, the middle, and the bottom. The result is the reproduction of class through its impact on children from their first days of life.

Let’s look at the numbers. Poor children have access to fewer resources at home and at school, and the effects show. In 1960, the gaps in reading and math test scores among whites of different classes were comparatively small, whereas the gap between blacks and whites was huge. That relationship has changed. Sean Reardon of Stanford University describes this as the “income achievement gap.” He looks at test scores from children at the ninetieth percentile of the income distribution and from the tenth percentile and measures the differences. These class-based differences have grown steadily since the late seventies, increasing in each passing decade. So, too, have the gaps among African Americans and Latinos of different classes, though not to the same degree as whites—who have dramatically more wealth at the top of the income ladder. In contrast, racial differences fell substantially between 1950 and the early 1980s. Today, Reardon’s income achievement gap is nearly twice as large as the black-white achievement gap and is 30 to 40 percent higher than it was twenty-five years ago. While racial differences persist, class has become the big story in looking at differences in children’s educational achievement.

Over the past decade, researchers gained greater insight into the sources of some of these differences. A study published in 2013 indicated that differences in cognitive performance associated with socioeconomic levels appear in children as early as eighteen months and found a six-month gap in both vocabulary learning and language processing efficiency at age two. Researchers have long been aware of differences in vocabulary; by age three, for example, children from higher socioeconomic status (SES) families had twice the vocabularies of children from lower SES backgrounds. The newest studies measure not just vocabulary, but processing speed—the amount of time a child takes to recognize a familiar word. These studies find a similar correlation between parents’ socioeconomic status and children’s speed, which predicts the rate of subsequent language acquisition. Both factors have long-term consequences that correlate with adult performance.

A major source of the differences is the quality of the children’s early language environments. Wealthier and better educated parents engaged in dramatically more child-directed speech, providing a more interactive and cognitively stimulating environment, though other factors, such as adequate nutrition, the presence of lead, or parental stress, may contribute. While bad schools can make the differences worse, good schools do not close the gap. So whatever is taking place affects early childhood development. Trips to Europe and SAT tutors may enhance elite children’s preparation for college, but they do not explain differences in cognitive achievement. The Head Start program focused on the pre-school years because that is where the largest differences in educational achievement begin—with lifelong consequences.

Reardon further acknowledges that parents’ education makes a difference, but it cannot explain what has changed over the past half century. Both in 1960 and 2000, if you wanted to predict how children will do on math and reading tests, you could look at their parents’ education. In every decade, the children of engineers do better than the children of carpenters. What has changed is the effect of income. In 1960, the children of a college graduate executive who made $80,000 a year did not do much better than a college graduate teacher who made $20,000 a year. Today the gap between the children of an executive making $200,000 a year and a teacher with the same education making $50,000 a year has increased.

Nor can the gaps be explained by greater income inequality between the bottom and the top in some abstract sense. While the income differences between the middle and the bottom increased during this period, these changes had little effect on children’s test scores. The big changes came from increased income inequality in the top half—the gap between the ninetieth and fiftieth percentiles. Ultra-high-income parents are doing something different that affects how their children perform. Tiger mothers like Yale Law professor Amy Chua, an admitted outlier even among high-status parents, really have discovered secrets that allow their children to outperform everyone else. Reardon suggests that high-income parents must somehow be changing how they invest in their children’s cognitive development.

Reardon’s description matches up with what we have been describing throughout this book. The new upper-middle-class model has enormous payoffs for children—payoffs that re-create class identity. Upper-middle-class parents are more likely to raise children within two-parent families, and both mothers and fathers spend more time with their children than their parents did. These well-off parents, who spend substantial sums on cleaning crews and energy-efficient washers and dryers, devote increasing amounts of their own time and that of carefully selected high-quality nannies, preschool teachers, tutors, sports trainers, and camp counselors to creating activities that stimulate their children’s cognitive environment. Well-off families have remade the use of parental energies to invest ever more in children even with two parents in the workforce.

Consider the results of studies that measure the amount of “developmental time” parents spend interacting with their children. They have tried to capture the change in the minutes per day parents spend reading to their children, playing with them, or taking them to sports practice, the library, and ballet lessons. In the sixties and seventies, these results did not vary much by class. High school–graduate mothers spent four minutes a day more than college-graduate mothers in activities that contributed to their children’s development. The college-graduate dads spent a bit more time than the high school– graduate dads, canceling out the differences among the mothers. Starting in the eighties, both groups began to spend much more time with their children, but the college graduates’ increase was more dramatic. By 2010, the differences had grown from a few minutes to more than an hour a day. The younger the child, the greater the differences in parenting time by parents’ education had become. College-graduate parents have become much more likely than parents with only a high school education to play patty cake with their toddlers. Perhaps reflecting these differences, a 2013 study found that parents who have attended college felt more confident about their parenting than those who have never attended college.

The same disparities are reflected in differences on spending on children. The parents with the most money seek out camps that reinforce foreign language skills, personal trainers who work on Little League techniques, and vacations with their children that range from the Bahamas to the Himalayas. In the seventies, the top-income quartile spent about three times as much as the bottom-income quartile on such activities for their children. Today, it spends nine times as much. In our childhood, working-class and middle-class kids both went to camps and attended after-school activities in their neighborhoods. In the middle-class neighborhoods, the camps might cost a little more and have nicer buses and fancier t-shirts, but the activities were not all that different. Today, the advantages that start in toddlerhood only increase over time. In researching this book, we spoke to an investment banker friend who described the thousands of dollars he spent on tutors, after-school activities, family trips to Nepal, college application coaches, and a private school that made sure all of the teachers’ letters of recommendations were in by the end of August. In the public schools that some of our children attended, an overworked guidance counselor was in charge of the process for hundreds of students, many of whom she had never met.