A six-horse hitch of Percheron horses makes its way around the Ranch-Way Feeds Indoor Arena at The Ranch while practicing for the 2011 Big Thunder Draft Horse Show. This year's show takes place Friday-Sunday, Jan. 19. ( Steve Stoner )

Northern Coloradans can educate themselves on a wide variety of topics this week. Learn about flood damages, our vets, how to knit a scarf, wildlife active at night, how to get a better gym workout, the aurora borealis and how big draft horses are used in teams.

Sunday

Hikers to take a look at damages from the flood

The Loveland Mountain Club will sponsor an "After the Flood" hike today where participants will walk 3 miles of the bike trail from First Street and Taft Avenue to see work being done to repair damages sustained in September's flooding.

For meeting time and place, call Linda at 310-8163. Non-members are welcome.

For details, visit lovelandmountainclub.org.

Monday

Historical Society will be 'Honoring Our Vets'

The Loveland Historical Society will present the program "Honoring Our Vets," by Marilee Rayome, past regent of the Namaqua Daughters of the American Revolution chapter, at 7 p.m. Monday at the Loveland Museum/Gallery, 503 N. Lincoln Ave., Loveland.

The event is free and open to the public.

For details, call 290-0169.

Tuesday

Classes to help people learn to knit scarves

In a three-class series with Angela Dallin, attendees will start and finish a simple scarf design while learning the basics of knitting.

Advertisement

The first class will be held at 1-3 p.m. Tuesday at the Loveland Public Library, Erion Room, 300 N. Adams Ave., Loveland.

No registration is required, but you will need size 10 U.S. knitting needles, three skeins of Lion Brand Jiffy yarn (bulky No. 5 weight), a large yarn or tapestry needle, a medium size crochet hook for fringe, scissors and pen and paper for notes.

For details, call 962-2401.

Wednesday

Moonlit walk will help hikers learn about wildlife

In a Moon Over My Open Space walk, area residents will get a chance to look for nocturnal animals and to learn about owls.

The free, two-hour walk led by a naturalist will start at 5:30 p.m. at Devil's Backbone Open Space, west of Loveland off U.S. 34.

Bring water and dress for the weather.

Registration required at larimer.org/naturalresources/registration. For details, call 679-4489.

Thursday

Library program to look at mistakes in the gym

The Loveland Public Library will offer a new series of health classes, "Making Loveland a Healthier Community," with Brian Flemming, from noon to 1 p.m. the third Thursday of each month in 2014.

The first class is "Mistakes People Make in the Gym" noon-1 p.m. at the library's Erion Room, 300 N. Adams Ave., Loveland.

For details, contact Bobbi at 962-2401.

Friday

Public Star Night program to feature aurora photos

Public Star Night will give night sky enthusiasts a chance to see Bryan White's 3-D photos of the aurora borealis in Yellowknife in the Northern Territories of Canada.

White will present the free slide show at 7-11 p.m. at the Berthoud High School Auditorium, 850 Spartan Ave., Berthoud.

He also will present three short shows on Yellowstone, Chaco Canyon and alpine flowers, all in 3-D.

The Little Thompson Observatory at Berthoud High will be open after his slide show, probably around 8:30 p.m.

For details, call 613-7793 or visit starkids.org.

Friday-Sunday

Big Thunder Draft Horse Show comes to The Ranch

The Big Thunder Draft Horse Show will come to The Ranch for shows at 6:30 Friday and 2 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday, Jan. 18-19, at Ranch-Way Feeds Indoor Arena, 5300 Arena Circle.

The show will feature many hitches that have traveled from across the country to compete.

Before or after each performance, with a total of four classes, audience members can visit the barns to meet the crew and their horses.

Tickets are $12 for adults, $10 for seniors and $6 for children.

For details and tickets, call 619-4122 or visit BudweiserEventsCenter.com.

For details about the horses, visit http://bigthundershow.com.