Sioux Falls, SD

Brian Duensing, Brian Dozier, Jack Morris, and Dick Bremer all headlined the annual Twins Winter Caravan in Sioux Falls this year.

With pitchers and catchers set to report in just over a month, the Twins Caravan hit the road last Monday, and will stop in 40 towns in ten days. Tonight, past and present players talked to over 700 fans at the Elmen Center and the players know loved every minute of it.

"It's important for us. After four losing seasons we have to do what we can to keep the fans happy. It is fun going to all of these stops along the way. We stop in a lot of small towns and we have big events like this in Sioux Falls. It is fun to meet the fans," Twins Pitcher Brian Duensing said.

"I think what is even more special is the fact that we have had a rough couple of years and people are still excited about the game," Twins Second Basemen Brian Dozier said.

Because of their rough four year stretch the Twins were forced to get rid of long time Skipper Ron Gardenhire. That opened the door for Hall of Famer and former Twin Paul Molitor to take over as the Manager in his home state.

"He will probably be a little more serious to begin with. He is very into details. He understands and follows all of the small things very closely," Former Twins Pitcher Jack Morris said.

"He is probably the most knowledgeable man about the game of baseball I have ever been around in my life. He brings so much to the table that people don't even realize. He knows the little things and the ins and the outs of the game. I think that is what made him not only one of the best players of his generation, but to ever play the game," Dozier said.

Manager wasn't the only splash the Twins made this offseason in an effort to turn their franchise around. They also signed fan favorite Torii Hunter and improved their pitching staff by bringing in Ervin Santana.

"We are doing what we can to try and get better. Obviously four losing seasons, we are ready to win and we want to win now. I think the fans what that and deserve that," Duensing said.

"There are a lot of bright things coming this year, I can promise you that," Dozier said.

Tomorrow the Twins Caravan will travel across Southern Minnesota with stops in Worthington, Windom, Sleepy Eye, and Mankato.

Sports

Professional {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.