For the second consecutive quarter, 1st District congressional challenger Roger Marshall outraised his two Republican opponents, but incumbent U.S. Rep. Tim Huelskamp still holds a sizable fundraising advantage.

Marshall raised $151,465 between July and September, $50,000 of which was a loan from himself to his campaign. He didn’t receive any money from political action committees but got $96,455 in donations from 63 individual donors.

“My family and I continue to be humbled by the continued financial support we have received,” Marshall said. “Every week we meet the greatest people, people who care about our country and state.”

Marshall, an obstetrician from Great Bend, currently has $192,485 on hand. The Federal Election Commission requires candidates for federal office to reveal the funds they have accumulated every three months.

Huelskamp raised $63,738 last quarter and has raised $291,736 this election cycle. He currently has $700,001 on hand.

“With the strong support of a record number of grassroots conservatives, I am well-positioned to raise the resources necessary to win in 2016,” Huelskamp said.

Last quarter, $58,238 of Huelskamp’s itemized donations came from 93 individual donors and $5,500 came from political action committees. This election cycle, he has received $228,286 from individuals and $63,450 from PACs.

“I have earned the support of the people in the Big First, because I continue to fight against Washington’s big spending, regulation-loving, open borders, gun confiscating, anti-values agenda,” Huelskamp said.

Chapman Rackaway, a political science professor at Fort Hays State University, said the figures show Marshall is still having success raising money, but Huelskamp shouldn’t be concerned.

“Huelskamp is definitely not asleep,” Rackaway said. “He doesn’t need to be aggressive right now. He can be aggressive later.”

Alan LaPolice, a student retention specialist from Clyde, raised $14,500 last quarter, his first quarter of fundraising. All of the money came from 47 individual donors. LaPolice’s campaign currently has $13,169 on hand.

“I raised far less than the other candidates, one who is a career politician, the other a very wealthy doctor,” LaPolice said. “Every penny I raised came from friends, family or regular voters who just believed in me, who believed in my message.”

LaPolice has been hesitant to raise funds and has been critical of the role large donors and special interests play in modern American elections.

“LaPolice and Marshall are continuing to split the I-don’t-like-Huelskamp vote,” Rackaway said.

Marshall’s campaign spent $64,485 in operating expenditures last quarter and has spent $147,920 since Marshall launched his campaign this spring. Marshall paid three campaign staffers last quarter, in addition to Oklahoma-based consulting firm CMS strategies.

By comparison, Huelskamp’s campaign spent $30,557 in operating expenditures last quarter and has spent $121,725 this election cycle. Huelskamp had only one paid staffer last quarter, former state Rep. Joshua Powell.

All four members of the U.S. House from Kansas are running for re-election, as is Sen. Jerry Moran, and all hold significant fundraising advantages.

Rep. Lynn Jenkins raised $226,495 last quarter and has $857,002 on hand. Jenkins, a Republican, doesn’t yet have a Republican or Democratic challenger.

Republican Rep. Kevin Yoder of the easternmost 3rd District has more than $2 million on hand, the most of any congressional candidate in the history of Kansas at this stage in the campaign cycle, according to campaign spokeswoman Cate Stark.

“I am grateful for the tremendous outpouring of support,” Yoder said in a statement. “The confidence from my constituents is humbling and I appreciate the opportunity to serve the Third District of Kansas."

Though no one has filed a statement of candidacy to challenge Yoder, Democrat Nathaniel McLaughlin has announced he will run for the seat.

Republican Rep. Mike Pompeo of south-central Kansas raised $90,961 last quarter and has $1,141,890 on hand. Dan Giroux, a Democrat challenging Pompeo, hasn’t yet filed a quarterly fundraising report.