Buy Photo U.S. Sen.-elect Joni Ernst addresses supporters Nov. 4 at the Marriott Hotel in West Des Moines after her victory over Bruce Braley. (Photo: Bryon Houlgrave/Register file photo)Buy Photo

Less than a year ago, Joni Ernst wasn't famous much beyond the Iowa town of Red Oak. These days, she's making world news.

Yet Ernst, one of the most high-profile politicians to come out of Iowa, has kept a decidedly low profile in her transition from little-known state senator to a U.S. senator recognized virtually everywhere she goes.

After coming off one of the hottest campaigns of the 2014 elections, Ernst was bombarded with media requests from every Sunday political show, network and cable TV station and major newspaper — influential outlets that her campaign aides last spring would've begged to just know how to spell her name correctly. She steered clear of all national media requests.

"There will be plenty of opportunities for that in the future," she told The Des Moines Register in an interview last week. "What we really want to do is focus on Iowa."

When Ernst, 44, places her hand on her grandmother's Bible at Tuesday's swearing-in ceremony, she will make history. The Republican will be Iowa's first woman in Congress. And among the 1,950 U.S. senators who have served throughout time, she will be the first female military veteran.

Ernst, a self-described farm girl from Montgomery County, is now within reach of world leaders, taking calls on her cellphone from the president of the United States and standing in front of cameras with the Israeli prime minister.

"Her rise is pretty much unparalleled," said David Polyanksy, Ernst's senior campaign consultant. "I cannot think of anything quite this dramatic."

The night after her historic election, she was watching the volleyball team from her native hometown of Stanton as it tried to make the state tournament when her cellphone rang with an unknown number. Ernst, who now lives in nearby Red Oak, ignored it a couple of times, but the caller's persistence caught her attention.

"It was the White House switchboard. I was a little embarrassed that I'd been rejecting the president's calls," she said in an interview on Des Moines' WHO Radio on Dec. 29. "He was very cordial to me. Of course, he makes all those calls to new incoming senators. He did state he will always have a special place in his heart for Iowa."

In December, Ernst went on a weeklong tour of Israel paid for by the American Israel Public Affairs Committee's education foundation. Benjamin Netanyahu used a meeting with her to criticize the European Court of Justice's decision to take Hamas off its list of terrorist organizations, calling it staggering hypocrisy. His office tweeted a video of Ernst standing by his side as he made the public statement.

Life since Nov. 4 has been a whirl of meetings with top GOP leaders and Iowa constituents, trying to soak in as much information from as many trusted sources as possible, she told the Register. A recent six-day stint in Red Oak, she said, was the longest time she'd spent at home in a year and a half.

"It has been an amazing journey," she said.

Some liberals view her with skepticism

Some Iowa liberals say they're braced for the worst, worried that Ernst will go nuclear on government programs that benefit Iowans and that the Democratic senator she succeeds, Tom Harkin, built over 40 years in Congress.

Democrats have also criticized Ernst as unavailable to the public and the media, noting that Harkin and Chuck Grassley have a reputation for accessibility.

Ernst will be "a reverse Dracula" who comes out only for the lights of favorable TV outlets, predicted Douglas Burns, co-owner of the Carroll Daily Times Herald and a left-leaning opinion writer.

"To this point, in a statewide sense, Joni Ernst exists solely in the Republican image cocoon," Burns said. "Until evidence emerges to the contrary, it is fair to assume the senator-elect will be heavily handled with carefully stage-managed accessibility."

The real fear is that she will neglect fine-print policy work essential for rural Iowa in favor of the siren song of the national conservative spotlight, he said.

Ernst and her aides rejected those notions.

In the telephone interview, Ernst told the Register she will follow Grassley's model of accessibility by holding town hall meetings in all 99 counties every year. Her tour kicks off in Montgomery County right after Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad's Jan. 16 inauguration for his sixth term.

As for the issues she will champion, Ernst said she wants to dig into the budget and ways to get the country "moving toward living within our means." She was assigned to the agriculture and armed services committees, her top two choices, she said. (Ernst, who in May will have logged 23 years in the National Guard, will likely remain a commander despite being eligible to retire.)

She's also assigned to a committee that combines government oversight and homeland security. During her campaign, she listed her priorities as follows: repeal of the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare; protection of the Second Amendment; and jobs. She favors authorizing the Keystone XL pipeline.

'I am there to work for Iowa,' Ernst says

Ernst said she hopes the media and her left-leaning constituents wait to see how hard she works before they draw conclusions based on election-season attacks.

"Many, many folks, especially Democrats, haven't maybe met me face to face," she said. "Of course we're not going to agree on every issue. But I am there to work for Iowa and to work for what I believe is the best path for the United States of America."

Ernst said she found it "disappointing" that Esquire last month published a blog post that falsely claimed she had signed a pledge to get rid of food stamps. The Esquire writer has since apologized, saying he had taken a satirical piece as fact. But the inaccurate information circulated in Iowa, including in a letter to the editor in the Register.

"I would love for people to give me the benefit of the doubt just as I give others the benefit of the doubt," Ernst said. "Those that know me, those that have worked with me, know I'm going to work very hard. ... They know I care about the communities I come from and that I care about Iowa."

And as for seeking the media spotlight, Ernst aides said she has turned down requests from all but Iowa reporters, such as those from the Register, Radio Iowa, the Associated Press, KWQC-TV and others.

Ernst won't always avoid the national stage, she said. If she can lend her voice to a cause that's important to her, she'll get out in front of that issue.

"I will do everything I can to assist other members who have been helpful to me through the campaign process, but they know that Iowa is why I am there," she said.

Polyansky, Ernst's campaign consultant, was with her when she traveled to Louisiana to campaign Dec. 5 for Bill Cassidy, the Republican who the next day ousted sitting U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu. Ernst received a boisterous standing ovation when she took the mic, and everyone seemed to know about her TV ads and that she'd beaten Democratic U.S. Rep. Bruce Braley by more than 8 points, he said.

"Louisiana's not a neighboring state or state that would have any Iowa tilt to its coverage," Polyansky said. "It was pretty special to see her campaign somewhere else and get the same response as in Iowa."

Expert: In Senate, respect is earned

But when it's time for the 114th Congress to get down to business, Ernst will be just one of 100 senators.

She's one of a dozen freshmen — 11 new Republican senators and one new Democrat. Six of those will have higher seniority than Ernst because they're moving over from the U.S. House.

Brown University's Richard Arenberg, who studies Congress, said that to be a successful legislator — "as opposed to just being an outside public figure like (Texas U.S. Sen.) Ted Cruz" — senators must earn the respect of their colleagues.

"This can be tricky for new senators, particularly those who come to the body with a great deal of notoriety for whatever reasons," said Arenberg, who worked on Senate and House staffs for more than 30 years. "People like Bill Bradley, Hillary Clinton ... have kept a low profile at first, stuck to their areas of expertise, focused on their state's local issues, and avoided national media. The old saw is to be a workhorse not a show horse."

As Iowa Democrats adjust to the idea of a congressional delegation without Harkin's fiercely liberal ideology — and Republican control of the U.S. Senate for the first time in eight years — some said their best hope is that Ernst doesn't contribute to the hyper-partisanship that has hamstrung the federal government for years.

"I don't think Democrats expect her to suddenly undergo a transformation and become a real progressive voice for Iowa and the nation," said Ray Walton, a longtime Iowa Democratic activist who worked for Harkin in the 1970s. "But exercising occasional independence from her caucus, voting for some of the president's nominees, and doing things that will genuinely help those in our society that exist at the margins would be to her credit."

Ernst's backers said she'll always have detractors who think she's radical or a media hog or a media shirker.

"Let's see where she's at in two years," Polyansky said. "She's going to anger some on the left, and she might anger some on the right and some people in the center. But whether they agree or disagree, they're going to know she believes she's doing it for the right reasons."

Temporary office, pricey apartment

NO PERMANENT OFFICE YET: Because Joni Ernst is almost at the bottom of the seniority pile, it will be late spring or early summer before it's her turn to select a permanent office, she said.

FIVE IOWA OFFICES: In Iowa, Ernst is going to lease one office that U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin used — his space in the federal building in Des Moines. Ernst will also have offices in Cedar Rapids, Davenport, Sioux City and Council Bluffs. A sixth, in Creston, is a possibility.

WHIRLWIND FOR STAFF: The transition has been "fast and furious and wild and crazy" as staffers organize everything from staff parking passes, office letterhead and telephone setup to policy proposals, Chief of Staff Lisa Goeas said in an interview. And getting ready for the swearing-in has been "like planning for a small wedding," she said with a laugh.

OFFICE BUDGET: Senators are given a lump sum budget based on their state's size and population, and Ernst was allotted about $3 million to cover annual expenses such as for offices in Iowa and D.C., salaries and benefits, equipment and travel. Ernst's staff was housed at first in U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley's conference room, then was assigned space on the eighth floor of the Hart Senate Office Building, directly above Grassley's first-floor office and a floor away from the one Harkin is shutting down.

HER APARTMENT: Ernst found an apartment she can move into in February — a one-bedroom efficiency in the basement of a brownstone within walking distance of the Capitol. Because parking is expensive, she won't have a car in D.C., she said. The rent ($1,700 a month) made her cringe. It's roughly twice the mortgage payment for her home in Red Oak, she said.

Male senators can find someone to share a living space with a colleague if they like, but "I don't have that type of liberty to just pick a roommate," Ernst said. "There aren't that many females that are serving in the U.S. Senate."

Twenty are women, but just six are Republican, and only two are newly elected.

About the swearing-in

Joni Kay Culver Ernst will be sworn in Tuesday as Iowa's first female member of Congress. Here's a rundown of the hoopla:

OFFICIAL CEREMONY: 11 a.m. Central in the U.S. Senate Gallery. Ernst has asked Iowa's outgoing Democratic U.S. senator, Tom Harkin, and Republican U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley to accompany her to the well.

11 a.m. Central in the U.S. Senate Gallery. Ernst has asked Iowa's outgoing Democratic U.S. senator, Tom Harkin, and Republican U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley to accompany her to the well. GUESTS: Ernst was allotted 18 tickets for guests in the gallery, plus 10 more for a viewing room. Among her guests will be Iowa National Guard Maj. Gen. Tim Orr and Lt. Gov. Kim Reynolds. Gov. Terry Branstad's plans to attend were canceled because of a recent surgery.

Ernst was allotted 18 tickets for guests in the gallery, plus 10 more for a viewing room. Among her guests will be Iowa National Guard Maj. Gen. Tim Orr and Lt. Gov. Kim Reynolds. Gov. Terry Branstad's plans to attend were canceled because of a recent surgery. RE-ENACTMENT SWEARING-IN: Because space is limited in the Senate Gallery, a ceremony that can accommodate a larger crowd will be held at 1:30 p.m. Central in the Old Senate Chamber.

Because space is limited in the Senate Gallery, a ceremony that can accommodate a larger crowd will be held at 1:30 p.m. Central in the Old Senate Chamber. FAMILY TOUCHES: Ernst will rest her hand on her grandmother's Bible, the same one she used when she became an Iowa senator on Jan. 5, 2011. She'll wear a ruby ring that was her great-great-aunt's engagement ring and has been passed down through generations. And she'll be surrounded by relatives and close friends. "They've been through so much," Ernst said. "It's not just the candidate that goes through the highs and lows of a campaign." She said it's important to her that family and friends are present "to experience a really high part."

Ernst will rest her hand on her grandmother's Bible, the same one she used when she became an Iowa senator on Jan. 5, 2011. She'll wear a ruby ring that was her great-great-aunt's engagement ring and has been passed down through generations. And she'll be surrounded by relatives and close friends. "They've been through so much," Ernst said. "It's not just the candidate that goes through the highs and lows of a campaign." She said it's important to her that family and friends are present "to experience a really high part." RECEPTIONS: Her official reception is at 3:30 p.m. From 5:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m., there's a reception hosted by the Republican Party of Iowa, Bruce Rastetter's Summit Ag Investors, Chuck Larson's LS2 Group, David Kochel's Redwave Communications, and businessmen Gary Kirke and Mike Richards. An "Iowa After Hours" party, sponsored by companies including campaign consultant David Polyansky's new firm, Just Win Strategies, is at 7:30 p.m. And Ernst is invited to attend several other receptions hosted by special interest groups and other political influencers.

Her official reception is at 3:30 p.m. From 5:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m., there's a reception hosted by the Republican Party of Iowa, Bruce Rastetter's Summit Ag Investors, Chuck Larson's LS2 Group, David Kochel's Redwave Communications, and businessmen Gary Kirke and Mike Richards. An "Iowa After Hours" party, sponsored by companies including campaign consultant David Polyansky's new firm, Just Win Strategies, is at 7:30 p.m. And Ernst is invited to attend several other receptions hosted by special interest groups and other political influencers. QUOTE: "I've had many other parents tell me that, wow, their daughters look up to me. They admire me for doing this, and they thank me for that because they say, 'You are showing them that it's not impossible to do this.' ... Being the first female veteran to serve in the United States Senate is extremely important because we do have a diverse population of veterans out there. We're all genders, we're all colors, we come from all walks of life. And to have that diverse representation in the United States Senate is very important."

— Jennifer Jacobs

Ernst's staff hires

Staff can be a power multiplier, politics watchers said. If a senator has respected staffers, they can enhance what the senator is able to do. Here are the people U.S. Sen.-elect Joni Ernst has hired so far:

CHIEF OF STAFF: Lisa Goeas, a former top staffer for the National Federation of Independent Business and for the U.S. Small Business Administration.

Lisa Goeas, a former top staffer for the National Federation of Independent Business and for the U.S. Small Business Administration. STATE DIRECTOR: Cam Sutton, a retired insurance company CEO who is one of Iowa's top donors to GOP candidates and causes.

Cam Sutton, a retired insurance company CEO who is one of Iowa's top donors to GOP candidates and causes. DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF: Jon Kohan, who was Ernst's campaign manager and is a former chief of staff to U.S. Rep. Mark Sanford, R-S.C.

Jon Kohan, who was Ernst's campaign manager and is a former chief of staff to U.S. Rep. Mark Sanford, R-S.C. LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR: Ryan Berger, who was policy director for Ernst's campaign and was legislative director for U.S. Sens. Bob Corker, R-Tenn., and Jeff Chiesa, R-N.J.

Ryan Berger, who was policy director for Ernst's campaign and was legislative director for U.S. Sens. Bob Corker, R-Tenn., and Jeff Chiesa, R-N.J. COMMUNICATIONS DIRECTOR: Brook Hougesen, a former press secretary for the National Republican Senatorial Committee.

Brook Hougesen, a former press secretary for the National Republican Senatorial Committee. PRESS SECRETARY: Angela Zirkelbach, an Iowa native and a former research director for the NRSC's independent expenditure unit.

Angela Zirkelbach, an Iowa native and a former research director for the NRSC's independent expenditure unit. DEPUTY PRESS SECRETARY: Meg Baglien, who was a deputy communications director for Iowa U.S. Rep. Tom Latham.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1IaBu2j