Harrisburg Mayor Eric Papenfuse this week has been rubbing elbows with leaders from 300 cities across the country during the U.S. Conference of Mayors in Washington D.C.

On Friday afternoon, he may get to rub elbows with President Obama as the group will spend the afternoon at the White House.

The itinerary for Friday includes briefings on topics such as the Affordable Care Act, expanding paid sick leave and minimum wage efforts, and strengthening workforce development in information technology and manufacturing.

After a series of breakout sessions at the White House, the mayors will be addressed as a group by senior White House officials and Cabinet Secretaries who will discuss the President's priorities.

President Obama will talk to the group at 4:30 p.m., Papenfuse said.

Papenfuse drove to Washington D.C. Tuesday night, after attending the gubernatorial inauguration activities in Harrisburg, to join the conference. He is among six mayors from Pennsylvania to attend. The other mayors are from Allentown, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Reading, and Wilkes-Barre.

Papenfuse has been steadily sending public messages on his Twitter account about the various panels he's attended, which have covered public transportation, summer jobs programs and vacant and abandoned properties.

He noted that Cleveland uses a vacant property registry, something he's trying to get started in Harrisburg. He then directed a Tweet at Council Member Shamaine Daniels, chair of the building and housing committee.

"Could we please have a committee hearing on our bill @ShamaineDaniels ?" he wrote in a Tweet.

"Sure," Daniels replied in a Tweet. "Please inform your staff blight is an issue you care about. Also, twitter is not the best way to reach me."

The Twitter war continued with Papenfuse chiding Daniels to get the bill moving in her committee.

"I am informing you," Papenfuse wrote. "Bill has been stuck in your com w/o a hearing for wks, revenues are needed - City can't afford to wait."

Daniels replied, "Again get your staff to work on blight...also...twitter...not best way to reach me. Enjoy your day."

Papenfuse also called out others in his Twitter updates, including the Harrisburg School District and its Chief Recovery Officer Gene Veno, during a panel by the U.S. Secretary of Education.

"We must put politics aside - realize that this is about civil rights says @ArneDuncan," said Papenfuse. "Listening?"

Papenfuse also sent a Tweet directed at Council Member Brad Koplinski after the Tacoma mayor touted a tax abatement plan with a 15-percent resident/job apprenticeship requirement.

"Are you ready yet?" Papenfuse asked Koplinski, who recently voted down Papenfuse's latest attempt at a tax abatement plan in Harrisburg.

Those tweets did not elicit responses.

The latest panel Papenfuse attended Friday before noon concerned Obama's My Brother's Keeper initiative, a challenge issued to cities to develop strategies to help improve the lives of youths. The program was developed to address persistent opportunity gaps faced by boys and young men of color.

More than 150 cities accepted the challenge, including Harrisburg.

"Hbg proud to be one," Papenfuse said in a Tweet.

At 12:52 p.m., Papenfuse sent a Tweet with a photo showing a stream of mayors working their way through a security checkpoint to enter the White House.

UPDATE: This article was updated to add Tweets from Mayor Papenfuse to others beyond Shamaine Daniels.