Lair Marin-Marcum , OCHLA community liaison, explained that Latino patients need the right medical interpretation to be treated properly and know their rights in a healthcare setting. She stated that health professionals in every region of Ohio cited it as a problem.

Medical interpreting continues to be a big topic of discussion, as there remains a shortage of bilingual medical staff to assist Spanish-speaking patients. As a result, cultural competence also looms large as a related problem.

The regional health conversation was one of five held across the state on issues impacting the quality of health care and health access for Hispanic Ohioans. Other meetings were held previously in Lorain, Cleveland, Columbus, and Cincinnati.

15 people who work with Toledo-area Latino families at various health agencies attended the meeting held at Adelante, Inc., 520 Broadway, on Thursday, June 26, 2014. Their responses will help shape the workshop agenda at the third annual Ohio Latino Health Summit, to be held Friday, August 8, 2014, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. at the Mt. Carmel West Medical Staff Building and Nursing School in Columbus.

Some Latino health leaders had an opportunity to provide feedback on health-related issues afflicting the Northwest Ohio community during a roundtable discussion with representatives from the Ohio Commission on Hispanic/Latino Affairs (OCHLA).

It has gotten to the point where Adelante staff must take a holistic approach to aid Spanish-speaking clients. For example, Wendy Avina , who runs the agency’s Nosotras program to help pregnant women obtain prenatal care, explained that a bilingual staff member not only accompanies clients to doctor and special appointments to interpret, but also helps them to sign up for CareNet to help pay for health services.

“The need is getting bigger and we can’t just push it on one or two people on staff,” she said.

Adelante Executive Director Guisselle Mendoza told the group that it is likely the agency’s entire staff will be bilingual by the end of August because of the growing number of Spanish-speaking families moving to the Toledo area who use their services.