Topics: aol_on, Beasts of the Southern Wild, Echo Friendly, Fleetwood Mac, Lili Taylor, Movies, Music, the americans, The Cold Lands, Tom Gilroy, Tusk, Video, Entertainment News

For a week now, we have been rolling out new music made by some amazing folks to accompany bonus footage from “The Cold Lands,” which stars Lili Taylor and is now available on most video-on-demand services. It started with Mark Mulcahy, and then the first new music from Michael Stipe since R.E.M. called it a day.

Here’s the latest, with indie-poppers the Echo Friendly, along with our conversation with the band.

How did you get involved with the project? What is your connection to Tom Gilroy and the film?

Shannon’s manager, Lillian LaSalle, put us in touch with Tom and then he and I had coffee and we really connected over music we loved — and turns out I was already a fan of his music video work with R.E.M. His vision for the project was really collaborative and it was important to him to have women involved and that really spoke to us.

Did you know what you wanted included in the footage or make any requests? Or did Tom simply set you up with the clip he wanted you to have?

He had the sequence in mind so he sent us the raw footage to look at and we loved the image of the spooky rest stop at night. Being in a band, we have driven a lot at night, stopping at places like that, so even though the film’s themes were different than ours, we still found a personal connection to the imagery.

What was your process like from there? How much time did you spend with the footage trying to match your music with the film? Or did you simply understand the emotional feel of what you wanted to do, and go from there?

We already had an instrumental we had worked up with our band of a long time that we were planning on recording, but it was the collaboration with Tom that made me want to add Shannon’s voice and our vocal interplay, which is the most recognizable element of our sound. The lyrics were part of a recurring theme in a new batch of songs that ended up working perfectly for the footage so it was very easy and organic.