It was the spring of 1990 in Yuma, Ariz., and I stumbled into the desert to cover Major League Baseball. I was a college kid with a press credential from the University of Colorado’s radio station, KUCB. The idea was to get sound — on cassette tape — for the sports show my brother and I hosted. Roughly five people listened to our broadcasts, so even arm-twisting a backup catcher into talking about Denver’s potential as a major-league city represented a victory.

I sneaked onto a back field at the Ray Kroc Baseball Complex, and there Tony Gwynn was, taking swings. It was as if I had stumbled into the recording studio to find Mozart.

Gwynn finished, and I walked over to him. I stopped playing baseball the year before and wanted to know everything about the game. I asked Gwynn if he had a second — not realizing the protocol of setting up an interview with a star major-leaguer. Gwynn smiled, and sat down. My first questions were like Chris Farley talking to Paul McCartney in a “Saturday Night Live” skit — “So you, um, are on, um, on the Padres?”

Photos: Tony Gwynn’s Hall of Fame career

Blog: Tony Gwynn Jr. responds to father’s death

Gwynn laughed — a memorable cackle I heard many times over the years — quickly putting me at ease. We talked for 45 minutes. I entered the rest of my life that day, realizing I wanted to write about pro sports for a living.

Gwynn died Monday from cancer, gone far too soon at age 54. I knew Gwynn wasn’t well, as he had taken a medical leave from his position as San Diego State’s baseball coach. I had no idea that oral cancer, which he traced to his years of chewing tobacco, had returned with such vengeance.

Gwynn ranks as one of the three greatest hitters I witnessed, alongside Albert Pujols and Barry Bonds. Gwynn lacked power, by choice, refusing to compromise his average for big swings. He turned batting into a science, evolving from a skinny singles hitter to a plump 30-something outfielder who revolutionized the sport with his use of video analysis.

Gwynn finished with 3,141 hits and a .338 career batting average, the highest since Ted Williams retired. The numbers are even better than you think. Gwynn batted .302 with two strikes. He hit .311 when the pitcher was ahead in the count. No wonder former Rockies outfielder Dante Bichette never took his Triple Crown bid seriously in 1995.

“I knew in my heart I was never going to get it, because there was no way I was beating Tony for the batting title,” Bichette said Monday. “I took pride in hitting with two strikes. But there was no one like him. He hit better with two strikes than the rest of the league hit with no strikes.”

Bichette appreciated Gwynn’s mastery of his craft, replaying his at-bats to pick up pointers, and to this day tells his ball-playing sons of Gwynn’s approach, which blended remarkable eyesight and hand coordination with a relentless work ethic.

“I loved watching him face a rookie pitcher. The guy would get ahead 0-2. Tony would take two close pitches, and spoil another one,” Bichette said. “Then he’d drive a shot between short and third. It was a beautiful thing.”

Gwynn played out his entire career as a Padre, turning down bigger money elsewhere. He retired in 2001, and was inducted into the Hall of Fame the same year as Cal Ripken Jr., in 2007. Writers adored him, shown by the 97 percent he received in the Hall of Fame voting.

In my 14 seasons covering baseball, I loved going to San Diego. I smiled as I drove down Tony Gwynn Way outside of Petco Park. Anytime I heard Gwynn’s voice — he had a country music singer’s twang — in the press box, I headed in that direction. I knew we could talk hitting, usually discussing one of his favorites, Todd Helton.

Gwynn fought cancer off like an 0-2 slider. He maintained his dignity, and his love for the game. He was a good man who shaped lives, including that of a naive kid reporter wandering aimlessly through the desert.

“A sad day,” Bichette said. “Man … He was a joy to be around and watch. I don’t know if there will ever be anyone like him. The bat was a wand in his hand.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck