Application will be posted on Hillsborough Township’s website this week

The New Jersey Racing Commission has decided to release an application to locate an off-track wagering facility in a former Route 206 restaurant in Hillsborough. (Photo: ~File photo) Story Highlights More than 1,400 residents sign petition opposing facility

HILLSBOROUGH – The New Jersey Racing Commission has decided to release to the public the application to locate an off-track wagering (OTW) facility in a former Route 206 restaurant.

The application will be posted on the township’s website once it is received, said Mayor Doug Tomson. That is expected early this week.

Assemblyman Jack Ciattarelli (R-District 16), a township resident, said the decision to allow public review of the application for an off-track wagering facility in the former Maestro 206 restaurant is in the best interest of the public.

More than 1,400 residents have signed a petition opposing the facility, which would be known as Favorites at Hillsborough and would be operated by the New Jersey Thoroughbred Horsemen’s Association.

Ciattarelli and Tomson expressed concerns with the approval process at the commission’s final public hearing last week at Hillsborough High School attended by more than 100 residents.

“While the public comment period has ended, the Racing Commission made the right decision to allow the public to review the developer's application,” said Ciattarelli. “The OTW approval process has been more than frustrating and the lack of transparency has only added insult to injury.”

Last year, Ciattarelli introduced legislation that would reverse a section of law changed in 2011 that eliminates a municipality’s right to have the final say on whether or not an off-track wagering business could operate within its borders.

The bill, co-sponsored by Ciattarelli’s district colleagues, state Sen. Chrstopher “Kip” Bateman and Assemblywoman Donna Simon, would restore the power of municipalities to reject a proposed off-track wagering facility, and to remove the five-year tax exemption, abatement or payment in-lieu-of taxes for privately operated off-track wagering facilities.

The bill has not advanced in the state Legislature.

“The decision to release the application, though late in coming, is a positive development,” Ciattarelli said. “Like any other application that goes before a local land use board, citizens should be allowed to review this OTW application.”

Tomson also said he was pleased that the application would be made public.

“Home rule empowers communities to have a say in what happens in their town and should be respected,” the mayor said. “Permitting an OTW facility to operate in Hillsborough, or any town, should be decided by the municipality, not the Racing Commission. This may work in some towns, but not necessarily in Hillsborough. I appreciate the commission disclosing the application so the public can examine it thoroughly.”

The facility would have seating for about 174 patrons and have about 80 employees with 40 in the wagering operation and 40 in the restaurant business. The facility is expected to generate about $20 million in annual revenue.

Staff Writer Mike Deak: 908-243-6607; mdeak@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1N2zdKm