Veteran entrepreneur Mark Cuban has some advice for Monday's selloff: "If you don't know what you're doing, or you think you do but you can't afford to lose your stake holdings, do nothing."

Cuban, famed for founding several successful dot-com era ventures, knows his way around a correction market. He took to an ephemeral messaging app to share some advice with his followers in a "short and dirty guide."

After the Dow Jones industrial average plunged over 1,000 points Monday morning, Cuban said his strategy is to stay long, not sell off.

"There are so many smart people with so much money chasing so few opportunities, that there are no hidden opportunities any more," he wrote on Cyber Dust, an app similar to Snapchat that Cuban funds and advises.

Related: Mark Cuban- Here’s Why Republicans Will Lose the Election

Cuban said he's hanging on to his dividend-paying stocks and Netflix and that he bought call options of Facebook on Friday.

"I will be looking to buy high-yielding stocks that have overcorrected," he wrote. "I will be looking for bloodbaths caused not by the company, but by de-levered sellers."

As the U.S. stock market snaps back and forth around session lows on concerns about China's equity markets, "Shark Tank"'s Cuban said the biggest mistake an investor can make is thinking they are smarter than they are.

"[China] thought they were really smart, like everyone in a bull market does," he wrote. "They think they have some measure of control. Neither is true. And we are seeing the consequences of both issues come to roost right now."

As analysts debate causes of the market's volatility, Cuban said those decrying the U.S. Federal Reserve are wrong. Instead, he weighed in on the lack of experience in Beijing.

"When things go good[,] it's really good and everyone looks smart," Cuban wrote. "When they go bad, those people have to pay those debts because prices fall and things get really bad. Now imagine if the 2nd largest economy in the world was in the same position. Then realize that economy is run by a [C]ommunist party that is new to all this."

Related: Mark Cuban to Young Millennials: Live Cheap – Clothes, Cars Don’t Matter

To be sure, not everyone agrees with Cuban's assessment to let the Fed off the hook. Stephen Roach, former chairman of Morgan Stanley Asia, said China is "not as bad as appears to be the case," on CNBC's"Squawk on the Street" Monday.

"We had the weakest recoveries post-any recession all over the world, whether it's the U.S., Europe, of course, Japan," Roach said. "The developing world is heavily dependent on our weak recoveries. These markets have been inflated by central banks, liquidity injections, interest rates. Now they're taking the medicine away, the markets are imploding."

It's a debate that's still unfolding, with the Dow Jones industrial average still down, though shaving losses.

As Cuban said in his note: "The stock market is hard."

This article originally appeared on CNBC.

Read more from CNBC:

A repeat of 2008? Volatility seen spooking shoppers

Four ways to play defense in a falling market

The little-used NYSe rule that can tame a wild market