Bobbie Marriott, with the Outlaw Saloon, tosses candy during the Lyons annual Holiday Parade of Lights on Saturday evening. (LEWIS GEYER)

A chilly night didn't deter hundreds of families from bundling up and converging on downtown Lyons streets Saturday to see the 2013 edition of the town's Annual Holiday Parade of Lights and Fireworks Show.

This year's theme: "There's No Place Like Home for the Holidays," and the community that survived and is sill recovering the devastating September floods appeared to agree.

"We took a heck of a hit in that flood," Kevin Braly said of the Lyons area, its residents and businesses.

Braly, who's lived in the Hygiene and Niwot area for all of his 50 years, said he thought it especially important for people to show up for this year's version of the Lyons holiday celebration, as a way to help "kind of help get this little town to come back and keep traditions going."

Braly was one of a number of people who huddled around bonfires in front of Redstone Cyclery before the parade started, and Redstone's owner, Dave Chase, said this year's event "means a little more than it has in years past," because it's "more of a homecoming parade."

Said Chase: "It's good to see the kids running around," both on Saturday and earlier in the week, when displaced Lyons students were able to return to the town's schools.

One of the children running around outside the cycle shop, 5-year-old Leo Legault, took a break from pre-parade snowball tosses to say he was looking forward to seeing "Santa Claus and Mrs. Claus."

Advertisement

That red-clad couple did eventually appear, riding a Lyons Fire Protection District truck, bringing up the rear of a parade that featured representatives of many of the agencies and organizations and volunteer groups that played key roles in helping rescue and evacuate residents from the flood and that have been there for cleanup, disaster recovery and community restoration efforts in the nearly three months since.

Drawing special and sustained applause was a contingent of Colorado National Guard members.

Colorado National Guard member Ryan Smart receives a handshake while walking along the parade route during the Lyons annual Holiday Parade of Lights on Saturday. ( LEWIS GEYER )

Town administrator Victoria Simonsen said of this year's holiday celebration -- which included a variety of activities and events before the parade as well as a fireworks show afterward: "It was especially important, to help keep whatever traditions and normalcy that people have had for years in Lyons."

John Fryar can be reached at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com.