Out-the-door forecast:

The calendar may say mid-May, but it will feel like mid-April the next few days. A cold front will track through the area today, and provide a chance of a scattered showers. A chilly northwest wind is expected this weekend. Snow showers are possible tomorrow morning north of Hwy 8.

Here are the top seven headlines in Northcentral Wisconsin to get you out the door for this Friday, May 13, 2016.

1. President Obama weighs in on the bathroom debate affecting transgender people in several states. According to the New York Times, the Obama Administration will send a letter to public school districts today...recommending transgender students be allowed to use the bathroom of their choice. The guidance comes amid an ongoing battle between the Justice Department and North Carolina. The state recently enacted a law limiting the use of public restrooms to the gender on a person's birth certificate.

2. One state's health insurance exchange estimates its Affordable Care Act premiums may rise 8% on average next year. Analysts said California mirrors an upward trend around the country as health insurers reassess their pricing. The price boost is being attributed to the expiration of two federal programs and rising costs for specialty drugs.

3. An internal investigation is set to begin this morning for North Central Health Care employees in Wausau. Authorities still are not sure who pushed an emergency button, prompting an evacuation, lockdown and large police presence, and why. No suspects or weapons were found and no injuries were reported. The lockdown was lifted around 7 Thursday night.

4. The results from the 2015 Marathon County Youth Behavior Survey show bullying is at an all-time high among local students. The survey, conducted at 10 Marathon County school districts, are part of a nationwide effort to monitor risky behavior in teens. Of the 2,000 teens surveyed, results reveal 30.4% say they have been bullied in the last year.

5. In any rural community this time of year, you will likely see farm equipment on roads. Because that farm equipment is not able to go the speed limit, it can sometimes create serious accidents or fatalities. Wisconsin state law does not allow the passing of farm equipment in a no-passing zone, but drivers still do it. No matter how big a hurry you think you are in, it is not worth putting your or someone else's life on the line by crossing that double line.

6. Yoga has many benefits to your body. According to the National Center for Complimentary and Inegrative Health, practicing yoga can reduce stress, and improve your overall physical health. At Community Soul Yoga, people can participate in events to help celebrate its fifth anniversary. Find out more at wsaw.com.

7. Every pet owner dreads having to decide whether to euthanize their furry family member once their quality of life is gone. The Gumness family was forced to say goodbye to two golden retrievers in the last year and a half when each became seriously ill. You can see their story, and NewsChannel 7's Jeff Thelen's personal story about the tough decision at wsaw.com.