Late in the snowmelt season, fast-flowing Colorado rivers continued to threaten recreational users, as the search continued Sunday for a woman missing in the Arkansas River near Salida. And in Fort Collins, crews pulled a woman from the Cache la Poudre River after she fell off an inner tube.

Amanda Taylor, 31, of Vernal, Utah, and six other people were thrown from a raft that flipped going over a diversion dam in the Arkansas River on Saturday night.

Taylor’s Facebook page says she attended the University of Wyoming from 2005 to 2008 and works at a bar in Alpine, Wyo.

The raft flipped as it when over a diversion dam off County Road 160 across from Butala Sand and Gravel Co. at about 10:30 p.m.

Five people from the raft made it to the bank, but Taylor and David Torchia, 22, of Sylvania, Ohio, did not. Torchia was pulled from the river by Salida firefighter Brian Jefferson, authorities said. He was taken by ambulance to Heart of the Rockies Regional Medical Center in Salida with minor injuries, according to the sheriff’s office.

Chaffee County Undersheriff John Spezze was on patrol when he found the five members on the riverbank. He drove to the east side of the river to look for the two missing people, and a few minutes later spotted the overturned raft in the river with Torchia clinging to it, the sheriff’s department said in a news release.

Jefferson went into the water anchored by a lifeline controlled by three men on the riverbank to make the rescue.

On the Poudre River, a swift-water rescue team with the Larimer County Dive Rescue Team pulled the woman from the river a quarter mile east of North Overland Trail on Sunday afternoon.

The woman, whose name was not released, was taken by ambulance to Poudre Valley Hospital in Fort Collins. Her condition was not available.

Many of the state’s rivers were running above normal Sunday, according to the U.S. Geological Survey. The Poudre River was rated at “much above normal,” stream-flow gauges indicated.

At least four people have died in the Arkansas River in the past three weeks, and more than a dozen statewide this year, as the melting snowpack and spring rains have engorged waterways. Three people died in separate incidents in the Poudre River during a two-week period at the end of May and start of June.

Reservoirs that normally help manage the heavy flow of snowmelt were refilled by floods in September, leaving little space to store the water and curb the high flows this spring.

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch