With hopes fading of passing an immigration reform bill, President Obama is reportedly contemplating bypassing Congress and making sweeping changes to immigration policy before the midterm elections.

Many analysts think the executive action under consideration and its political fallout could, as Ronald Brownstein put it in The National Journal, “define both the Democratic and Republican parties for the burgeoning Hispanic population.”

The Public’s Growing Preference for Border Security Since early this year, polls show an increasing preference for prioritizing border security over creating a path to legal status for illegal immigrants. Focus on border security Focus on path to legal status February July 41% 54 51 45 Focus on border security Focus on path to legal status February July 41% 54 51 45

But what isn’t clear is why Mr. Obama would engage in such a move before the election. Of course, Mr. Obama faces short-term pressures to address the surge in migrant children being detained at the border, but news media reports suggest that the policy changes under consideration would be far broader, potentially providing legal status to many of the nation’s undocumented immigrants.

Such a broad executive action could provoke a backlash in the midterm elections that might be avoided with a move just a few months later. Although the public is generally supportive of allowing immigrants to stay in the United States legally under certain conditions, opinion has grown less favorable toward this prospect over time.

A recent CNN poll showed, for instance, that 51 percent of Americans now prefer an emphasis on border security and deportation versus 45 percent who prefer creating a path to legal status for illegal immigrants — a reversal from the 41 percent to 54 percent margin observed earlier this year. Polling also suggests that opponents of creating a path to legal status feel more strongly about the issue than supporters.

Photo

Mr. Obama might hope to mobilize the Democratic base or boost Hispanic turnout, but midterm electorates are skewed toward an older, whiter group of voters who are likely to view a legalization plan less favorably. By contrast, the Hispanic population votes at lower rates and is likely to make up a small share of the electorate in this year’s most competitive House and Senate races (though their role in 2016 could be more significant).

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It’s easy to overstate the effects of policy on electoral outcomes, but there is a recent worst-case example: the passage of the Affordable Care Act. Research that I conducted with a group of political scientists found that the Republican landslide in 2010 was strengthened by health care reform. In total, Democrats lost 63 seats in the House of Representatives, a substantial increase over the expected outcome, which was seemingly attributable to the depressed support for reform supporters in competitive districts, who were seen as more liberal by voters.

Given these risks, the politics of pre-election legalization seem inexplicable, creating an opening for elaborate bank-shot theories about Obama’s intentions. The columnist Charles Krauthammer floated a conspiracy theory along these lines Wednesday, suggesting on Fox News that Obama might be trying to “bait Republicans into impeachment as a way to save his party in the midterm elections.”

Such an outcome seems unlikely, but the comment illustrates just how much uncertainty there is over what Mr. Obama is doing or how Republicans — and voters — will react.