Topics: From the Wires, News

BARLONYO, Uganda (AP) — This is the horror that Silveria Okweny is willing to forgive:

On Feb. 21, 2004, as the sun dipped below the horizon, rebels walking single file approached the Ugandan refugee camp in which she lived. At the shrill sound of a whistle, one of the worst attacks on civilians by the Lord’s Resistance Army began.

With gunfire and screams punctuating the evening, some of the rebels entered Okweny’s hut as the family cowered inside. As the insurgents assaulted Okweny’s husband, their 5-year-old son Innocent pleaded with them to stop. Instead, one grabbed the boy by the legs and smashed his head against a wall, killing him.

All told, more than 120 civilians — including Okweny’s husband and her older son — would die that day.

Eleven years later, the International Criminal Court in The Hague is preparing to try senior LRA commander Dominic Ongwen for war crimes and crimes against humanity. Ugandan military officials and survivors say he helped direct the attack on the camp in Barlonyo.

But Okweny and some other survivors of the Feb. 21, 2004, attack say Ongwen should not be tried by the ICC. Instead, they say he should be pardoned if he comes to Uganda to confess his crimes and seeks forgiveness in a ritual ceremony.

Their willingness to forgive is partly a function of northern Uganda’s traditions and culture, but it is also prompted by Ongwen’s personal history — he was kidnapped as a boy by the LRA and turned into a child soldier.

“From the victims’ perspectives under the circumstances, traditional justice and reconciliation would have been more appropriate,” than a trial in the Netherlands, said Jonathan Odur, who runs the Facilitation for Peace and Development in northern Uganda. “Many victims think that an international trial is not going to change anything tangible.”

Ongwen was taken into custody in January in Central African Republic by a local rebel group and handed over to U.S. special forces who are pursuing top LRA leader Joseph Kony, who started the insurgency in the north not long after President Yoweri Museveni seized power in 1986.

Though this region suffered the most at the hands of the LRA, there is widespread feeling that it would be appropriate for Ongwen to undergo a traditional ceremony in which the aggressor confesses his crimes, goes through some form of ritual cleansing, and is then made to pay damages. During the ceremony — called “Kayo Cuk” or “Utmost Forgiveness” — a bull may be slaughtered, its blood smeared on the foreheads of both the perpetrator and victims. Only then, some believe, may it be possible to achieve justice and reconciliation.

“Kayo Cuk is about extending an olive branch, and if Ongwen comes to Barlonyo and seeks forgiveness and people see that he is sincere then he can definitely be forgiven,” said Ben Erweny, a senior member of the Lango Cultural Foundation, an institution that unites the clans of the Langi people. “He would maybe bring a bull which would be slaughtered for the people to eat. It would an occasion for merriment.”

Anna Acheng, a 45-year-old who had been abducted by the LRA and whose left ear was partly sliced off by rebels, said reports that Ongwen turned himself in makes him seem a sympathetic figure and worthy of Kayo Cuk.

“Since he surrendered, we can now forgive him for the atrocities he committed against our people because we are confident that he will never go back to the bush,” she said.

Scores of former LRA rebels who were granted amnesty by Uganda’s government have been guided through similar rituals. They now live freely across northern Uganda. None of these former rebels, however, had been charged with war crimes by the ICC.

Ongwen told the ICC in his first and so far only appearance that he was abducted as a 14-year-old boy in 1988. That account is confirmed by his relatives who say he was kidnapped by the LRA while walking home from school.

Ongwen rose, according to the ICC arrest warrant, to membership in the LRA’s “Control Altar” — a group of senior commanders that plotted and carried out attacks in northern Uganda. It does not specifically cite the Barlonyo incident.