By Susan Wade

Years ago, Chesterfield resident Albert Brown put in long hours, doing sometimes-nasty work with his septic-tank service, to earn a living.

When the weekend arrived, he raced his small-block Chevy Vega at Old Bridge Township Raceway Park in the National Hot Rod Association's Super Gas class. Competing, too, was his brother Andre. And they always attended the Summernationals.

Tagging along, soaking in all the sights, sounds, smells, and the passion, was Albert's young son, Antron, who alternated between pretending he was a racing star like Kenny Bernstein and Joe Amato and actually meeting his heroes, getting their autographs, and standing close to their cars as the teams worked feverishly on them.

Antron Brown is back at Raceway Park this weekend for the Toyota Summernationals as a husband, father of three, the only drag racer to run in both the Pro Stock Motorcycle and Top Fuel classes, and 2012 Top Fuel champion.

Now he's the one greeting fans, signing his name, posing for pictures, making memories for the next generation.

"It's just me," Brown said, downplaying his place among the sport's legends. "I'll never change. I'll never forget where I come from. I support this sport because this sport has been so great to me and so many others.

"What makes it so special is I remember growing up seeing "Big Daddy" Don Garlits and Dave Schultz and all of them. You could go up and shake their hands and talk to them, and it made it like I was a part of things," he said.

"You got to see them working on their cars. With this form of racing, there's no guessing what they do — you get to see it and imagine yourself doing it. That gets your dreams going, because you know what you need to do to get there.

"That's what helped me along the way, that same passion that they had," Antron Brown said.

Some have lauded Brown as the first black Top Fuel champion, but Brown said he'd be satisfied "if I can be an inspiration for others — not just African-Americans, just Americans, period — give them somebody they can look up to who's positive, who never settled for things in life."

Brown said the NHRA always has been inclusive because "everybody can relate. We're able to do it on our own budget and have fun. All my heroes did their craft in their back yard and came out here and did it on a professional level.

"Look at John Force, our modern-day hero," he said. "He was a truck driver. A truck driver. But he had a passion for the sport. And look where it has taken him. We all have that passion. That's why we're diversified."

With his evangelical flair, the strikingly young 38-year-old said, "I'm an old, beat-up kid from Chesterfield, New Jersey. My family had a septic tank business. I used to pump out sewers for a living. And now I smell the sweet smell of nitro. It gets no better than that."