Government is getting farther and farther from the ideals of our founding fathers. Politicians are caring less about representing those by whom they were elected and more about making those backdoor deals to seal their political future. The residents of District 40, along with the rest of the Republicans in Nevada, were betrayed last session, the biggest knife in our backs was the Commerce Tax. This sort of misrepresentation became the catalyst for my campaign. When the government betrays its people, it is up to the patriots amongst us to stand together and let our will be known.

I am a statesman, a citizen, who chose to run not because I am looking to pursue a career politically, but because I believe in democracy, I believe that change is needed and I believe that I am the man for the job. I believe that the leadership experience I gained from 13 years of military service can help heal our fractured party. We have become accustomed to individually dying on so many hills that we have forgotten how to collectively charge up them. At the state level Assemblymen and women are truly the hands and feet of the Republican Party, and each of us has something to offer.

Being born and raised right in the middle of District 40, and choosing to set down roots and raise my own family here makes the issues of District 40 near and dear to me.

What happens next session will impact me and my family for years to come. Just like all of you, my family’s future is at stake.

I am prepared to fight for our children’s education and their parent’s right to choose what is best for them. We have talented, hard-working teachers, we have knowledgeable and caring parents all of whom need the federal red tape removed in order for our children to thrive. I am prepared to fight for our children’s privacy, every student needs to feel safe, period. I care deeply about all of Nevada’s children and want each child to feel safe at school, but, I believe that a blanket bathroom bill does not.

I will fight for our local businesses; we appreciate all of your hard work and I refuse to see large companies receive tax cuts while you pick up their slack. If we do not fight to repeal the Commerce Tax I fear that small local businesses will be forced to either close or move out of state. This will not help Nevada thrive, as the establishment claims.

Another issue that I am passionate about and have the expertise to resolve is our health care system. The medical system is under-represented in legislature; as a Physician Assistant, I have intimate knowledge of our medical system and insurance providers. There are tangible ways to lessen the effects of ObamaCare on your wallet. Although ObamaCare is a federal issue, there are state level fixes that can decrease cost and improve access to your provider.

This upcoming legislative session is going to be fight, we are going to have to fight to restore and maintain the rights given to us by the Constitution and I understand what it takes to defend our freedoms. I have had no greater honor than defending our freedoms overseas and I intend to fight just as diligently for them in February. Our freedoms are not up for negotiation, and District 40 needs a representative willing to stand his ground and hold true to the voters who elected him.