Some people like to set resolutions and buy gym memberships to get their new year off to a rocking start. Boulder resident Geoff Noyes kicked off his 2015 by running straight into freezing water.

"It's rejuvenating," Noyes said. "There's no feeling like it in the world."

Hundreds of people joined Noyes today as they doggie-paddled, danced and dunked themselves in the 36-degree waters of the Boulder Reservoir for the 32nd Polar Plunge.

The Boulder County AIDS Project — which took over the event last year — said about 400 to 600 people registered, raising about $25,000 for HIV education, prevention and care.

This was Noyes' second year taking the plunge, and he said it's not exactly something that gets easier with time.

Nicole Heineman, right, and Jennifer Jones gasp as the run back to the shore after taking part in the 32nd annual Polar Plunge at Boulder Reservoir in Boulder, Colorado January 1, 2015. (Mark Leffingwell/ Daily Camera)

"It was just as hard this year," Noyes said. "But when you get out of the water you feel like a newborn person."

Noyes family watched him make the plunge this year, but he still holds out hope they will join him in the plunge.

"One of these years I'll get them to go," Noyes said.

While Noyes braved the waters solo, many of the plungers showed up in teams, including Team Hamhock, named for the celebratory ham they always feast on after the plunge.

"It's a bunch of friends having a good time and starting off the new year right," said Charlie Barkmeier, a member who has done five plunges so far. "One year around Christmas we just said, 'Let's try this thing out.'"

Maria LeFebre, another member of the team, said she was keeping a close eye on the forecast before the plunge, with temperatures in Boulder as low as -14 just two days ago.

"I kept checking the weather," LeFebre said, though Barkmeier said he was never that concerned.

"No matter what, we would have been out here," Barkmeier said.

Luckily for the plungers, the skies were sunny and the temperatures hovered in the mid-20s for the plunge, though Barkmeier said that almost made the plunge even harder.

Hannah Zimmerman, left, and Courtney Mikinis, right, react to the cold after running into the Boulder Reservoir for the 32nd annual Polar Plunge in Boulder, Colorado January 1, 2015. (Mark Leffingwell/ Daily Camera)

"The water just hits you hard," he said. "We broke up some ice with our shins this year."

The 17 people on Team Hamhock included a new plunger this year in Paul Rohr, who admitted he was a little hesitant to join at first.

"I made the decision after a few drinks," Rohr said.

Rohr did say that he felt his strategy of going into the plunge wearing as little clothing as possible actually helped.

"I saw people coming out wearing cotton and they were freezing," Rohr said. "My feet were the only things that got really cold."

Rohr said he will be coming back for another go at the plunge, and didn't even need any adult beverages to come to that decision.

"It was better than I expected," Rohr said. "I think I'm hooked."

Two other first time plungers were cousins Hope and Erica Atkinson, both 13, who heard an ad for the event on the radio.

"We decided it would be a good way to start of 2015," Hope said.

Both of the girls said it was a fun — but chilly — experience.

"It was cold, very very cold," Erica said. "Your body turns numb."

And unlike Boulder native Erica, Hope hails from Texas, where polar plunges aren't exactly a local tradition.

"I'm so not used to this," Hope said.

But when asked if they would take the plunge again, both girls answered instantly with a resounding, "Yes."

Mitchell Byars: 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars