Former Oklahoma women’s basketball guard Danielle Robinson has been named as one of 25 finalists for the 2016 U.S. Olympic Women’s Basketball team, USA Basketball announced Monday.

Robinson recently competed in USA Basketball’s European Tour last October, helping Team USA to a 4-0 record against a three European professional clubs and the Italian National Team. Robinson and the other 24 finalists will compete at a training camp, Feb. 21-23, at the University of Connecticut. The 12-player roster will be announced at a later date following the conclusion of the mini camp.

At Oklahoma, Robinson appeared in two Final Fours and finished her career ranked second in program history in assists (726), steals (309) and games played (141). She’s the Sooners’ all-time leader in games started (140) and was a two-time AP All-America selection. Robinson guided the Sooners to back-to-back Final Four appearances in 2009 and 2010 and finished her career fifth in OU history with 2,138 points.

Robinson currently plays for the San Antonio Stars in the WNBA where she averaged 9.2 and 5.0 assists per game last season. The San Jose, Calif., native is vying to become the first OU women’s basketball player since Stacey Dales (Canada, 2000) to participate in the Summer Olympic Games.

Finalists for the 2016 U.S. Olympic Team include: Seimone Augustus (Minnesota Lynx), Sue Bird (Seattle Storm), Tamika Catchings (Indiana Fever), Tina Charles (New York Liberty), Elena Delle Donne (Chicago Sky), Skylar Diggins (Dallas Wings), Stefanie Dolson (Washington Mystics), Candice Dupree (Phoenix Mercury), Sylvia Fowles (Minnesota Lynx), Brittney Griner (Phoenix Mercury), Briann January (Indiana Fever), Jantel Lavender (Los Angeles Sparks), Jewell Lloyd (Seattle Storm) Kayla McBride (San Antonio Stars), Angel McCoughtry (Atlanta Dream), Maya Moore (Minnesota Lynx), Chiney Ogwumike (Connecticut Sun), Nnemkadi Ogwumike (Los Angeles Sparks), Candace Parker (Los Angeles Sparks), Odyssey Sims (Dallas Wings), Breanna Stewart (University of Connecticut), Diana Taurasi (Phoenix Mercury), Courtney Vandersloot (Chicago Sky) and Lindsay Whalen (Minnesota Lynx).

Connecticut head coach Geno Auriemma will serve as the team’s head coach. He will be assisted by DePaul’s Doug Bruno, the Minnesota Lynx’ Cheryl Reeve and South Carolina’s Dawn Staley.

The 2016 Olympic Games will be held Aug. 5-21 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.