Longmont stabbing victim Michelle Wilkins. (Not Provided / Daily Camera)

With the gruesome attack on Michelle Wilkins and her baby, a most striking example of life and love unfolded in Longmont. You might want to stop me right quick and say, "What the hell do you mean, 'a most striking example of life and love'?"

Yes, there was a killing and a brutal attack on Michelle. But in response, there was a wonderful outpouring in support of life. Many, many people, who had never even heard of Michelle Wilkins before March 18, reached out to send their love. From around the world have come cards, flowers, and prayers of support and healing. And they've grieved the loss of a little girl named Aurora. The expressions of life-affirming love and compassion have been nothing less than amazing and inspirational.

I think the reaction is reasonable and understandable. For anyone who has an honest appreciation of nature surely finds the sight of a mother carrying her unborn baby as beautiful. The reason our society's so passionate about Michelle's injury and the loss of her baby is that we know the love and support a mother deserves and needs. This fact is written on our hearts.

And yet! At the same time, a most bizarre alternate reality exists, causing mental chaos for some. People cannot understand why murder charges can't be brought in this case. Unfortunately, many are being reminded — and some are learning for the first time — that the intentional killing of an unborn baby, clear up to the delivery date will not result in any charges on the baby's behalf.

Advertisement

For what happened to Michelle's baby, even in the seventh or eighth month, is perfectly legal in most of the thousands of abortion clinics across America.

Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett explained the charges filed, stating, "Now, I understand that many people in the community - and heaven knows, I've heard from a lot of them - would like me to have filed homicide charges. However, that is not possible, under Colorado law, without proof of a live birth. A prosecutor cannot file murder charges when a baby, who is killed, has not lived outside the body of the mother."

But it's worse than that. Assuming that the act of cutting baby Aurora out was the only "homicidal act" committed against her, it appears that Garnett couldn't bring homicide charges in this case even if there was proof that Aurora did breathe after being taken from Michelle's womb. So the idea that murder charges could have been filed, if only there was evidence that Aurora breathed, is wishful thinking.

Let me clarify that point.

According to Colorado law, §§ 18-3-101 to -107:

(1) "Homicide" means the killing of a person by another.

(2) "Person", when referring to the victim of a homicide, means a human being who had been born and was alive at the time of the homicidal act.

So the way it stands now, if someone attacks a baby in the womb, clear up to the actual due date, and it is subsequently born and lives for a period of time, then dies from injuries it sustained in that attack, they cannot be charged with homicide. Maybe child abuse resulting in death, but not homicide.

A reasonable person might ask: Why have we not passed a law that would allow murder charges to be brought against someone for a baby's loss, such as Aurora? You need look no further than the Colorado State House. Fetal Homicide laws, which would allow for homicide charges in a case like this, have been defeated twice in the last three two years.

At one of the Fetal Homicide hearings, Planned Parenthood attorney Kevin Paul coldly stated that, "Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains would oppose any Fetal Homicide measure, no matter how it might be written," according to the Colorado Right to Life website.

About the bill, State Rep Claire Levy stated, "it seemed to be a backdoor way to establishing separate legal rights for a nonviable fetus," according to the Longmont Times-Call. And, "I just viewed it as a very sloppy bill that was intended to make a political statement." So much for babies like Aurora.

So please, when you're beating your head against the wall, trying to find some logic and justice here, don't think that it's some fluke or oversight that prevents justice for baby Aurora. We have a whole industry that wants it just so. And we have elected officials who are happy to help keep it that way.

Charlie Danaher lives in Boulder.