Topics: Activism, Anarchism, anniversary, Editor's Picks, Occupy, Occupy Wall Street, Protests, rupture, September 17th, Wall Street, Zuccotti Park, Life News, News, Politics News

“I believe in anniversaries,” says one character in late playwright Sarah Kane’s psychodrama “Crave.” “That a mood can be repeated even if the event that caused it is trivial or forgotten,” the character continues, adding, “in this case it’s neither.”

Today, Sept. 17, is an anniversary and the event that caused it is neither trivial, nor forgotten. This day, two years ago, Occupy Wall Street first inserted itself into the streets of lower Manhattan and the broader public consciousness. But I will not be celebrating the anniversary of Occupy Wall Street: I will not go to Zuccotti Park today and I will not attempt to repeat the mood of fight, energy and unbounded possibility and impossibility that electrified New York and beyond in Occupy’s first flush two years ago.

The impetus and collective action that arose around the first “Sept. 17″ were neither trivial, nor forgotten (shit is, after all, still fucked up and bullshit). An Occupy anniversary — a calendar date to relive and repeat — is all too possible as an event, and that’s why I won’t be going.

As I pointed out consistently at the time, and as writer Nathan Schneider stresses again in his new book, “Thank you, Anarchy,” there was no one Occupy. That strange constellation of camps, rallies, street marches, meetings and relationships meant many things with varying potency to those involved. But above all for me, Occupy was about rupture: In the bold and basic act of taking space in New York’s overdetermined grid, we found ourselves, each other and our streets anew. “Whose streets? Our streets!” we would chant. And sometimes — when the police had lost control and we stormed across thoroughfares usually reserved for the constant flows of cars, work and consumption — it was true; the streets were ours.

It’s beyond the purview of these paragraphs to detail why Occupy was stunted — I have no interest in debate over whether we should have built a program, platform or party. For me and many others, that was never the Occupy we loved or sought. (Call me an anarchist.) Suffice to remember that militarized police forces across the country, and especially in New York, cracked down on Occupy encampments and marches with overwhelming force and regularity.

In preparation for today, Occupy’s so-called second anniversary, police barricades have been stacked up and waiting to surround Zuccotti Park. It’s now a familiar dance between protesters and police who are now practiced in the prevention of occupation of New York’s “public” spaces. Hundreds if not thousands of Occupy anniversary attendees will gather in Zuccotti Park today to dance the same old dance. I too know the steps and that’s why I won’t be taking part.

Loath as I am to agree with philosopher-clown Slavoj Zizek, he has long decried the tendency of radicals and activists to come together to fondly remember the good old days of insurrectionary fervor they once shared. No doubt, the Occupy anniversary is not meant to be any such commemoration in service of nostalgia; organizers truly hope to reignite the sort of energy that fueled Occupy in late 2011. But on Sept. 17, 2011, Zuccotti Park was not even the first-choice resting place for the ambling crowds — it was third on a list. That day, and those that followed, were crucially unbounded and unfamiliar. Going back to Zuccotti Park today, where the police are ready and waiting and events seem all too constrained (a “People’s Exchange” after work hours, a march to demand a Robin Hood tax on Wall Street); the familiar fare contains little promise of rupture.