Professors Jenni Buckley (middle, in blue) and Amy Trauth-Nare (right, in black) work with students Seth Bulich, Hunter Bachman, Kyle Culver, and Molly Wessel working on "Orthopedics in Action" kits. (Photo: Courtesy of Evan Krape, University of Delaware)

It might be a great learning opportunity for a high school student to try and repair a broken tibia or suture a torn Achilles tendon, but the science teacher would probably have a hard time finding volunteers to provide the materials.

That's where the University of Delaware's College of Education and Human Development and College of Engineering come in.

The group has produced "Orthopedics in Action" kits that come with anatomical models designed to simulate "the real thing" as closely as possible.

The kits include a broken tibia, or shinbone, that students can fix with an implant called an external fixator; a knee on which they can perform diagnostic tests; spinal x-rays they must inspect for scoliosis; a hand to demonstrate how orthopedic pulley systems work; and a torn Achilles tendon on which they can practice suturing techniques.

One of the exercises students can perform is placing lines attached to pullies on a skeletal hand to simulate the muscles that allow people to flex their fingers. (Photo: Courtesy of Evan Krape, University of Delaware)

"These are very high-fidelity models," said Jenni Buckley, assistant professor of mechanical engineering. "The x-rays are real patient x-rays. The bones act just like real bones would, and the fractures have the exactly right geometry of a real fracture."

In addition to the models, the kits come with bio-mechanical testing stations, lesson plans, and video tutorials to show the students how everything works.

Amy Trauth-Nare, associate director for science education at UD's Professional Development Center for Educators, helped the team make sure the lessons would be practically useful for teachers.

"When I started working with this team I said, look, this work is important, but teachers have very little time and very little money," Trauth-Nare said. "They have to be affordable and approachable to teachers. I think we've had that in mind from the start and the team has done a really great job making this something that teachers will be able to make use of."

One exercise included in the kits use real patient x-rays and task students with diagnosing scoliosis. (Photo: Courtesy of Evan Krape, University of Delaware)

Trauth-Nare said the experiments are a perfect fit for the new Next Generation Science Standards that schools are adopting, because they mix engineering into lessons about biology and physics.

Organizers say the project is an excellent example of an "interdisciplinary learning" mindset that breaks down the traditional silos of departments and majors, something UD and other universities are pushing schools to do more of.

The OIA started as an interdisciplinary senior design program by a team of undergraduate biomedical engineering seniors. As it gathered steam, it has pulled together engineers to create the models; educators to design the curriculum and materials; graphic designers to create the diagrams; and social psychologists to create evaluations to measure how effective the lessons are.

"I think it's been easy for us to work as a team on this, because we're all centered around the goal of giving teachers high-quality science lessons," Trauth-Nare said. "It's been a really good motivator."

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1FsBOuk