Vernon Davis arrived in Denver like an 8-year-old on Christmas morning, eager with anticipation at taking the next step in his career. He was going to catch passes from Peyton Manning, a dream of his since college.

Except it hasn’t quite happened like that. Davis hasn’t caught a pass from Manning in three games with his new team. Instead, the veteran tight end has developed impeccable rhythm with quarterback Brock Osweiler, who was thrust into the starting lineup last Sunday at Chicago with Manning sidelined because of foot and rib injuries.

When Davis first arrived from San Francisco he spent a lot of time working with the second team as he got acclimated to a new offense, one much different than the 49ers ran. He caught his first pass as a Bronco from Osweiler in a blowout loss against Kansas City two weeks ago. But perhaps the most important first catch came in practice a week earlier on a pass delivered by Osweiler.

“It was a corner route and it was perfect,” Davis said. “He said, ‘Good route Vernon.’ “

That might be why Osweiler and Davis, who have played together only two weeks, are already in sync.

Osweiler targeted Davis six times in the Broncos’ 17-15 win last Sunday at Chicago, all of them catches for a total of 68 yards.

“Sometimes it takes awhile to get on the same page and develop that chemistry with a quarterback,” Davis said. “But with this guy, it’s like we connected from Day One.”

When the Broncos acquired Davis via trade, everything was peachy. He was leaving a 2-6 team that was in turmoil and ready to bench its starting quarterback, Colin Kaepernick, to join a 7-0 Broncos team coming off their best win of the season, a 29-10 drubbing of the Packers.

Then things started to go south. The Broncos lost consecutive games and lost Manning to injury. Plus, Davis wasn’t getting a lot of snaps as he adjusted to a new offense.

“Everything that is difficult turns out to be really good,” said Davis, who had played every snap of his career in San Francisco after being drafted sixth overall in 2006. “That’s the beauty of being here and I saw it right away. I was like, ‘Wow, I dreamed of being in a place like this, a system, a coach who understands talent.’ “

He wasn’t afraid of the timeshare, either. Tight end Owen Daniels began to play his best football upon Davis’ arrival, but the two agreed early on that there would be enough passes to go around, especially with a coach such as Kubiak who likes to emphasis passing to the tight end.

“That’s what I’m used to in my career in Coach Kubiak’s offense — a lot of two-tight end, three-tight end sets,” Daniels said. “That’s why it’s been so fun to play in this offense with him. I’m just hoping we continue to do more of it.”

Denver struggled to fill the gaping hole left by the departure of tight end Julius Thomas in the offseason. That’s a big part of the reason general manager John Elway traded for Davis.

Daniels and Davis were the Broncos’ leading receivers against Chicago, providing the weapons Osweiler desperately needed with wide receiver Emmanuel Sanders out because of an injury.

Davis believes the best is yet to come. Chemistry, trust and timing should only get better with practice.

Cameron Wolfe: 303-954-1891, cwolfe@denverpost.com or @CameronWolfe