Members of the Avalanche alumni team, who experienced a similar on-ice atmosphere with a different result the night before, visited the current team’s temporary quarters in the Rockies’ clubhouse late Saturday night.

The alums knew the protocol. Speak softly enough to each other and to the Avs, be sufficiently somber, offer good-luck messages for the rest of the season and beyond … and say the sun will come up tomorrow.

And sure enough, it did.

For some of the Avalanche, the Stadium Series game and the 5-3 loss to Detroit at Coors Field on Saturday night might have been a once-in-a-lifetime experience, but it was even conceivable that for some, it could have been their final game in any kind of a Colorado jersey.

Avs Mailbag: Pose a question for Terry Frei, Mike Chambers

The NHL trade deadline is Monday, and the Avs have a pivotal Tuesday night meeting with the Minnesota Wild in St. Paul.

The Avs (32-28-4) are in the second of the two wild-card playoff slots in the Western Conference, two points ahead of the Wild.

In a prelude to the trade deadline, the Avs placed goaltender Reto Berra, who is on the 23-man active roster but on a conditioning assignment with San Antonio of the AHL, on waivers Sunday. He has another season, at $1.45 million, remaining on his three-year contract.

If Berra is claimed, that clears a spot and a contract; if not, that would give the Avalanche a 30-day window to assign him to San Antonio without sending him through waivers again. It’s even possible, although unlikely, that Colorado could continue to carry three goalies — Semyon Varlamov, Calvin Pickard and Berra — beyond Monday. But that depends on who still is around after the trade deadline and Berra’s 24-hour waiver period.

Berra has played 14 games for Colorado, and his 2.41 goals-against average and .922 save percentage actually are better than those of Varlamov and Pickard. But he hasn’t played for Colorado since suffering an ankle injury Dec. 21, participating in the pregame hallway kibitzing with a soccer ball.

The Avalanche, which didn’t practice Sunday, will be back on the ice Monday at the Family Sports Center before traveling to Minnesota.

Meanwhile, the memories of playing in front of 50,095 fans at Coors Field in the NHL-staged Stadium Series game won’t be all negative for the Avalanche … especially as time passes.

“I’m not going to lie to you, it was a lot of fun,” said captain Gabe Landeskog. “It was different. It was so quiet, because we’re in that little bubble out there. During warm-up you don’t really hear the music, you don’t really hear any of the crowd. But it was fun; we enjoyed it.”

The wind forced a rare hard whistle at 10 minutes of the third period and switching ends, meaning each team went each direction for 30 minutes. The sight of strips and pieces of the ersatz on-field snow flying around, even landing on the ice, was bizarre. It also ruled out pretending to the international television audience that crews in always snow-covered Denver had just scraped 6 feet of snow off the baseball field around the rink.

“There was a nice breeze there in the second period,” Landeskog said. “It wasn’t bothering us. I know they switched ends in the middle of the third, but I don’t think it made much of a difference.”

Most players said the ice held up remarkably well.

“It was a little slow, but you’re not going to expect the best ice, like Edmonton and arenas like that,” Landeskog said. “I think the NHL did a great job of making this event as good as they could. The ice was fully, absolutely good enough to play out there.”

He added that the loss “is going to leave a bit of a bitter taste in the mouth, but at the same time, I’m sure down the road we’re going to be able to look back at this and say what an amazing experience it was.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei