A Chicago-area zoo has reportedly fired a black employee following intense backlash after she posted on Facebook a photo of herself in her uniform and a complaint about serving white people.

Officials at Brookfield Zoo said they have taken “prompt action,” after receiving multiple complaints after Facebook user Shana “PoohPooh” Latrice posted the photo that said, “At work serving these rude ass white people,” a local CBS affiliate reported.

The photo was tagged as being taken at the zoo and appears to have been shot in front of a concessions stand. Ms. Latrice’s Facebook page has since been disabled.

SEE ALSO: Subway employee fired for ‘got em’ post celebrating police murders

Brookfield Zoo spokeswoman Sondra Katzen called the employee’s actions “unacceptable.”

“This employee’s statements in social media are in violation of our policies and do not reflect our institution’s values. We have zero tolerance for these kinds of divisive behaviors. We treat all employment matters confidentially, but rest assured that we have taken prompt action to remedy the situation,” she said in a statement.

Several Facebook users were angry that the zoo’s statement didn’t clearly specify whether Ms. Latrice was fired. David Sears posted, “At this point she is either still employed there and I will never step foot there again. Or she got fired in which case you have not confirmed this so I still will not go to the zoo and discourage others from going.”

The zoo responded: “This individual is no longer employed by the Zoo.”

Many commenters said they would continue to support the zoo.

“We hope you continue to hold Brookfield Zoo in high regard and not let the actions of one individual overshadow the longstanding good work of the Chicago Zoological Society,” Ms. Katzen said.

Meanwhile, a Facebook group titled, “I stand with Shana Poohpooh Latrice,” has reached 512 members.

“This group’s purpose is to decry the violent and racist [upheaval] of one of Brookfield Zoo’s finest employees! Shame on Brookfield Zoo! Shana Poohpooh Latrice, we stand with you!” the group’s description states.