“The whole emergence of sovereign wealth funds is disrupting the market,” said Britt Harris, the chief investment officer of the roughly $132 billion pension system during a board meeting in February. “We’re in competition with funds outside the country that are very large and very heavily resourced.”

Public pension funds have to step up their game and fight harder for co-investment deals as sovereign-wealth funds, fast-rising titans in private equity, are increasingly dominating the market, according to officials with the Teacher Retirement System of Texas.

Texas Teachers, which Mr. Harris said could “easily” do transactions above $100 million, faces intense competition for large co-investment deals as sovereign-wealth funds increase in influence. The pension fund, though a sizable North American limited partner, is dwarfed by investment giants such as the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority and Singapore’s GIC Private Ltd.

More sovereign-wealth funds are seeking to bypass funds as a source of deals as they get more familiar with private equity investing. Direct transactions that these investors backed rose to $50.02 billion for the first half of 2014, a 23.1% increase from year-earlier results, according to the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute.

Texas Teachers sources co-investment deals, which it calls “principal investments,” by focusing on a network of existing general partners and strategic partners.

“We have to convince these guys that we are the people to bring big investments to,” Mr. Harris said.

The pension fund may consider stationing staff in other major cities to expand its presence beyond its Austin, Tex., stronghold. It also is trying to structure transactions creatively.

“We have to come up with new ways of structuring things,” said Eric Lang, senior managing director of real assets and private equity.

Texas Teachers said it hopes to become involved in deals before they are signed and syndicated across a manager’s limited partner base.

“We’d like to be a full underwriting partner,” Mr. Lang said. He raised the possibility that if the pension fund has a larger role in due diligence before a deal closes, “We might have to share in deal costs with the [general partner].”

A team is reviewing additional costs that it might have to foot by playing a more direct role in deal making.

What is at stake for the Texas Teachers: The ability to be able to replicate past successes of its private equity co-investments program. The pension fund’s 20 private equity “principal investments,” valued at $2.2 billion as of Sept. 30, delivered a five-year internal rate of return, which outperformed its $12.9 billion in private equity fund holdings in the same period, according to a presentation shown to trustees last month.

Sovereign-wealth assets are estimated to have rose to about $7.1 trillion at the end of 2014, from roughly $3.3 trillion in 2007, according to the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute.