Socialized medicine. It's like a totalitarian dictatorship run by a million bureaucrats based on ideas from control freaks.

If you let it through the door, you're giving it permission to terrorize you any way the sociopaths running it can think of. And they can think of a lot of ways.

Jonathan Gruber, long credited as the architect of ObamaCare, once discussed the necessity of taxing fat people by body weight in order to fight obesity. “Ultimately, what may be needed to address the obesity problem are direct taxes on body weight,” Gruber wrote in an essay for the National Institute for Health Care Management in April 2010, just months after helping design ObamaCare with the president in the Oval Office and during the period in which he was under contract as an Obama administration consultant. “While it is hard to conceive of this approach being a common public policy tool in the near term, such taxation may be happening indirectly through health insurance surcharges,” he wrote. “Currently, employers may charge up to 20 percent higher health insurance premiums for employees who fail to meet certain health-related standards, such as attaining a healthy BMI.” “The new health reform legislation increases this differential to 30 percent, with the possibility of rising to 50 percent. Results of programs that use differential premiums to impose direct financial penalties for obesity will bear watching in the future.”

If the left can't get one of its horrible ideas through the door, it'll smuggle it in under the door. It'll make regulations that have the same effect, but that most people won't understand.

So sure, let's forget the backdoor stuff and go right to taxing people based on body weight. We'll have certified weighers, crowds of naked taxpayers being weighed (minorities will be exempt due to a history of persecution causing their obesity. No seriously.) and the privilege of then paying how much you weigh. People will go on crash diets before tax season.

If we're going to have a creepy Socialist dictatorship, let's just have one. We can put Gruber in charge of weighing everyone. And Obama can justify the whole thing as a "common sense reform" that only haters of sensible reforms will object to.