Americans who attend college are more likely to report that they have a higher quality of life and a higher standard of living, a new survey has found.

The survey, by Robert Morris University Polling Institute, found that those with a college degree were more likely to say they have both a higher quality of life and a higher financial standard of living.

Among those surveyed, 75.5% of the college educated reported having a good or very good standard of living, while 63.6% of the non-college educated said the same.

In the area of quality of life, the difference was smaller. About 88% of college graduates and those with some college education reported having a positive quality of life. About 85% of those without any college education reported the same.

Overall, among both the college educated and those without a degree, a large majority reported having a very good quality of life. According to the Robert Morris University survey, almost 87% of Americans reported having a good or very good quality of life. Only about 9.5% described their quality of life as poor and only 1.4% called it very poor.

The survey, done for the university by Trib Total Media, asked questions of 1,006 adults nationwide. They survey did not gather information on what college they attended. The goal was to determine what the perceived value of a college degree is in terms of quality of life and financial standard of living.

One surprising result, according to a news release from Robert Morris University, was that only 59.1% of those with a college education attributed their quality of life with attaining a college degree. And only 56% credited their good or very good financial standard of living with having a college education.

Those numbers, according to the university press release, are lower than what would typically be expected.

“Our results confirm that numerous other objective measures have proven: college graduates earn more and have a better quality of life than those without a college degree,” Wendy Beckemeyer, vice president for enrollment at Robert Morris University, said in the news release.

“However, these results also show that colleges and universities must constantly demonstrate the link between what students learn and experience in college, and what they achieve in the real world.”

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments