Photo

Robots may not be writing science fiction just yet, but they can write you a letter.

At Medium, Clive Thompson reveals that “marketers are working diligently to develop forms of mass-generated mail that appear to have been patiently and lovingly hand-written by actual humans. They’re using handwriting robots that wield real pens on paper.”

They’re still not perfect at it. Humans have certain lovable eccentricities like dotting their i’s in different places depending on how they’re feeling. But robots may one day imitate even these quirks: “We can expect the robots to get better at mimicking our all-too-human irregularity. The best handwriting machines already vary some letters to avoid seeming too repetitive.”

Which means robots may soon mimic human consciousness not for the purposes of, say, operating a complex spacecraft but of simply sending us junk mail:

“I’m kind of cracked up by the fact that the most avid prosecutors of Alan Turing’s sly and audacious 1950 thought-experiment have been not philosophers or computer scientists or advanced A.I. labs but … marketers. The former folks have foundered for years on the difficulties of understanding the fractal contours of human consciousness. The latter just want you to open up their damn mail.”

Mr. Thompson references a related phenomenon, “the mid-00s wave of spambots that quoted classic literature” — and I remember getting a chill down my spine when I got a spam email whose subject line was “Skunk Hour,” the title of a particularly wrenching Robert Lowell poem. It’s hard to imagine that poem as a sales pitch for anything — and it wasn’t, really. As Mr. Thompson notes, the snippets of poetry and prose may have been meant simply to foil spam filters. Similarly, a robot-addressed letter he received soon revealed itself as a fraud: “I ripped it open — only to find it was an oily invitation to take out a second mortgage on my home. I’d been fooled.”

And robo-marketing techniques may feel farther ahead of loftier A.I. projects in part because their goals are more modest — they need to act like humans only long enough to get a (robot) foot in the door.

That could change. In a Wall Street Journal examination of the role of chatbots in advertising, Christopher Mims quotes Ted Livingston, the founder of the chat service Kik: “If you could chat with a brand in the same way you chat with a friend, that’s powerful.” Mr. Mims notes that for now, chatbots on Kik have limited powers: “There is some worry at this stage in the development of the technology that a more autonomous chat bot might start saying things that could damage a brand.”

But for a glimpse of the future of chatbots, Mr. Mims points to Mitsuku, a bot who can apparently advise humans on such topics as relationships, job interviews and dealing with illness: “Any advertiser who doesn’t sit bolt upright after reading that doesn’t understand the dark art of manipulation on which their craft depends.”

Mr. Thompson does point out one potential obstacle to the rise of the letter-bot:

“The amount of upright, breathing humans who regularly write letters by hand has been shrinking steadily for years. So maybe it’s not long before handwriting flips its existential polarity. A handwritten envelope will become not a litmus test of humanity but sure-fire proof that we were sent a form letter by an impersonal database. We’ll sort through our paper mail with the inverse logic of today, tossing aside immediately all the letters addressed with pen-script (robot, robot, god, another one sent by a robot).”

On the other hand, as in “Her,” we may come to prefer the nurturing love of a bot to the imperfect human variety. Will advertising bots one day be so good at everything, from writing letters to giving therapy, that we’d rather interact with them than deal with actual humans? Unclear — but we have already reached the point where humans impersonate bots.

I speak, of course, of Cat Facts, a prank wherein the Reddit user frackyou pretended to be an obnoxious and persistent automated dispenser of cat information. Frackyou repeatedly texted her cousin with silly factoids and increasingly involved instructions for cancellation, all of which only resulted in more cat facts. Sample conversation:

Cousin: “Shut up!!!! I’m calling this number, if u don’t stop”

Cat Facts: “Thanks for texting Cat Facts! Remember, every time you text you will receive an instant Cat Fact. To cancel, reply ‘chrykutfgh5764gvhtfvkigdrf678’”

And now, according to Josh Lowensohn at The Verge, the developer Kyle Venn has created a Cat Facts app, which sends automated messages to the mark of your choice in the manner of the original Cat Facts prank. Says Mr. Lowensohn, “This is not, of course, a useful service.” It is, however, a bot imitating a human imitating a bot.

This disturbing ourobouros may allow us to look at robo-authenticity in a new way. We often ask if robots can be as empathetic or as emotionally complex as humans. With Cat Facts, we’ll find out if they can be as annoying.