Bloomberg News A tanker truck passes a Valero Energy Corp. refinery in Corpus Christi, Texas.

Thanksgiving is over, but some Texans are still talking Turkey.

San Antonio, Texas-based refiner Valero Energy Corp., a major exporter of diesel and gasoline to foreign countries, is unhappy the Export-Import Bank of the United States is lending an Istanbul company $641 million to build a new fuel-producing plant in Turkey.

Valero Chief Executive Bill Klesse penned a pointed letter earlier this month to bank president Fred Hochberg, lamenting the loan that Star Rafineri A.S. wants to help build a new 214,000 barrel-a-day refinery.

“The new Turkish refinery will be a direct competitor of U.S. refineries in the global market,” Mr. Klesse said in a letter provided to The Wall Street Journal. “Though some refined products produced at the refinery may be consumed domestically, it takes away potential export markets.”

Valero would know. The company has said it is banking on increasing diesel exports out of the U.S. by more than 25% over the next few years.

Mr. Klesse’s concern stems from his vigorous approach to protecting market share. The U.S. position in the world fuel market turned on its head two years ago when the country become a net exporter of fuel. U.S. refiners have been making massive profits taking cheap U.S. and Canadian crude, refining it and then shipping their products world-wide.

Consider this: As recently as May 2010, the U.S. imported an average of 873,000 barrels a day more fuel than it exported. But last week net fuel exports from the U.S. were 1.5 million barrels a day, on average, according to the latest data from the Energy Information Administration.

The Export-Import Bank doesn’t get CEO letters of protest very often, but still believes in the project, according to spokesman Phil Cogan. The Turkish refiner wants to use the borrowed funds to buy equipment and parts for the refinery from companies based in the U.S, he said. Valero may feel stung, but the bank expects the Istanbul deal pay off, with interest, while supporting 3,000 U.S. jobs.