It's time to stop sending the same Republicans from the same farm system up to D.C. accountable to the same party bosses.

PELHAM, Alabama -- Saying that Obamacare will crush the American dream, Indian Springs orthopedic surgeon Chad Mathis became the first to announce his candidacy for Alabama Congressional District 6.

"Because of our out-of-control government with its over-spending and over-taxing and trampling our freedoms, it has made it impossible for Alabama families to achieve that dream," he said. "And what has our government done to fix this problem? It has literally stopped working."

Originally from Evansville, Ind., Mathis moved with his family to Alabama in 2006. Today he works as a surgeon at the Alabama Bone and Joint Clinic.

Last month, Rep. Spencer Bachus announced his plans to retire at the end of this term. Since then, several current elected officials, including state Senators Cam Ward and Slade Blackwell, have said they would not run for the open seat.

Mathis is a newcomer to politics, having neither held nor pursued public office before. On Tuesday, he cast himself as a Washington outsider and decried what he called the Republican Party farm system for grooming candidates for public office.

"Insider career politicians, seeking only to better themselves and looking out for themselves, have forgotten about the people they represent," he said. "It's time to send someone different to Washington. It's time to stop sending the same Republicans from the same farm system up to D.C. accountable to the same party bosses."

Mathis has worked on one campaign -- that of Sen. Ted Cruz, the outspoken conservative opponent of Pres. Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act, and a central political figure in the ongoing federal shutdown.

Echoing Cruz and quoting Ronald Reagan, Mathis said that he wants to kill Obamacare and make government smaller.

On Tuesday, Mathis said that no one wants the federal government shutdown, but he did not give any specifics when asked what he would do if he were serving in the U.S. Congress today.