Photo of LSU Health Center from Wikipedia

Louisiana State University Health President F. King Alexander has given the foundation operating its hospitals in Shreveport and Monroe 15 days to correct problems or face a breach of contract.

Alexander's July 10 letter to Steve Skrivanos, chairman of Biomedical Research Foundation of Northwest Louisiana, is an 11-page list of complaints and requirements for a remedy, though Alexander expressed doubt the situation could be rectified.

"Given BRF's ongoing, systemic failures as set forth herein, it is difficult for LSU to articulate a path forward that will enable the parties to achieve the Public Purpose envisioned by the CEA (Cooperative Endeavor Agreement)," Alexander wrote.

Follow Healthcare Finance on Twitter and LinkedIn.

Among other requirements, Alexander has called for a detailed plan of action, an immediate retraction of a Centers for Medicare and Medicaid report alleging discriminatory practices by Health Sciences Center-Shreveport and its physicians in the delivery of patient care; and the immediate resignation of Dr. John George from the BRF Board of Directors and any other positions he holds with BRF.

A statement from BRF was not immediately available.

The research foundation is fighting its ouster, according to the News Star. BRF took control of the two north Louisiana hospitals through a no-bid contract, part of Gov. Bobby Jindal's push to privatize most of the university-run public hospital system, according to the published report.

[Also: Tracking 2015 mergers and acquisitions]

BRF has failed to act collaboratively with LSU and the state, Alexander said, indicating problems have been ongoing for two years.

Alexander outlined IT issues with HIPAA security and electronic health records; issues over reimbursement from CMS due to Shreveport Hospital's outpatient clinics not being compliant with administrative requirements along with BRF's counter-accusations against physicians of inappropriately caring for the uninsured; and damage to the hospital's reputation.

Twitter: @SusanMorseHFN

Photo Credit: "LSU Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA IMG 2364" by Billy Hathorn - Own work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 via Wikimedia Commons - https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:LSU_Health_Sciences_Center,_Shre...