The population who were born between 1980-2000 are considered Millennials or Generation Y. As a whole, they are considered to be classic liberals, supporters of increasingly prevalent topics such as same sex marriage, legalization of marijuana, and acceptance of publicly displayed tattoos and piercings. These classic liberal views make them different, rebellious, and in fact evolved. Very tech savvy, some were around when smart phones first made it to market, and others never experienced life before a touch screen mobile device. A group who while growing up during the economic downfall could not realize the lasting effects that they now are forced to grasp. I am not referring to the obvious factors such as saving money or investing their money into the stock market, but rather the lasting impacts that it caused on the job market.

The bulk of the Millennials have recently or are preparing to finish up their college education, and enter that very struggling job market. Struggling? Yes, struggling. Despite that the Department of Labor statistics saying that unemployment is on the decline and job availability is on the rise it is still a struggle for people in their early 20-30’s to find a good job or even an internship. The job market is the real world hunger games. Employers want experience. They are more willing to hire older individuals who require in their eyes less training than taking a chance on someone who just graduated with their bachelor’s degree. Being raised in a struggling economy most of these individuals have had to have a retail or restaurant job to contribute to costs of education. Retail and restaurant work is not something that employers see as valuable experience to make land that job therefore, they are not being hired.

ADVERTISEMENT

I get it, Human Resource personnel have that ever so important experience, and there is a method to their madness. However, where is the real logic behind hiring someone who is set in their ways? When a recent graduate is looking to obtain their first real job to start the career they studied to have, wouldn’t they be the better fit? Yes, they may have little experience, but they are more easily trained, because they are not set in any ways by the how they previously tackled tasks.

We live in an age where technology has overtaken the normal run of the mill procedures. If experience requirements are not met, our applications are not even seen by real eyes, they are rejected by a machine. I am a Millennial in my early twenties. I completed my four year degree in three years, and will be done with my master’s degree this summer. I know I am not the only person who has accomplished this, however, shouldn’t our perseverance and accomplishments speak a little louder than having a resume full of mediocre jobs that do not pertain to what we want to actually accomplish in life? Shouldn’t the spark that motivated us to push education to the limits count for something? Yes, they should, but until this happens, Millennials will be struggling to get jobs, not be able to put their fresh ideas out there to help society, and the world will stay the same.

Mayer is Ia student at Miericordia University in Dallas PA.