Keith Bedford for The Wall Street Journal Liam Goldsmith wears headphones during a baby DJ class at Cool Pony in Crown Heights.

By Lilit Marcus

Mommy and baby yoga, music and sign language classes are apparently so over. Some parents are instead giving baby disc jockey classes a spin.

The tots are experimenting with turntables and DJ equipment to electronic music and techno at Baby DJ School in Brooklyn, a new program developed by composer and performing artist Natalie Elizabeth Weiss.

“The midi-trigger’s connected to the laptop, the laptop’s connected to the PA,” Ms. Weiss crooned in a sing-songy voice to the tune of “Dem Bones” this week. It was the first session of the class–which has garnered some national attention – even before a single class had taken place – as an example of Brooklyn being almost too cool for itself.

Six children, ages nine to 20 months, along with their parents and caregivers, sat, crawled, and walked as Ms. Weiss went over the basics of DJing.

Ms. Weiss, 31 years old, has taught classes for children at the School of Rock in Manhattan, but she had never worked with infants. One night she took her DJ equipment to a friend’s house and watched as the friend’s baby began to express interest in the machines. Soon, she began writing original songs that would teach kids about DJing and electronic music.

“I enjoy teaching kids because there’s a lot of joy and no judgment,” Ms. Weiss said, comparing it to her experience in the “low key” indie rock scene. Though she originally was wary of electronic dance music (EDM) and its stereotypical drugs-and-partying culture, she met some EDM musicians and began to understand their work. “It’s intense, but it’s not scary,” she said.

The class took place in Cool Pony, a Crown Heights store that opened in March whose co-owners, Ari Ben Eli and Craig Judelman, met while volunteering with superstorm Sandy relief efforts. They hatched the idea of a vintage store (they sell clothes, records, and books) that could also hold events, and Baby DJ School is their first series. Mr. Judelman, who lives down the street, wanted to open something in his neighborhood that would appeal to locals, as well as the nearby Park Slope stroller set.

Keith Bedford for The Wall Street Journal Natalie Elizabeth Weiss shows infants Julien Al-Fayez, right, and Liam Goldsmith, left, DJ equipment.

Ms. Weiss and the store owners realized they opened themselves up to Brooklyn hipster backlash with the classes. But Ms. Weiss points out that children are often interested in both music and electronics young–while Ms. BENEli’s main concerns was whether the class schedule would work around nap times.

And to be sure, the children at the first class certainly weren’t scratching or mixing beats in any way recognizable to fans to hip hop and house music. But some were eager to push buttons and play with the equipment. The kids were exposed to the terminology – master, beat matching — and eagerly bopping to the tunes.

Parents were just as excited about the music–a far cry from dull lullabies–as their kids. Samantha Al-Fayez beamed as her one-year-old son, Julien, eagerly danced and pressed buttons on the DJ console. “He loves gangsta rap,” she explained. He joined in as Ms. Weiss led the students in a round of the ABC Song set to a gentle techno beat.

Audrey Beerman, who took her son, Ari, to the class, said that most of the baby programs that she’d participated in were “so boring,” which is why the DJing class seemed promising. “I think anything that gets kids loving music early is great,” she said.

Keith Bedford for The Wall Street Journal Samanthat Al-Fayez puts headphones on her son Julien during the class.

Ms. Weiss refuses to use any music with profanity or sexism in her DJing work, and that ethos stuck for the class, with kids dancing around to The Jackson Five’s “I Want You Back” and The Emotions’ “Best Of My Love.” She watched as the one girl in the class – who was there with her father – began to sway with the music. “Girls learn those lessons early, and it’s important for them to hear this,” Ms. Weiss said.

Although some parents were initially skeptical about introducing babies to electronic music, others pointed out that their kids became comfortable with technology early. (“They already love Mommy’s iPad,” Ms. Weiss explained.) Though there was a record player next to the DJ console, most of the babies were more interested in playing with the records than actually playing them.

And it wasn’t only the kids who were glued to their gadgets – shortly after returning home from class, Ms. Beerman posted a photo of her son in his DJ headphones to her Facebook page.