Almost 11.7 million Americans nationwide have enrolled in family or individual health insurance through Affordable Care Act marketplaces, federal officials announced Tuesday.

At the same time they declined to set a goal for the newly extended enrollment period that starts March 15 and runs through April 30, ostensibly for those who were unaware that a penalty applied for failure to purchase health insurance.

"It's an opportunity for folks to come back to http://www.healthcare.gov for people unaware of the fee," said Kevin Griffis, acting assistant secretary for public affairs for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "We'll do everything we can to let people know about affordable options."

For most Virginians shopping through the federally facilitated marketplace, those options include paying less than $100 a month in premiums. The average tax credit in Virginia for those purchasing through the marketplace in 2014 was $263 per person per month, for an average premium of $93, according to the government's report.

This year, more than half of the sign-ups were new customers. Meanwhile, of re-enrollees, 1.2 million took an active role in updating and selecting plans, according to Griffis. As yet, it's unknown how many of the millions who were automatically re-enrolled intend to continue with their current coverage. "That will become apparent later in the spring," said Meena Seshamani of the Office of Health Reform.

(Kaitlin McKeown/Daily Press)

Meanwhile, as people file their taxes, they're learning if they owe a penalty or not, either for not purchasing coverage in 2014, or for earning more than they estimated. "We tell them what the penalties will be in the future — in the $1,800-$1,900 range — we tell them the consequences," said Steuart Kimmeth of H&R Block tax service.

Though most clients have insurance through their employers, he said, he has counseled some seeking exemptions. There are many in Virginia who are exempt from the requirement to purchase insurance and from the associated penalty, including the hundreds of thousands who fall into the coverage gap created by the General Assembly's refusal to expand Medicaid.

At the Hampton office of Enroll Virginia!, the government's outreach program, navigator Jamila Allen is delighted with the extended enrollment period. "The government has opened up a window. It's awesome," she said, citing several clients who had filed taxes recently and just realized they'd be penalized. To take advantage, people have to certify that they didn't know, she said.

To enroll, go to http://www.healthcare.gov.

Salasky can be reached by phone at 757-247-4784.