“Everything, all the time.” That’s how the Eagles once described life in the fast lane. Those words now epitomize Big Government in the Obama Era.Obama maintains a southern “border” that deserves those air quotes. He let cyberattackers seize the personnel records of some 22 million of its own workers.And in his spectacularly dysfunctional VA system, combat veterans literally drop dead waiting for medical care while corrupt staffers shred patient files to cover up their toxic incompetence and lassitude.Despite this mind-blowing incapacity to perform core functions, Obama’s minions stay busy, busy, busy doing everything, all the time, everywhere else. Consider these examples of their micromismanagement:• On page 30 of a 101-page document titled “Energy Conservation Program: Test Procedure for Automatic Commercial Ice Makers,” the U.S. Department of Energy announces that it will “require that the ice hardness factor, as defined in AHRI Standard 810-2007 with Addendum 1, be calculated, except that it shall reference the corrected net cooling effect per pound of ice . . . using seasoned, block ice.” The “Final rule” demands: “These values will be reported to DOE to show compliance with the energy conservation standard.”• As Cato Institute scholar Chris Edwards notes in his paper “ Why the Federal Government Fails ,” the National Park Service produced a 2,400-page study on dog-walking options — not from coast to coast, but solely in the Golden Gate Recreation Area. What, possibly, could anyone say about canine exercise in one park that would consume as much paper as the entire text of Obamacare?• Michelle Obama has become America’s K-12 chef-in-chief. Her federally mandated recipes are awful. “Students have been caught bringing — and even selling — salt, pepper, and sugar in school to add taste to perceived bland and tasteless cafeteria food,” John S. Payne, an Indiana school officialbefore Congress in June. As if creating a black market for spices were not enough, federal food rules have killed school bake sales and “whole-grain items and most of the broccoli end up in the trash.”• Obama recently decreed that employees subject to overtime pay requirements would shift from those making $23,000 annually to those earning up to $52,000. Many of those who enjoy salaries, benefits, and management roles soon will punch clocks, often without benefits. Under revised federal “Duties Tests,” companies must tally managers’ hours on specific activities. It would be easier to drop them from management.• A new IRS regulation fines small companies $100 daily per employee reimbursed, partially or fully, for buying individual health-insurance. Rather than spend time and money purchasing group coverage, some employers simply pay workers to acquire their own plans. Instead of applauding such generosity, Obama’s taxocrats recently began hammering employers $36,500 annually for each such employee. As the Galen Institute’s Grace-Marie Turner explains, companies could slash that penalty by 94.5 percent by furnishing neither insurance nor reimbursement. The zero-coverage penalty is just $2,000 per employee. So, small employers will run these cruel numbers and give their staffers nothing. This is not just stupid. It’s sadistic.• As the Center for Medical Progress has documented , Washington also subsidizes Planned Parenthood, America’s go-to source for limbs, internal organs, and even decapitated heads — all pried from the bodies of aborted human babies. It’s revolting enough that such barbarism transpires in a reputedly civilized country. Even worse, just last year, taxpayers underwrote this mayhem to the tune of $528 million.The Obama administration is utterly out of control. Claude Wayne Crews of the Competitive Enterprise Institute notes that no one knows how many federal agencies boss Americans around. FOIA.gov lists 252 such bureaucracies.The Federal Register counts 257. The United States Government Manual cites 316.Meanwhile, the $4.1 trillion federal budget finances a soft totalitarianism in which Team Obama fails miserably at the big stuff and barks orders about the most molecular matters — with a dash of subsidized butchery, to boot.Obama and Co. should downshift and try life in the slow lane.