ENLARGE Abraham D. Sofaer sang at the American Numismatic Society gala honoring him and his wife. Alan Roche

The pursuit of currency is typically an unspoken dynamic in the air at New York soirees but at the American Numismatic Society's gala on Thursday evening, the cards were on the table.

Devoted to the study and collection of coins, the organization operates a museum and research institute in lower Manhattan that boasts some of the greatest holdings in the U.S. Held at the Waldorf Astoria, their annual benefit honored collectors Marian Scheuer Sofaer and Abraham D. Sofaer and kicked off the New York International Numismatic Convention being held this weekend.

The proliferation of credit cards hasn't done anything to dampen attendees' enthusiasm for the vocation of numismatics. "The collecting of historical coins is one of the greatest escapes in the world," said Victor England, of the firm Classical Numismatic Group. "One can lose oneself almost instantly in history. People from all walks of life, regardless of education have an interest in some form of history and coins are a tangible form of history."

Mr. Sofaer, the Hoover Institute's George P. Shultz Senior Fellow in Foreign Policy and National Security Affairs and a former federal judge, has derived tremendous pleasure from the collection of Holy Land coins that he and his wife Marian, CEO of Federal Arbitration Inc., have been building since 1975. The assemblage now resides with the society.

"You can not only find and learn a lot about history from coins, sometimes you can actually see things that no other source provides," Mr. Sofaer said. He offered an example of this from his own collection, a second-century coin from the city of Acre, which was located on what is now a tell, an archaeological mound.

"I met the archaeologist of Acre and got to know him quite well and he was uncovering the tell and trying to find out what was there, where were the walls, where was the main gate and I showed him this coin, which was at that time unique," Mr. Sofaer said. "And it had the whole ancient city of Acre laid out. Not in great detail, but you could see the basic structure of the city. He went crazy. It was like having a puzzle, only now you could look at the cover of the box and you see what you're heading towards."

A cocktail hour featuring melodies from the Jolly Holidays, a Victorian-costumed a cappella group, saw coin aficionados from around the globe talking trade.

At the following dinner for just under 200 in the hotel's Empire Room, smoked salmon galette, grilled tournedos of beef, New York cheesecake mousse and Waldorf Astoria petit fours were served and jazz musician Dominick Farinacci performed.

After receiving his award, Mr. Sofaer took to the stage to provide vocals for a rousing rendition of "I've Got You Under My Skin."

To a truly devoted numismatist, the song's iconic lyrics ("I'd sacrifice anything come what might/For the sake of havin' you near") couldn't be more apt.