With the help of platinum-selling groups like Mumford & Sons and the Lumineers, a good chunk of the twenty-something audience has returned to the cleaner, simpler days of folk-rock and a broader appreciation of artists like The Band, Neil Young and Bob Dylan.

It was only a matter of time before they latched on to the vocal harmonies of Simon & Garfunkel.

It is that sound that jumps out at you on the debut album of Hamilton folk duo Ash & Bloom. The album is called Let The Storm Come Out and is being released on Toronto's Orange Lounge record label. The group is performing at a CD release party Wednesday at the Casbah.

Ash & Bloom are Matt McKenna, 32, and James Bloemendal, 30, two Hamilton-based singer-songwriters who met some 10 years ago while studying music at Redeemer College University in Ancaster.

Although the album consists of 12 originally penned songs, they don't try to hide the huge influence of Paul Simon and Art Garfunkel, the respected American folk duo that had a string of hits in the late '60s and early '70s which included Sounds of Silence, I Am A Rock, Mrs. Robinson, Cecelia and Bridge Over Troubled Water.

"We were very familiar with the music of Simon & Garfunkle," says McKenna in a phone interview last week while Ash & Bloom were on the road touring the Maritimes. "Our parents were playing it in the background when we were growing up and we absorbed it. As you start learning guitar, I was looking for music that sounded good on acoustic and immediately I was drawn toward Simon & Garfunkel."

When the time came to record their album, coproducers Marc Rogers and Karen Kosowski suggested that McKenna and Bloemendal watch the 2010 documentary, The Harmony Game, on the recording of Simon & Garfunkel's Bridge Over Trouble Water.

"We knew the music well, but as we watched the documentary, it became clear that there were definitely things that we could learn from our heroes on how to record," McKenna says.

"I tend to sing more of the high stuff and James tends to sing more of the mid-range, but what Simon & Garfunkel call "the Harmony Game" is the fun, creative way of looking for all the possible lines and harmonies you can build into a part, letting the lower part become the higher part, and the higher part become the lower part. So there are moments (on the record) where James is higher than I am and then we sort of criss-cross back and forth.

"For us, that is just so fun."

For the recording of the album, McKenna, Bloemendal and their production team rented a cottage near Owen Sound and spent a week in relative isolation with microphones at the ready at any time of day.

The 12 songs they recorded are lyrically rich, some times pulling at the heartstrings on tracks like If You Stay and You Need More Than Love, while taking a comedic turn on Heaven Is A Ghost.

One of the stand out tracks, This Town (Hamilton) is about the split personality of the duo's adopted city. McKenna is originally from Brampton, while McKenna grew up in Caledonia. Neither musician had much of an opinion of Hamilton when they first came here for school.

"To be honest we didn't think we would stay," McKenna admits. "You know the reputation Hamilton has for people who are outside of Hamilton. We just thought, to be perfectly frank, that we thought it was going to be an old stinky town.

"As we stayed it grew on us. We found wonderful little neighbourhoods and met a bunch of people. Now we call it home and we couldn't really think of living anywhere else."