Douglas R. Egerton is Professor of History at Le Moyne College. His books include Year of Meteors: Stephen Douglas, Abraham Lincoln, and the Election That Brought on the Civil War, and the forthcoming The Wars of Reconstruction: The Brief, Violent History of America's Most Progressive Era.

By Douglas R. Egerton

November 6, 1860, Election Day, dawned cool but sunny in Springfield, Ill.. Around mid-morning, Republican candidate Abraham Lincoln strolled to the courthouse to vote, stopping afterward at the telegraph office in search of news from New York and Pennsylvania. It proved to be a long wait, and final results did not come in until around 1:30 the next morning. Walking with great strides toward his house, Lincoln shouted out, "Mary, Mary, we are elected." Nobody in the town slept. Church bells tolled, and somebody thought to fire off the old cannon in Capitol Square.

Not all Americans were as pleased. The Republican Party had been founded just six years before, with the express purpose of restricting slavery from the western territories (a policy that had been ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in 1857.) When word of Lincoln's victory arrived in South Carolina, Gov. William Gist called for a special convention to consider secession and the creation of a "slave republic." Before the president-elect could take the oath of office on March 4, seven states had seceded from the Union. "The tea is thrown overboard," one Southern planter crowed.

During the four intervening months, Northern moderates and conservatives labored to forge a grand bargain that would halt the tide of secession, and each proposal began with the incoming president bargaining away the key element of his triumphant party's platform. Lincoln was having none of that. "Let there be no compromise on the question of extending slavery," he advised a number of party members. "You judge from my speeches that I will be inflexible on the territorial question," he lectured one critic. And he was. Lincoln believed that elections mattered, and that the votes of the majority must be heeded.

The crisis facing the young republic sounds eerily familiar today, as a small fraction of the modern Republican Party holds the national budget hostage unless the current president bargains away the Affordable Care Act, a key issue he twice placed before American voters, and which has been upheld by the Supreme Court. During the Secession Winter, as it came to be called, angry northern Democrats charged that Lincoln refused to negotiate. Barack Obama is today equally stubborn, Wisconsin Rep Sean Duffy alleged, adding that his party's demand of the ACA's repeal in exchange for ending the government shutdown is "incredibly reasonable, [merely] a small ask."

Lincoln's response to his critics resonates today. If Southern radicals destroyed the Union because of his election, they would be the ones to blame. "A highwayman holds a pistol to my ear," Lincoln reasoned, "and mutters through his teeth, 'Stand and deliver, or I shall kill you, and then you will be a murderer!' " Lincoln's opponents -- and he faced four of them in the curious election of 1860 -- had waged tough campaigns, but they had lost, a point missed by New Jersey Rep. Scott Garrett, who observed that his party "fought so hard" in 2012. If a budget agreement "doesn't have a full delay or defund of Obamacare," Garrett added, "I and many others will not be able to support whatever the leadership proposes."

Modern Democrats respond that voters have twice placed Obama in the White House, but that argument has little appeal to conservative commentator George Will. "Well, the Fugitive Slave Act was the law," he recently observed, "separate but equal was the law, lots of things are the law and then we change them." What Will failed to concede was that the 1850 Fugitive Slave Act was overturned during the Civil War by Republican majorities in both houses of Congress, and that state laws mandating segregation were struck down in 1954 by the Supreme Court. Neither were held hostage to an artificially-manufactured budget crisis.

"We have just carried an election on principles fairly stated to the people," Lincoln lectured one wavering moderate. American voters had opted for slavery's restriction, yet extremists then demanded that "we surrender to those we have beaten." The will of the people meant a great deal to 19th Century Republicans, but clearly less so today. When informed that some moderate Republicans have grown weary of Tea Party antics, Michael Needham, the chief executive of the Heritage Action lobbying group, warned that the "attention of Republicans and conservatives needs to be back on Obamacare and not other ways out of this [budget] situation."

Sens. Rand Paul and Ted Cruz have both insisted that they are more than willing to compromise, in that while they both favor the total repeal of the ACA, they will settle for a one year delay. But when told that some concessions would bring the lower South back, Lincoln refused to be fooled. If his party bartered away its basic platform, he cautioned, not "a year will pass, till we shall have to take [slaveholding] Cuba as a condition upon which they will stay in the Union." If white Southerners wished to open the territories to slavery, Lincoln supposed, they should sell their case to the voters and carry the day at the polls. If they profess to believe in the democratic process, modern Republicans might wish to be mindful of his advice.