Denver Post sports writer Patrick Saunders posts his Rockies Mailbag every other week on Tuesdays.

Pose a Rockies- or MLB-related question for the Rockies Mailbag.

Preface to this edition of my Rockies’ mailbag: As you will see from the following questions, Rockies fans are frustrated right now, as they have been for some time.

Most of the following questions are really more rants than questions, but I’ll try me best to provide some insight on the Rockies.

I don’t understand all of the trade talk. If Troy Tulowitzki isn’t asking for a trade, why would the Rockies even consider doing so unless the other team is willing to take on all of the salary? If we are going to pay for him to play, how about just keeping him in a Rockies uniform?

— Dan, Ponte Vedra Beach, Florida

Dan, that’s a very good question, but the answer is complicated. Tulo says he’s not pressing for a trade — right now — but in the past he’s certainly indicated that he wants out of Colorado if the Rockies can’t win. And right now, they are one of the worst teams in the majors.

Remember, last July that Tulo told The Denver Post:

“In Todd Helton, there’s someone who’s easy to look at his career here and how it played out. I have the utmost respect for Todd, but at the same time, I don’t want to be the next in line as somebody who was here for a long time and didn’t have a chance to win every single year. He played in a couple postseason games and went to one World Series. But that’s not me. I want to be somewhere where there’s a chance to be in the playoffs every single year.”

Rockies general manager Jeff Bridich last week said that the recent Tulo trade talk is a “media production.”

I think that’s a crock and I told Bridich as much. I believe that it was Tulo’s own agent, Paul Cohen, who ignited the trade talk with his comments to New York Post baseball writer Joel Sherman. Bridich vehemently disagreed.

We obviously see this situation from two totally different perspectives.

Anyway, given Tulo’s injury history and his salary, you might get your wish and see Tulo in a Rockies uniform for a long time to come. Trading him now is problematic.

Hi Patrick, What is wrong with the Rockies development? It seems everybody has taken a step backwards as the pitchers can’t find the strike zone, established hitters like Carlos Gonzalez are hitting below the Mendoza line and Drew Stubbs must need his eye sight checked as he is striking out at an alarming rate.

This season is over before it barely began. … What type of changes do you think are needed at 20th and Blake? There had to have been some serious miscalculations as to the where they felt the team was compared to what we are witnessing on the field.

— Mike S. Highlands Ranch

Mike, that’s a mouthful of questions and opinions, so I’m not sure where to begin, or finish.

CarGo is not really about “development,” since he’s an established star. But his is going through a prolonged slump after missing much of last season with an injury. CarGo told me recently that he still has a goal to hit .300 this season, and he’s shown signs of busting out. Still, he’s been one of the team’s biggest disappointments this season — and he knows it.

Stubbs — who, by the way, is making $5.28 million this season — has been a disaster. As I write this, he’s hitting .120, with three walks vs. 30 strikeouts in 50 at-bats, for an on-base percentage of .185.

The company line is that “he’s a veteran, and he’ll come around,” but I can’t imagine the Rockies will have patience much longer.

Before Tuesday’s game, Weiss said: “I wish all it took was saying the magic words. You work through it. Athletes have a feel for when they are going well, and it’s about that feeling and trying to get back to it.

“That’s what (Stubbs) is doing. He’s struggling, and it’s tough as an athlete to struggle at that level in this league when there is a lot at stake every night.”

The big-picture problem with the Stubbs situation is he’s the only one who can back up Charlie Blackman in center field. CarGo could do it, but Weiss said recently that he has no plans to play switch CarGo from right field into center, even as a backup.

Brandon Barnes would seem to be the logical call-up from Triple-A Albuquerque, but he’s currently hitting .198.

At Double-A New Britain (Conn.), prospect David Dahl has hit .419 over his last 10 games, hiking his average to .283. But his on-base percentage is only .311 and he just turned 21 years old. I doubt the Rockies would call up Dahl now.

I get the impression (I may be wrong) that the Rockies draft young pitchers who have been successful (i.e. Jon Gray) and then tinker with their mechanics until they become a mess (either physically or mentally). Is this true? If so, why don’t they just let them do whatever made them successful to get to this point?

— Brian, Evergreen

Brian, I think that’s brushing with too broad of a brush. No matter how talented a pitcher is coming out of college (and especially high school), he simply can’t succeed throwing the same stuff at the major-league level.

Please check out my recent story on Gray, which explains a little bit of this.

Even with a great fastball and slider, Gray has to learn to pitch at the next level. He’s not the only young pitcher going through growing pains.

So I think it’s unfair to say the Rockies tinker with pitchers’ mechanics until they become “a mess.” It’s more complicated than that.

However, it is true that Colorado’s record for drafting and developing pitchers has been the organization’s biggest weakness.

Why in the name of Rob Scahill do the Rockies keep using a Triple-A pitcher like Scott Oberg in close late-inning situations?

— Jon, Louisville

Jon, Oberg’s numbers are not good: 6.35 ERA and a 1.68 WHIP in 11 1/3 innings. Worse, he’s given up five home runs.

The Rockies’ like his stuff, but has simply not executed as the Rockies expected him too. He’s hung the ball in the strike zone too many time. I don’t think Weiss wants to use him in late-game situations, but with the overuse of the bullpen for much of May, Oberg fell into that role from time to time.

As a Rockies fan since the World Series run in 2007. I know a great deal of the fan base wants Dick Monfort to go. However Dick doesn’t want to go. My question, is there any future Rockies owner out there that can pressure Monfort to go?

— Emily, Littleton

Dick, as well as his brother Charlie, have no desire to sell the team. And no one from the outside is going to pressure then to do so. It’s that simple.

There have long been rumors the Denver billionaire Phil Anschutz would be interested, but there has been no substance to those rumors.

Dan O’Dowd was unwilling to make midseason trades to build for the future, even when the Rockies had no hope of making the playoffs. Is there reason to think Bridich will be more open to trades this year? Everybody mentions Tulo, but it seems like Justin Morneau could bring back a good prospect, and that would allow the Rockies to give Willin Rosario and Ben Paulsen a real look at first base.

— Ben, Boulder

Ben, as you surely know, trades in the majors are complicated. There is a lot more to it than saying, “Trade Morneau for prospects.” Everybody is looking for a deal, while at the same time, everyone is trying to protect their prospects.

I do think Bridich will pull the trigger on a trade, if not for Tulo or CarGo, than certainly for Morneau, who’s in the final year of his contract. There is a $9 million mutual option for 2016, but I can’t imagine the Rockies picking it up.

I’m sure there will be a contender looking for a solid, left-handed hitter at the trade deadline. However, Morneau’s current stint on the disabled list for concussion-like symptoms complicates things. His trade value will depend on how long he’s out and how he performs when he returns.

What is Mark Wiley’s role regarding the Rockies major and minor league pitching development? When he was hired, wasn’t he supposed to address the Rockies’ pitching problems? Instead it seems like it’s more of the same: ineffective starters, injuries and too many walks, and first round draft picks Rex Brothers and Jonathan Gray are a mess.

— Steve, Aurora

Mark Wiley’s official title is director of pitching operations, a role he began in October 2012. His job is to oversee all things pitching — from what the Rockies look for at the amateur level, through the minors to the majors.

Wiley is not attempting to install a cookie-cutter approach to Colorado pitching, because the talents and styles vary so much. However, he does preach the club’s overall philosophy of pitching low in the strike zone and getting groundball outs.

I understand your frustration with the Rockies’ problems to develop solid pitching, but it would be unfair to put on the blame on Wiley.

Denver Post sports writer Patrick Saunders posts his Rockies Mailbag every other week on Tuesdays.

Pose a Rockies- or MLB-related question for the Rockies Mailbag.