The most popular types of coverage for New Jersey residents on HealthCare.gov, the marketplace created by the federal Affordable Care Act, will cost virtually the same in 2015 as they did this year — a remarkably flat line after years of unrelenting price hikes for those who buy their own health coverage.

AP File photo The federal Affordable Health Care Act website.

But consumers in New Jersey who want to take advantage of the steadiness in monthly premiums will, in many cases, have to change plans. The companies offering the lowest-cost plans in the two most popular levels of coverage — silver and bronze — are different than they were last year.

“It makes sense for those who obtained insurance in the last open-enrollment period to shop for a better deal,” said Raymond Castro, senior analyst with New Jersey Policy Perspective, a research and advocacy group. “The plan that was a great deal last year could be a very bad deal this year.”

Compared with other states, which have had sizable price swings as the federal marketplace for health insurance begins its second open-enrollment period, the news in New Jersey is good: Not only are average premiums stable, but consumers have many more plans to choose from, according to recently released federal data.

In the past, “typically you’d see rates close to double-digits upward — not downward,” said Linda Schwimmer, vice president of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute.

In fact, the least costly silver plan, the most popular type of coverage sold, will cost 0.9 percent less — $258 monthly in 2015 for a 27-year-old, compared with $260 this year, or $668 monthly for a 60-year-old, compared with $674 this year. Most of those who buy on the marketplace will not pay the full premium, however, because they will receive tax subsidies based on their income and family size.

The increased competition from the addition of two insurers to the New Jersey market has helped hold premiums down, Castro said. “That is welcome news in a state that has been beleaguered with double-digit increases in premiums for comprehensive plans for years,” he said. “That was the main reason why fewer and fewer New Jerseyans were able to afford these plans in the past, which caused them to remain uninsured.”

The three-month sign-up period began strongly last weekend, with more than 100,000 applying for coverage nationwide on Saturday and Sunday, said Sylvia Burwell, secretary of health and human services. That contrasted with last year’s disastrous rollout, as website freeze-ups kept all but a handful from purchasing coverage in the opening days.

In New Jersey, more than 161,000 people signed up for coverage in plans sold on the federal marketplace during the previous open enrollment. At least 400,000 more uninsured are estimated to be eligible for coverage through the marketplace, Castro said.

More than four in five of those who chose a marketplace plan for 2014 received financial assistance, in the form of a tax credit, to do so. Those tax credits will not change much in New Jersey, but those who have had a change in financial status, whether because of the gain or loss of a job or a child being born or moving out, will be entitled to a different amount this year.

When they return to the healthcare.gov website, users will find the site much more “friendly,” said Schwimmer. “It’s much smoother,” she said. The options available are still confusing, but new features make it easier to compare plans around the features that are most important to each shopper.

Returning customers will automatically be reenrolled in the same plan if they do nothing, the federal government said. Policyholders should have received, or will soon receive, letters notifying them about that from their insurer this month. But “automatic renewal could produce some surprising results for consumers in some areas,” said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a health policy research organization.

As insurers adjust their rates to meet the competition, returning customers have opportunities to save “but only if they return to the marketplace and review their options rather than have their plan automatically extended and hope for the best,” Castro said.

In New Jersey, seven in 10 enrollees for 2014 chose a silver plan. If they bought the lowest-cost silver plan for 2014 and did nothing this year, they will be automatically reenrolled — and pay a monthly premium that is 11.7 percent higher. AmeriHealth of New Jersey, which offered the lowest-price silver plan in 2014, raised its rates for 2015. If they switch, however, to the lowest-cost silver plan for 2015, offered by Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey, they will pay 1 percent less.

A 27-year-old, for example, would have paid $260 a month in 2014 for an AmeriHealth Tier 1 Advantage Silver Plan. For 2015, the same plan will cost $291. But if he switches to the lowest-cost plan for 2015, Health Republic’s Active Access Spotlight Silver, it will cost $258 a month.

Similarly, a 60-year-old, who paid $674 monthly in 2014 for the AmeriHealth plan, will pay $753 monthly to continue the same plan. But if she switches to the lowest-cost plan for 2015, offered by Health Republic, the premium will be $668.

When making a decision about health coverage, experts say, premiums are only one factor to consider. The out-of-pocket costs for visits to primary-care doctors and specialists as well as for hospital stays and prescription drugs vary from plan to plan. So do the lists of participating and preferred doctors and hospitals and the coverage and pricing of various medications.

Returning customers have until Feb. 15 to change plans, if they want.

“If someone wakes up on Jan.1 and decides they want a new plan,” said Pollitz, “they still can.”

That flux can be expected to continue for a few more years, as new insurers join the marketplace, accumulate more experience upon which to set their rates and determine which plans appeal most to consumers, Schwimmer said.

For now, people must shop around — just as businesses large and small have done for years.

“Nobody has any loyalty right now,” said Schwimmer. “Once the plans get good at consumer engagement and customer service, consumers will stick with them, even if it means a few dollars more.”

Email: washburn@northjersey.com