Indiana Gov. Mike Pence praised Ted Cruz's "devotion to our Constitution" in an op-ed endorsing Cruz for president on Sunday. iStockPhoto

A few days after delivering a laughably lukewarm endorsement of Ted Cruz, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence tried again to boost the Texas senator's flagging presidential hopes in the Hoosier state.

On Friday, Pence, a popular two-term conservative, told his constituents he planned to vote for Cruz, but also praised Cruz's rivals – including GOP front-runner Donald Trump – and encouraged "every Hoosier to make up their own mind."

In an op-ed published in the Indianapolis Star Sunday, Pence was more effusive about his reasons for supporting Cruz.

"In making my decision to support Ted, I am guided by the principles best espoused by former President Ronald Reagan," he wrote." I am a Reagan Republican; drawn to his vision of less taxes, less government, traditional values and a strong military. Ted articulates that same agenda with an unwavering devotion to our Constitution, the sanctity of life, and the freedoms enshrined in the Bill of Rights."

Pence cheered Cruz's tax plans and proposals to eliminate federal regulations, which the governor said would build on his own work cutting taxes – a move he credits for Indiana's decline in unemployment.

"Ted has a plan to eliminate excessive government programs and has taken on big-government overreach," Pence wrote. "He led the fight to repeal Obamacare, one of the greatest burdens on families and small businesses and I have no doubt he will follow through in checking government power to restore prosperity to the people."

Cruz needs all the help he can get to win Indiana, where polls now show him trailing Trump by a growing margin.

As recently as last week, Trump's lead was in the single digits, but an NBC News/Wall Street Journal survey taken last week had him expanding his advantage to 15 points, with just 4 percent of likely Republican voters undecided. A Gravis poll from Thursday and Friday has Trump's lead even larger – 17 points – but found 19 percent of likely Republican voters are undecided.

Even worse, voters were strongly opposed to Cruz and Ohio Gov. John Kasich's efforts to box out Trump by essentially dividing up several states between them.

Kasich, who trails both his rivals badly in the delegate hunt and has just 13 percent support in the NBC News poll, pulled resources from Indiana in exchange for Cruz dropping efforts in New Mexico and Oregon ahead of those states' primaries later this month.

But Kasich actually out-polls Cruz, 39 percent to 31 percent, when likely GOP voters were asked their second choice, with Trump at 18 percent. That preference may be why just 34 percent of Republican Hoosiers said they approved of the Cruz-Kasich team-up, compared to 58 percent who did not.

Even if Pence can sway some Indiana voters before Tuesday's primary, it's not clear there's enough runway left for Cruz's campaign.

Cruz trails Trump by more than 300 bound delegates, and reports this weekend revealed he might be weakening in a former area of strength : the so-called "shadow primary" fight for unbound delegates and commitments from others who would vote for Trump on the first nominating ballot but could switch if Trump falls short of the 1,237-delegate majority needed to win the nomination.

For Trump, a victory in Indiana would all-but assure him the nomination , lessening the stakes for him in the upcoming states even as his margins grow.