Local flower shops now have the chance to get their products featured on 1-800-Flowers.com thanks to a new program from 1-800-Flowers and BloomNet.

The “Local Exclusive Florist Designed Program” will help local florists get a much larger audience for their products by featuring their original floral work, edible products or other gift items on the 1-800-Flowers website.

Quantcast estimates that 1-800-Flowers.com gets over a million website visitors a month, a number that is almost insurmountable for most local florists.

“We’re excited to provide a world stage where the incredible design talents of local florists can be enjoyed and appreciated by an enormous audience,” said President of BloomNet, Mark Nance, in a press release. “In addition to celebrating the creativity and artistry of local designers, our Local Exclusive Florist Designed Program can deliver tremendous incremental sales possibilities to flower shops large and small.”

There is currently no cost to apply for the program. Interested florists just need to go to the website and fill out an application, including a picture of their original work.

Chosen designs will be featured on 1-800-Flowers.com with a photo, video and story about the florist and his or her store. Florists that use BloomNet’s web portal will also get a link to their website on the 1-800-Flowers product page.

The local exclusive program is located on the “Same Day Flowers” section of 1-800-Flowers.com within the specific zip code of the local florist.

There are multiple categories available in the program, from floral arrangements and corsages to gift baskets and fruit bouquets. Products should be unique and ideally utilize local products and design elements.

The program will also feature company spotlights, social media marketing campaigns and contests.

1-800-Flowers also recently announced that they will begin accepting Bitcoin as payment in the near future. They are currently in negotiations with Coinbase.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments