Action Points Note that this study was published as an abstract and presented at a conference. These data and conclusions should be considered to be preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

NASHVILLE, Tenn. -- Nurse practitioners responding to a survey indicated a critical attitude when dealing with overweight and obese patients, researchers reported here.

Peggy Ward-Smith, PhD, RN, associate professor of nursing at the University of Missouri, Kansas City, told MedPage Today more than 50% of the clinicians surveyed agreed with statements that:

Overweight people are not as good as others.

Overweight people are not as successful as others.

Overweight people are tidy.

Overweight people are not as healthy as others.

Most people do not wish to marry an overweight person.

Overweight people have family issues.

Overweight is the result of overeating.

Overweight people are addicted to food.

"The first step in overcoming this bias is to be aware that we are biased towards overweight people," Ward-Smith said at her poster presentation at the annual meeting of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners. "We are human. Weight biases exist among participants in this study."

She also noted, "Negative perceptions interfere with providing high quality care for the obese individual."

"We know that it is harder to take care of these patients because they weigh more; they are hard on the equipment and they are hard to move," she said in explaining what may be at the root of the problems.

Ward-Smith and co-author Jane Peterson, PhD, APRN, clinical associate professor of nursing at the University of Missouri, compiled their survey by interviewing nurse practitioners at the 2012 AANP annual meeting.

The 19-item, study-specific survey used a 6-point Likert scale. Responses ranged from strongly agree to strongly disagree. No neutral response was provided. The researchers used a survey adapted from the Attitudes Toward Obese Persons and the Beliefs About Obese People, both validated instruments.

They scrutinized responses of 358 individuals, 94% of whom were women. Five or 1% of the participants were underweight; 172 or 51% were normal weight; 127 or 38% were overweight; 32 or 10% were obese. Another 22 people failed to disclose their personal weight.

About 77% of the sample were Caucasian, 9% were African American, 5% were Asian, and 5% were Hispanic.

Martin Murphy, NP, of Swope Health Service in Kansas City, MO, in commenting on the study, told MedPage Today, "These findings appear to be very accurate, from my own anecdotal experience. We do have a tendency to shame people into losing weight even though in my experience it doesn't often work." Murphy did not participate in the study.

Ward-Smith noted that in the medical literature, studies show that obese women report experiencing stigma in healthcare and from their healthcare provider. In fact, other research indicated that about one in five overweight patients who experience weight stigma avoid future medical appointments and would seek to find a new provider.

"Reflection on personnel and workplace environments that foster weight biases can be altered to better meet the health needs of the overweight/obese person," she reported as implications of her study.

"Increasing sensitivity and empathetic support can be a critical aspect in improving the care of these people who struggle to manage their weight," she said.