Jimmy Fallon has some great guests on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon tonight! His first guest was actress Kerry Washington of Scandal, which will premiere this week. Also, later in the show, Fallon played Box of Lies with Kerry. His second guest was The Voice host, Carson Daly and his musical guest was Julian Casablancas and The Voidz.

Here were a few of the jokes from Jimmy Fallon’s monologue: Talking about the security risks at the White House, Fallon said “The White House said ‘from now on we’ll be locking the doors.’ Biden said ‘I’ll just use the doggie door.'”

“Vladimir Putin will not be there in New York for the U.N. General Assembly. Not with all of those other countries left unattended,” Fallon continued.

Then, Fallon told monologue jokes specifically for the U.N. General Assembly. He used some difficult-to-pronounce names in the jokes, but also made references to shows like Keeping Up With the Kardashians.

“In a new interview, Bill Clinton hinted that his daughter, Chelsea, would be due in October. when asked if it would be a boy or a girl, Hillary Clinton said ‘I haven’t decided yet; I haven’t decided yet!”

“This week marks the 20th anniversary since the premiere of Friends. It’s also the 20 anniversary of when America used to think apartments in New York were that huge.”

“Paula Dean Announced her new Lifestyles Network,” Fallon said. Steve Higgins, the announcer, imitated Paul’s voice as “she” announced funny shows on the network, like America’s Got Lard.

“From the hit TV series, Scandal, the lovely, talented Kerry Washington is here and we’re going to play the game Box of Lies. Also, host of The Voice, Carson Daly, is here! The musical guest will be Julian Casablancas and The Voidz!”

“Time for Pros & Cons — here we go,” Jimmy Fallon said. “We’ll look at the Pros & Cons of having 120-pound-scrotum removed. Pro: Opting to get the surgery was an easy decision. Con: But it took a lot of balls. Pro: No longer being annoyed at people’s stares. Con: But still getting a little testy. Pro: Your wife said the surgery will change your life forever. Con: Your dog says ‘been there, done that.’ Pro: It’s easier to enjoy playtime with your kids. Con: You no longer have a built-in Hippity-Hop.”

“Our first guest is the Emmy-winning actress who stars in the hit, hit, hit TV series Scandal, ladies and gentlemen, Kerry Washington!” Fallon said, also telling Kerry that “You look gorgeous.”

“I try to clean up for you,” Kerry replied.

Fallon told her congratulations on her baby. They talked about how hard it was to keep it a secret that she was pregnant when she was on the show last.

“Congrats on Scandal! It’s a giant, giant show. What are your fans called?” Fallon asked.

“What are our fans called? Gladiators!” Kerry said. She added there is a whole line of clothing based on what she wears as Olivia Pope on Scandal.

She talked with Jimmy about having loved the movie, Splash. She said “I knew that I was a mermaid — knew it. I was allergic to fish. I had the theory that it was because I couldn’t eat my brethren. Black people swim — that’s my PSA for tonight.”

“Next time you come, we could get a tank and swim around together,” Fallon said.

“I’d prefer synchronized swimming,” she told him.

Then, Kerry and Jimmy talked about their favorite TV shows. Kerry told him one of her parents’ favorite was Game of Thrones and she started watching it and it became her favorite, too.

“I cooked my mom a Game of Thrones Thanksgiving dinner last year,” Kerry said, “with giant turkey legs.”

“Where on Earth is Olivia Pope?” Jimmy Fallon asked her.

“I can’t tell you but you will know immediately in the season premiere,” she answered him.

“Do you feel like playing a game with us?” Fallon asked her.

“Sure — if you feel like losing,” Washington replied. So, after a commercial break, they will be playing Box of Lies.

It is an easy game, really. a person chooses a box and gets out what is in the box and gives the other player hints. If the eventual guess is incorrect, the other player gets a point. If it is a lie, and the person guessing says it is a lie, then the person guessing gets a point. The first object was a pumpkin with spaghetti in it. Kerry said that is what it actually is, and Fallon said he thought it was a lie. So, Kerry got the point.

Then, Kerry said there was “an iPhone 6 in my box,” and he described it further, but Kerry said “That’s a lie.” She was correct, what Fallon had said was a lie, so she got a second point and won the Box of Lies game. Fallon said that Carson Daly would be the next guest after another commercial break.

Back from another commercial break, Jimmy Fallon introduced the producer and host of The Voice, saying “Ladies and gentlemen, here’s Carson Daly!” He and his wife brought their baby, London Rose, with him. She was in a baby carrier.

“Oh, my God — she’s gorgeous!” Fallon said.

“The whole family’s backstage,” Carson told Jimmy.

They both talked about having kids and babies. “Everyone around you is having babies,” Fallon said.

“Yes, Christina Aguilera had a baby. Shakira had a baby and set up an entire zoo with petting animals backstage,” Carson told Jimmy.

Fallon congratulated Carson on having been with the Today Show for one year now. “I’m lucky to be there, Carson humbly said.

“The Voice — it couldn’t be better this year,” Fallon said.

“This particular group of coaches is just fantastic,” Carson said.

“You have big mentors this year,” Fallon said. “Stevie Nicks, Little Big Town…”

“Yes, we couldn’t be happier with them,” Carson said.

Then, Jimmy Fallon announced that when the Tonight Show returns, the musical guests Julian Casablancas and The Voidz will perform. They performed a song from their Tyranny album, called Where No Eagles Fly. Slate calls the Tyranny album “sprawling and unruly.” The band played a sort of punk or New Wave-ish style of music, loud, raucous, but pretty good. They rocked the place with their song and the audience applauded enthusiastically at the end.

The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon had on some excellent guests tonight. Scandal star, actress Kerry Washington, was Jimmy’s first guest of the evening. She talked about her show, her childhood, and more and they played the game Box of Lies, which Kerry easily won. Then, the second guest was The Voice producer and host, Carson Daly. Jimmy Fallon and Carson talked about their families and a bit about the new season of The Voice. Ending the Tonight Show was the powerful and energetic music of Fallon’s musical guests Julian Casablancas and The Voidz.

Written By Douglas Cobb

Jimmy Fallon and Kerry Washington Play Box of Lies



Sources:

NBC Universal Media Village

Slate

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr