Transcript for Inside the Spin Room After the Second GOP Debate

Welcome back eight dot com I've rate it. It. And it. It's enters. Doors here on the right. Behind us and with her. Lines. Actor. It's. Earlier. On. Yet. And I. They're little. It. I Carly an incredible opportunity. I'm her. Yet a couple the most. Oh most buzz about a moment. Outlook grim and are on theater in the big she talked about her own. Little. With drug abuse and it I think it the best moment that the little face off that she had with Donald Trump. Trump backtracking a little bit on that insult that that he he talked just look that are based. And her facial expressions somehow beating his basically threatens the kingdom facial expressions lost the Carly Fiorina so I think he just happened. The fact that she crashed the man's party and wanna be eleven on. Place and then more than held their own. And was Donald Trump to match tonight on business record I'm personal story he's the clear winner and I think trump sort of disappeared for long stretches which hasn't happened before this Republican. I just want to show. Everyone what to scenes like it's kind of a stampede media running. We're gonna take you in there we're gonna go a little slower and a little safer. Because we want to stay alive but this is quite the picture right now and there's our Candace Smith IC on the side which makes me think it might be Chad. So let's take every when it was over 250 people. In the veterans administration federal points. Mark. And nurses pharmacists and other health care professional status hearing for veteran. They're doing in your work that's wrong and should be. Actually helping veterans. Can I did have a few calls. To date you think he did not tonight I'd feel different. There recipe it was that the owner Leon we set a contrast there are down to. It's there that there is another and it's the White House seat that's failed. We've seen what that it with Barack Obama being elected a guy never run anything government for. American and look at that they'll look at that all. Want. Oh. The politics out. Not really get things done with it once it actually get things done we shall we can do it we've got him yeah. What's at lightning. Well Roderick at this point shook things up at his campaign he got we've focused on being a successful governor. Or partly just as Reagan was victorious in 1980 we will be victorious week. Highlight our good record record taking on the big government special interest. Many of which are based in Washington and in laying out our plan when it's repealing obamacare through reading of that program and our. Back in the American people I think the more we do that that are operative. Of your campaign. Impart to you saw tonight we are much more aggressive on people's the first day. We are solid but not as aggressive bureaucrats write off the bat. We laid the Contras there yet effective immediately early I don't think Americans need another witness of the White House we've had 100. It has failed. We here at the leadership be real ideas real solution where the ones pulling the solutions out. As an exit tonight on the only one on the stage you got real. Or is he obamacare. You could say that was who got a plants in. His speech from substance. I and others in early states like Iowa and others on the line you can look at itself they're gonna. A lot if I was just Iowa this week that well early so there. What they want it now. It is what did you but he did make an error rate. What that partner you know make it better were the ones really got a plan to do we. Just announced today he cares. Where they were there believe in the and that's are grassroots organization. It. It. So. They verse. He replaced the units were part form that was really support. Ultimately. Work it. Here. My. Position that they are all. We've got to secure the border. Enforce the laws which includes its. Which. We talked about it that I and we have a legal immigration system going forward. It gives priority to their work that way. From the American now we shouldn't have any more Sanctuary Cities. We should have a way don't force the law. As a workable if there. We've talked about that Washington for years we need politicians were accidental but those problems. It's really sad is certainly the way to and police brutality of three members of your own state legislators that they have no knowledge of doing that you respond to that. Why don't do the training law enforcement does like nobody targets hitting. Are retreating in Wisconsin. In our state we did effectively for a law enforcement agencies the first governor I believe the only Governor Patrick but the law requiring it. An investigation anytime. There an area. But the police custody I'm the only one in the country do that that's what the law enforcement it's good for the public. But I do believe we need a president once for a you know better. And women of America who service police officers sheriff's deputies. In his state troopers who are oral while we who have the right thing every day under incredibly difficult circumstances. The deserve to have us. Should the governor's accident. To me the bottom line is you've got to secure the border enforce the laws I do not lead and we need to have a legal immigration system going. To me again I'd I waited out the question amnesty we should not have amnesty that we should have a legal system going forward it's part of her work with. And their wages and went over the America greatly bakery. Here in the spin room and we're gonna put the Mike didn't hear what you're on a governor Arnold has to say he just completed in the debate. Talk about my experience and what do you know that have experienced. Puts me in a position of being able to. Yeah things went right senate passed its area. Unify us all problems in this country country again. Building at the parents and igniting citizenship. Eric yes we can believe in ourselves that we all make efforts that are so many are raiding Courtney trumpet bubble to burst for everyone to get back to reality. Was tonight the nights that people started to say wait a minute not so fast I don't know it. What I don't when you were listening to on his talk. About a lot of restaurants I am not going to be judged in the eighties. Except Alex judges you know I don't. Having people call vote on the basis of emotion really doesn't accomplish them. Doctor and you do you didn't the. I don't think you're gonna get altars and no matter what you Clinton and some of the complicated. It probably gonna have the if you don't gets it to large load that he thinks it's. That's all for tonight grade C news digital coverage. GOP today thank you for joining us live from the spin room and the media filing center and the Reagan library tour Ahmad likes and bring jobs after Philip in honor and swelling thing I didn't see here Sam back. Both of us think I'm betting on abcnews.com. We'll see you at the next today.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.