On Sunday, in a series of declarations from Donald Trump, Ted Cruz is described as misleading debate audiences with regard to his position on Justice Roberts, and indirectly connected to the continued existence of the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare.

The pair of Republican presidential hopefuls have been squaring off over a number of issues. A key element of Saturday’s CBS debate was, according to VOX, a vocal disagreement between the two about Trump’s position on Planned Parenthood — the defunding of which is a high priority for many GOP voters this election year.

Cruz spoke as Trump argued, with the former insisting that the billionaire real-estate and reality TV mogul was a supporter of Planned Parenthood, and Trump mounting the defense that the organization provides a number of important services, but that he doesn’t support their abortion aspect.

The two also traded verbal blows over what the political leanings might be of an appointee to the Supreme Court by either, with Cruz saying appointees by Trump would be too liberal — a matter that was already a concern for this election even before long-time justice Antonin Scalia passed away during a hunting trip this weekend.

On Sunday, Trump reiterated his response to this particular matter, bringing up what he called proof that Cruz would support justices whose decisions would be more liberal-leaning than much of the GOP base might prefer. Specifically, he addressed Cruz’s support for Supreme Court Justice John Roberts.

During the debate, Cruz asserted that Justice Roberts would not have been his first choice for nomination in 2005, had he been president and in the position to make the decision. However, a 2005 op-ed by Cruz, then the Solicitor General for Texas, printed in the National Review, shows strong support for the Justice.

“As a jurist, Judge Roberts’s approach will be that of his entire career: carefully, faithfully applying the Constitution and legal precedent.

“The Senate should confirm him swiftly.”

It was to this piece that Trump pointed.

This shows what a complete & total liar Ted Cruz is- he said he wouldn’t have nominated John Roberts. Really? https://t.co/gBnsNgomom — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 14, 2016

Is it a fine hair to split — the line between recommending a “quick confirm” for the proposed justice, and considering him one’s own first choice as nominee? There’s enough wiggle room between the two positions that both can stand, certainly.

Trump didn’t stop there, though. He went on to indicate that the op-ed was proof, not just that Cruz lied, but that because of this 2005 position, Cruz is responsible for the Supreme Court rulings in favor of Obamacare.

Ted Cruz, along with Jeb Bush, pushed Justice John Roberts onto the Supreme Court. Roberts could have killed ObamaCare twice, but didn’t! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 14, 2016

It’s not new point of argument from Trump. CNN has video of him saying the same thing earlier this month, at a rally in Arkansas. He says that by supporting Roberts, who voted with the majority of SCOTUS in favor of the ACA on two occasions, Cruz ensured that the health care law would remain in place.

Meanwhile, Cruz responded with a video that reiterated his statements about Planned Parenthood, using clips that included Donald Trump stating, “Planned Parenthood serves a good function…” alongside news clips that claim Planned Parenthood sells fetal organs, and clips directly from the “sting” videos — videos found to be faked and that have resulted in charges for the individuals and organization behind them, while the medical centers themselves have been repeatedly found clear of wrongdoing.

Donald Trump and Planned Parenthood. WATCH –>https://t.co/LTQnvNQE1B — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) February 14, 2016

As the pair remain two frontrunners for the GOP nomination, this back-and-forth between Donald Trump and Ted Cruz can only be expected to further amplify as the race goes on.

[Photo by Spencer Platt/Getty Images]