Recent public surveys show that Americans strongly support Medicare and Medicaid, the twin pillars of the health care safety net, and that approval of the Affordable Care Act, President Obama’s health care reform law, is steadily rising. The popularity of these three government programs is a stiff warning to critics, mostly Republicans, who seek to radically change or demolish them.

Last month, the Kaiser Family Foundation reported that a majority of the public and the vast majority of beneficiaries support Medicare, the federal program for elderly and disabled Americans, and Medicaid, the federal-state program for the poor. Majorities of Democrats, independents and Republicans all favor keeping Medicare as it is rather than converting it, as many Republican politicians have urged, to a program in which each enrollee would be given a fixed dollar contribution to buy health insurance.

Photo

There are legitimate concerns that the financial condition of Medicare could deteriorate as the baby boomers age and as health care costs continue to rise faster than normal inflation. Polls analyzed by Harvard researchers in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2013 showed the public strongly in favor of reducing Medicare spending to improve the long-term financial outlook of the program, but strongly opposed if the cuts would be used to reduce the deficit or pay for tax cuts.

As for Medicaid, the Kaiser survey found that more than 60 percent of the public opposes converting it from an entitlement, in which the federal and state governments split the cost for everyone who qualifies, to a block grant, in which the federal government would provide a fixed amount of money. Under that approach, the states would be struggling to keep all costs within that amount, which might well require reducing benefits.

The Affordable Care Act is also gaining support. The latest Gallup poll, published in July, showed that Americans’ approval of the law rose to 47 percent, the highest level since 2012. (About 83 percent of Democrats supported the law compared with 14 percent of Republicans.) Other surveys in June and July have also shown a closely split verdict, which is an improvement over earlier polls showing greater public opposition.

The growing approval of the act is likely to get stronger as more people gain coverage and benefit from it. These voters need to throw their political weight behind candidates for Congress and the White House in 2016 who will work to improve the law, not repeal or weaken it.