Three Mustangs made up the first and second all-conference teams in volleyball, and another three were named honorable mention for 2015. In addition to the six conference honors, two players were named academic all-state honorable mention as well.

Senior Karli Baker was named first team all-conference after leading the conference with 256 kills and also leading the Mustangs with 38 blocks. The senior was a focal point in the Mustangs offense and also brought leadership to the team. Baker will continue her career next year at the University of New Orleans.

The six players for the Mustangs to be named all-conference, from left to right: Riley Bauman, Haley Lewis, Karli Baker, Hallee Shaver, Jordyn Rivera. Not pictured: Alycia Romero. (Courtesy Photo)

The two players named second team all-conference were sophomores Haley Lewis and Hallee Shaver. Lewis helped form a one-two punch up front for the Mustangs, finishing second with 146 kills. She also proved to be a versatile player with a team and conference high 60 aces, and the third most digs with 168. As for Shaver, she solidified the offense from her setter position, ending with 462 assists, the second most in the conference.

Sophomore Riley Bauman and juniors Alycia Romero and Jordyn Rivera received honorable mention in the Colorado 7 League after having their biggest individual seasons at the varsity level. Bauman made a big impression in her first season at the varsity level, finishing with 95 kills and 31 blocks on the front line. Rivera, the libero for the Mustangs this season, led the team with 247 digs. Romero had her second straight season playing a big factor on the back line, finishing second on the team with 129 digs.

Advertisement

The two players to be named academic all-state honorable mention were seniors Amy Anderson and junior Mikayla Prevost.

Another honor for the Mustangs was given to head coach Cami Weimer, who was named the Colorado 7 League coach of the year for helping lead the team to a second place finish in the conference. The award is her first honor in her two years coaching the Mustangs.

Fort Morgan went 17-8 and finished second in the Colorado 7 League with a 12-2 conference record. The Mustangs finished their season in the regional tournament for the first time since 2007.

Brandon Boles: 970-867-5651, bboles@fmtimes.com twitter.com/FMT_Sports