CT scans can find smokers' lung cancer early

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Tom Schroeder smoked for 44 years, sometimes up to three packs a day.

His wife of 30 years, a nurse, constantly worried about his health and urged him to get screened for lung cancer.

“You don't like to look for problems, but at the same time you can't stick your head in the sand,” said Carole Schroeder of Cecil.

She persuaded her husband last month to undergo a CT scan in West Penn Hospital in Bloomfield. The low-dose test, offered by the hospital at no cost, took less than 10 minutes to complete and found no abnormalities in his lungs. It was a relief for Schroeder, who understood the health implications of his addiction to cigarettes.

“Lung cancer was always on my mind. Any smoker is lying if they say they're not worried about it,” said Schroeder, 59, a draftsman.

CT scans of the lungs have emerged as a powerful, yet controversial, medical tool as doctors fight lung cancer, the nation's No. 1 cancer killer. The disease kills about 160,000 people every year in the United States.

Experts say the scans, used within the right parameters and on the right people, can help find tumors in the earliest stages, when they are most treatable.

Cost: $9B over 5 years

This month, Medicare announced a proposal to pay for the screening for people at high risk, mainly heavy smokers who are at least 55. The move is expected to cost the government more than $9 billion over five years, according to a study published in May. That's about $3 per Medicare beneficiary.

“This will cost the nation money … but when you look at how little progress there's been in the treatment of lung cancer, the opportunity to reduce lung cancer death is an investment that society is willing to make,” said Dr. Richard Wender, chief cancer control officer with the American Cancer Society.

Hospitals have stepped up to pay for the tests, which cost between $200 and $300 each. Allegheny Health Network has provided more than 175 free CT scans since September, said Dr. Rodney Landreneau, director of thoracic oncology and co-director of its Esophageal and Lung Institute.

About 20 percent of the tests found nodules in the lungs that required patients to undergo follow-ups. Four of those screened eventually were diagnosed with cancer, he said.

“If you identify cancers at an early stage, you save money, as compared to treating cancers at a more advanced stage,” Landreneau said.

Allegheny Health's parent, health insurer Highmark Inc., supplied a $174,000 grant to pay for the tests. Highmark and other area health insurers will follow Medicare's lead in covering the screenings next year.

Some insurers cover them as part of requirements of the Affordable Care Act. In some cases, it could affect what consumers pay for health care.

“Benefit changes like this do add to overall health care cost, and the cost of providing health care is the largest driver of premium increases,” said Aaron Billger, spokesman for Highmark, the state's largest insurer.

UPMC Health Plan spokeswoman Gina Pferdehirt said the coverage will not affect its members' premiums.

“In the scheme of things, this is not a significant percentage of costs and is assumed in the normal trends we plan for in health care,” she said.

False positive results

Experts caution the scans are not for everyone — and certainly not for every current and ex-smoker. The ideal candidate is between 55 and 74 years old and smoked at least a pack a day for 30 years. This includes people who quit as long as 15 years ago.

Dr. David Wilson, associate director of UPMC's Lung Cancer Center, warned the scans might find abnormalities that have no medical consequence but might scare or intimidate people.

He oversaw a study of nearly 4,000 CT lung screenings in Western Pennsylvania called the Pittsburgh Lung Cancer Screening Study. It found 40 percent of people had positive scans, yet fewer than 2 percent of those people had cancer.

Wilson said most abnormal scans are “very low risk for lung cancer and really don't require anything more than a repeat scan in a year.”

“The decision to get a CT scan, even if you're eligible, is not something anyone should rush into,” Wilson said. “People have to explain what to expect before you get the scan so we don't generate mass hysteria here.”

Follow-up biopsies

Some studies have raised doubts about the test because too many people received false positive results. Doctors have worried about potentially harmful follow-up biopsies.

Follow-up scans could expose patients to higher doses of radiation, said Dr. Kenneth Lin, an associate professor of family medicine at Georgetown University School of Medicine.

Lin said he's not surprised some health care systems offer free scans because they can make up for the cost with additional tests.

“Whenever something is free, especially in health care, there's usually some catch,” said Lin. “If they're just telling you about the benefits, or they're just telling you about the drawbacks, they're not giving you a balanced perspective.”

Lung CT scans gained acceptance after the National Lung Screening Trial in 2010 showed the screenings reduced lung cancer deaths by 20 percent in older, longtime smokers. The test's impact solidified in December with a recommendation from the Preventive Services Task Force, which sets widely followed screening advice.

Patient advocates said the screening is a promising tool, much in the same way mammograms help detect abnormalities in the breast.

“It gives lung cancer another tool. Is it the final answer? No. Is it a start? Absolutely,” said Andrea Ferris, president of the Chicago-based LUNGevity Foundation.

Luis Fábregas is Trib Total Media's medical editor. He can be reached at 412-320-7998 or lfabregas@tribweb.com.