Learn more about nutritional needs to ensure dogs and cats stay healthy

Pet owners want to make sure they give their cats and dogs the healthiest food possible. Veterinarians say a raw food diet is not the best one for cats and dogs. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you're a pet owner, you understand the special bond that can exist between the members of a family and their dog or cat.

In many cases, we pamper them, buying them special beds and toys. It's important to us to keep them happy and healthy, and we want them to have the best care and food possible.

Many individuals are exploring a new trend in pet food — the raw-food diet. But the diet is raising concerns among veterinarians across the country and locally among veterinarians at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Colorado State University.

The diet is sometimes called "Paleo for Pets" or the "ancestral diet" based on the thinking that dogs should eat like their early ancestors.

The raw-food diet's main ingredients are raw meat, organs and bones, typically from beef, lamb, chicken and turkey. Unpasteurized dairy products and raw eggs may also be included. The raw diet is uncooked or undercooked and usually devoid of grains.

Many veterinarians take issue with different aspects of the raw-food diet. The first is the question of whether or not the diet is nutritionally sound. "Many of the websites promoting raw food for dogs equate the nutritional needs of our household pets to those of 'ancestral' wolves," said veterinarian Dr. Camille Torres of CSU. But, she adds, there is a "good indication that the best diet for today's wild wolves is different than the best diet for today's domesticated dogs."

Advertisement

Some dog and cat owners feel that the raw diet gives their pet a healthier skin and coat, increased immunity, teeth that are cleaner and the ability to better manage weight issues.

"Unfortunately, there is no scientific evidence to support such claims, and the veterinarians at Colorado State University do not recommend feeding raw diets to pets," said Torres.

She suggests that when claims are made, consumers, "look for references to research that has been both published and peer-reviewed: this approach is built on scientific rigor and helps ensure valid data."

Even when the meat in a diet is cooked, "the main concern is making sure that it's balanced and that it's meeting a pet's nutritional needs," said Dr. Torres.

Veterinarians at the CSU Veterinary Teaching Hospital recommend the following when considering nutritional options for pets:

• Feed a diet that is balanced and appropriate for the age of your pet.

• Puppies and kittens should be fed a diet that is formulated to meet the specific needs of a young animal. Avoid diets stating they are for "all life stages."

• Feed a diet from a company active in nutritional research and continuous improvement to formulations, with strict quality control, and that employs a boarded nutritionist.

• Home-cooked pet diets should be made with the help of a boarded nutritionist. Meat in homemade pet diets should be cooked until the internal temperature of 165 degrees Fahrenheit is reached.

• Any dietary change should be made slowly, over five to seven days, to avoid stomach upset.

• Consult your veterinarian with any questions or concerns regarding nutrition and your pet.

Another issue that concerns veterinarians and other health-care workers is the risk for exposure to harmful bacteria for both the animal and its owners. The American Veterinary Medical Association notes, "It's common knowledge that raw meat is likely to be contaminated with bacteria; it's not sterile by any means. Even USDA-inspected, 'human grade' meat is not free of bacterial contamination." The difference is that meat for human consumption is generally cooked.

On the Centers for Disease Control website it states, "Do not feed your pet a raw diet. Raw diets consist of foods that have not been cooked or treated to remove harmful germs. These foods can carry harmful bacteria including salmonella and campylobacter."

If you do want to feed your pet food that you prepare, the CDC and FDA suggest you take steps to protect against bacteria.

1. "Do not feed raw meat to pets. This is even more important if there are young children, pregnant women, elderly persons or others in the household who have a weakened immune system.

2. Cook raw meat until it is no longer pink.

3. Wash hands, knives, cutting boards and countertops well with hot soapy water after handling raw meat.

4. Do not keep raw meat in the refrigerator longer than a couple of days.

5. Do not taste pieces of meat while they are still raw. Clean up and properly dispose of all dog and cat stool as soon as possible."

Store bought or not? Ultimately, it's about what's best for your dog or cat. By learning more, you can ensure a safer, healthier pet.