If you wonder whether children, adolescents and young adults in the U.S. are being overprescribed psychiatric medications, two recent reports indicate they are.

The first, by Dr. Marc Olfson, of Columbia University and the New York State Psychiatric Institute, and colleagues, described national trends on antipsychotic medication treatment for children, adolescents and young adults. While use increased from 2006 to 2010 in those 13 to 24 years of age, at least there was evidence that prescriptions did not for those 12 and under.

Antipsychotic medications are critically important agents used to treat psychotic symptoms such as paranoia, delusions, hallucinations and impaired thinking that interfere with functioning in school, with friends and with family. These are symptoms seen especially in conditions like schizophrenia, which tends to come on in adolescence and requires early treatment to prevent a trajectory towards disability.



[READ: Why Doctors and Hospitals Need Better Health IT Solutions]

Antipsychotic medications (including Risperdal, Abilify, Zyprexa and Seroquel) are among the most widely prescribed (and costly) medications in this country. But Olfson's report indicated that more than half of youth were prescribed these medications without a diagnosis of a mental disorder. Of those youth with a diagnosed mental illness these medications were prescribed far more frequently for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, disruptive behavior disorders and aggression than for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, autism spectrum disorder or Tourette's syndrome. While some doctors may refrain from making diagnoses of a psychotic condition because of concerns about stigma, these data are just too compelling for that to explain very much about what is happening.

In an accompanying editorial, Dr. Christoph Correll and colleagues stress (as he has in earlier work) the powerful and almost immediate problems (for some within 12 weeks) that antipsychotic medications can produce, especially weight gain and high glucose levels (which may predict diabetes) and abnormalities in lipid metabolism. The overreliance on medications in youth is further demonstrated by the finding that less than 25 percent of prescribed youth had any therapy services – which could include teaching parents to better manage their child's behaviors or youth to control them. And prescribing antipsychotics seems predominantly aimed at aggressive and impulsive behaviors, especially in males, where the disruption in school and home insists on action and remediating symptoms.



[READ: Why Obamacare Won in the Supreme Court]