A super-sized Tim Hortons cup — empty, no less — gained international attention last weekend after a Canadian curator at a Swedish art fair posted its photo on Reddit.

Related Stories Berton: Is it coverage or...

Boasting a beaded exterior matching its iconic design and housed within a Plexiglas display case, the work is called 24 Ounces of Misrepresentation.

It's by Gabriel Parniak, a 25-year-old artist from Guelph whose work was part of the lone Canadian booth at the fair.

Guelph-based curator Scott McGovern posted the photo late one evening. By next morning, the posting had already sparked numerous comments.

We need to resist the idea that we can look into a cup of java and find ourselves reflected there.

Most were from Canadians — some angry, some amused, others confused or distracted.

(Among the latter, many commentators got sidetracked into arguing over Tim Hortons versus McDonald's coffee and parsing the meanings of "regular" and "double double.")

By the end of the weekend, the piece had drawn thousands of online views, touched off hundreds of comments on Reddit and even snagged a headline on the Huffington Post. What accounted for the attention?

For many, Parniak's work struck a nationalistic nerve. Some viewers saw his piece as an attempt to equate a ubiquitous coffee chain with our national identity — and not all of them liked the idea.

The more restrained commentators were ironic. "Canada's national identity is defined by a chain of coffee shops," wrote one. Another said, "Now our defining activity is going on a run for mediocre coffee."

Others were disgusted, such as the commentator who wrote: "I hate that Tim Hortons is associated with our national identity."

Granted, the brand has stamped itself into our collective psyche, not least through all those feel-good commercials linking Tim's with our national sporting pastimes, from street hockey to the Olympics.

Raising questions about national identity, branding and iconography was exactly the point for Parniak, who talked to me about his work this week. But far from holding up his beaded cup as the Canadian nationalistic grail, he had just the opposite idea in mind.

Maybe some of those naysayers missed the title of Parniak's work. 24 Ounces of Misrepresentation actually disputes the idea that a coffee chain — even one as ubiquitous as Tim Hortons — can represent a nation.

If there is anything iconic about his cup, it's a symbol for a corporation, not a country. We need to resist the idea that we can look into a cup of java and find ourselves reflected there. As with most works of art, things are a bit more nuanced and layered.

Placing such a commonplace object into a glass display case is a satirical act. It elevates a paper cup into a kind of museum-quality artifact — a few ounces' worth of misrepresentation to begin with.

Then there are those beads, intended to evoke traditional aboriginal craft. The beads are affixed with superglue — or maybe, says Parniak, it's "superficial" glue. The cup mimics the act of relegating aboriginal art objects — and maybe their aboriginal creators — to an artifact under glass studied by anthropologists and ethnographers but maybe ignored by everyone else.

The surface treatment, including that superficial glue, reminds us of a colonialist tendency to gloss over or misrepresent the myths and narratives of indigenous people. Parniak was amused that one Reddit commentator assumed he must be an aboriginal artist; he's a third-generation Canadian with Polish and Italian roots.

(The cup's genesis lies in Parniak's disgust over the federal election of spring 2011, when Harper's Conservatives won a majority after only 54 per cent of eligible voters went to the polls.)

There's also symbolism in the emptiness of this adorned cup. How can you have a national icon that holds nothing? Emptiness can be dangerous, says McGovern: "When there is a void, anything can step in to fill it."

Does emptiness reflect a lack of common values in this country? Or does it point to a lack of discussion of those values or at least a dumbing-down of the conversation into Us Versus Them? Think of the way we frame issues into simple binaries: the One Per Cent and the 99 Per Cent; Aboriginal Peoples and Everyone Else.

But what about all of the flag-waving in Sochi over the past couple of weeks? Surely there are common values bound up in our collective quest for Olympic gold.

Parniak isn't so sure. Like his jumbo cup, he says, the Games with their bigger-is-better mantra look and feel more like a corporate branding exercise than anything else: "It's a super-sizing of an event that could be much more humble and respectful."

If our national identity is something more than a corporate cup, what does it look like exactly and how do we fill it?