Pianist Billy Childs grew up in Los Angeles in a home with two older sisters. One, named Joy, turned him on to jazz. The other, named Kirsten, turned him on to Laura Nyro, the singer-songwriter whose early albums became part of the soundtrack to Childs's boyhood.

Now, having been inspired by her songs for decades, he has recorded a new album of Nyro's music, "Map to the Treasure." With an all-star quartet (featuring drummer Brian Blade), several excellent singers (Lisa Fischer, Becca Stevens, Shawn Colvin) and a string quartet, Childs will perform songs from the album Saturday night at the Monterey Jazz Festival.

Pianist Billy Childs. David Katzenstein/Monterey Jazz Festival. ( David Katzenstein/Monterey Jazz )

What a soundtrack Nyro created: She was among the most brilliant composers and singers of the 1960s and '70s, penning such tunes as "Wedding Bell Blues," "Stoney End," "And When I Die," "Sweet Blindness," "Eli's Coming," "Stoned Soul Picnic" and "Save the Country." And those are just the hits, covered by the Fifth Dimension, Blood Sweat and Tears, Three Dog Night, Barbra Streisand and others.

Her "lesser" tunes are just as exceptional: poignant as midnight, or powerfully joyful -- and what melodies!

She was a genius from the Bronx, drawing on R&B, Goffin-King pop, jazz, Broadway, and putting her indelible stamp on all of it. Her fans were like a cult; among them were many musicians, including Miles Davis, her hero. Nyro died of ovarian cancer at age 49 in 1997.

Advertisement

Now Childs, 57, has issued "Map to the Treasure" (Sony Masterworks), his tribute to Nyro. With assistance from veteran producer Larry Klein (who oversaw Herbie Hancock's Grammy-winning album of Joni Mitchell tunes, "River: The Joni Letters"), Childs has assembled a formidable cast of interpreters for the recording. They include Renée Fleming, Yo-Yo Ma, Wayne Shorter, Rickie Lee Jones, Ledisi, Esperanza Spalding, Susan Tedeschi, Alison Krauss and Dianne Reeves, as well as Fischer, Stevens and Colvin.

I phoned Childs at his South Pasadena home to talk about Laura Nyro. Here are excerpts from the conversation:

Q Is there one Laura Nyro tune that you love above all the others?

A My sister Kirsten would play her records, and the one tune that kind of changed everything -- the Laura Nyro tune that just really connected with me -- was "Map to the Treasure." I believe it came out in 1970 -- it was on "Christmas and the Beads of Sweat" -- so I was about 13. And just that piano pattern that she hits in the body of the song: It's in A minor, and it starts really slow and then it speeds up; that's one of the earliest things I learned on piano. I liked how when it got to the fast part, then she doubles it up somehow in her left hand to make it seem even faster. It was just brilliant, very simple, but brilliant.

It's taken at this painstakingly slow tempo and speeds up, and it's just the repetitive thing it has, so it kind of gives this chant-like thing, which gives it a spiritual vibe -- especially when you add the harp that Alice Coltrane played.

But I also dug "Save the Country," "Time and Love." I liked all the stuff on "Eli." (Nyro's album "Eli and the Thirteenth Confession," 1968.) I can't even name one, because my sister would play the albums from beginning to end.

Q My favorite Nyro tune is "Luckie."

A Oh! That's the one that goes like -- (Childs sings the song, nearly all the way through.)

Q What's the significance of titling your album "Map to the Treasure"? Did you do it mostly because it's such a seminal tune for you? Or were you also saying something about Nyro herself being a treasure -- or about how you're guiding listeners through your own "map" to the "treasure" of her music?

A That's true. It does point to where we're trying to get to -- to who Nyro is.

But actually it was my agent who came up with the name. I told him how important the tune was for me, and it's just such a cool-sounding phrase to begin with. And it's the tune that was kind of a window for me, a way into Laura Nyro.

Q Nyro was a songwriter, a singer, a pianist. Which aspect of her talent most stands out for you?

A Probably it started with her piano playing, just because I gravitated toward the piano. I liked the triadic movement. Without getting too technical, her language is very triadic and also very quartal, too (emphasizing chords built on intervals of fourths). I think she was influenced a lot by Trane (John Coltrane); at least I heard that she was. And as such, if she was influenced by Trane, then she had to have absorbed some of McCoy Tyner's language, which was quartal. (Tyner was Coltrane's pianist.)

I liked the simplicity of it, but the way it moved kind of connected with me. The simplicity of it made it easy for me to hear and learn. But the way it moved and shifted tonalities was very sophisticated, and it also helped shape my ear and conception to those kinds of movements.

Q So you were just entering your teen years as you got into this: 13, 14?

A Something like that. But I don't want to give the impression that Laura Nyro was the only influence I had. Another big one was Herbie Hancock, obviously. And there was Keith Emerson of Emerson, Lake and Palmer. And there was Chick Corea. And later on I would listen to Stravinsky, Hindemith. I've always had a lot of Bach playing in the house. So all that was going on all the time, but Laura Nyro is right up there.

Q Will you describe her voice?

A I think it was an instrument that served the story that she was telling. She could go from zero to sixty in two seconds, from a whisper to a scream. Or from sixty to zero. And I think what struck me about it was the way she used it like an instrument to tell a dramatic story. But also, by "instrument" I don't mean that her voice just mimicked a musical instrument like a trumpet. I mean she used it to imitate life in the same way an instrumentalist would use his horn to convey something in life. Like Billie Holiday would've done.

Q You've said that Nyro sits at the highest level of popular songwriters. People like -- well, you name them.

A Gershwin, Sondheim, Paul Simon ... Lennon and McCartney. Especially her music from her first four albums -- just breathtaking.

Q And so many of those songs she wrote when she was, like, 17 or 18. It really is breathtaking. I mean, how did she do it?

A I don't know. It's like Billy Strayhorn when he wrote "Lush Life." I think he was like 18 or 17.

Q When I was in high school, only the girls listened to Laura Nyro -- only they were smart enough to get into her music. I got into Nyro a few years later -- through girlfriends.

A Yeah. Well, thank God, I had two older sisters. I had a great upbringing. I was athletic as a kid, so I would play with my friends. But in the household we'd be reading books or playing games or listening to music.

My sister Joy -- she exposed me to jazz, she and a next-door neighbor. Everybody at the time was into James Brown and Motown and Sly. But then my sisters went their separate ways: Joy was into jazz. Kirsten was into more of the singer songwriters like Laura Nyro, Carol King, James Taylor, Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young, Cat Stevens, and Joni Mitchell, of course.

And then my own musical tastes went into the fusion area: Mahavishnu, Gentle Giant, Emerson, Lake and Palmer, Yes, Herbie and the Headhunters. So I got hit from all angles.

Q You've said the seed for your new album was planted by Bobby Colomby, the drummer and producer. Maybe 15 years ago, the two of you did a session where he mentioned that one of your arrangements reminded him of Laura Nyro, and that got your juices flowing?

A I guess it kind of planted the seed. But I can't really -- to be honest, after I said that in that other interview, I realized that I'm not 100 percent sure how it happened!

I know I've been thinking about it for 12 or 15 years, and I kind of remember doing this arrangement, and him saying, "Wow, that sounds like Laura Nyro," and we started talking about her. I must've taken something from that session: "Wow, it would be cool if I could do an album of her music."

Q Did that idea feel huge to you, even like a pressure, given how important her music has been to you since you were a kid?

A It was daunting. I thought maybe I should do an instrumental version, but then so much of her music is about the word. But then there's no one singer I would ask to do all of it. So then I thought, "Well, I'm going to need a bunch of singers, so forget about it. I don't have a budget."

Then about two years ago, I just got tired of it being on the back burner. So I called my agent (Myles Weinstein), and I said, "Myles, I'm just tired of waiting on this. What can we do to actually get this to happen?" So he called some people, and I called some people. And Myles connected with Chuck Mitchell, of Sony Masterworks.

Q It's a complicated album, with a lot of musicians and varying arrangements. It must've been a lot of work.

A It was like doing ten albums. But I loved every second of it. I even loved making the phone calls to pursue people, because I believed in the project, and I'm so glad that Chuck Mitchell gave us a chance to do this. And he was very hands-off. It was a dream come true, probably the best situation with a label that I've ever been in.

Q How did you assemble the star-studded cast? There must have been a lot of negotiating. Renée Fleming?

A Larry and I talked about it -- Larry Klein, who produced the album and contributed so much conceptually. It was a true collaboration. He really had brilliant ideas, sonically and conceptually, arrangement-wise and in terms of the casting. And some of the people I hooked up, and some of them he hooked up. But Renée Fleming was somebody he went after and got.

Q Did any of your special guests turn out to be super Laura Nyro fans?

A Most of them knew her and appreciated her. One of the main people who was influenced by her and really continued in her legacy in her own career was Rickie Lee Jones. She's kind of the one that carries on the legacy in that mold. But all of the singers were able to find something in Laura's words and music where they could get to themselves and to Laura Nyro, too.

Q I especially love Becca Stevens's singing on "The Confession," and Lisa Fischer's on "Map to the Treasure." To me, they seem to get right at the feeling of Laura Nyro's music.

A About Becca, I can't say enough. She's doing Monterey with me, and we're setting up some other gigs. I've really taken to her. I want to collaborate with her on some other things. She and I are writing songs together.

Q Would you like to choose and describe a couple of your favorite songs from the new record?

A I don't place one above the other. But how about if I describe the album's first couple of tunes?

I looked at "New York Tendaberry" as if it were a tone poem or an art song, or an aria from an opera. And I love the quality of Renée Fleming's voice on it. Because while she has this incredible technical virtuosity in her voice, there's also a real soulfulness to it, and a real purity in her tone and her voice that is striking. I wanted a conversation between the piano, the cello (played by Yo-Yo Ma) and the voice as the central engine that was driving the song.

And I like how "The Confession" turned out, because I think we were successful in making it build by degrees, incrementally, right up to her confession. The song gradually builds to that. And the song is kind of about sexual discovery.... So the innocence in Becca's sound kind of suits it. But there's a visceral urgency underlying the innocence, so it strikes a balance that makes it work.

And Lisa just kills it on "Map to the Treasure." I feel great about the whole album.

Q Tell me about Wayne Shorter's contribution.

A Wayne, he's just a master of playing around words and playing the image and orchestrating the saxophone around words. You know, he's Wayne Shorter. That's just one of the things he does better than anybody else. I don't know that he knew her music very well, but it didn't matter when he stepped behind the microphone.

Q Did you ever see Laura Nyro perform?

A I saw her once at the Strand, which was a club in Redondo Beach. It was maybe a couple of years before she passed.

Q What did you think of the show?

A By that time, I think she was in pain, and it wasn't as dynamic as the records were. But still there was something I could hear there; there was a genius. She did a version of "Confession" that I'll never forget, it was so haunting.

Q You've compared her songs -- her whole oeuvre, from album to album -- as amounting to one big opera. What's the story line as you hear it, or what are the themes?

A There are recurring characters that I always notice. There's God. There's the devil. The devil appears in the title of "Captain Saint Lucifer." Or on "Gibson Street," she sings, "The devil is hungry, the devil is sweet."

And there's the errant men who have done her wrong, like in "Tom Cat Goodbye," or in "Been on a Train, with the heroin user. Men who have a weakness. And men who have strength: In "Blackpatch," there's Jones who "got his kindness from God."

And I don't know the plot. There's no introduction. There's no Act One and Act Two. It's just like random scenarios. But it all seems to me to be centered around New York City. Like Gibson Street is, to me, a fictitious street in New York, maybe in a bad neighborhood. And it's 11 o'clock at night, the place where "they hang the alley cats," where danger is palpable.

It's like a lot of great stories. It's completely open to your interpretation, but it also opens the door for your mind to imagine these things. She leaves you clues, and you kind of cobble together your own version of the stories and what happened.

Q Before we finish, tell me one more time why you love Laura Nyro's music. You've been listening to her for more than 40 years now.

A There are certain artists that I binge on occasionally. There's Herbie Hancock, from every era. There's Chick Corea. There's Bill Evans. There's Emerson, Lake and Palmer. There's Hindemith. And there's Laura Nyro. I guess it's because her music is -- well, first of all, it sounds great. I talked to Lyle Mays, and he said, "You know, a lot of people forget that at the center of music, after you strip away all the craft and orchestration, music should just sound good."

So No. 1 is the tunefulness of her music, the strength of the melodies that kind of hooks you in. But once you get in that world, it's like you're pulling back all the layers and you're seeing all of this depth. It's like a well that's 100 feet deep. There's the imaginative, orchestrational aspect of it. There's the dramatic aspect of it. There's the emotional aspect of it. And then there's a spiritual side to it. And all of these things are kind of synthesized into this one organic whole and this very powerful message you hear in her music.

Q Over the years, have you passed your love for her music on to other people, maybe to younger people? I suppose that's part of what you're doing on a grand scale with this album.

A Actually, I don't want to alienate people by saying this. But the motivation to do the record wasn't "I've got to make more people aware of Laura Nyro, and I've got to get a record deal to make that happen." It was more that this music spoke to me, and I loved it so much that I wanted to set it through the prism of my own experience and make it relate to who I am now. And I don't want to take all the credit for the conception. Larry Klein really helped shape how to make it happen, how to make it relevant to today.

Also, I don't admonish anyone for not knowing who Laura Nyro was, but I urge them to find out.

Contact Richard Scheinin at 408-920-5069, read his stories and reviews at www.mercurynews.com/richard-scheinin and follow him at www.twitter.com/richardscheinin.