In just a matter of weeks, the approximately 100 calls received every day at a local crisis center — everything from people who feel suicidal to those who are grieving or stressed — are expected to jump to about 500 daily.

Metro Crisis Services, a nonprofit local hotline, won a $3 million state contract to expand its call center into the first statewide mental health crisis hotline.

It’s part of a larger, $20 million plan to change the way people going through a mental health crisis can access help. The plan was proposed by Gov. John Hickenlooper after the Aurora theater shooting and the Newtown, Conn., school shooting.

But the plan was delayed for months as the first bidding process was deemed a failure and one company with a revoked contract took the state to court.

The contract for the hotline was untangled from the court delay of other contracts earlier this year, and a deal with Metro Crisis Services was signed in May.

The statewide 24-hour hotline, expected to be functional in August, will be the first part of the revamped plan to expand access to help.

Those who take the calls are trained to help stabilize a person in crisis and provide referrals to services, preferably avoiding police or busy emergency rooms.

“This is a huge benefit for all of Colorado as it will provide one place that people can call to then be routed to crisis services across the state,” said Patrick Fox, deputy director of clinical services for the state’s Office of Behavioral Health.

Metro Crisis Services has been in Denver since 2010 operating a local hotline for mental health crisis, as well as answering calls for the national Suicide Prevention Lifeline and the Disaster Distress Helpline.

Already, Metro Crisis Services has hired and trained six additional clinicians to field the expected increase in call volume. They also hired four regional coordinators, an administrative assistant and an operations director.

With the expansion, Metro Crisis Services also will introduce peer specialists — people who have been through a mental health crisis themselves and are in recovery. Six peers and a supervisor have been hired and trained.

Callers will have a choice to speak with a peer specialist, but the licensed clinicians will be the default for anyone who is unsure.

Both clinicians and peer specialists will be responsible for calling back people after their crisis to check that they did connect with the recommended services.

For now, twice as many call-takers are working in about 2,400 square feet of space, until they move into a new 5,600-square-foot office in the coming weeks.

Part of the $3 million in the contract is funding the creation of a custom database that will allow clinicians and peer specialists to access resource directory information or evaluation checklists faster, and to help track the use and effectiveness of the hotline.

“It’s not just a hotline. This is a service,” said Metro Crisis Services CEO Bev Marquez. “We want people to know they are thoughtfully being cared for.”

Yesenia Robles: 303-954-1372, yrobles@denverpost.com or twitter.com/yeseniarobles