Neil Hall/Reuters

For Barclays PLC, there’s no doubt the past is still proving a burden.

The U.K.-based bank announced first quarter earnings on Wednesday, and while underlying profits are up, litigation continues to weigh on the share price and drag profit down.

Here are the big five takeaways:

Litigation provisions continue

Barclays has continued to stockpile against incoming fines. Over the first quester, it added £800 million to its provision against fines related to foreign exchange rate manipulation, and a further £150 million for reimbursing payment protection insurance. That means the total set aside for investigations and litigation, primarily related to foreign exchange benchmarks, hit £2.05 billion, more than four times as much as net first quarter profit.

Underlying figures are good

The increase in litigation dragged on profits, down to £465 million versus £965 million last year. Strip out fines and taxes, and group profit increased £1.85 billion, compared to £1.69 billion the previous year. According to analysts at Deutsche Bank: “Barclays is on track, in our view, to achieve its targeted 11% Core Tier 1 and greater than 4% leverage ratio by end 2016.”

Peter Ward, dealer at London Capital Group, said: “The underlying performance is there, as a 9% improvement to adjusted profits for the first quarter shows, but once again another round of provisions for misdemeanours of yesteryear continues to hold back further progress.”

A lighter Barclays

Barclays’ risk-weighted assets, essentially balance sheet assets weighted according to riskiness, also decreased, falling £10 billion to £65 billion in its non-core unit, a “bad bank” set up to house and wind down non-essential assets. The drop comes as Chief Executive Antony Jenkins continued to slim down the bank. Across the group, risk-weighted assets dropped to £396 billion, from £402 billion in December, thanks to the due to the sale of its Spanish business. As a result, Core Tier 1 capital, or top-quality assets, increased to 10.6%, up from 10.3% at the end of last year.

A weaker but more profitable investment bank

Compared to its rivals, Barclays’s investment banking businesses were weaker. Fixed income trading was flat year on year. This was weak compared to its main regional Deutsche Bank, whose fixed income trading arm was up 9%. According to Credit Suisse, Barclays’s peers were up 3%. Equities trading was up 5%, compared to 21% for peers. Investment banking advisory was up 7%, versus 4% for its rivals. According to analysts at Credit Suisse, “overall progression seems slightly weaker than European peers so far.”

Despite this, investment banking revenues were up 2% year on year to £2.15 billion. And most importantly profit before tax from the unit was up 37% year-on-year. Mr Jenkins said the results represent “a performance which is more indicative of the potential of the franchise following the repositioning undertaken last year.”

Chairman bounce is over

John McFarlane took over as the new chairman of Barclays last week. Since the announcement of his appointment in September 2014, Barclays share price has increased just over 15%. Wednesday, the share price was down 0.5%. Ian Gordon, analyst at Investec, said: “We perceive that Barclays shares have been well-supported in recent weeks/months as investors have reacted positively to the arrival of the new Chairman. This is understandable, but we think the outlook for reported earnings and dividends is challenging.”