Advertisement - story continues below

If you thought the cartoon “Bambi vs. Godzilla” was the most unfair mismatch in history, try “The United States Government vs. The Little Sisters of the Poor.”

That’s not actually the name of the case heard this week by the Supreme Court. But it sums up the mega-overreach of the Obama Administration in trying to use the Affordable Care Act to bludgeon religious charities and schools into violating their sacred beliefs by paying for employees’ contraceptives. Seven of the 92 lawsuits filed by such groups were bundled into the case argued on Wednesday. Plaintiffs include the Little Sisters of the Poor (Catholic nuns who care for the impoverished elderly) and Priests For Life, a group of pro-life activist priests. Imagine arguing that those groups don’t have a sincere religious objection to paying for contraceptives!

Granted, the government did offer a compromise, in which insurers would pay for contraceptives, but that’s just word games. The charities pay the insurers, so they would still, in effect, be paying for contraceptives. “Plausible deniability” might be a good enough moral fig leaf for Washington, but God sees through it.

Advertisement – story continues below

The idea of nuns being forced to take resources away from caring for the elderly poor to fight an attempt by government to bully them into violating their most sacred beliefs is so patently outrageous that even the USA Today editorial board scolded the Obama Administration. They noted that churches and religious for-profit companies are already exempt, and some simple accommodation for this small number of employees could have prevented this expensive and repulsive legal battle.

But as we saw with Obamacare itself, this Administration is less concerned with solving a specific problem than with expanding federal power. They seem intent on using the heavy hand of government to force Americans to accommodate newly-created rights (free contraceptives, same-sex marriage), even if it violates their First Amendment right of religious freedom. With the Supreme Court now split 4-4, this is why choosing the right President to replace Justice Scalia is crucial to the continued existence of basic individual rights.

During oral arguments, liberal Justice Stephen Breyer outrageously lectured the plaintiffs’ attorneys that some burdens are the price of “being a member of society.” It’s a cliché you see on every “progressive” website: paying for everyone else’s health care, food, housing, college tuition, abortions, etc., is the price of being a member of society. Those who think this way need to consider what kind of “society” this is. It’s the only society in the world built on the Bill of Rights.

Advertisement – story continues below

The Supreme Court must make it clear that respecting other people’s rights, including freedom of religion, is the price liberals have to pay to be members of American society.

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.