Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Hundreds take the New Year's Day plunge at Boulder Reservoir

Leonie Walker, a first timer, runs in to the icy water to do one of the things on her bucket list. The 31st annual Boulder Polar Plunge was held at the Boulder Reservoir on New Year s Day, organized by connectBCAP as a fundraiser for the Boulder County AIDS Project. ( Cliff Grassmick )



“You don't expect how cold it will be,” said Charlie, of Boulder, as he shivered after today's dip. “Your legs start to turn numb and then you trip on the water.”



Still, he added, he has every intention of continuing the tradition for many more years to come.



“It's just fun,” he said.



Hundreds line up each year for the for the New Year's Day Polar Plunge. While in year's past organizers had to break through a layer if ice, this year the water wasn't quite freezing, with a temperature of 37 degrees. Emerging from the water, participants had to dash through the 39-degree cold to get to a heated tent to thaw out.



The Boulder County AIDS Project took over the event this year after the previous organizers, the Young Professionals Alzheimer's Association of Colorado, cut ties with the fundraiser. The young professionals' fundraising arm of the Boulder County AIDS Project — connectBCAP — headed up the fundraiser this year.



“It's a really fun and crazy event,” said Katie Johnstone, co-chair of connectBCAP. “We had a lot of teams. It's a really fun way for people to connect and come together.”



The event was founded in 1983 by Norwegian Trygve Bauge, grandson of Bredo Morstoel, whose frozen remains are celebrated at Nederland's annual Frozen Dead Guy Days festival each March.



Golden's Kim Taha said she's taken a freezing dip on New Year's for the past 10 years. Her reason — or excuse, as her family termed it — is that she's Norwegian. And, she acknowledged, “a little bit crazy. Kyle Garrity, left , Kelly White, and Alyssa White, lead a wave into the icy water on Wednesday. The 31st annual Boulder Polar Plunge was held at the Boulder Reservoir on New Year s Day, organized by connectBCAP as a fundraiser for the Boulder County AIDS Project. ( Cliff Grassmick )



She brings children and grandchildren along every year, some who plunge and some who serve as the towel brigade. She also sports a troll wig every year.



“It's exhilarating, is what it is,” she said. “I love it.”



Another long timer is 17-year-old Calla Dilli of Littleton, who's also on her 10th year. She said she can't remember exactly why she started the tradition, but continued it because her grandmother had Alzheimer's and she liked the idea of the fundraiser. The Boulder County AIDS Project also seems like a good cause, she said.



This year, she and a friend went in twice. The first time, they didn't go under — though her friend did manage a backstroke. So they went in a second time to dunk their heads, a move they to debate for a bit before committing.



While it wasn't as cold as last year, Calla said, “it was still really cold.”



Scott Thompson, his wife and daughter all took their inaugural plunge today.



“It's for a good cause, and everyone's in a happy mood,” he said.



Longmont's Abby Crisafulli, who talked two friends into coming with her — one who had it on her “bucket list” and one who said she succumbed to peer pressure — was on her third plunge.



“It's an adrenaline rush,” she said. “It's cold enough that it doesn't really matter how cold it is.”









After a wild run and dunk in the chilly water of the Boulder Reservoir for the second year, 12-year-old Charlie Springer warned that even experience isn't enough to fully prepare for the numbing cold.“You don't expect how cold it will be,” said Charlie, of Boulder, as he shivered after today's dip. “Your legs start to turn numb and then you trip on the water.”Still, he added, he has every intention of continuing the tradition for many more years to come.“It's just fun,” he said.Hundreds line up each year for the for the New Year's Day Polar Plunge. While in year's past organizers had to break through a layer if ice, this year the water wasn't quite freezing, with a temperature of 37 degrees. Emerging from the water, participants had to dash through the 39-degree cold to get to a heated tent to thaw out.The Boulder County AIDS Project took over the event this year after the previous organizers, the Young Professionals Alzheimer's Association of Colorado, cut ties with the fundraiser. The young professionals' fundraising arm of the Boulder County AIDS Project — connectBCAP — headed up the fundraiser this year.“It's a really fun and crazy event,” said Katie Johnstone, co-chair of connectBCAP. “We had a lot of teams. It's a really fun way for people to connect and come together.”The event was founded in 1983 by Norwegian Trygve Bauge, grandson of Bredo Morstoel, whose frozen remains are celebrated at Nederland's annual Frozen Dead Guy Days festival each March.Golden's Kim Taha said she's taken a freezing dip on New Year's for the past 10 years. Her reason — or excuse, as her family termed it — is that she's Norwegian. And, she acknowledged, “a little bit crazy.She brings children and grandchildren along every year, some who plunge and some who serve as the towel brigade. She also sports a troll wig every year.“It's exhilarating, is what it is,” she said. “I love it.”Another long timer is 17-year-old Calla Dilli of Littleton, who's also on her 10th year. She said she can't remember exactly why she started the tradition, but continued it because her grandmother had Alzheimer's and she liked the idea of the fundraiser. The Boulder County AIDS Project also seems like a good cause, she said.This year, she and a friend went in twice. The first time, they didn't go under — though her friend did manage a backstroke. So they went in a second time to dunk their heads, a move they to debate for a bit before committing.While it wasn't as cold as last year, Calla said, “it was still really cold.”Scott Thompson, his wife and daughter all took their inaugural plunge today.“It's for a good cause, and everyone's in a happy mood,” he said.Longmont's Abby Crisafulli, who talked two friends into coming with her — one who had it on her “bucket list” and one who said she succumbed to peer pressure — was on her third plunge.“It's an adrenaline rush,” she said. “It's cold enough that it doesn't really matter how cold it is.”