Mike Ring, a volunteer with the American Red Cross, talks Tuesday in Fort Collins, about how the Emergency Response Vehicle is used to help people during disasters as he looks out the window which is used to hand out food in many situations. The American Red Cross is offering training and recruiting volunteers to operate the Emergency Response Vehicles. ( Jenny Sparks )

If Mike Ring could dream of a number for the next round of volunteers at the American Red Cross, he'd tell you two dozen.

Thirty people from the Northern Colorado chapter already volunteer to operate the emergency response vehicles deployed to natural disasters locally and across the nation, but more are needed to transport and distribute emergency relief supplies.

If You Go What: American Red Cross emergency response vehicle training; must be 21 or older. When: 9 a.m.-1 p.m. Saturday, Jan. 18. Where: American Red Cross office, 120 Saturn Drive. Registration: Required; RSVP to Julie.DeSena@RedCross.org. Questions?: Email Mike.Ring@redcross.org.

"We do this training twice a year to boost our ranks," said Ring, Emergency Response Vehicle, or ERV, coordinator for the Northern Colorado Chapter of the American Red Cross. "This isn't spontaneous.

Advertisement

Its takes a commitment of time and a commitment of training."

The next semi-annual training, which takes an average of three months to complete, will kick off with a four-hour introductory session on Saturday, Jan. 18, at the Red Cross office in Fort Collins.

Prospective volunteers will learn about operating an ERV, the equipment inside and the additional training sessions that are required.

Fort Collins has one of the 325 ERVs in the nation, which provide food, water, information and resources to victims of disasters. ERVs are stationed across the country and are called to the sites of large disasters, such as floods, wildfires and hurricanes, for disaster response.

An ERV team, consisting of two volunteers, is asked to drive to the disaster or fly there through the Red Cross's travel agency. The volunteers need to be available for deployment for up to three weeks at a time at least once a year; or they may be asked to respond locally to anything from an apartment fire to a natural disaster.

"You get to help your neighbors out," Ring said. "Some of my neighbors are in Alabama, South Dakota and New York. It's an opportunity to give back to others."

The training sessions include in-person classes, online coursework and an individual vehicle driving session. The classes and coursework are in a variety of topics, including First Aid and CPR, food safety and defensive driving.

"This is a great entry into the Red Cross," said Erin Mounsey, executive director of the Red Cross. "What I think of the ERV training is it's a great skill set to get in your back pocket."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.