Photo-op: Obama meets the pope

In anticipation of the meeting, everyone seems to want a piece of the pope. The head of the New Evangelical Partnership for the Common Good has posted a petition on the White House's "We the People" website that makes a religious case for action on climate change.

WASHINGTON — Thursday's meeting between Pope Francis and President Barack Obama holds great promise in a time of turmoil, though not necessarily in the ways some may hope.

Pope Francis, who will meet with President Barack Obama on Thursday at the Vatican, will exude kindness, but he has serious concerns about the conflicts between his church and the White House. (VINCENZO PINTO, Getty-AFP)

Activists pushing for immigration reform are seeking an audience with Pope Francis the day before he meets with Obama. The president has said he wants to discuss his own agenda of tackling poverty and income inequality, the focus of the pope's ministry.

None of these issues can be characterized as hard sells to the leader of the Roman Catholic Church, a man who has eschewed the papal palace for more modest accommodations and strolls the streets of Rome in sensible shoes; who has said we have a duty to protect God's creation; and who is, by the way, South American.

Thus, getting the pope to voice concern about poverty, immigration and environmental conservatism is not likely to require much sweat in the exercise of persuasive powers. Getting to how one accomplishes such things through policy isn't in the pope's wheelhouse. Getting people to examine their own souls is something else.

When the pope and the president look into each other's eyes, they may not see each other's souls, but we know that one of them will be focused intently on its discovery. What happens next is known to no one. But it is inconceivable that the president will not be moved in the presence of such grace. Equally likely is that Pope Francis will discover the pilgrim in Obama.

The rest of the world will see what it needs.

In the U.S., both left and right have projected onto the pope the image they wish to see — that is, a reflection of themselves — rather than the man he truly is. My own observations are gleaned not from a crystal ball but from many conversations with people close to the Vatican and from each man's actions. From these we may infer the verities each holds dear.

We know our president well enough at this point, but our view of the pope has been only a partial image conveyed by commentaries and cameras. He is the pontiff who pats a stray boy's head when the child tries to keep the pope's attention to himself. He's the leader who wants the church to focus less harshly on the social issues that divide. He is the most unusual pope who organizes a fast and leads a peace vigil opposing U.S. military action in Syria.

And he is the one who asks, "Who am I to judge?" on the subject of gays.

He is beloved because he makes us feel good, pointing us in the direction of our better angels. But he is also human and we should not infer that because he is benevolent, he is also benign. This would be to misunderstand and underestimate him. In his daily homilies, Pope Francis talks frequently about the struggle between good and evil. He quotes from Robert Hugh Benson's 1907 novel "Lord of the World," a story of the anti-Christ.