Hillary Clinton spent five minutes trying to avoid speaking about the Obamacare medical device tax during a question-and-answer session at AdvaMed 2014, a medical device industry conference.

Clinton delivered the keynote address at the conference, which was held in Chicago, Illinois. While she was successful in essentially sidestepping the medical device tax during her initial remarks, Clinton — a supporter and defender of Obamacare — got caught in quite a pickle when the AdvaMed president asked her directly about it later.

Individuals in the medical device industry, of course, want the tax to be done away with.

“In reference to health care reform, we really look at the device tax as really a tax issue, sort of a symptom of an increasingly uncompetitive tax code, the reimbursement environment getting more challenging,” said AdvaMed president Stephen Ubl. “So, any views that you have on how we can balance this tension to make sure that we are supporting the ecosystem and addressing challenges like the device tax?”

Clinton began her answer by not so elegantly stumbling.

“I’m well aware of your concerns about the … device tax, and I think you have an argument to make,” she answered. “I think it has to be made within the context of the larger set of issues that have been raised by the ongoing implementation of the Affordable Care Act. And, I would hope [for] … the kind of process that is aimed at problem solving and enlists people of good faith who will come to the table and really work through to the right, best outcomes.”

Wait, what?

To make matters more confusing, Hillary went on to discuss Ebola, economic growth and China before finally referencing the tax again after more than three minutes of rambling.

It actually took Clinton five minutes to admit, “I don’t know what the right answer about the tax is.”

“I think we could, taking a look at everything and not standing there with out arms folding staring at each other across the partisan divide, begin to sort it out,” Hillary concluded.

Watch the first painful five minutes below.