When the Affordable Care Act was passed, it upheld some limitations to abortion coverage, while also handing authority to states in deciding whether private, tax-subsidized health insurance plans could cover the procedure

The move satisfied neither those opposed to abortion nor those in favor of abortion rights.

Anti-abortion groups say people are often unknowingly forced to violate their moral beliefs by paying into plans that cover it, while pro-abortion rights groups say not enough plans cover the procedure. Both groups agree that people should be able to more easily figure out what their health plans cover – something Obamacare requires, though guidance on what details to offer still hasn’t been given.

"It’s difficult for consumers to understand what’s included for them,” says Kinsey Hasstedt, public policy associate at the Guttmacher Institute, which supports abortion rights. “It has certainly gotten better as [the law] has been implemented but there are still issues to be resolved."

Eric Scheidler, executive director at the Pro-Life Action League, says the issue isn’t new for anti-abortion groups.“The Affordable Care Act made it worse,” he says.

“If it’s so essential to women’s freedom and reproductive health, why wouldn’t you want to make it easy for women to understand?”

Since the 1973 Supreme Court Roe v. Wade decision, which legalized abortion, the federal government and states have moved to limit ways abortion can be funded. The 1976 Hyde Amendment restricts abortion coverage for low-income women who are enrolled in Medicaid – the joint state-federal program that 31 states have decided to expand under Obamacare – except in cases of rape, incest or when a woman’s life is threatened. (Seventeen states, however, use their own funds through Medicaid to pay for abortion, according to Guttmacher.)

Congress has also restricted access for federal employees, members of the military and federal prison inmates.

While Obamacare was intended to increase access to health insurance, controversy over the law put coverage under a microscope.

USN&WR

“Going into the focus on abortion coverage and debate on the Affordable Care Act brought to light that [private] plans were covering abortion,”says Kelly Garcia, senior counsel for the National Women’s Law Center, which supports abortion rights. The result, she says, is that fewer private plans are now covering abortion.

In creating “exchanges” where people could buy health insurance that the government helps them pay for, the law required coverage of maternity services and contraception, among other reproductive health care services, but also allowed states to decide whether to ban abortion coverage.

About half of states opted to do so. In Louisiana and Tennessee, abortion is not covered by health insurance at all; in other states, abortion coverage is limited to cases where a woman’s life is in danger or when a pregnancy is the result of rape or incest. Even plans that cover abortion have to use an administrative requirement so federal funding doesn’t go toward the procedure.

National data is not available, but a 2014 report from the Government Accountability Office, which looked at 28 states, found 1,036 health plans covered abortion services beyond cases of life endangerment, rape or incest and 1,062 did not.

A Kaiser Family Foundation analysis released Thursday found that 31 states have limited availability for abortion coverage in their exchanges, and six states have no plans that offer abortion coverage even though their laws allow it to be covered. Hawaii and Vermont, on the other hand, include abortion in all plans sold on their exchanges, so residents of those states cannot purchase a plan that does not cover abortion.

Having health insurance that covers abortion, however, doesn’t address other barriers women face when they seek to terminate a pregnancy. Many states restrict what kinds of medical provider can perform abortions, and some geographic areas do not have clinics for hundreds of miles.

Other states do not provide multiple plans through the marketplace, though under the law by 2017 at least one multi-state plan must guarantee abortion is not covered. Abortion rights proponents say that women should also have the option of at least one plan that does offer coverage for the procedure.

Most private health plans, meanwhile, do cover abortion, but some states restrict abortion coverage to certain cases, according to the Guttmacher Institute. Idaho, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota and Oklahoma specify that insurance plans can cover abortion only when a woman’s life is in danger, and Indiana limits coverage to incidents of rape, incest, fetal impairment or when the woman’s life is in danger. Utah’s laws are similar, though they include exceptions for “substantial and irreversible impairment of a major bodily function.” Seven states permit abortion coverage for those who buy a separate rider and pay an additional premium.

About half of all pregnancies in the U.S. are unplanned, and some estimates have said about a third of women have an abortion in their lifetimes. On average, abortions cost about $600, not much more than they cost in the 1970s, but the farther along a woman is in a pregnancy, the more expensive and complicated the procedure can be. Garcia says costs can reach $1,500 around 20 weeks, and that later in a pregnancy, when a woman who chooses to terminate does so because of fetal abnormalities that threaten survival, an abortion can cost $10,000 or more, Garcia says.

Mirroring the polarizing views on abortion in the U.S., Congress is moving in different directions on the issue. The Equal Access to Abortion Coverage in Health Insurance Act would restore Medicaid abortion coverage, while the No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion and Abortion Insurance Full Disclosure Act of 2015 would ban any public funding for abortion. In recent weeks, Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton has made statements supporting the repeal of the Hyde Amendment, while all of the Republican candidates have confirmed their commitment to restrict, or even eliminate, access to abortion.