President Barack Obama’s signature health care initiative will likely cost Idaho another $250,000 as the state seeks to comply with federal insurance reporting requirements under the law.

Idaho Controller Brandon Woolf, who’s asking for the funds to comply with Obamacare’s requirements, isn’t thrilled about the plan, which must go before state lawmakers early next year.

“This is just another disastrous unfunded federal mandate that comes as a result of one of the poorest pieces of legislation to ever come out of Washington, D.C.,” Woolf said.

Under Obamacare, large employers must verify to the federal government they are providing a certain level of health insurance to employees working more than 30 hour each week. Federal guidelines classify a large employer as any business with more than 50 workers.

The state is not exempt from the requirement. Idaho state government, for example, has more than 24,000 full-time workers.

The verification forms will be sent electronically to the Internal Revenue Service, and each state employee will also receive a digital copy.

State workers who want paper copies of insurance verification forms can request them, Woolf’s office told IdahoReporter.com.

The verification process begins Jan. 1, 2015, and Idaho must submit its first report to the IRS by Jan. 31, 2016.

The $250,000 will fund computer coding expenses for the sizable undertaking. A document turned over to IdahoReporter.com by the controller’s office reveals the IRS project will take agency employees off two other undertakings, which Woolf and company didn’t explain in the budget request.

The IRS project also has the potential to force Woolf’s office to incur overtime costs.

With a few months remaining prior to the January kickoff of the 2015 legislative session, budget writers were less than familiar with Woolf’s pitch. Rep. Maxine Bell, R-Jerome, who serves as chair of the Joint Finance-Appropriations Committee, told IdahoReporter.com she’d seen the request in passing, but hadn’t thought much of it.

Bell did say she looks forward to a “thoughtful discussion” on the expense.

While lawmakers might indeed hold that discussion, they don’t really have a choice on the matter. If the state declines to fund the project, the federal government can enact severe penalties on Idaho, including up to a combined $350,000 per year.

Woolf doesn’t want any association with Obamacare, but says he will request the funds to prevent future expenses for the state.

“I don’t like Obamacare and I believe it’s not right for the people of Idaho, but the penalties for non-compliance are very real and very severe,” Woolf said.