A Benton County judge, in a case followed nationally, has ruled that a Richland florist violated Washington’s Consumer Protection Act when she refused to sell flowers to a longtime customer preparing for his marriage to another man.

In his ruling, Benton County Superior Court Judge Alex Ekstrom went to the heart of the argument by Barronelle Stutzman, a Southern Baptist, that she was exercising her religious freedom when she spurned customer Robert Ingersoll.

“For over 135 years,” wrote Judge Ekstrom, “the Supreme Court has held that laws may prohibit religiously motivated action, as opposed to belief.

“In trade and commerce, and more particularly when seeking to prevent discrimination in public accommodations, the Courts have confirmed the power of the Legislative Branch to prohibit conduct it deems discriminatory even where the motivation for that conduct is grounded in religious belief.”

The issue came up after Washington voters in 2012 passed Referendum 74, bringing marriage equality to the Evergreen State.

In February 2013, Ingersoll went to Arlene’s Flowers in preparation for marriage to Curt Freed. Stutzman refused the business in an emotional scene.

Attorney General Bob Ferguson sent a letter to the owner of Arlene’s Flowers, asking Stutzman to comply with state law, which forbids discrimination based on sexual preference. The AG said he would not have sued had she complied with the letter.

The 70-year-old florist refused. Ferguson filed a consumer protection lawsuit against both Arlene’s Flowers and Stutzman as its owner.

Judge Ekstrom granted summary judgment in the case late Wednesday. Earlier, the judge had ruled that damages could be sought against both Stutzman and her business.

“The law is clear: If you choose to provide a service to couples of the opposite sex, you must provide the same service to same sex couples,” AG Ferguson said in a statement.

“Washington has enacted laws recognizing equality for same sex couples, and I will continue to vigorously uphold those laws.”

Kristen Waggoner, counsel for the Alliance Defending Freedom, represented Stutzman. She read far more into the case and its implications.

“Laws that are supposed to prohibit discrimination might sound good, but the government has begun to use these laws to hurt people — to force them to conform and to silence and punish them if they don’t violate their religious beliefs on marriage.”

Waggoner, once a law clerk to state Supreme Court Justice Richard Sanders — renowned for his libertarian views — charged that “the government will bring about your ruin if you don’t help celebrate same sex marriage.”

In a statement, Stutzman said that government is “coming after me and everything I have just because I won’t live my life the way the state says I should.

“I just want the freedom to live and work faithfully and according to what God says about marriage without fear of punishment.”

Judge Ekstrom, in a lengthy opinion, cited legal precedents ranging from a state consumer protection action brought against high-profile auto dealer Ralph Williams in the 1970s, to the historic U.S. Supreme Court discrimination case of Heart of Atlanta Motel vs. United States.

He discussed the Supreme Court’s controversial Hobby Lobby decision, which allowed a private business to opt out of providing contraceptive services under the Affordable Care Act.

He rejected the argument that the state’s anti-discrimination law violates the free exercise of religion guaranteed by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Ekstrom wrote:

“Again, defendant mixes the distinction between belief and conduct, clergy and laity, and the distinction between accommodation and public accommodation, and as a result cites two cases that are distinguishable on their facts.”

Ultimately, the decision rested on the distinction between religious belief and the exercise of trade and commerce under laws that forbid discrimination.

“Religious freedom is a fundamental part of America. But religious beliefs do not give any of us a right to ignore the law or harm others because of who they are,” said Sarah Dunne, legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Washington, which backed Ingersoll.