More Video...

Credit: Kansas National Guard/Facebook

Snow that fell on Easter Sunday has helped contain a wildfire in Barber County. Officials report the fire is 81 percent contained, up from 31 percent on Saturday.

Barber County Attorney Gaten Wood says the powder did wonders for knocking out hot spots and worries for those within the burn lines.

"Snow is better than rain because rain hits the ground and runs off, this snow blanketed our area and slowly melted through the morning allowing the ground to soak it in," said Wood.

However, some problems areas remain. The Barber County Sheriff's Office says the snow helped on grasses and light fuels, but the snow was unable to reach some drainage areas and canyons.

It is those areas where four Kansas National Guard Black Hawk helicopters along with hundreds of firefighters and volunteers concentrated their efforts. On Saturday, those helicopters dumped nearly 70 Bambi Buckets and 50,000 gallons of water on fire-devastated areas across the county.

The combination of snow and efforts from above have been enough to start sending volunteer crews home after a long 5 days.

"I think we're only going to have 4 outside units tomorrow and one commander for them so we're getting it down," said Barber Co. Fire Chief Rick Wesley.

Wood says the beginning cost estimates for fighting this fire has reached over a million dollars and that doesn't include Barber County's own fire department expenses.

Sheriff's office: Drones hinder firefighting efforts in Barber County

Snow that fell on Easter Sunday has helped contain a wildfire in Barber County. Officials report the fire is 81 percent contained, up from 31 percent on Saturday.

However, some problems areas remain.

An official with the Barber County Sheriff's Office said the snow helped on grasses and light fuels, but the snow was unable to reach some drainage areas and canyons. It is those areas where four Kansas National Guard Black Hawk helicopters along with hundreds of firefighters and volunteers concentrated their efforts.

On Saturday, those helicopters dumped nearly 70 Bambi Buckets and 50,000 gallons of water on fire-devastated areas across the county.