Rep. Greg Walden, Oregon's sole Republican in Congress, stayed far away from the conservative revolt against House Speaker John Boehner that failed to prevent his re-election.

The GOP rebels -- none of whom were from the Northwest -- did manage to collect 25 votes against Boehner, the most ever cast against a sitting speaker by members of his own party in more than a century.

Walden's loyalty to Boehner is no surprise. Boehner first brought Walden into the House leadership in 2010. Walden has also had his differences with the Tea Party groups that encouraged the revolt against the speaker.

Washington Post columnist Dana Milbank reported that Walden was among the establishment members of the House that openly derided some of the votes cast by the dissidents on Tuesday.

When Rep. Curt Clawson, R-Fla., voted for Sen. Rand Paul, Walden could be heard on the floor asking, "Why a senator?" House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., shrugged in response.

As it happened, most of the votes against Boehner went to symbolic candidates like Paul. Critics hoped to deny the speaker a majority on the first vote and prod the House to turn to someone else.

Rep. Raul Labrador, R-Idaho, was a leader of the anti-Boehner faction two years ago. But this time he voted for the speaker's re-election, saying he didn't want to "marginalize" himself in what he felt would be a doomed effort to defeat Boehner.

"The votes were simply not there to defeat the speaker," Labrador said in a statement.

House Democrats, meanwhile, cast their speakership votes for House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., with the exception of four. One, Rep. Daniel Lipinski, D-Ill., voted for Rep. Peter DeFazio, D-Ore.

DeFazio, who withheld his support from Pelosi after the Democrats lost control of the House in 2010, voted for her this time, as did the other three Democratic representatives from Oregon.

DeFazio is now the ranking member on the House Transportation & Infrastructure Committee, so he doesn't need to pick fights with his leadership.

Rep. Kurt Schrader is another Oregon Democrat with a new committee assignment. He's shifting from the House agriculture, small business and budget committees to the House Energy and Commerce Committee, which is one of the most powerful in the House.

Schrader spokesman Richard Carbo said one advantage of the new committee position is that it will give the congressman more opportunity to weigh in on issues surrounding Oregon's shift to the federal health care exchange after the failure of the Cover Oregon website.

In a statement, Schrader said:

In this new capacity, I'll advocate for stronger investments in renewable energy that will reduce our carbon footprint and our reliance on foreign oil, I'll fight to ensure Americans have access to quality health coverage without overly burdensome government interference, and I'll work with members of both parties to ensure we have a robust economy that gives our businesses, of all sizes, the tools they need to succeed."

--Jeff Mapes

jmapes@oregonian.com

503-221-8209; @Jeffmapes