While whittling down your holiday gift list for loved ones, don’t forget all the other people who’ve made your life easier, often behind the scenes.

Small gifts or even monetary tips, along with a hand-written note, show your appreciation for the people who provide regular services for you and your family throughout the year.

Related: Tips on Holiday Tipping: How Not to Go Broke

Seven in 10 families intend to tip this season, according to a recent survey from Care.com, with a third planning to spend between $101 and $250 on tips. Three in five families say they prefer to give a mix of cash and actual gifts.

“Although we may say a verbal thank you throughout the year, it is it important that we show gratitude in a more tangible way at the end of the year,” lifestyle and etiquette expert Elaine Swann writes in an email.

Here’s a stress-free guide outlining what to give to whom, courtesy of etiquette experts Diane Gottsman and Swann along with The Etiquette School of New York. If your budget is already strained, remember: Most people will appreciate any gift, no matter the size. It’s the thought that matters most.

Building Superintendent

Tip: $50 to $100, depending on how responsive and obliging your super has been.

Doorman

Tip: $25 to $150 for each doorman if he or she is friendly, accepts frequent deliveries for you, or has a long-standing relationship with you.

Elevator Operator/Other Building Staff

Tip: $25 to $50. But first find out from your building association if there is a tip pool for the building staff.

Landscaper/Gardener

Tip: $20 to $50 for occasional landscapers. Up to a week’s pay for frequent landscapers.

Newspaper Carrier

Tip: $25 to $50 for carriers who deliver daily. $10 for carriers who deliver once a week.

Mail Carrier

Gift: Small gift or homemade treat worth less than $20. U.S. Post Office workers aren’t allowed to accept cash, checks, gift cards or any cash equivalents as a tip.

Regular UPS Driver

Tip: $20.

Regular FedEx Driver

Gift: Worth up to $25.

Handyman

Tip: $25 to $40, depending on the amount of work he or she has done for you.

Trash/Recycling Collectors

Tip: $10 to $20 for each collector. First check local regulations for tipping public-service employees.

Car Wash Attendant

Gift: Offer a communal gift, like a plate of cookies, if you visit regularly.

Tip: $5 to $10 for any standout employee.

Dog Walker

Tip: Equivalent of one week’s service for daily dog walkers. Equivalent of one walk for occasional dog walkers.

Pool Cleaner

Tip: The cost of one cleaning. If only one cleaner, a gift of equal value is also appropriate.

Babysitter or Nanny

Tip: One week to one month’s pay.

Gift: Have older child give a small handmade gift, too.

Housekeeper

Tip: Equivalent of one week’s pay. A little less if the housekeeper comes less frequently.

Long-Term Care Nurses or Private Caregivers

Gift: If multiple nurses assist you or your loved one, give a shareable gift. Check with the hospital first for any restrictions.

Tip: One week to one month’s pay, or gift of equal value for private caregivers.

Related: Which Credit Card In Your Wallet Is Offering Holiday Deals

Barber or Hair Stylist

Tip: Equivalent of one service, or gift of equal value for regular barbers or stylists.

Shampoo Person

Tip: $10 or small gift.

Child’s Extracurricular Instructors (such as private tutors, sport coaches or dance teachers)

Gift: Small gift from your child.

Manicurist/Pedicurist

Tip: $15 to $25, or a small gift.

Massage Therapist

Tip: $15 and up, or a small gift.

Personal Trainer

Tip: Cost of one session, or gift of equal value.

Teacher

Gift: Small gift from you and one from your child. Cash could look like you’re trying to get preferential treatment.

School Principal

Gift: A thoughtful, handwritten note would be much appreciated.