With take-home pay of about $200 a week from her minimum-wage job at a Highland gas station, Karina Longfellow finds herself having to decide which of her bills she can pay and which will have to wait a little while longer.

The creditors haven't started calling on the 22-year-old student at Purdue University Calumet yet, but she knows it could only be a matter of time.

"I have a lot of bills to pay, but it's kind of hard when you're only making $200 a week," said Longfellow, who is considered part-time but works between 35 and 40 hours a week.

She said she has earned more at other jobs in the past, but accepted this job and its $7.25 an hour salary with no benefits about a month and a half ago, when she found herself jobless and with only $30 to her name.

"I don't know how people with families can do it," she said of parents who work in minimum wage jobs.

Minimum wage movement underway

Families can't make it on their own making $7.25 an hour, Indiana's minimum wage, said state Sen. Karen Tallian, D-Ogden Dunes, who said she filed legislation to increase the rate for two or three years, but none of the bills received a hearing.

Still, Tallian said she'll try again this year. She said she'll be filing another bill, this time asking that the minimum wage in Indiana be increased to between $9 and $11.50 an hour.

Someone earning $7.25 an hour, which is also the federal minimum wage, makes just over $15,000 a year working 40-hour weeks. It's above the federal poverty level for a single person, but dips below for a household of two, at $15,730, and even further below for a family of four, which is $23,850.

"No one who works 40 hours a week should be below the federal poverty level," Tallian said.

She said in those cases the families would qualify for state benefits.

"The state of Indiana is subsidizing these businesses," she said.

Tallian isn't alone in looking at increasing minimum wage. Cities, states and companies themselves are making the move.

Wal-Mart said it would raise its minimum pay to $10 an hour by next year and Amalgamated Bank announced it raised its teller pay to $15 an hour. Chicago is raising its minimum wage to $13 an hour and Seattle, an expensive city in which to live, raised its to $15 an hour.

Minimum wage varies by state. Vermont voted to gradually increase its minimum wage to $10.50 by January 2018 and Washington, D.C., increased its to $11.50 as of July 2016.

A matter of timing

State Rep. Julie Olthoff, D-Merrillville, said she doesn't know if now is a good time to talk about minimum wage in Indiana, noting it was only six years since the last increase.

"A lot of businesses were hit in 2007 and 2008 and are just now bouncing back. Now they're faced with another challenge -- trying to figure out the Affordable Care Act and how they can handle it," Olthoff said.

She said some companies would put on more part-time workerers, which she said wouldn't be positive for the employee, employer or the business.

Paul McGrath, an economics professor at Purdue University Calumet, said it's probably time to look at the issue again in Indiana, even if the rate is only increased to $8 or $9, but added whether the General Assembly would do so would likely depend on whether it's mostly blue (Democrat) or red (Republican).

He doesn't see the minimum going as high as $10 an hour in Indiana. He said the state doesn't have the high cost of living that Chicago and Seattle do that drove their minimum rates higher.

He said how much of an impact raising the rate will have on a company's profitability depends on how important unskilled labor is to the company.

"If a company, municipality or university uses a lot of unskilled labor, it could have a cost impact, which they'd try to pass on to the customer. To what degree will customers agree to eat that cost," McGrath said.

"Some might ask why a meal costs 25 cents more than last week," he said.

McGrath said he's pretty sure there are a lot of service sector jobs in Northwest Indiana's seven-county region that start out at minimum wage, many of which are part-time.

Ross Township Trustee Joseph Shudick said his office sees, and serves, a lot of working poor residents, people making minimum wage working at two to three different part-time jobs.

"Minimum wage is OK, but now add two to three kids. You have to pay rent, utilities and transportation costs. It creates a hole that's real difficult to crawl out of," Shudick said.

Longfellow said her parents are paying her college costs for the first four years, but she has a car payment, hospital bills and other bills. Plus, she wants to go on to graduate school, which she knows she'll need to obtain loans to accomplish. She also wants to move out of the dorms and into an apartment, which she can't do on her current salary.

"I definitely would like to see minimum waged increased. You can't live on $7.25 an hour," she said.

Karen Caffarini is a freelance reporter for the Post-Tribune.