By Jason Hart | Watchdog.org

Teachers union bosses keep fighting for bigger government and redistribution of wealth – whether teachers like it or not.

The National Education Association and American Federation of Teachers spend teachers’ union dues pushing a far-left wishlist including a $15 minimum wage, universal preschool and expanded college subsidies.

Promoting these policies and tax hikes to pay for them, NEA president Lily Eskelsen Garcia and AFT president Randi Weingarten were both featured guests at the May launch of “The Progressive Agenda to Combat Income Inequality.”

Official NEA and AFT support for projects like The Progressive Agenda — which is led by New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio and allied nonprofit Campaign for One New York — is the rule, not the exception.

Though claiming to speak on behalf of all America’s teachers and school children is Eskelsen and Weingarten’s stock in trade, not all educators are buying what they’re selling.

“I see no reason for either union president to endorse the Progressive Agenda,” Wisconsin teacher Amy Rosno said in an email to Watchdog.org. “Nothing on the agenda is for the benefit of public education.”

RELATED: Taxpayer money fuels Big Labor’s political machine

Rosno, a former member of NEA affiliate Wisconsin Education Association Council who was freed from mandatory union fees by Gov. Scott Walker’s labor reforms, is now a member of Association of American Educators, a non-union professional organization.

“As soon as I had a choice to leave the union, I did,” Rosno said. “NEA and AFT are losing members, and the loss in membership is a direct result of their involvement in political agendas that do not relate to education.”

Maryland teacher Vann Prime, another AAE member, agreed with Rosno that Eskelsen and Weingarten do a disservice to teachers by supporting The Progressive Agenda and similar political campaigns.

“Actions like signing on to The Progressive Agenda are exactly why I refuse to belong to the AFT and the NEA,” Prime said in an email to Watchdog.org.

“Regardless of their politics, most American teachers simply aren’t interested in being political pawns,” Prime added, bemoaning AFT and NEA’s “cartel-like power over school districts.”

In most of the states without right-to-work laws, NEA and AFT can take mandatory “fair share” fees from nonmembers. Fair share fees helped AFT pay Weingarten $557,875 last year, and helped NEA pay Eskelsen $345,728.

Teachers who agree with Weingarten’s justifications for backing The Progressive Agenda would likely be shocked by her annual compensation.

"We're all in this together and we will rise and fall together. Those who create America's prosperity should share in it." #p2Agenda — Randi Weingarten (@rweingarten) May 12, 2015

Like my students used to say, "It's time to walk the walk and not just talk the talk" to achieve The #ProgressiveAgenda. #p2Agenda — Randi Weingarten (@rweingarten) May 12, 2015

The Progressive Agenda may not be widely supported by the teachers Eskelsen and Weingarten are paid to represent, but it’s incredibly popular among union bosses.

American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees president Lee Saunders and Service Employees International Union president Mary Kay Henry both spoke at The Progressive Agenda’s kick-off event last month.

NEA, SEIU, AFT and AFSCME account for nearly half the nation’s union membership. Most of the workers who choose to join — or are forced to pay fair share fees — are public employees.

The Progressive Agenda, Communist Party USA reported, is a coordinated effort to pull Democrat presidential candidate Hillary Clinton further left.

Maybe that’s why The Progressive Agenda so strongly resembles the presidential platform of socialist Bernie Sanders, a long-shot challenger to Clinton in the Democratic primary.

The Progressive Agenda borrows heavily from “The Progressive Promise,” as well. The Progressive Promise was drafted in the 1990s by Sanders and his Congressional Progressive Caucus, and promoted by Sanders supporters at Democratic Socialists of America.

DSA, the Sanders campaign and Campaign for One New York all failed to respond to requests for comment on the similarities between their various agendas.