istockphoto.com/wsfurlan

By Laura Kreutzer and Amy Or

Private equity firms may be ready to shop in the public markets again.

The same stock market volatility that has sent some private equity portfolio valuations down, particularly for firms with sizable public company stakes in their portfolios, may translate into more public stock purchases by private equity firms, or perhaps even privatizations of public companies.

High public stock valuations made public-to-private transactions less attractive to investors in recent years with the number of such deals in the U.S. dropping to just 18 deals totaling $26.04 billion in 2014 from 47 deals totaling $48.8 billion back in 2010, according to data provider Dealogic.

Market volatility and growing concern among public stock investors about the global economy have driven down valuations for many public companies, making them more attractive to some private equity buyers.

On a recent earnings call, Blackstone Group President and Chief Operating Officer Hamilton “Tony” James said “many individual company stock prices have dropped 30[%] to 40%,” at a time when “those companies’ other sources of growth capital have dried up.”

He added that despite the choppy markets, many public companies continue to see revenue growth, and consumer demand has remained comparatively steady. Absent a major macroeconomic shock, Blackstone doesn’t foresee a U.S. recession, according to Mr. James.

“The market has overreacted,” he said.

Tom Lacy, a managing director in the financial sponsors group at investment bank Robert W. Baird & Co., said the private equity community is “definitely more interested in actively discussing ideas in the public markets, whether through PIPEs or take-private transactions, but those deals can be more difficult to consummate.”

Specifically, he added, private equity firms considering a take-private deal must navigate the different constituents on corporate boards and among shareholders, which is often a complex process.

“It can take some time for the stars and moons to align,” Mr. Lacy said.

Access the full story in LBO Wire here (subscription required).

Write to Laura Kreutzer at laura.kreutzer@wsj.com and Amy Or at Amy.Or@wsj.com.