Mitt Romney can’t stop lying. On Fox News Sunday, Romney claimed that if Republicans win the Senate they will prove that Democrats are the real party of no.

Video:

In Romney’s fantasyland, Democrats will help Republicans get 60 votes in the Senate and pass bills that President Obama will sign.

Romney said,

The good news is that in many cases the president will sign them with regards to for instance the economy. The president has asked for trade promotion authority. Harry Reid won’t give him that authority. Republicans want him to have that authority. We want to see trade negotiations under way and see if we can’t find more places to sell American goods that will help the economy. The president will sign that. When Reince Priebus talks about adjusting our healthcare system to make Obamacare work better, look, we’ve got Obamacare at least for the next couple of years, there are a lot of things a number of Democrats in the Senate agree with Republicans on. One is to keep the penalty for people who are in part time work from driving more people out of full time jobs. These kinds of changes I actually think you’ll see the president sign. I am absolutely convinced that you’re going to see with a Republican led Senate, if we are lucky enough to get that, you’re going to see bills get to the president’s desk. He will sign some. Some he won’t sign, no question about that. He’ll veto some, but I think at that point we’ll find out who really is the party of no.

Mitt Romney was selling a package of rainbows and unicorns to Republicans. Here is what will really happen. If Republicans take control of the Senate, they will not have the sixty votes needed to pass legislation. At this point, you will see Harry Reid and the Democrats embark on a revenge campaign that would make Emily Thorne proud.

Nothing is going to get through the Senate unless it is something moderate that Obama and the Democrats want. There will be no Republican led flood of legislation hitting Obama’s desk. Within a month of taking over the Senate, Republicans will be moaning about not being able to pass anything.

Republicans in the Senate will try to ransom Obama by using the funding process to shut down the government. It will be proven the American people, once again, why Mitt Romney is a compulsive liar who is rarely right about anything.