Centennial City Council has increased the tax exemption for business personal property to $100,000, an attempt to make life easier for existing businesses and attract new ones.

Attracting new businesses will be vital because the council’s vote July 21 means the city will be forgoing $220,000 in revenue, according to Lisa Bigelow, an analyst with the city’s finance department. Attracting new businesses would make up for that shortfall, Bigelow said. She said normally the city takes in about $1.1 million in business personal property tax revenue every year.

Businesses are taxed on personal property that includes any items that are removable or moveable like equipment, light fixtures and furniture. Bigelow said about 91 percent of businesses in Centennial will not have to pay the business personal property tax next year as a result of the change.

“Compared to our surrounding communities, it’s quite a substantial increase,” Bigelow said, adding most of the surrounding communities only have exemptions of $10,000 to $20,000. “So $100,000 was pretty significant. We hoped it would attract new businesses into our city limits.”

Robert Golden, president and CEO of the South Metro Denver Chamber of Commerce headquartered in Centennial, said Centennial’s move is a positive one and will make the chamber’s job of recruiting new businesses to Centennial easier.

“It’s a pretty aggressive move, but it’s a positive one and we say hats off to them,” he said. “We look forward to seeing it have the positive impact that they say it will.”

He also said he expects it to cause surrounding communities to take notice and re-think their own tax exemptions.

Centennial Mayor Cathy Noon said the city council hopes businesses will think about reinvesting in or expanding their businesses with the money they save.

She said business personal property tax is a big complaint in the state.

“What we heard from businesses is that it’s not the money, it’s the reporting they have to do,” Noon said. “All we can do is give the exemption for our portion of the tax so we were actually being more pro-active than reactive to make the statement that we want to be business-friendly.”

Clayton Woullard: 303-954-2953, cwoullard@denverpost.com or twitter.com/yhclayton