I see from Mark Thoma that Chris Dillow is doing battle with the usual idiots suspects, who are once again accusing me of hypocrisy or something for saying that increased unemployment benefits would, under current conditions, reduce unemployment. “But your textbook says that UI raises unemployment!”

Folks, we’ve been here before. Full explanation here:

Everyone agrees that really generous unemployment benefits, by reducing the incentive to seek jobs, can raise the NAIRU; that is, set limits to how far down you can push unemployment without running into inflation problems. But in case you haven’t noticed, that’s not the problem constraining job growth in America right now. Wage growth is declining, not rising, and so is overall inflation. A wage-price spiral looks like a distant dream. What’s limiting employment now is lack of demand for the things workers produce. Their incentives to seek work are, for now, irrelevant … And the truth is that unemployment benefits are a good, quick, administratively easy way to increase demand, which is what we really need. So right now they have the effect of reducing unemployment.

Where I think even Dillow goes wrong, however, is in suggesting that this kind of regime-dependence makes economics different from the natural sciences. Actually, phase shifts are common across many phenomena. Suppose I want to cross a river. The effects of a simple policy of walking in the direction I want to go will be very different if the river is flowing than if it’s frozen solid.

And an economy where monetary policy has hit the zero lower bound is a very different place from one in which monetary policy can play its normal role. Right back at the beginning of this mess I said as much:

We are already, however, well into the realm of what I call depression economics. By that I mean a state of affairs like that of the 1930s in which the usual tools of economic policy — above all, the Federal Reserve’s ability to pump up the economy by cutting interest rates — have lost all traction. When depression economics prevails, the usual rules of economic policy no longer apply: virtue becomes vice, caution is risky and prudence is folly.

Now, you may disagree with this diagnosis; you’re wrong, but that’s OK. What you can’t do is claim that I’m being inconsistent, let alone hypocritical: I’ve been telling the same story all along.