Topics: climate, Climate Change, climate science, Editor's Picks, Extreme weather, Global Warming, The Polar Vortex, Weather, Sustainability News, News

Here in the U.S., the polar vortex is back, repeating its attack from last year. Like last year’s event, this one is extreme; it is bringing unusually cold temperatures and deluges of autumn snow. And it just turned serious, with at least 10 people killed by back-to-back city-burying blizzards in Buffalo. The forecast now threatens flooding as temperatures rise and rain falls on snow.

Here, however, is where some expert observers will beg caution: In most of the rest of the country, it’s just cold. And, in the bigger picture, the polar vortex is repeating what it has done every year since long before there were human beings on the planet. There has always been cold air over the pole in winter, and it has always moved around and sometimes moved over us.

Some weather stories take the normal behavior of the atmosphere and turn it into hype. That bothers many professional meteorologists in academia and the media. But I’m making my peace with it. First of all, the hype becomes warranted when the weather brings real death and destruction, as it has this time. But also, it’s a sign of increasing public interest in the science of weather and climate, and we need that.

The polar vortex is a permanent feature of the earth’s climate. Actually, it’s closer to being two features. In the scientific literature, many uses of the term “polar vortex” refer exclusively to the blob of cold air over the dark winter pole in the stratosphere, high above where planes fly. This blob is encircled by a belt of intensely powerful westerly (west to east) winds, the stratospheric polar night jet.

Down in the troposphere – the lower layer of the atmosphere, where we live – there is more polar cold air. It too has westerly winds blowing around the edge of it, still high above the surface, but below the stratosphere. That’s the polar vortex that brings the weather. The edge of the tropospheric vortex wobbles around, and when the edge dips south of us, we get a delivery of that cold air from the pole, as we are now.

But while the stratospheric and tropospheric polar vortices influence each other, they are often disconnected, with a substantial gap between them, the stratospheric one circling well above the tropospheric one. Some of the coverage fails to explain the stratosphere/troposphere distinction well, or mixes the two up entirely. That can be confusing or misleading.

More grating to some is the way the term “polar vortex” burst on the scene last year. It seemed as though something completely new had dropped into the earth’s atmosphere from space. Last winter was indeed extreme in how far south the edge of the polar vortex dipped in the eastern and central U.S., and especially in how long it stayed there. This current event may well get into the same record-breaking ballpark (at least in terms of departures from normal for the time of year, and almost certainly for snow in Buffalo). But really pretty much every cold snap is related to the polar vortex to some extent. If one were inclined to be cranky, one could fairly say that headlines like “The Polar Vortex Is Coming Back” are just hype-speak for “it’s going to be cold.”

Yes, there do seem to be more overblown weather stories than in the past. My strictly unscientific, anecdotal assessment is that the atmosphere gets a lot more media coverage altogether, and more different kinds of coverage, than it did even just a couple of years ago. It’s a mixed trend, as some mainstream media outlets are cutting back on climate coverage; but online, there are quite a few journalists, bloggers and even entire websites staffed with people writing about nothing but weather and climate, often right as it happens, supplementing longer articles with rapid-fire social media activity.

While some over-hype is inevitable as our 21st century, 24-hour news media strikes on any topic, a lot of this content is really quite good. Some of these writers have advanced degrees in meteorology, write well and offer original, substantive analysis. (I first learned of Hurricane Sandy a week before landfall from Jason Samenow’s Capital Weather Gang blog for the Washington Post.) The reason there are so many of them is clearly that their employers recognize the devoted audiences they draw.