ENLARGE Photo: TOPEKA CAPITAL-JOURNAL/ASSOCIATED PRESS

Kansas Supreme Court justices could be impeached for behaving discourteously in the courtroom or for trying to “usurp” legislative power under a bill approved by the state Senate on Tuesday.

The proposal, now under consideration by the Kansas House, specifies various “crimes and misdemeanors” that would constitute impeachable offenses. Among those enumerated in the legislation:

● Attempting to subvert fundamental laws and introduce arbitrary power. ● Attempting to usurp the power of the other branches of government. ● Discourteous conduct toward certain persons.

The Kansas impeachment measure applied only to judges when it was first introduced. The version that passed the Kansas Senate would apply to the governor, attorney general and other statewide executive branch offices. The Senate passed the measure 21-19 on Tuesday.

The debate in the statehouse focused on the implications for the court. One opponent charged that it “blatantly seeks to muzzle our Kansas Supreme Court.” Supporters said it aims to guard against judicial tyranny.

The advancement of the bill is the latest front in the outright hostilities between Kansas lawmakers and some justices on the state’s high court. At one point, as Law Blog wrote about earlier, lawmakers came close to defunding the state court system over a dispute about who picks the state’s chief judges.

The Wichita Eagle has more on what’s driving the new legislative effort:

Sen. Mitch Holmes, R-St. John, said he voted yes to keep judges from having absolute power to the detriment of democracy. “We live in an era where people believe independent courts and absolute power are synonymous,” Holmes said. In debate Monday, Holmes cited two examples from the 2014 election of what he sees as impeachable offenses: the decision by the Supreme Court to allow a Democratic candidate off the ballot without forcing the party to name a replacement, and a justice allowing her husband to hold a political fundraiser at their home, which she did not attend. Lawmakers have said the court has overstepped its bounds on the always-contentious issue of school finance.

Republicans control a large majority of seats in the Kansas Senate and House, in addition to the governorship. The state high court is bluer. Four out of the seven current justices are appointees of former Democratic Kansas Gov. Kathleen Sebelius, who previously worked in the Obama administration overseeing the Obamacare rollout. The other justices were appointed by GOP governors, including current Gov. Sam Brownback.

Sponsors of the bill said it honors the original meaning of the “high crimes and misdemeanors” impeachment standard in the U.S. Constitution.

The term, mentioned in Article II, Section 4, isn’t defined. It encompasses ordinary crimes. Alexander Hamilton in the Federalist Papers indicated that it could also apply to acts of misconduct that violate the public trust but not necessarily the law.

A fiscal note attached to the Kansas bill says that if lawmakers seek to remove a judge, the judicial branch is on the hook for any extra costs to handle the judge’s workload during the impeachment proceedings.