DONNA — Thousands of people in the Rio Grande Valley have been diagnosed with diabetes. Without insurance, the cost to manage the disease can soar into the thousands. Government services, like Medicaid and Medicare, can help cover some of those costs for diabetic patients.

The difference between Medicaid and Medicare is simple. Medicare provides health coverage to those who are 65 or older or people who have a severe disability, no matter how much they make. Medicaid is a federal and state program, providing health coverage for low-income families and individuals with certain restrictions.

Every week, Ruben Estrada takes a short trip to his doctor’s office in Donna. “I’ve had diabetes for about 30 years,” he said.

Estrada’s checkups are the same. It’s the journey getting to this point that nearly killed him.

“Before, when I didn't have insurance, I would buy it in Mexico,” Estrada said about his medication.

Controlling his diabetes isn’t easy. At first, Estrada didn’t qualify for Medicaid, and he was too young for Medicare.

“Many people just go to Mexico and they buy at the pharmacies,” said Dr. Jose Pena, president of the Donna Medical Clinic and CEO of the Rio Grande Valley Accountable Care Organization. “They buy a pill for blood sugar, but it's very poor care.”

Pena said he sees cases like Estrada’s more and more.

“We have a huge social problem that is called diabetes without insurance,” he said.

Texas is the uninsured capital of the United States, according to Texmed.org. The website states more than 4.2 million people are living without insurance.

“Medicaid covers pretty much 100 percent, even though it's a low payment for the providers,” Pena said. “But Medicare will cover 80 percent of cost. In both of them, people have access to medication with some limited coverage.”

In Cameron County, more than 132,000 people are living without insurance. And in Hidalgo County, 164,000 people don’t have insurance. These are some of the highest numbers in the state.

"Many people get into the emergency room with a heart attack at 55, because they had 10 years of diabetes, high blood pressure without good coverage,” Pena said. “Many times, it's too late.”

In Texas, Medicaid covers senior citizens, the blind and disabled adults without dependent children. Adults with dependent children are only eligible if their household income doesn’t exceed 14 percent of the federal poverty level.

Children are eligible for either Medicaid or CHIPS (Children’s Health Insurance Program) if their household incomes are up to 201 percent of the federal poverty level.

Pregnant women are eligible for Medicaid if their household income doesn’t exceed 198 percent of the federal poverty level. That’s roughly $3,300 a month or $39,000 a year.

Whenever a child turns 18, they do not qualify under any of those terms.

"Medicaid gets dropped,” Pena said. “Medicaid has an age limit for kids. After that, you're on your own.”

Texas hasn’t expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. The state has the biggest Medicaid coverage gap in the country. Roughly 766,000 residents are ineligible for the federal program. Doctors said out of that number, residents in the Valley account for 30 to 35 percent.

"We are in favor of the Medicaid expansion, so people don't get broke or just die because of lack of Medicaid or insurance,” Pena said.

Medicaid expansion covers uninsured adults. This is mostly the working poor who don’t make enough to buy insurance.

Hardworking people are forced to do whatever it takes to stay alive.

Until Medicaid is expanded or more companies offer health insurance at affordable rates, those people in the gap of insurance coverage have few to no options.

Anyone who has questions about Medicaid or Medicare qualifications should contact their local health department or the main Medicaid office in Austin by calling 512-424-6500.