Topics: blue jasmine, cate blanchett, Comedy, Diane Keaton, Editor's Picks, Golden Globes, Movie Awards Season, Movies, Scarlett Johansson, Woody Allen, You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger, Entertainment News

This weekend Woody Allen will receive the 2014 Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement at the Golden Globes ceremony, and it’s tempting to crack jokes about these two enduring but seemingly irrelevant American institutions. Tempting but wrong. Whatever you make of the opaque, unpredictable and often bewildering genius of the man born 78 years ago as Allen Stewart Konigsberg — my own feelings are immensely mixed, and given the length and variety of his career, whose aren’t? — he doesn’t belong to the same category as the Globes in any way. Woody Allen famously doesn’t attend the Oscars, even when he’s likely to win one (he made an exception in 2002, but only to talk about filmmaking in New York after 9/11), so there’s no way he’ll show up for the Oscars’ self-evidently whorish second cousin. In fact, I feel confident in saying this award means nothing to Allen, and possibly less than that. The honorary Palme des Palmes he received at Cannes in 2002, or his lifetime Golden Lion from the Venice Film Festival (in 1995!) — those he cared about.

Yes, Allen received a career achievement award from the most venerable of European film festivals nearly 20 years ago, which only highlights the difficulty of talking about his career. Which one do you mean? There are various ways of carving up Allen’s career, which encompasses 44 feature films (I think) as a writer-director across almost half a century. There are the funny movies versus the serious ones, the Diane Keaton period and the Mia Farrow period, the movies set in New York and the globetrotting period, the ones where Woody is the star and the ones where he ventriloquizes through someone else. Those are all somewhat valid distinctions, but in considering all of Allen’s films from “What’s Up, Tiger Lily?” through “Blue Jasmine” (he has another, “Magic in the Moonlight,” with Emma Stone and Colin Firth, already in the can), I found them naturally dividing into four categories that seem thematically, philosophically and technically distinct from one another.

Each of these periods has its own highlights and lowlights, but it’s the differences between the periods that seem most striking to me, and that begin to lend some shape and clarity to a discussion of Allen’s bewildering output. I use that industrial term deliberately. Allen has reliably made a movie every year since the late 1970s (OK, he skipped 1981, but made up for it by releasing two in 1987), and it has sometimes felt as if the pace and the intense productivity were more important to him than the question of whether each individual picture was actually any good. As he recently told Mark Olsen of the Los Angeles Times, “the Colin Firth-Emma Stone film is over and history to me. ‘Blue Jasmine’ is ancient history.” Allen has, in a certain sense, demystified the artistic process; it barely seems possible that the same person made “Bananas,” “September” and “Melinda and Melinda,” to cite three extreme examples. (I once saw him, at a Cannes press conference, unable to remember the title of the latter film.)

Two of my periods overlap, as we will see. In fact, I think the transition zone of the mid-1990s, approximately from “Husbands and Wives” to “Sweet and Lowdown,” could be classified as its own period. That was the end of Allen’s romance with New York and the end of his period of concentrated cinephilia, when he self-consciously followed in the footsteps of European idols like Fellini and (especially) Ingmar Bergman. It was in that period that he left behind the withering Manhattan intelligentsia that had long been his principal audience (which included an entire generation of film critics), in search of a younger and larger audience that could ensure his late-career viability. He didn’t find it in a misguided attempt to make Hollywood entertainment (“Curse of the Jade Scorpion,” anyone?) but ultimately did find it — first in Europe, and then at home — with a series of middleweight, misanthropic comedies and thrillers shot in picturesque locations with all-star casts.

If the public’s view of Allen was conditioned, for many years, by a longing for his “early, funny movies” (as the invading aliens put it in “Stardust Memories”) and later by the tabloid scandal over his love affair, and subsequent marriage, with his longtime girlfriend’s adopted daughter, those questions have now faded. I’m not a huge fan of Allen’s later films — my favorite of his post-New York movies is probably the openly mean-spirited “Vicky Cristina Barcelona” — and as numerous readers have reminded me, I’m a critical outlier on the lavishly praised “Blue Jasmine,” which I found a rickety and silly construction built around a remarkable Cate Blanchett performance that goes right to the edge of painful self-parody. But there’s no doubting the scale of Woody Allen’s achievement, or his prodigious, voracious creativity. He shaped an entire mode of neurotic and self-conscious American comedy, he nurtured an entire generation of brooding art-house depressives (myself very much included) and then, of all things, he reinvented himself, in his mid 70s, as a commercially successful filmmaker with a worldwide middle-class audience.

When He Was Funny: 1966-1976

Key Works: “Bananas,” “Sleeper,” “Love and Death”

The first movie to carry Woody Allen’s name as a director was “What’s Up, Tiger Lily?,” which is somewhere between an idiotic practical joke and a brilliant work of Situationist détournement. Allen redubbed a grade-B Japanese action movie with gag-laden Borscht Belt dialogue about a secret egg-salad recipe, exposing the essentially mannered and artificial quality of the original film. Indeed, all of Allen’s “early, funny movies” — from the crime farce “Take the Money and Run” to the pseudo sci-fi of “Sleeper” to the surrealistic sketch comedy of “Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex” — are spoofs that entirely reject any claims of realism, and I think that’s important when considering his later movies. He’s always been interested in frame and genre, never in trying to represent the world-as-it-is, and those of us who understood “Interiors” or “Crimes and Misdemeanors” in the latter context were making a categorical error.

Turning Point: “Annie Hall”

What many critics and fans still regard (justifiably) as Allen’s best and funniest film actually began life as a murder mystery to be called “Anhedonia.” The decision to recut the movie as a romantic comedy focused on Diane Keaton’s character (and her iconic wardrobe choices) happened during post-production, and reflects the immense influence of editor Ralph Rosenblum on this stage of Allen’s career. Allen biographers have suggested that Rosenblum, across the course of “Sleeper,” “Love and Death” and “Annie Hall,” essentially taught Allen how to structure a dramatic film and began to push him more toward a heightened level of naturalism or realism. As I’ve just said, I think any use of those terms with respect to Allen’s career should be viewed with extreme caution.

The Bergman of Manhattan: 1977-1997

Key Works: “Manhattan,” “Stardust Memories,” “Hannah and Her Sisters,” “Crimes and Misdemeanors,” “Husbands and Wives”

These are without doubt the works of highly self-conscious drama-tinged comedy, and comedy-tinged drama, for which Allen will be remembered the longest. Some of them haven’t aged as well as others: Given what we would later learn about Allen’s personal life, it’s difficult to overlook the fact that “Manhattan” (although it remains a lovely movie to look at, and often very funny) is about a 42-year-old guy who’s dating a teenager. “Hannah and Her Sisters,” although a revelatory work of dysfunctional family dramedy at the time, has been imitated (and outdone) so often over the years that it no longer looks like anything special. I loved his smaller and more serious Bergman imitations back then (“Interiors,” “September,” “Another Woman” and so on) but don’t feel much desire to revisit them now. A strain of misanthropy, self-mockery and even self-hatred that surfaces most clearly in this period has endured through all of Allen’s subsequent work, major and minor. “Crimes and Misdemeanors” and “Husbands and Wives” still seem to me Allen’s dramatic masterpieces, and a great many of his later films feel like attempts to sugarcoat and repackage the bleak insights into human nature found in those two films, such that a larger audience will swallow them.