Buy Photo Jackson Miller, Nashville Chamber of Commerce MNPS Report Card committee (Photo: Special to The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights Support flexibility for educators to teach what works best in their schools.

As software development in schools becomes the focus of public education in Nashville, take note: standardizing coding in schools will kill the very thing that propels its success.

Teaching students to code is definitely a good idea.

As a longtime coder myself, I am well aware of how software development is a strong career choice and a path to developing and honing critical-thinking skills. I see firsthand how coding nurtures both analytical and creative minds.

But coding is not a silver bullet.

The easy way to show support for coding in schools would be to announce some sort of poorly thought out and rash Universal Coding Initiative.

While that kind of initiative would get great press and would likely include 6-foot, cardboard checks from area business partners — it would be the opposite of what is working now, and it would be the opposite of what Nashville’s students, teachers, and tech companies need.

The Academy model in our high schools has given school principals and leaders the autonomy to choose focus areas within their building.

High schools, middle schools, and even elementary schools are using clubs and after-school programs to create new opportunities for students.

The student-based budgeting model that Metro Nashville Public Schools Interim Superintendent Chris Henson and his team developed is a step toward pushing the control of more dollars to the school level — where educators have deep understanding of students’ unique needs.

When schools — and the high-performing teachers and administrators that run them — are given the ability to choose the programming that their students need, we open the door to great things.

We allow them to architect new, bright futures and we empower students to work in fields with high earning potential, doing what they love.

Like at Maplewood High School, where students are using HTML and CSS instruction as a stepping stone to drone research for Nashville Electric Service, and supporting the company in using drones to assess problems with electrical lines.

At Hunters Lane, where students in the Griffin Academy of Design and Technology learn to write Java—and earn college credit for doing it.

And at Nashville Academy of Computer Science, where every high school student graduates with some understanding of how to code, because — in the words of Steve Jobs — “it teaches you how to think.”

And this is just to name a few— Eakin Elementary, Rocketship, KIPP Nashville, Overton High School, and more are all working independently to teach kids to code.

Each program plays to the strengths and interests of their team.

A universal approach to coding in schools may score quick publicity points now, but the long-term implications are scary: More responsibilities for teachers, less flexibility for funds controlled at the school level, and limited opportunities to develop NEW good ideas.

Mandates, standardizations, top-down directives, and “universal” solutions are how bureaucrats operate. Not innovators.

Instead of a universal coding initiative, support educators who build upon their strengths and passions to ignite a love of learning within their students. Support the innovation happening within our public schools.

Yes, coding in schools is a good idea. But there are plenty of other ideas around advanced technologies that we need to explore and nurture.

Things like robotics, alternative energy, hardware and circuit boards, bio-engineering, artificial intelligence, or any number of other advanced technologies that will be in high demand for tomorrow’s workforce.

Too many times we have taken a good idea and ruined it with standardization and a top-down approach. Just ask any area teacher if they feel there are too many district initiatives.

Ask if they have time to plan and develop new programs that align with the interests of their students. Ask if they want to start teaching coding.

Coding in schools is a good idea. Don’t screw it up by treating it like the only good idea.

Jackson Miller is a parent of students in the Metro Nashville Public Schools and CEO of L2M LLC. He is also a Pencil Foundation partner at Maplewood High and a member of the Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce's education committee.

Buy Photo Damaris Revolorio, a junior at Maplewood High School, participates in the school's coding club. (Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1NXi2x1