By Bill J. Kluting and Lee Paterson

The Oregonian's series on rural law enforcement paints a dire picture of lawlessness and economic hopelessness in many of Oregon's rural communities. The lack of resources for public safety agencies has left many Oregonians vulnerable, and the situation is worsened by the fact that unemployment and poverty levels in these communities remain high.

Most Oregonians living in these communities would agree the virtual end in federal timber harvests is, as reporter Les Zaitz described, the "main culprit." Many family owned logging and sawmill companies closed without the reliable supply of timber that federal lands were intended to offer. Not only did the steep decline in harvests cost thousands of family wage jobs, it affected many small businesses that once benefitted from a strong, Oregon-grown industry.

This economic decline severely impacted rural county governments. The feds control as much as 70 percent of the land in these counties, yet Washington, D.C. doesn't pay property taxes to support local communities. With fewer taxpayers and shared timber receipts, and with dwindling and uncertain "Secure Rural Schools" payments, the imbalance in federal land management has created a perfect storm where many Oregonians lack access to good jobs, law enforcement protection and other basic services.

Some environmental activists ironically blame Oregon's forest sector for the problems we're facing. For the past 20 years, they promised that recreation jobs would fill the void, even though these limited number of jobs tend to be seasonal and don't pay enough to help families make ends meet. The recreation industry was growing before the decline in timber harvests, but it has not replaced the jobs and high wages our forest sector continues to offer. Despite the differences, it's disingenuous to create a false choice between timber and recreation jobs in the first place.

Responsible management activities, including timber harvests, thinning and forest restoration, help support a wide range of recreational opportunities, from improving wildlife habitat to maintaining forest access. Reducing the risks of wildfire, insects and disease helps keep our forests healthy, protects our water quality and quantity and reduces health risks associated with wildfire pollutants.

People can debate whether we used to cut too many trees, but many Oregonians believe the pendulum has swung too far to the other side, and now we are harvesting only a very small fraction of what grows naturally. We can continue down this path of "hands-off" forest management and live with the economic, social and environmental consequences. Or, we can restore active management, put Oregonians back to work and sustain our forests for all the values they provide.

Federal lands belong to all Americans, and they will continue to serve as playgrounds to urban citizens. But it's time to restore responsible economic opportunities to those living near these lands. Let's set aside the empty promises, or "solutions" that don't address the root causes of unemployment and poverty. It's time for our elected officials to restore balance to federal land management, and enable our rural communities to once again become self-sufficient.

Bill J. Kluting, of Monmouth, is Oregon legislative affairs representative for the Carpenters Industrial Council. Lee Paterson, of Roseburg, is a retired superintendent of Roseburg Public Schools.