And yet she became the scariest type of terrorist, a true Soldier of Allah, anxious to kill infidel police at the cost of her own life.

Hasna Ait Boulahcen, the suicide bomber girl who tried to lure police close enough to die with her when she blew up her suicide vest, was exactly the kind of “modern” Muslim who would have passed any kind of vetting. The 26 year old young woman was a semi-nude selfie-taking, hard drinking, hard smoking, promiscuous person that would seem an unlikely terrorist.

The UK Daily Mail:

Europe's first woman suicide bomber was a party animal with a string of boyfriends who had shown no interest in religion, it emerged today. Hasna Ait Boulahcen, 26, blew herself to pieces during the siege of Saint Denis after anti-terror police closed in on the safehouse where she was hiding with her cousin, the mastermind of the Paris attacks. Just a day after her death, family and acquaintances gave extraordinary accounts of a young woman with a 'bad reputation' who was known for her love of alcohol and cigarettes rather than devotion to Islam. Her brother Youssouf Ait Boulahcen said that she had had no interest in religion, never read the Koran and had only started wearing a Muslim veil a month ago. A photograph has also emerged of Ait Boulahcen posing for a selfie in the bath. Her face is covered in heavy make-up and she wears nothing but jewellery (sic).

Call it “sudden jihad syndrome”:

Now, to be clear, she was no refugee – she was born in France. Which is why her transformation reveals so much about Muslim immigration. The hard fact that all the “no religious test” liberals must confront is that Islam at its core is an ideology of global conquest. And even those who stray as far as possible from its teachings are vulnerable to reversion to the strict dogma of brutal conquest and repression contained in the Koran and Hadith.

Keep in mind that the Tsarnaev Brothers, whose brutal Boston Marathon bombing killed and maimed, and traumatized a major city, were also innocent child refugees when this country opened its heart and treasury to their family.

How many non-Muslims must be slaughtered before liberals get it?