East Garrison housing development on Fort Ord. (Vern Fisher - Monterey Herald)

East Garrison >> A fire station and a regional park are in the works at East Garrison, the first public facilities at the Monterey County-backed master planned community where hundreds of homes have already been built and sold.

Later stages of the development agreement call for adding a library and sheriff’s office as part of a developer-backed Town Center, rehabilitating historic buildings into an art district, and building a range of rental affordable housing, along with a number of other public amenities including a sports and recreation center, Community Services District office, day care center and youth center.

The county’s plan is to pay its share of the public amenities cost through tax revenue, or “tax increment,” generated by the development, but the state Department of Finance says not so fast.

That has left county officials locked in a debate with the state over whether the East Garrison public amenity investments are “enforceable obligations” in the wake of the Dissolution Act that ended redevelopment agencies, along with many of their assets and initiatives. Construction of the public facilities, the historic building rehabilitation and the affordable rental housing are expected to cost the county’s successor agency to the redevelopment agency about $20 million, as well as up to $300,000 a year in administration of the East Garrison redevelopment project area, according to a county staff report.

County representatives, on behalf of the successor agency to the county redevelopment agency, have argued the East Garrison development agreement, signed in 2005, long predates the Dissolution Act and the agreement should remain in full force. They say they’re so confident the county will win the argument that no backup financing plan for the development’s public amenities has been seriously considered.

“The East Garrison project has been quite successful and we’re working closely with the developer on the next wave of homes including affordable townhomes, which are much-needed,” Board of Supervisors chairwoman Jane Parker said. “We believe the (tax increment) issue will be resolved before we need the funding.”

Union Community Partners East Garrison developer Jim Fletcher also believes the county’s position is a strong one and he hired an independent legal firm to provide an opinion that ended up supporting the county’s argument. He also acknowledged the prospect of the county not being able to tap millions of dollars in tax revenue for its share of the public amenities is a real concern.

“I think this is not going to be a problem; we concur the state has a weak position,” Fletcher said, adding, “This is something we’re highly concerned about and we’re monitoring it.”

Advertisement

Fletcher noted the East Garrison development agreement calls for a meet and confer session between the developer and county representatives if the successor agency is unable to fulfill its share of the public amenities obligations. He suggested the county would need to come up with an alternative source of financing in that event. But he added that no one including himself wants to have that conversation yet. He praised county staff for working in “good faith” to help the development move forward on what he called a “very aggressive” construction schedule.

The work goes on

That schedule has resulted in more than 250 homes being built, or under construction, and 180 being sold as of the end of March in the first two phases of the 240-acre, 1,400-unit development.

Meanwhile, design work is under way on the community’s $7 million fire station, which Fletcher said should be under construction by the beginning of next year and be finished by the end of 2017. The station will be owned and operated by the Monterey Regional Fire Protection District. Fletcher said he’s covering the cost of the station and the county will be expected to pay him back.

Lincoln Park, the six-acre regional park, should be ready to start construction by June 1, according to Fletcher, and be completed by the end of this year. The park, located in the center of the community, will feature a baseball field with bleachers and a concession stand, a soccer field, a basketball court, playground area and barbecue pits. The cost will be borne by the developer, and be owned and maintained by the community services district.

A library and small sheriff’s office is planned as part of the 16-acre, mixed-use Town Center commercial district, Fletcher said. It will feature 34,000 square feet of commercial development, 40 loft-style residential units and a public park as part of the development’s third phase near the main entrance at East Garrison Drive. A public town square is to be included for hosting community events, festivals and concerts.

The historic arts district is also planned to be part of the third phase and includes rehabilitation of 25 historic buildings from World War II, including the old theater building, with up to 100,000 square feet of affordable studio space for visual, performing and literary artists, as well as administrative, work, day care and classroom space for organizations, and two public parks. Affordable housing in the district will be provided through the Minneapolis-based nonprofit ArtSpace, Inc., which also developed the Tannery in Santa Cruz. The district will be managed by the local nonprofit Arts Habitat.

Phase 3 construction is set to get under way in 2018, after infrastructure work is completed.

Affordable housing in the development ranges from the already completed 65-unit Manzanita Place low-income rental housing complex by Mid-Peninsula Housing in Phase 1 and a 65-unit low-income rental housing project backed by CHISPA in Phase II to the 66 units of low- and very-low-income rental apartments by ArtSpace and 49 live/work artists units, along with a range of affordable townhome and workforce housing units.

Will there be enough money?

County special programs manager Melanie Beretti and special projects engineer Nick Nichols acknowledged there may not be enough tax revenue for the remaining public amenities even if the state allows their use at East Garrison. Nichols said that was anticipated when the development agreement was signed more than a decade ago and the amenities were identified as “hope to have.” Beretti said the county is working with the developer to find ways to cut costs on some of the mandatory public facilities, such as the fire station, so the savings can be used on the other amenities. The county will continue seeking grants and partnerships to help finance them, she said.

Fletcher said East Garrison is “starting to feel like a community now,” and the public amenities will be a key part of its progress.

“When we started the project it didn’t have much credibility, it sat out there ugly and unused,” he said. “We’ve come a long way since then; we’ve passed the credibility threshold.”

Jim Johnson can be reached at 831-726-4348.