Sunday will be an EARLY WARNING WEATHER DAY due to rain and gusty wind.

10:30 PM UPDATE

If you have been watching the game on Channel 3, you have also been previewing the rain that we will get by tomorrow morning. the latest model runs are still suggesting a 3 AM to 6 AM start, from southwest to northeast. Also, in looking at some of the latest model data, there may be enough instability for thunderstorms, especially in the afternoon and especially east of the river; the official forecast will be adjusted accordingly.

--Mike Cameron

***Previous Discussion***

CLOUDY & MAINLY DRY TONIGHT

Most of tonight will be cool and rain-free, so if you plan is to “go out on the town,” you shouldn’t run into too many problems with wet weather. One storm system is departing while another is fast on its heels to replace it. As a result of this close succession of storms, we can expect clouds-galore. In between storms, there won’t be much “forcing” (something that would promote upward motion in the atmosphere) to make too much rain until well after midnight. So, beyond an isolated shower or a little bit of patchy drizzle, the weather will otherwise be dry. With the clouds and a wind slowly turning southeasterly, temperatures will remain fairly steady in the upper-30s and lower-40s overnight.

RAINY & WINDY SUNDAY

Sunday will be windy and wet. A storm much stronger than today’s drizzle-maker will track through the eastern Great Lakes tomorrow. The storm and its path with have several consequences:

Record warmth is possible. Given this storm’s track west of the state, Connecticut will be on the warm side – so much so, record high temperatures are possible. A warm front will likely have great success in passing through and to the north of the state, which will allow the warm air to surge north. The record high for the Greater Hartford area for January 10th is 52 degrees, set in 1972 and the record high for Bridgeport is 55 degrees, set in 2000. We think that these will be easily surpassed, as strong southeasterly wind pumps in air that will support middle and upper-50s. Many of the models are suggesting 58 to 59 degrees, which would be record-shattering.

Rain will be heavy at times. This storm has a very good draw from the “tap” that is the Gulf of Mexico. Rain will start sometime around dawn and become steady and heavy by late morning. There will be several hours of steady rain. Heavy spells of rain are likely, occasionally with rain coming down at over a half inch and hour. The rain will taper to showers by mid-afternoon and the last showers will leave sometime after 7 or 8 PM. Rain tallies will likely be in the one to two inch range, with some towns receiving more than two inches.

Wind gusts could be strong. There will be a lot of wind energy with the storm. Strong south-southeast wind will develop tomorrow morning as the storm and its strong pressure gradient gets closer. By afternoon, wind will be sustained at 15-25 MPH with gusts that could occasionally go over 40 MPH. Wind at this strength has the capability of bringing small limbs and bigger unhealthy limbs down on power lines, creating isolated power outages.

The air will turn colder as the storm leaves. After the bulk of rain has left, a cold front will move through the state from the Great Lakes, sometime shortly after 7 PM. This from may come with a few more rain showers during the evening. After it passes, the wind will go west and the colder air will come. By morning, the record warmth will be replaced by lows in the 20s by Monday morning.

COLD & DRY MONDAY & TUESDAY

Winter-like weather will make a true blue comeback next week. Monday will be partly sunny and windy with highs in the low and middle-30s. High pressure will be moving closer, which will help to bring the sun. A strong gradient between the departing low and the in-coming high will bring the wind that we expect will be quite strong. Lake-effect snow showers will be on-going in Upstate New York. Although the trajectory on the wind won’t be most favorable for flurries to make their way all the way to Connecticut, a few flurries cannot be completely ruled out.

The mercury will likely dip into the teens and lower 20s Monday night. The wind will diminish as high pressure passes overhead. Tuesday begin sunny, but some clouds will spread over the state during the afternoon. Daytime highs will be in the 30s. By late afternoon or evening, a few snowflakes will start to tumble down from the sky.

A LITTLE SNOW TUESDAY EVENING - WEDNESDAY

A period of light snow is possible late Tuesday and Wednesday morning. A fast-moving clipper, possibly redeveloping as a coastal storm, would be the root-cause. While this storm doesn’t look like a big one, some accumulation is possible. Some models would lead us to believe we miss out completely on the benefit of coastal redevelopment and only get a few snow showers or flurries. In this scenario, we would get a dusting at most. Other models suggest a richer moisture field, suggesting 1”-3” or even perhaps 2”-5.” So, the details in the accumulations are very much in flux still and require another day’s-worth of model runs to help flush out.

As the storm departs, a northwesterly wind will get quite gusty Wednesday afternoon and evening. Gusts to 40 MPH or higher are possible. Plus, it will be cold with daytime highs 30-35, a combination that will render wind chill sin the teens at times. The weather will turn even colder overnight as the air temperatures drop through the 20s and into the teens Wednesday night and wind chill readings plunge into the single digits to near zero.

COLD AND DRY THURSDAY THROUGH SATURDAY

Thursday and Friday will be dry and cold with highs in the 20s to near 30 degrees, and lows in the teens. Persistent wind will make it feel even colder. As high pressure moves directly overhead Saturday, the wind will subside, but the cold will stay.

Meteorologist Mike Cameron and Chief Meteorologist Bruce DePrest

“Copyright 2016 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved”