Sen. John McCain John McCainOvernight Finance: Puerto Rico bill clears panel | IRS chief vows to finish term | Bill would require nominees to release tax returns Overnight Defense: Pentagon chief fears sequestration's return Groups urge Senate to oppose defense language on for-profit colleges MORE (R-Ariz.) panned the relationship between President Obama and Congressional Republicans as the worst he’s ever seen and placed the blame at the feet of both parties during a Monday appearance on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.”

“When the president says, ‘I have a pen, I have a phone, I’m speaking for the two-thirds that didn’t vote,’ I mean, in your face,” he said.

“I have never seen relations between the president and Congress worse than they are today, and I’m not saying that Republicans did anything right.”

He called the recent spat over this week’s speech by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu as “symptomatic of the terrible relationship” between Obama and Republicans in Congress.

The White House and some Democrats have criticized Republicans for not clearing Netanyahu’s invitation with the administration. But Republicans argue that they need to hear from the Israeli leader, who disagrees with the White House’s strategy to negotiate with Iran over its nuclear program.

Former Rep. Joe Scarborough (R-Fla), who co-hosts “Morning Joe,” told McCain that he believes Republican leaders should have spoken to the president first. But while McCain said he would have called the president, he argued that the GOP shouldn’t shoulder the blame alone and that Obama has been equally non-cooperative with McCain’s party.

“[House Speaker] John Boehner will tell you that he should have picked up the phone when he declared this amnesty executive order on immigration,” he said.

“When Bill Clinton launched a second-term election, he called Republicans over. When George W. Bush launched a second-term election, he called the Democrats over. What did this president say? I’m speaking for the two-thirds that didn’t vote.”