WASHINGTON — Some primary candidates struggle to differentiate themselves from the pack. Kesha Rogers does not have that problem.

The Democratic Senate hopeful’s platform calls for the impeachment of President Barack Obama and compares the Affordable Care Act to Nazism. She campaigns around the state with a poster of Obama sporting a Hitler mustache. Plus, she’s a supporter of extremist Lyndon LaRouche.

“There is this certain unique quality to what I do,” she said in an interview. “I go out and inspire people, especially people who have been discouraged by the party and discouraged by the political situation.”

That has drawn the ire of mainstream Texas Democrats, who know that a Rogers win would disrupt the party’s unified front. The party is touting what it hopes will be its most competitive statewide slate in years, but if Rogers were to win the nomination in the May 27 runoff, she would stick out.

“They want candidates that are traditional and effective, and that’s something I think that they are at a risk of losing here if … Kesha Rogers wins the runoff,” said Brandon Rottinghaus, a political science professor at the University of Houston. “It makes the party look like they are in disarray. It makes it look like they haven’t adequately vetted their candidates.

Democratic organizations across the state are lining up to discredit the Rogers campaign while David Alameel, the Dallas dentist who led the March primary but didn’t get a high enough share of the vote to win outright, keeps his distance. Even though many Democrats believe Alameel will win, they don’t want to take chances.

“It’s important that Dr. Alameel be the nominee and we do demonstrate that gadfly candidates like Kesha Rogers won’t get nominated in important races,” said Matt Angle, an adviser to Democratic gubernatorial nominee Wendy Davis who runs the Washington-based Lone Star Project. The group recently put out a video opposing Rogers.

State parties usually stay out of primaries, but the Texas Democratic Party has been vocal in its support of Alameel. Rogers’ campaign remains cut off from all party resources, including access to its voter data.

That doesn’t sit well with Rogers, who says that the party has been hijacked by Wall Street financial interests and has lost its historic principles. She considers Alameel part of the problem: A wealthy dentist and investor, he has spent more than $3 million during the primary, mostly his own money. Rogers’ campaign spent about $27,000 as of the most recent filing deadline, on Feb. 12.

Rogers said the push to impeach Obama and her disagreements with the state party shouldn’t give the Texas Democrats “the right to isolate me.”

Rogers, 37, supports LaRouche, a controversial perennial presidential candidate and economist. A Houston native, she’s a volunteer for LaRouche’s political action committee and has won two Democratic U.S. House primaries for a Houston-area seat, badly losing the general election both times to Rep. Pete Olson, R-Sugar Land.

“What a LaRouche Democrat in short represents is the defiance of the Wall Street control over our nation’s institutions of government,” she said. On her website, she writes that if “Wall Street has its way, we are headed toward thermonuclear war.”

Elizabeth Jennings, the secretary of the Sharpstown Democrats Club in Houston, said that Rogers’ stance on banking reform and support of NASA won her support. She added that the party shouldn’t be blindly supporting the president, who she believes has overstepped his bounds.

“I see a firebrand Democrat and I say, ‘Bring it on, girl,’” she said. “If she’s the Democratic nominee for U.S. Senate against John Cornyn ... he’s going to have a hell of a lot harder time fending himself off from Kesha than from David Alameel.”

Rogers was able to win a spot in the runoff by taking 22 percent of the March primary vote, second to Alameel’s 47 percent. But Rottinghaus said that a runoff victory will be much harder thanks to low voter turnout.

“A nonpresidential year, out of the traditional primary cycle, and it’s a runoff — you’ve got the most committed core Democrats,” he said. “The people that turn out are going to be turned out by the elite and most likely to receive the elite messages.”

Alameel said that he is more focused on the Republican incumbent.

“Even though we still have a runoff, we need to lay the ground on how to send John Cornyn home,” Alameel said. “The runoff will take care of itself.”

Rogers has called for debates, but Alameel hasn’t agreed to face her. She said he is avoiding the issues.

“My opponent thinks that because he has lots of money and can flood the money around, he doesn’t have an obligation to debate me or address the issues at hand,” she said.

Alameel rejected that, saying his spending is designed “to build my base against Cornyn. That has been my strategy from the beginning, and beating John Cornyn is not going to be cheap.”

Follow Ben Kamisar on Twitter at @bkamisar.