Texas Sen. Ted Cruz challenged Donald Trump's threats of a defamatory lawsuit against Cruz as "frivolous." Cruz's comments came in response to a cease-and-desist letter he claimed to have received from Trump's legal team.

Cruz also upped the ante on his attacks against Trump by arguing that the billionaire's financial donations to Democrats in Congress led directly to the passage of Obamacare.

"If Donald Trump files the lawsuit that he threatens in this letter, that lawsuit will be frivolous and it will result in both Donald Trump and any lawyer who signs his name leading to being sanctioned," said Cruz during a Wednesday afternoon press conference. "So I look forward to any lawsuit."

Cruz added that he would likely not retain any outside counsel and may do any forthcoming deposition himself because he would love to get Trump under oath and penalty of perjury.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

The Texas senator listed several data points he would use to argue against any Trump lawsuit, including that his ads use Trump's own words. In his explanation about how he would refute Trump's lawsuit, the senator also claimed Trump was directly responsible for the passage of Obamacare by donating to Democratic campaign committees.

"That's not buying access, that's not being a businessman and playing the game. That is helping fund the Democratic takeover of Congress," Cruz said. "So if the people of South Carolina think it's a good thing that Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi became majority leader and speaker of the house, then you can thank Donald Trump for helping to make that happen. I would note that if Donald had been unsuccessful in helping Democrats get majorities in both houses of Congress, we would never have had Obamacare. Donald Trump is a direct cause of Obamacare."

The letter Trump sent to Cruz purportedly took issue with an ad Cruz has run titled, "Supreme Trust," which highlights the vacancy on the Supreme Court as a reason to choose Cruz over Trump.

"Life, marriage, religious liberty, the Second Amendment. We're just one Supreme Court justice away from losing them all," a narrator says in the controversial ad. "We cannot trust Donald Trump with these serious decisions."

The Cruz campaign claims it does not believe Trump's statements that he is pro-life and claims to use Trump's own words in the video to bolster the Cruz team's assertion.

Cruz is not the first target of Trump's legal warfare. Trump's team has previously threatened supporters of Ohio Gov. John Kasich and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush. With under a week remaining until South Carolina's GOP primary, Trump's cease-and-desist letter may indicate a greater level of concern about the Palmetto State's results than the New Hampshire primary.

Trump ranks first in the Washington Examiner's newest GOP presidential power rankings. Cruz ranks second.