Several medical societies and groups are developing around the practice of concierge medicine as the rapidly growing field tries to sort itself out.

One group of doctors is working to start the American College of Private Physicians (ACPP) to help the fiercely independent doctors coalesce around each other, network, foster research, and share best practices to help grow concierge medicine even more.

Organizers have applied for 501(c)3 tax exempt status, are collecting money, and are about to launch a website. They hope to send a letter next month announcing their plans to physicians known to be working in this type of practice.

"If we can network a lot of these places around the country in an organization, we can credential them and vet them and list their characteristics where people who are looking for this kind of care have some place to go where they can look at prices and decide what they want to join," Thomas LaGrelius, MD, chair of the group's steering committee told MedPage Today.

LaGrelius estimates around 9,000 physicians -- roughly 1% of the nation's doctor workforce -- are practicing in the model that charges patients a monthly or annual membership fee for near unlimited office access. They often bill patients for the tests and supplies they use.

But the exact number of physicians practicing this way is unknown -- something LaGrelius and others hope to change by bringing them into one leading organization.

The concierge practice is billed as a way for doctors to rid themselves of the headaches of health insurance, freeing up time to spend with patients outside of 15-minute blocks. Talk of the practice was a hot topic at this fall's American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) scientific assembly.

The ACPP could offer educational programs, build a referral network for out-of-town patients seeking care away from their regular doctor, and help build knowledge and awareness of the profession that has taken off in recent years, LaGrelius said.

"There are a lot of physicians who want to practice concierge or direct practice medicine but don't know how to get started," LaGrelius said. "Most of the people who are doing what I'm doing are senior docs and have converted their existing practices. What do you do if you're a 32-year-old recent graduate of a residency program and want to do direct practice and don't have a practice?"

Some may turn to the American Academy of Private Physicians (AAPP), which already exists for a similar purpose.

"Some of our functions overlap with AAPP, but that's OK," said LaGrelius, a past president of the group. "The more organizations promoting direct practice the better."

AAPP could not be reached for comment about the formation of another group.

Then there is the Direct Primary Care Coalition, which formed as Congress was debating the Affordable Care Act as a way to protect the interests of those physicians who bill their patients directly for services.

And don't forget another group with a similar name: the organizers of the first Direct Primary Care National Summit that took place in October in St. Louis.

"As of yet, there is no formal organization," Erika Bliss, MD, a leader of the coalition and chief executive of the five-location concierge practice Qliance, based in Seattle, said. "There's discussion about forming an organization, but no formal organization has come to being."

All have different interests and objectives they want to meet. They are a reflection of the morphing practice that is still trying to find an identity.

"This is early stage and there's a lot of variety in the field," Bliss said. "There are a lot of organizations popping up. Eventually, it will settle out and it will be one or two groups."

For example, the Direct Primary Care Coalition has tried to separate itself from concierge practices, which is viewed as mostly for well-to-do individuals.

Qliance and others like it have tried to scale the concierge model to make it more affordable for all. Bliss views practicing primary care in an insurance-less world as a payment model that all of primary care should be using in the future.

"We think everybody deserves excellent, high-service, high-access primary care," Bliss said. "Why not make it more efficient? Does it have to be that expensive? Make it available to more people."

Groups such as the ACPP, however, are more interested in maximizing the power of concierge medicine for individual providers, Bliss said.

Despite the benefits supporters tout, concierge medicine is not without its critics who call it elitist. They say it could increase the shortage of primary care physicians as these doctors typically have lighter patient loads.

Supporters of concierge medicine say ridding physicians of the administrative burdens and paper work associated with insurance could actually free them up to see more patients.

"Membership in a direct practice is affordable to most Americans, but is often not a choice they wish to make as an expenditure," LaGrelius said. "I believe much of the health insurance we buy is a waste of money. Patients would be better served by having inexpensive, high-deductible catastrophic health insurance and using the money they save on a direct practice that will keep them well and out of the hospital and out of the emergency room."

In March, the AAFP board of directors issued a position statement in favor of the direct primary care model, saying it empowers the physician-patient relationship.

"This next year is going to be very interesting," Bliss said. "I think by the end of 2014, we'll have a pretty good idea which way this is going to go."