Demonstrating the parallel storytelling from dual viewpoints that “Breaking Bad” does so well, tonight’s episode, “Rabid Dog,” also offered one of the great Vince Gilligan hook lines, another gem from Saul’s bank of wicked euphemisms. Saul suggests that, what they’ve got on their hands is “an Old Yeller-type situation,” in which the loyal mutt (ie. Jesse) shows up rabid one day and must be put down by dutiful little Timmy (ie. Walt). It was the prettiest cover line since “going to Belize.”

This episode allowed each character to fantasize and consider next moves. After Jesse poured gasoline around Walt’s house but was interrupted by Hank before setting fire, we get a momentary pause in the action. Taking a breather in a hotel, Sklyer tells Walt she didn’t believe his gas pump lie for a minute, and demands he get serious. Her suggested resolution to the Jesse Pinkman problem is Lady Macbeth-cold — “We’ve come this far for us, what’s one more?” — every bit as cold as Saul’s rabid dog suggestion. Walt firmly rejects it. “It’s complicated,” he says, referring to his paternal feelings for Jesse even while playing him.

Meanwhile, Marie vents her anger to her therapist and weighs murderous poisoning options. Violence can only make a bad situation worse, the shrink warns, foreshadowing the inevitable really bad mess to come. And Hank thinks playing by the book, getting Jesse on video and having him wear a wire while confronting Walt may be a solution. Of course, it’s not. Walt is smarter and luckier than they are and besides, Jesse says, not for the first time, he’s the Devil.

Jesse balks when he sees what looks like a thuggish bald man hovering near Walt. (We see later the man is simply “Daddy” to a little girl in the plaza.) He promises Walt he’s going to come after him. Which forces Walt to make the call to Todd (Jesse Plemons), his latest meth cook trainee and dutiful fixer who previously helped him get rid of Mike Ehrmantraut. Todd was last seen bragging at a coffee shop about his connection with the meth king, hanging with his neo-Nazi pals.

Several great visuals: another inside shot of liquid flowing through a tube (this time cleaning fluid for the gas); the “Deadwood” DVD set on Hank and Marie’s bookshelf; Jesse drinking coffee from a DEA mug at Hank’s home; Walt as Santa Claus in family photos, and Walt once again sitting by a pool (at the hotel) thinking through his dilemma. It was a gripping episode giving each character a moment to reflect on who they want to avenge, who they actually want to protect. Nearly everyone seems rabid. Except Junior. And here we had one more heart-wrenching instance of Walt’s loyal son innocently worrying about dear dad’s cancer.