Mount Airy High School head girls basketball coach Howard Mayo has won more than 300 games in his career, with nearly 200 of them coming in a decade of leading the Lady Bears.

Before he achieves that milestone, however, Bluefield College plans to honor him and several other distinguished graduates on Saturday, Oct. 24 at the school’s Alumni Awards and Sports Hall of Fame Dinner.

Mayo, a 1988 graduate of Bluefield, was a standout player on four National Little College Athletic Association (NLCAA) National Tournament men’s basketball teams at the school between 1984 and 1988. He led the Rams to three NLCAA National Runner-up honors and was an NLCAA All-American in 1986 and 1987.

After he graduated from Bluefield, Mayo served as head coach for girls’ basketball at Carroll County High School in Virginia from 1993 to 2002 and led the Lady Cavaliers to three Southwest District championships and a 139-77 record. Today, he has a 196-82 win-loss record as head coach for girls’ basketball at Mount Airy High School in North Carolina. His teams have won 20 games or more in six of the last nine seasons, and never fewer than 17 in any year.

The college will be honoring Mayo along with three other former Bluefield sports standouts, three of its most distinguished graduates, and one of its most faithful supporters during the dinner, which is part of Bluefield’s Homecoming week. It begins with the traditional Alumni Awards Dinner at 6:30 p.m. inside BC’s Dome Gymnasium, and will also feature a dance following the awards ceremony.

Joining Mayo as honorees are Dr. Tim Sharp (’74), who will be inducted into the BC Hall of Distinguished Graduates; Dr. Jennifer Jones Powell (’93), who will be named Alumna of the Year; and Dr. Wayne Massey (’59), who will receive the Primitivo Delgado Christian Service Award. The other former members of the Department of Athletics to be inducted into the BC Sports Hall of Fame include onetime men’s basketball and baseball coach Mark Blevins and three of his former men’s basketball players, Dan Brown (’85), Mayo, and Lamont Woods (’92).

Mount Airy head girls basketball coach Howard Mayo will be inducted into the Bluefield College Sports Hall of Fame on Oct. 24. http://mtairynews.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/web1_Mayo-Howard-B.jpg Mount Airy head girls basketball coach Howard Mayo will be inducted into the Bluefield College Sports Hall of Fame on Oct. 24.

Staff Report

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus