GYNECC, The GYN Emergent Care Center We are proud to say that the GYN ECC is a product of Complete Women Care’s efforts to stay true to our mission and offer women what they really deserve in emergency situations

As Affordable Care Act’s March 31st open enrollment deadline approaches, the Gynecology Emergent Care Center (GYN ECC) located in Long Beach, California invites women to visit the Center for all urgent OB GYN problems.

With the new law, preventive care, including life-saving breast and cervical cancer screenings, STI/STD testing, and annual well-women exams will also be covered and provided without co-payments. By eliminating the financial disincentives for these services, women will receive much greater value from their insurance policies.

The state-of-the-art Gynecology Emergent Care Center in Long Beach is the only facility of its kind on the West Coast, providing comprehensive emergency gynecological care in one location. From lab tests and imaging to diagnosis, surgery and medication, this Long Beach OB GYN Clinic offers patients and their families a convenient and affordable alternative to traditional emergency rooms for urgent pregnancy and gynecological needs.

Care is provided by experienced OB GYN specialists with less costs and shorter waiting times than traditional emergency rooms. Because of their new approach to women’s health and their vertically integrated service model, the GYN Emergent Care Center cuts the entire process down to just one day for almost all services needed including various types of surgeries.

For the past 15 years, the mission of Complete Women Care has been to provide the most advanced health care for women of all ages in a kind, caring, and convenient environment. “We are proud to say that the GYN ECC is a product of Complete Women Care’s efforts to stay true to our mission and offer women what they really deserve in emergency situations," says Dr. Miriam Mackovic Basic, founder and CEO of Complete Women Care.

The GYN ECC Long Beach OB GYN Clinic has extended hours, is open on weekends, and welcomes walk-ins. To learn more about the GYN ECC, visit GYN-EmergentCare.com.

About Complete Women Care

Dedication to provide excellent and comprehensive healthcare for women over the past 17 years leads them to continuous improvement and expansion of their services. Their approach is a complete and comprehensive solution for all obstetric and gynecological needs. A Branch of Complete Women Care, Inc., they are the First GYN Emergent Care Center in California. This setting allows them to provide diagnostics, imaging, lab tests, surgical procedures, and prescription dispensing at one location in real time.

PR Contact

Jimena Cortes

949-861-8414

info (at) WizardMedia (dot) net

http://www.WizardMedia.net