Welcome to THE TRAIL 2016, your daily rundown from The Hill on all the latest news in the White House, Senate and House races.

Candidates in both parties are gaming out their final strategies to obtain the delegates required to win the nomination -- or to at least block the front-runners from doing so.

Emboldened by a trio of victories over the weekend, Bernie Sanders’s campaign argued in a conference call with reporters Monday that no candidate will emerge with a clear majority in pledged delegates to win the nomination outright.

The Sanders campaign is eyeing Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonJudge seals all video interviews in Clinton email case State aide thought Clinton email was for ‘family and friends’ Clinton: I'm ready for Trump's 'fantasy' campaign MORE’s super-delegates, hoping to convince party leaders who supported Clinton early to move over to their insurgent campaign. On Monday, vulnerable incumbent Rep. Collin Peterson (D-Minn.) said he’d support Sanders at the convention to reflect the vote at his home district.

Still, the Clinton campaign believes it’s on pace to win outright on the basis of pledged delegates. They held their own conference call Monday to boast about having received 2.5 million more votes than Sanders and a delegates lead they say is “practically insurmountable.”

Read the story tomorrow by The Hill’s Ben Kamisar, Lisa Hagen and Harper Neidig about Sanders’s efforts to make a grab for Clinton’s superdelegates.

On the Republican side, efforts to block Trump from obtaining the 1,237 delegates he needs to win the nomination are in full swing. Some Republicans want John Kasich to drop out to pave the way for the anti-Trump vote to coalesce behind Ted Cruz Ted CruzFiorina returns to attack Clinton's 'lust for power' Trump clinches GOP nomination Eleven states sue Obama over transgender bathroom directive MORE, but the Ohio governor isn’t having it. Read The Hill’s Jonathan Easley on that back-and-forth tomorrow.

If Trump can’t get to 1,237, it will lead to the first floor fight for the nomination since 1976. Veteran Republican strategist Charlie Black is one of the few Republican strategists working today who played a role at that convention.

Check back Tuesday for a “Facebook Live” conversation between Black and The Hill’s Jonathan Swan about what to expect at a potential contested convention.

RACE TO 1600 PENN

EMAILS LINGER PART I: The Hill’s Mark Hensch reports: The FBI is reportedly arranging interviews with some of Hillary Clinton’s top aides as part of an ongoing look into her use of a personal email account and server as secretary of State.

EMAILS LINGER PART II: The Hill’s Jesse Byrnes reports: There are reportedly 147 FBI agents involved in the Clinton email probe.

SLEIGHT OF HAND: The Hill’s Julian Hattem reports: A prominent Republican senator is accusing Clinton of planning a speech on the Supreme Court to distract from the emails probe.

CONDITIONS: The Hill’s Jesse Byrnes reports: A top aide to Hillary Clinton’s campaign said whether the former secretary of State agrees to more debates with Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersThe Trail 2016: Interleague play Clinton laughs off idea of Trump-Sanders debate Colorado gov sports Trump socks MORE depends on the tone of his campaign going forward. The Sanders campaign is pushing for a debate in New York ahead of the primary there.

NEXT TIME: The Hill’s Scott Wong reports: Paul Ryan Paul RyanOvernight Energy: Trump outlines 'America First' energy plan in North Dakota Bible verse prompts GOP walkout after LGBT vote labeled a 'sin' Ohio ObamaCare co-op shutting down due to finances MORE’s moves in 2016 are stirring talk that he could be the party’s nominee in 2020 if a Trump nomination leads to a landslide defeat for the GOP.

EMPIRE STATE IN PLAY?: The Hill’s Amie Parnes reports: Donald Trump Donald TrumpTrump: I can put 15 states in play in November Clinton: I'm ready for Trump's 'fantasy' campaign Trump sticks by 'Pocahontas' nickname after being challenged MORE is making it clear that he intends to make a run at Hillary Clinton in deep blue New York, their shared home-state.

NO EASY PATH: The Hill’s Cate Martel reports: Anti-Trump Republicans face significant hurdles in putting forth a third-party candidate if Trump becomes the GOP nominee.

ODDS AND ENDS

GUN-FREE ZONE: The Hill’s Jordan Fabian reports: The Secret Service says those attending the Republican National Convention in Cleveland in July will be prohibited from carrying firearms into the venue.

ON THE OFFENSIVE: The Hill’s Jesse Byrnes reports: John Kasich is going after Ted Cruz and Donald Trump for their rhetoric on Muslims.

LATE NIGHT CIRCUIT: The Hill’s Judy Kurtz reports: Ted Cruz will make his debut on Jimmy Kimmel’s late-night show this week.

GLOBAL CONCERN: The Hill’s Julian Hattem reports: The State Department said Monday that leaders around the world are expressing concern over comments made by the Republican presidential candidates.

THE DAILY TRUMP

WOMEN ISSUES: The Hill’s Jesse Byrnes reports: Donald Trump is explaining away his past remarks about women by arguing that he never envisioned having to defend them in a presidential run. And responding to criticism for going after Cruz’s wife, Trump said he was merely “counter-punching.”

CALLING FOUL: The Hill’s Rebecca Savransky reports: Donald Trump’s campaign is promising to contest the delegate allocation in Louisiana after he won the primary but may finish with fewer delegates than second-place finisher Ted Cruz.

SPOOKY: The Hill’s Mark Hensch reports: A tombstone with Trump’s name on it has been removed from Central Park.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“I believe Hillary Clinton has zero chance of not being the Democratic nominee.”

-- Former Obama campaign manager David Plouffe.

POLL POSITION

GOLDEN STATE: The Hill’s Rebecca Savransky reports: Trump leads Cruz by only 1 point in California, according to a new poll.

SECURITY CONCERNS: The Hill’s Kristina Wong reports: Voters who list national security as their top issue favor Donald Trump over Hillary Clinton, a new poll finds.

MONEY WATCH

MOMENTUM: The Hill’s Rebecca Savransky reports: The Sanders campaign has hauled in $4 million since its victories at three caucuses over the weekend.

GOING DARK: The Hill’s Jonathan Swan reports: A super-PAC seeking to promote Ben Carson as vice president has shut down amid a torrent of criticism.

CONGRESSIONAL CAMPAIGNS

BIG ENDORSEMENT: The Hill’s Ben Kamisar reports: President Obama is endorsing DNC chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz who faces a primary challenger for her House seat in Florida for the first time.

VULNERABLE: The Hill’s Mark Hensch reports: Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson Ron JohnsonThe Trail 2016: Interleague play Sanders fundraises for Feingold in Wisconsin Senate race Pressure builds from GOP to delay internet domain transition MORE, one of the most imperiled GOP incumbents in 2016, is embracing Donald Trump.

WIN OR ELSE: The Hill’s Jesse Byrnes reports: Ben Carson is predicting “absolute destruction” for the GOP at the House and Senate levels if Trump loses the nomination at a contested convention.

WHAT WE ARE WATCHING FOR TODAY AND TOMORROW

(All times Eastern)

John Kasich holds a town hall in Madison, Wis., tonight at 7. He’ll be a guest on “Hardball with Chris Matthews” on MSNBC, which airs from 7-8 tonight and on Fox News's "The Kelly File" at 9 p.m. He’ll hold a town hall in Waukesha, Wis., at 12:30 p.m. on Tuesday.

Hillary Clinton holds a campaign event in Milwaukee at 9 p.m. today. On Tuesday, she’ll hold a community forum on gun violence prevention in Milwaukee at 10:45 a.m.. She has campaign events scheduled in La Crosse, Wis., at 2:30 p.m. and in Green Bay at 6:15 p.m. tomorrow.

Donald Trump holds a 5 p.m. town hall in Janesville, Wis., on Tuesday.

Ted Cruz will be a guest on Fox News's "Hannity" at 10 p.m. today. On Tuesday, he holds a rally in Brookfield, Wis., at 10 a.m., with Carly Fiorina.

Bernie Sanders holds an Appleton, Wis., rally, Tuesday evening.

Donald Trump, Ted Cruz and John Kasich appear in a CNN town hall in Wisconsin starting at 8 p.m. on Tuesday.

TWEET OF THE DAY

Just touched down in the land of cheese curds and the great Governor Walker. See you soon, @tedcruz! pic.twitter.com/ynQYk82Y3N — Carly Fiorina (@CarlyFiorina) March 28, 2016

Write us with tips, suggestions and news: Jonathan Easley, Ben Kamisar, Jonathan Swan, Lisa Hagen.

Sign up to receive The Trail | 2016 overnight newsletter here.