Whatever taxes you paid this year, you would’ve paid more if not for Grover Norquist. And while the government spent $3.5 trillion this year, it would’ve spent more if not for Norquist. The head of Americans for Tax Reform is one of the most influential figures in the history of the U.S. tax code and the U.S. budget, a consistent and provocative voice for less of each. His Taxpayer Protection Pledge is the economic backbone of the modern Republican Party, and his stated goal of getting government small enough to drown in a bathtub could be a mission statement for the Tea Party.

Norquist began his advocacy career as the director of the National Taxpayers Union in 1978, helping to fuel tax revolts in states like California and Massachusetts. He founded ATR in 1985 to assist President Ronald Reagan in passing sweeping tax reforms. He helped Newt Gingrich to write the Contract with America that launched the Republican congressional revolution in 1994, and he still hosts the weekly Wednesday meeting where conservatives plot strategy in Washington.

POLITICO’s Michael Grunwald spoke to Norquist about the state of taxes and spending in the Obama era, and where things can go from here. The bottom line is that in many ways, Norquist is winning: Even under a Democratic president, by historic standards taxes are low and spending is extremely low. And in 2016, Norquist says, America might be ready for a revolution.

Michael Grunwald: You’ve been at this for more than 30 years, pushing for lower taxes. So how’s it going?

Grover Norquist: People forget Republicans weren’t always for tax cuts. Even during the Reagan years, it wasn’t a settled issue. Bob Dole wanted to do a gas tax. A lot of Republicans wanted to get rid of various deductions and credits. Remember in 1988, even after Reagan passed tax reform, Dole refused to take the pledge. He won Iowa, but then during a debate in New Hampshire, Pete DuPont handed him the pledge, and he reacted like someone had thrown the cross in the lap of a vampire. George Bush took the pledge and won. But then Bush broke his pledge in 1990, and broke the Republican Party. It cost him the presidency. Well, no one’s life is a complete waste; some people serve as bad examples to others. We haven’t had someone break the pledge since Bush. In 1994, 95 percent of Republican candidates took the pledge, and we swept the House and Senate. Today, more than 90 percent of the Republicans in Congress have signed the pledge and kept it. And we’re pushing it down to the state level, too.

George H. W. Bush abandoned his no-new-taxes campaign pledge, a reversal that many conservatives believe cost him a second presidential term. | AP Photo | AP Photo

MG: Basically, being Republican now means you’re against all tax increases.

GN: The starkest contrast between the parties today is not the divisive issues. There are pro-life Democrats and pro-choice Republicans. There are a few Democrats who won’t steal your guns. But in Washington, there’s no Democrat who won’t vote for tax increases and no Republican who will. You know, Goldwater voted against the Kennedy tax cuts. That should give you an idea of how dramatic the change is.

MG: That’s one of the big political stories of the last 30-plus years. The Republicans all agree on this now. So how much have they actually lowered taxes?

GN: The top tax rate was 70 percent when Reagan came in. When he left it was 28 percent. It climbed up to 39 percent under Clinton. Now it’s 35.5 percent, plus 3.8 percent for Obamacare taxes. The corporate rate went from 50 percent to 35 percent, although it got stuck there. And at the state level, there are now nine states with no income tax.

MG: The top rate has gone up significantly under Obama. But even he had some tax cuts in his first term, and he hasn’t pushed big tax hikes on the middle class.

GN: Obama ran promising not to raise taxes on anyone who earns less than $250,000 a year. He broke that in like 16 days. The Democrats try to run on their version of a tax pledge, no tax increases for the middle class, but they don’t keep it.

MG: I’m giving you an opportunity to declare victory here. Because it seems like as a percentage of the economy, historically, taxes are pretty low today.

GN: Lower than they have been. Not as low as they should be.

MG: The fiscal cliff deal in 2013 did raise taxes on everyone making more than $450,000 a year, and you were actually OK with that.

President Obama speaks in January, 2013 about the passage of the fiscal cliff deal, which made 82 percent of the Bush tax cuts permanent. | AP Photo | AP Photo

GN: That was a phenomenal victory. All the Bush tax cuts were going to expire on January 1. All Obama had to do was twiddle his thumbs and go for a walk, and taxes were going to increase by $5 trillion over a decade. He would have gotten the largest tax increase in the history of western civilization. Not only didn’t he do that, he allowed 85 percent of the Bush tax cuts to be made permanent, for 99 percent of the country.

MG: But taxes went up, and you were OK with it. A lot of people expected you to take the maximalist position, that you can’t vote for anything that allows taxes to go up.

GN: The pledge has been a powerful tool because it’s written down, it doesn’t move, it’s simple. It’s one line: You can’t vote for net tax increases. It’s a binary thing: Fred either voted to raise taxes from the status quo or he didn’t. It’s a guardrail. When the law says a tax cut has lapsed, I can’t say that the failure to renew it is a tax increase, even if I want it renewed. Yes, voters might think that, but the pledge is the pledge. If I changed the pledge to fit the circumstances, Harry Reid would be right when he says, 'Oh, Republicans just do whatever is Grover’s thought of the day.'

MG: My one quibble is that you make it sound like Republicans snookered Obama into cutting taxes for most Americans. I think he was happy to cut taxes for all but the very wealthy. Even Democrats are coming around to the Grover way!

GN: You think? Well, then that’s even better.

MG: People don’t seem to like paying taxes.

GN: Look at the states; it’s still a very powerful issue. In Massachusetts, there was a gas tax initiative in 2014. Everyone loves the gas tax, right? It’s for infrastructure! Nope. Not even Massachusetts. The governor of Nevada raised taxes and that was repealed, 80-20. Tennessee, Georgia, we’ve had a tremendous collection of votes against taxes. In Michigan, the Republican governor and the Democrats wanted to raise taxes, and that was defeated 80-20. In Maryland, Martin O’Malley’s lieutenant governor lost because O’Malley raised taxes. In Pennsylvania, the Republican governor raised taxes and lost. In Illinois, the Democratic governor raised taxes and lost. Illinois! And look at consistent tax cutters – Rick Scott in Florida, Doug Ducey in Arizona, Paul LePage in Maine. They got reelected. Chris Christie vetoed more taxes, dollarwise, than anyone else in history, and he got reelected in New Jersey.

MG: There does seem to be political appeal to letting people keep their money.

GN: I wrote a book called 'End the IRS Before It Ends Us' that’s actually a history of taxation in America. In 1774, Americans were paying 1 percent or 2 percent income taxes. The Brits thought about raising it a bit and the guns came out. The Civil War, aside from slavery, was partly about taxes. In the 1830s, South Carolina called out its militia over the tariff. People brought the guns out, so they rolled back the tariff. It was viewed as a tax on the South. Historically, it’s always been a huge part of U.S. politics.

MG: But if people hate taxes, they still seem to like government goodies. You’ve talked about getting government small enough to drown it in the tub.

GN: My goal is to reduce the size of government by half over 25 years, and then to do that again in 25 years, and eventually get it small enough that if you wanted you could drown it in the tub. That’s doable over time. It’s a long-term goal.

MG: Well, how are we doing on spending? People have talked about the Obama era as this festival of high taxes and out-of-control spending, but historically it seems like pretty low taxes and low spending.

GN: Well, advocates of limited government had an extraordinary victory in 2011 when John Boehner stood down the president over a $2.5 trillion increase in the debt ceiling. He said: Cut $2.5 trillion in spending over a decade, or else no deal. The president kept saying OK, we’ll reduce the deficit, we’ll raise taxes and we’ll cut spending. Boehner said no. All spending cuts. That’s what the Budget Control Act did. Obama thought the spending caps would break, but they haven’t. Government spending has decreased from 24 percent of GDP to 20 percent in just three years. Huge.

MG: The last time Republicans controlled Washington, it, um, wasn’t like this.

GN: That was before the Tea Party. When people ask what happened to the Tea Party, part of the answer is it moved into Congress. The other answer is it fundamentally transformed the Republican Party. Republicans were already on board with step one: Don’t raise any taxes. That’s the pledge. They were mostly OK with step two: Cut taxes at every opportunity. What was missing, and it was painfully obvious under George W. Bush, was spending restraint. It wasn’t on their list of things to do. Every crisis, from September 11 to the flooding in New Orleans to the crash, the answer was spend money. Never reform government. It was always: spend money. The Tea Party changed that. There were about a million people in the streets. And those rallies were before any significant tax increase passed under Obama. They were rallies against spending. Against bailouts. Against the stimulus.

MG: It sparked some changes in how Congress operates.

GN: Well, the big change was the ban on earmarks, because earmarks were the currency of corruption. The appropriators would say, here’s $10 million for your local college or whatever if you vote for this spending bill. Earmarks are what you give people to vote for bills they don’t like. And that went away, no more bribing people to vote for spending bills. So now the appropriators are no longer the giants of Congress. People thought they would beat the sequester, but they haven’t. This was partly because of term limits for committee chairmen, so the appropriations chairman wasn’t this godlike character who was going to be around forever and if you ever want anything, you better do what he wants today. But earmarks, too.

Now we’ve got a campaign to get the entire membership of the appropriations committee term-limited to six years, so nobody goes completely native. You can’t help it if you’re on the committee for 20 years. You can’t swim against that spending current for that long. We also want to establish an anti-appropriations committee, which we actually had during World War II. Its only job was to recommend budget reductions and the elimination of programs, and it saved billions of dollars. It killed the Civilian Conservation Corps. It killed the Works Projects Administration, where they painted the outsides of post offices. It ended a lot of New Deal stuff that might otherwise be multi-billion-dollar operations today. We ought to do that again.

MG: But like you said, 20 percent of GDP is pretty low for spending.

GN: Yes, there’s much more focus on spending restraint today; even the Reagan Republicans tended to focus more on tax cuts. Paul Ryan has done for spending restraint what Jack Kemp did for tax rate reduction. He’s an evangelizer. And the Republican House has voted overwhelmingly for his budget plan five times. It reforms entitlements, so spending doesn’t go up to 40 percent of GDP but instead goes down to 16 percent.

Another big moment was the death of Simpson-Bowles. For years, everyone used to tell me, Grover, everyone knows we’re going to hit a bridge abutment with entitlements someday, and the only way to get Democrats to agree to steer away from it is to give them tax increases. That’s what Simpson-Bowles was: promises of spending restraint, down to 21 percent of GDP, in exchange for $5 trillion in tax increases over a decade. Well, we got a lot lower than that without their tax increases.

The so-called Simpson-Bowles Commission was created to find bipartisan ways to reduce the deficit. It failed. From the right in the picture: former Senate Budget Committee Chairman Pete Domenici; former White House Budget Director Alice Rivlin; and the commission's co-chairs, former Wyoming Sen. Alan Simpson, and Erskine Bowles. | AP Photo | AP Photo

MG: Exactly. I know deficits aren’t your big thing, but they’ve dropped by almost three-fourths under Obama.

GR: I tend to focus more on total taxation and total spending. The difference between those two numbers is less important than those two numbers themselves.

MG: But even spending today is historically low, especially on the discretionary side. That looks like another huge Grover victory in the dreaded Obama era.

GN: It is a tremendous victory, and we need to hold onto it. Democrats are like teenage boys on a prom date. They’re going to keep asking for the same thing again and again in different ways.

MG: But you feel like there’s been a real shift lately.

GN: Yes, we’ve changed the way we’re going to do budget deals in the future. Three times now, Republicans have agreed to spend a bit more on the discretionary side in exchange for permanent restraints on entitlement spending. There was the budget deal between Ryan and Patty Murray. There was a thing with the FDA. And there was the “doc fix,” where they put $140 billion into Medicare to avoid reimbursement cuts for doctors, which they had done like 16 times before, but this time in exchange they reduced the amount we’ll spend on Medicare by $3 trillion over 50 years. It’s like eliminating one-fifth of the national debt. Instead of the old way, promising spending cuts down the road for tax hikes now—Reagan got cheated in 1982, Bush got cheated in 1990, and Simpson-Bowles would have cheated us again—we’ll loosen the sequester a bit in exchange for permanent savings. That’s very big.

MG: The other big long-term shift is the slower growth of health care costs. That was going to bankrupt us all, but it seems like the growth isn’t out of control anymore. That’s a big deal, and the Obama administration says it’s because of Obamacare.

GN: It is a big deal. The health savings account revolution has been helpful. But a lot of Obamacare is high-deductible insurance. Republicans have always argued that ought to be an option. I’m not crazy about it being mandatory, but it does make people shop around. When you get individuals paying for their own health care, you do get price competition, and that does reduce the amount of money that gets spent.

MG: I mean, low taxes, low spending, falling deficits, slower health care cost growth. It seems like the Obama era has worked out OK for you.

GN: Obama did some very helpful things. He terrorized the country into electing a Republican House and Senate – and those Republicans had ringing in their ears: Stop spending so much! Those are the people who voted to reform entitlements five years in a row, and it didn’t cost them any elections. Those votes for the Ryan budget are the most small-r radical votes for significant reform in the history of American politics. There’s a unity in the Republicans now. Obama brought all those things.

MG: But now it feels like the revolution is eating its own. You have these Tea Party guys saying Boehner’s a wuss, Ryan’s not pure enough, why isn’t all this awesome stuff we were promised happening yesterday?

GN: I understand the frustration and disappointment. We have the votes in the House to pass the Ryan budget. And the House has passed the Ryan budget. But the Senate requires 60 votes, and there aren’t 60 Republicans in the Senate, certainly not 60 Reagan Republicans. And even if there were, you still have a president who will veto anything like that. Really, people are frustrated that Romney forgot to win the presidency. He was supposed to get the milk, wash the car, and win the presidency, and somehow he forgot. Some elected officials are so frustrated at Romney not being here that they blame Boehner. If Romney was signing Boehner’s legislation, nobody would be complaining. Boehner would be the hero of the day.

MG: Right. You said when Romney was running that you just need someone with five fingers to sign the Ryan budget into law.

GN: We don’t need five! Just enough working digits to hold the pen. Republicans need to focus their angst and disappointment and frustration into electing a Republican president and maintaining a Republican Senate. Then the current House as currently structured can change the world. But it can’t change the world alone.

MG: The current Republican presidential candidates all seem to have working digits. I mean, Kasich is supposed to be the moderate in the field, but you love his tax plan.

GN: Yes, Kasich’s people were kind enough to share it with me before they released it, and it’s great. Look at all the Republican tax plans on the table. They all reduce marginal tax rates. They all dramatically cut corporate tax rates. They all go to full expensing for business investment. They all get rid of the death tax and the alternative minimum tax. They’re all unique, but there is unanimity among the Republicans on taxes that you never saw in 40 years of Democrats saying they wanted to do health care. That’s why it took Clinton and Obama so long to do their health plans. On taxes, Republicans have a plan. On the central issues, they’re all in the same place. I can throw a dart on the wall and be happy with any of them.

MG: Even Trump.

GN: Sure, Trump’s plan is really good too. His tax plan, that is. And the plans will all get better once the House and the Senate get to look at them.

MG: The Republican candidates would all presumably sign the Ryan budget into law.

GN: There’s no reason to think they wouldn’t.

MG: That would be another huge victory for you. But during the debate, Hillary pointed out that the economy has done so much better under Democrats. And the fact-checkers basically said yeah, that’s true. How do you explain that?

GN: Well, that’s just the president. If you want to know what actually happens to the economy, watch Congress. The first two years of Bill and Hillary, the economy was pretty flat. Things got better after the Republicans took Congress in 1994. The last six years of Clinton were pretty good. The first two years of Bush sucked. We lost control of the Senate, spending went nuts. The middle four years were quite strong. The last two years were weak, with Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid. And with Obama, the growth really all comes after 2010, with the Republican Congress.

MG: But the president matters. If you can get a Republican president in 2016, then you can get to your dream of cutting the government in half, right?

GN: Absolutely.

MG: Do you worry that with full control of Washington the Republicans would start backsliding and spending again?

GN: You know, the voice of the tea party is still ringing in their ears. I think we’ll keep moving towards lower taxes and lower spending. We’re not going to see tax increases unless the Democrats control everything, and if you look at the House districts right now, that’s unlikely. We just need a Republican to win the presidency in 2016 or 2020 and pass the Ryan budget. A Republican with working digits.