Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Must-Do, Nonfiction, Nuclear Power, Nuclear Weapons, Physics, Science, What to Read, Entertainment News

A short video, released earlier this month, in which the actor Kevin Bacon presumes to lecture “millennials” on everything they don’t understand about the 1980s, is mostly a limp affair, with Bacon moaning about the hardship of having to phone a girl for a date instead of pinging her on “OK Twinder.” But the clip does touch upon an epochal difference between the past century and this one when Bacon informs his viewers that if they think Russia is a problem now, “Lemme tell you about a little thing called the Cold War. They had nukes pointed at us for 20 years.” That pronouncement soon gets lost in more lame jokes about skateboarding kids getting “nuked,” but: point taken. No one has grown up under a Sword of Damocles bigger or sharper than that one. Neither the threat of international terrorism nor the menace of global warming can quite measure up to a nasty little thing we used to call MAD: Mutually Assured Destruction.

It was a 20th-century madness and malaise, but also the 20th century’s glory, and historian Craig Nelson tells the tale with exceptional panache in “The Age of Radiance: The Epic Rise and Dramatic Fall of the Atomic Era.” Because Nelson’s purview in this book encompasses both nuclear power and nuclear weapons, the story isn’t really over yet, even if the 2011 Fukushima Daiichi meltdown prompted more than 17 nations to begin phasing out their nuclear power plants. Nelson characterizes humanity’s harnessing of the atom as a “blessed curse,” one that has taken many lives and (in the form of medical technologies) has saved others. And he concludes by pointing out that many leading environmentalists have now come to embrace (well-regulated) nuclear power as the only currently viable solution to the modern world’s voracious energy demands.

Mostly, though, “The Age of Radiance” is an example of top-notch storytelling. The earliest chapters are the most focused and effective, as Nelson traces the winding routes of several brilliant scientists from Europe to the isolated community of Los Alamos, N.M., in the early 1940s. This is far from the first time this narrative has been told, but Nelson’s version is one of the best, an ideal balance of detail, character, conflict and information. “The Age of Radiance” is unlikely to help a complete novice understand the workings of nuclear science, but that’s not the book’s purpose. It will, however, give readers a vivid picture of the apparatus around the science, from the bare-bones suburb erected to house the families of the Manhattan Project’s staff to the winches and trestles and rods and massive graphite bricks used to build the world’s first nuclear reactor in a decommissioned squash court at the University of Chicago in 1942, to the distinctive (and according to Russian physicist Andrei Sakharov, quite pleasant) smell of a nuclear explosion: ozone, “fresh, clean and electric, like the air of great natural hydrodynamics, of Angel, of Niagara, of Victoria.”

And then there are the characters. There’s the outwardly dour but inwardly passionate Marie Curie, discoverer of radioactivity. There’s the winning Enrico Fermi and his off-and-on partner/nemesis, the iconoclastic Leo Szilard, visionary physicists from Italy and Hungary, respectively, with diametrically opposed styles of pursuing the truth about the essence of matter. J. Robert Oppenheimer, who oversaw the Manhattan Project, is less emphasized here than in some other accounts of the building of the bomb, where he is often cast as a Faustian figure embodying an entire civilization’s torment at what it has wrought. And in counterpoint to all the eggheads, there is Lt. Gen. Leslie Richard Groves, the notoriously choleric wrangler of the project, who told his officers, “At great expense, we have gathered on this mesa the largest collection of crackpots ever seen.” It took the awe-inspiring spectacle of the test detonation of Trinity, the first atomic bomb, in the New Mexico desert to change his tune: “Groves, grumbling as ever: ‘Well, there must be something in nucleonics after all.'”