Rockies left-hander Jorge De La Rosa has found a home sweet home on the Front Range.

Although his team owns the worst record in the National League, he departed Wednesday night’s 5-2 victory over the Kansas City Royals with a 13-8 record and 4.21 ERA. He has a legitimate chance to surpass his career-high of 16 victories, set in 2009 and again in 2013.

And while other pitchers cringe at the mere thought of pitching at Coors Field, De La Rosa revels in it. He improved to 9-2 with a 3.19 ERA in 13 starts at Coors Field this season. In his career, De La Rosa is 44-14 at Coors. His 44 wins are the most all time at the ballpark. That hometown performance will certainly factor into the Rockies’ decision-making when De La Rosa becomes a free agent at the end of the season.

“Jorge is tough, tougher than some people might think,” pitching coach Jim Wright said. “He knows how to get through an outing, and he knows how to win a ballgame. Plus, he’s not intimidated by this place. He thinks he can outlast the other pitcher.”

De La Rosa did that again Wednesday night, utilizing his baffling changeup and outperforming Royals lefty Danny Duffy. De La Rosa has now pitched at least six innings in 11 consecutive starts.

“His changeup is his money pitch,” manager Walt Weiss said. “He speeds hitters up with his cutter, but the changeup has been really good for Jorge. Every once in a while he’ll pop a fastball in there at 95 (mph) or sneak a curveball in there. He’s had it all working, and he’s been ridiculously good here.”

De La Rosa threw eight innings, allowing two runs on five hits and inducing four double plays — tying the franchise record for a starting pitcher. He wanted to go for the complete game, but Weiss pulled him after 103 pitches.

“I wanted to try, but I respect their decision,” De La Rosa said.

He got rocked by a solo homer by Alex Gordon to lead off the second and gave up another run in the fourth, when Billy Butler led off with a double and then scored on a sacrifice fly by Josh Willingham.

But Colorado’s offense delivered, as it usually does when De La Rosa is on the mound. First baseman Matt McBride, called up from Triple-A Colorado Springs on Tuesday, tagged Duffy for a two-out grand slam in the sixth inning, turning a 2-1 Rockies deficit into a 5-2 lead. De La Rosa entered the game getting 6.16 runs of support per nine innings, the best in the majors.

Not so long ago, De La Rosa too often allowed his emotions to get in the way of his performance. Not the past two seasons, however, as he’s learned to channel his passion.

Said Wright: “Even though his emotions might get out of control at times, and maybe his anger gets the best of him, sometimes, he still has an attitude of, ‘I’m coming after you.’ That’s why he can win here.”

The left-hander is a maddeningly slow worker but highly effective nonetheless. He’s also costly. His $11 million salary is the second highest on the team this season, behind injured shortstop Troy Tulowitzki’s $16 million.

So the Rockies and the 33-year-old De La Rosa are quickly heading toward a crossroads. In an effort to keep him, the Rockies will have to make De La Rosa a $14 million qualifying offer. That move would ensure draft-pick compensation if De La Rosa were to sign with another team.

But suppose another team were to offer De La Rosa a two-year, or even a three-year, contract at, say, $20 million to $25 million? Would the Rockies match it?

“I don’t know about that right now,” De La Rosa said. “I just want to concentrate on this season.”

Owner Dick Monfort, the man who holds the power and pulls the purse strings, indicated this summer that he wants De La Rosa back. But at what price?

And there are others in the organization who aren’t so sure De La Rosa is worth re-signing for big-time money.

After De La Rosa’s stellar performance Wednesday night, the debate is bound to get very interesting.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp