CHARLOTTE, N.C., November 12, 2014 — President Barack Obama used to just be dangerous. Now he is wounded with nothing to lose, and that makes him treacherous.

Last Tuesday night, Obama was pushed off America’s political wall. So he climbed up on the Great Wall of China and cut a deal. It is a preview of coming attractions for the next two years.

Under the guise of making a climate change deal with China, Obama gave us a small sample of just how vindictive he will be.

READ ALSO: “Oh the shark has pearly teeth, dear” and so does Barack Obama



China gave up nothing in the so-called environmental treaty. They will not be held accountable for global pollution until 2030, long, long, long after Obama is gone. Meanwhile, the United States will begin our part of the bargain right away.

What kind of a deal is that? Its a deal that will push American manufacturers out of the U.S. with new regulations, sending them to China where they won’t have to bother with higher costs associated with the President’s newest treaty.

In the meantime, the administration continues to negotiate with Iran about stopping ISIS by using concessions on the Iranian nuclear program as the carrot.

CNN reports that Obama is reviewing his strategy in Syria and now admits that it is not working. He also has decided that Bashar al-Assad has “got to go,” which is exactly what ISIS wants; our goals are now aligned with our greatest enemy.

Reports from China are that Obama and Vladimir Putin have had several brief conversations about nuclear negotiations with Iran, the civil war in Syria, and their disagreement over Ukraine.

“On three occasions throughout the day, for a total of approximately 15-20 minutes, President Obama had an opportunity to speak with President Putin,” said Bernadette Meehan, spokesperson for the U.S. National Security Council. “Their conversations covered Iran, Syria, and Ukraine.”

The Kremlin also mentioned the Obama talks in a statement, mentioning also Putin meetings with the leaders of Vietnam, Indonesia and Australia.

With regard to Putin’s conversations with Obama, the Kremlin said, “The Presidents of Russia and the United States had a brief discussion of bilateral relations and the situations in Ukraine, Syria and Iran.”

That means that in the space of a little over a week, the U.S. is “sleeping with the enemy”, possibly making multiple bad deals that have international implications.

On the home front, while Obama was playing “Let’s Make a Deal” in China, MIT economist Jonathan Gruber, the architect of Obamacare, publicly admitted on more than one occasion that the administration lied about the healthcare law in order to get it passed.

In the process Gruber called the American people just plain stupid.

“Lack of transparency is a huge political advantage,” said Gruber during a speech. “Call it the stupidity of the American voter or whatever, but basically, that was really, really critical for the thing to pass.”

READ ALSO: Jonathan Gruber: We lied about Obamacare to stupid American voters



With his comments, Gruber not only expressed his own elitist contempt for the American people, he also demonstrated Obama’s disdain for the electorate. Not that Gruber said anything that opponents of Obamacare didn’t already suspect or know, but the out and out arrogance of his remarks was stunning.

Obama has no intention of governing during the final 700 days of his presidency. He will do nothing other than create perpetual barriers which will keep the government from operating smoothly or getting anything done.

Admiring pundits may argue that Obama would never do such a thing because it would damage his legacy. The truth is that Obama has never cared about his legacy, other than to change the United States into his own image of what it should be.

Furthermore, the president has already fulfilled his legacy. Whatever he does from now until November 2016 will only expand the garbage heap of history he has established.

READ ALSO: How Barack Obama destroyed his presidency



Obama’s moves were predictable. When he spoke of transparency he meant it. How many times has he said, “Let me be perfectly clear.”

The President has telegraphed his intentions every step of the way, yet even now the press acts like those three monkeys: “Hear no evil, see no evil, speak no evil.”

Very little has been said in the media about Gruber’s comments except on conservative talk radio and on FOX News, and here on Communities Digital News. In spite of media attempts to ignore them, however, they’ve gone viral on the internet.

The American people pushed Humpty Dumpty off the wall last week and they do not want him to be put back together again. But then, what we want has never really mattered.

Bob Taylor has been traveling the world for more than 30 years as a writer and award winning television producer focusing on international events, people and cultures around the globe. Taylor is founder of The Magellan Travel Club (www.MagellanTravelClub.com)

Read more of What in the World and Bob Taylor at Communities Digital News. Follow Bob on Twitter @MrPeabod