But despite conservatives’ hopes (and liberals’ fears), Obama and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid refused to give in. Meanwhile, another deadline loomed: The debt ceiling would be reached on October 17. The prospect of default finally forced Republicans' hand, and a deal was reached to reopen the government and raise the debt limit. Republicans got practically nothing for their stand save battered reputations (just as many had predicted): The agreement funded the government into January, raised the debt ceiling until February, and mandated a budget conference. Obamacare, meanwhile, stood unscathed—until shocking rollout failures did far more damage than the GOP ever could, and helped to revive the Republican Party’s political fortunes. Obamacare's Catastrophic Rollout Reuters How's this for a plan: Require citizens to purchase a product through a website that's down more than half the time and has epically slow page-load times and an astounding error rate. Oh—and a substantial portion of the back end of the site hasn't even been built, so who knows if your transaction has gone through when you're done? But hey, it's better than paying a fine, right? This, in a nutshell, is the proposition the Obama Administration—through a combination of neglect and poor management—posed to voters in introducing the Affordable Care Act's insurance exchanges, a central part of the president's signature legislative achievement. No great surprise, then, than his poll numbers, riding high in the wake of the Republican-backed government shutdown, quickly plummeted to the lowest levels of his presidency. The decline in support was particularly acute among key Democratic constituencies such as Hispanics, Millennials, and working-class white women. From Guns to Immigration, Gridlock on Capitol Hill Reuters It’s hard to remember now, but 2013 dawned rather hopefully in Congress. The so-called “fiscal cliff” had been resolved without bloodshed, giving lawmakers another few months to avert the clumsy “sequestration” cuts to federal spending, and seeming to break Republican resistance to agreeing to raise taxes. Bipartisan teams were earnestly at work on compromise legislation to address two of the president’s priorities, gun control and immigration reform. It looked like it might be the Year of the Thaw. Instead, it quickly turned into the Year Nothing Got Done. The sequestration deadline came and went without progress, forcing cuts to Head Start programs and furloughs of Defense Department employees. The bipartisan bill to increase background checks for gun purchases ran aground on the implacable opposition of the National Rifle Association and failed to garner 60 votes in the Senate. Immigration reform passed the Senate by a wide margin, then went nowhere in the House, though leaders continue to promise action—eventually. The budget stalemate got so bad that the government shut down, and the Senate bottleneck for presidential appointees so frustrated Democrats that they invoked the long-feared “nuclear option.” In the waning days of 2013, House and Senate leaders reached a new budget deal, prompting another outbreak of optimism. But if the last year is any guide, don’t get your hopes up for a new dawn in Washington. The Justices Strike Down the Defense of Marriage Act Reuters It was an amazing year for gay rights, as changes that began to sweep the nation in 2012 were extended and a more-than-decade-long fight finally resolved. In June, the Supreme Court in June finally overturned 1996's anti-gay Defense of Marriage Act, making plaintiff Edie Windsor into a hero and setting the stage for a slew of administrative changes to recognize same-sex marriages at the federal level. States, in their turn, have taken advantage of the surge in public support for same-sex marriages to rewrite their laws. At the start of the year, same sex marriage was legally sanctioned in nine states; that number had increased to 16 by years' end. Critically, five of those states accomplished the change through their legislatures, not through a court decision. But same-sex marriage remains barred by law in 33 states. The Invisible Primary Begins Reuters When one presidential election ends, another begins. And so, with President Obama’s reelection in 2012, both parties’ most ambitious personalities began to look ahead to 2016—stealthily, of course, and while pretending not to.