Clinton, Trump 'dead even' in Florida, Ohio, and Pennsylvania

With voters sharply divided by gender, race and age, Democrat Hillary Clinton and Republican Donald Trump are virtually tied in Florida as the focus of this year's presidential race shifts from the primaries to the November general election, a new poll shows.

» The full report on the Quinnipiac Poll is here.

» Also read more at the Tallahassee Democrat, USA Today, Business Insider, the Tampa Bay Times and Politico.

Surprise, Florida is not the best state to grow old in

A flock of snowbirds doesn’t necessarily mean that Florida is the best state in the country to spend your twilight years. According to a study released Monday from Bankrate, the Sunshine State ranks No. 31 in the U.S. among the best states to grow old in. More from the South Florida Business Journal.

Should employers be flexible about children at work?

Employers and workers have become more conscious of the need to maintain work-life balance, whether by turning off work mobile devices at home, more vacation time or working from home. Yet one possibility of helping that balance, at least for parents, has remained relatively taboo. More from the Lakeland Ledger.

The fertilizer industry insider who's credited with helping Sarasota Bay

Michael Juchnowicz has been called a traitor, a deserter and a double-crosser by his peers. He thinks of himself more as a maverick. It has been nearly a decade since the founder of Gardenmasters of S.W. Florida Inc. broke with the fertilizer industry by pushing for stricter nitrogen-control laws. More from the Sarasota Herald-Tribune.

Increasing number of Hispanics can't afford healthcare

An increasing number of Hispanics are finding it harder to afford healthcare and the percentage of those without any health insurance is up slightly over a year ago, but a majority still have a favorable view of the Affordable Care Act. More from News4Jax and BenefitsPro.

Health Trends

Miracle transplant saves an infant from a deadly disease UHealth–University of Miami Health System physicians at Jackson Memorial Hospital’s Miami Transplant Institute (MTI) perform a lifesaving transplant after a pediatric patient endures a misdiagnosis and failed treatments at other hospitals. [Sponsored Report] » Read the full report here.

Florida Icon

Artis Gilmore Artis Gilmore talks about growing up in segregated Chipley, Florida; playing pro ball for 18 years; how he counsels his students and his own children; what life is like when you are 7' 2" tall. He tells us: "Having the proper equipment, that was a problem, like having shoes to play basketball in. Even a pair of sneakers that probably cost a dollar and half, that wasn’t in the budget." » Access full article.

In case you missed it: