Aster Medcity, south Asia's largest quaternary care hospital, sets up a helpdesk in Qatar

Aster Medcity, south Asia's largest quaternary care hospital, today announced the opening of its helpdesk in Qatar. The helpdesk will assist patients in Qatar to know more about Aster Medcity and, if required, facilitate in seeking treatment at the hospital. The helpdesk will be housed at the Aster Medical Centre facility in C Ring Road, Doha.

Located in Kochi, Kerala, India, Aster Medcity is a part of Aster DM Healthcare, the leading healthcare conglomerate in the Middle East and India.

Aster Medcity, an integrated medical township, is dedicated to providing healthcare services of the best international standards at the lowest cost in the Indian subcontinent. The first phase of this mega project opened in April 2014.

Spread over 40 acres, along a kilometer long waterfront, Aster Medicty is a conglomeration of several super-specialty hospitals, including nine Centre of Excellences (CoE), in one campus. It will capitalize the potential of the Indian state of Kerala as a health tourism destination, attracting patients from around the world and also promoting reverse brain drain of Indian healthcare professionals. The state-of-the-art quaternary care referral hospital cluster is being developed at an estimated investment of US $300 million.

Dr. Azad Moopen, Chairman and Managing Director, Aster DM Healthcare, said: "Aster Medcity is unique as a global healthcare model with high-end infrastructure, cutting-edge medical technologies and excellent knowledge partnership with healthcare innovators from different parts of the world. In every sense of the word, Aster Medcity will be a game changer in healthcare delivery model in the region. The helpdesk in Qatar will function as a gateway to Aster Medcity's holistic treatment of global quality standards for patients here."

Addressing a range of complex and critical care requirements, the helpdesk in Qatar will serve as a single point of contact for assistance in scheduling appointments with specialists and booking rooms in Aster Medcity, in addition to making all the necessary guidance for travel and visa procedures.

Speaking at a Press Conference to announce the launch of Qatar helpdesk, Dr. Harish Pillai, CEO, Aster Medcity, said: "We are pleased to open the Aster Medcity's Qatar helpdesk, which will provide a direct and easy access for the patients from the country to avail the world-class treatments at the multi-specialty healthcare destination in the south Asia. The patients will also be able to avail follow up treatment through the Aster healthcare network across Qatar."

"Being one of the world's best healthcare destinations, Aster Medcity introduced a unique and unparalleled model of care, reducing the need for patients to travel other countries in the world for treatment. The iconic medical city will be a major healthcare destination in the South Asia once fully operational," he added.

The first phase of project, which has been commissioned, has a capacity of 575 beds. The second phase will witness an addition of 500 more beds.

The Aster Medcity campus will also house an international convention centre, a four-star hotel and apartment complexes.

Commenting on the launch of Aster Medcity Qatar helpdesk, Dr. Sameer Moopan - CEO of Aster Medical Centre, Qatar, said: "Aster has been synonymous with quality and affordable healthcare. Our growth in general and in Qatar in particular is a testimony to that fact. We will continue to strive to provide the best healthcare services. Through our growing network of medical centres, clinics and diagnostic centres here, we have been able to provide primary and secondary healthcare services to patients. Our new 50-bed hospital in Doha, slated for 2015 opening, will further consolidate our position as the leading private healthcare provider in the country."

"The opening of Aster Medcity helpdesk in Qatar is aimed at helping our patients to seek further consultations and treatment at the one of the best quaternary care hospitals in the world. With Kochi being only four hours away from Doha with good air connectivity, Aster Medcity would be the first and ideal choice for patients here to avail specialist treatment," he added.

Aster Medcity is in discussions with several leading international institutions for affiliations and establishment of a knowledge exchange.

As Kochi is well connected to the Middle East and several countries of the world, the 1,100-bed capacity medical city will be within easy reach of local and international communities, especially the people from the Middle East, Africa and European Union for advanced and cost-effective care.

Aster Medcity will have a pool of internationally recognized doctors, researchers and medical professionals migrating back to India with their wealth of global expertise, skills and exposure to the advanced knowledge garnered from top-ranked medical institutes across the world.

-Ends-

About Aster DM Healthcare

Aster DM Healthcare is a healthcare group in the Middle East and India. Founded in 1987 by Dr. Azad Moopen, a doctor turned entrepreneur, Aster DM Healthcare is recognized as the largest private healthcare provider in the GCC region, with over 175 network units consisting of hospitals, medical centers, clinics, diagnostic centers and pharmacies, providing primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary healthcare, academics & research, management and consultancy services.

Its six brands -- ASTER, Medcare, Access, MIMS, DM WIMS and ASTER Medcity -- are repositories of consumer trust across the GCC and India. The Group touches the lives of over 7 million patients a year, providing care to more than 20,000 patients per day. Aster DM Healthcare provides healthcare of the highest quality in the geographies they operate in.

For further information, please contact:

Mohamed Sohel Rasheed Palliyalil

DM Healthcare Watermelon PR

Dir: +971 4 4546044 Tel: +971 04 2833655

Email: sohel@dmhealthcare.com Email: rasheed@watermelonme.com

© Press Release 2014

© Copyright Zawya. All Rights Reserved.