BUFFALO, N.Y. (WIVB) — As tax season begins, expect fraudulent phone calls to ensue. Scammers are targeting the average person, but officials are working to protect and prevent loss.

Scams take many forms, from phone calls to emails — but one thing is always in common. Those looking to steal from hardworking citizens almost always ask for information no official would ask for, and they frequently ask for payments in the form of gift cards or pre-loaded credit cards.

LISTEN | Hear how a fraudulent caller sounds over the phone.

Many elderly people fall victim to the scams on an annual basis, but the New York Attorney General’s Office has worked hard to spread the message that the IRS will never call a person on the phone to warn of an outstanding debt.

Now, New York State has launched a website encompassing various crimes that take place during the tax season, encouraging New Yorkers to report the crimes. New Yorkers can report impersonation scams, tax evasion schemes and identity theft.

Reporting the scams allows officials to investigate, even if action is difficult to take.

“Rapid advancements in technology provide criminals with various avenues to invade people’s personal privacy and cheat New Yorkers out of their hard-earned money, especially during tax season,” Jorge Montalvo, the head of the NYS Consumer Protection department, said. “We ask the public to remain vigilant as they prepare their taxes and urge them to contact the proper authorities immediately if they feel they have been targeted.”

Common scams people are encouraged to report include the following:

Posing as a treasury or other state officials, notifying people they have a large sum of money to collect, but need to submit a payment of $250 to collect it.

Affordable Care Act penalty threats from tax preparers, who advise their clients to pay penalties directly to them, then pocket the funds.

Threatening IRS phone calls to tax preparers, demanding client information.

IRS phone scam from consumers, threatening arrest or penalties if a sum isn’t paid immediately.

Phishing emails are abound, too. New York warns it will never ask for personal information by email.