Photo

American workers need protection from unfair scheduling practices like on-call shifts, the editorial board argued on Tuesday. Below, Teresa Tritch, editorial writer on economic issues, responds to reader questions and comments about unfair scheduling and how to address it.

Isn’t this an opportunity for unions to step in and help? Laguna

The decline in union membership goes hand in hand with the rise of disadvantageous pay and scheduling practices. So it stands to reason that having a union would curtail unfair pay and scheduling practices, because unions offer a voice and a means to bargain for better pay and conditions.

But forming a union is not simply a matter of unions stepping in to help. Changes in the political, legal and regulatory landscape in recent decades have made union organizing difficult, while efforts to make unionizing easier have gone basically nowhere. For example, before President Obama was elected president the first time, he pledged to champion the Employee Free Choice Act, which would have let employees form a union by signing cards to that effect. But the support was not forthcoming. Nor has there been much rhetorical or political support for unions in recent years as they have come under attack in the states (see Wisconsin). In recent executive orders, Mr. Obama has raised the minimum pay of employees of federal contractors and instituted other beneficial changes that could be a model for private employers. But he has stopped short of pushing federal contractors to support collective bargaining.

And he is one of the better politicians on labor rights and the agenda of working people!

The push to unionize will have to come from the grassroots – as is happening in the Fight for $15 effort – which has a dual aim: To get fair pay and to be able to unionize without retaliation from anti-union employers.

The article did not address the biggest problem with wages, the Obamacare mandate that practically limits works to less than 30 hours a week to avoid providing healthcare. This forces workers to hold two or three jobs and pay for their living cost plus pay for healthcare themselves. Many of them, with multiple jobs, earn over the government assistance threshold.

Blame industry, but blame the U.S. government as well for punishing workers. leaningleft

I think that government has contributed in many ways to the diminished state of labor today. But I don’t agree that Obamacare is one of them.

The last time I looked into the impact of Obamacare on work hours, in June, there was no evidence that it had resulted in an increase in the number of people who were working part time but wanted and needed full time work, known as “involuntary” part timers.

The Editorial Board weighed in on the issue last January.

The threshold at which an employer must provide insurance to an employee under Obamacare or pay a penalty — 30 hours — is sensible. Not many people work around 30 hours, so if an employer is inclined to cut a worker back from say, 31 to 29 hours, there are not that many people in the workforce who would be affected. If the threshold were set at 40 hours, many more workers would be in danger of having their hours trimmed, because a far greater share of the workforce puts in around 40 hours.

All that said, a lot of people are clearly scrambling to get enough hours of work to make a living. That is not only because they don’t have enough hours. It is because pay is stubbornly low in so many fields. The need to have more than one job actually makes it all the more important for workers to have stable schedules so that they can juggle two or more jobs.

“The fundamental problem is that as scheduling has become a tool for higher profits, it has also generated unfair practices,” plus “Managers are often compensated on the efficiency of their staff. A retail manager’s best employee would not necessarily be the top seller, but rather the one who sells the most at the lowest pay.” I.e., the nexus of the problem.

and …

“Meanwhile, bills in Congress and some states would curb some of the most disruptive scheduling practices, including on-call shifts or sending workers home early without pay. Approving these bills will require lawmakers to put the interests of workers ahead of their corporate contributors.” What’s the likelihood of that?

When do we (on the productive and consumer sides) stop this? forbesgayton

Interesting idea. Boycotts, like strikes, are hard fights, with potential for collateral damage. Please don’t misunderstand: I’m not saying, ‘You could cause more harm than good.’ That’s a reactionary argument for doing nothing. I am just thinking aloud. In the absence of an organized effort, there is nothing to stop individuals from writing to a company to express dissatisfaction with how employees are treated. Presumably, image and brand are very important to corporations and, accordingly, they would want to know if you think the company’s practices are at odds with their image and brand. It’s relatively easy to fire off an email. Ask for a reply – and let me know what they say!