Medical Reimbursements of America (MRA), a leading provider of reimbursement optimization services for hospitals and health systems, today announced it has completed the acquisition of Blackmaple Provider Recovery Group, LLC, a leading provider of payment integrity auditing and underpayment recovery services.

For the Blackmaple Group (BMG), the sale of its payment integrity business allows the company to focus on its core businesses, providing Advisory Services and Group Purchasing Solutions to a wide range of physician group and industry clients.

“The addition of payment integrity auditing and underpayment recovery provides MRA customers with a perfect complement to AcciClaim, MRA’s reimbursement optimization solution for accident claims,” said Bobby Rolfe, MRA CEO. “This acquisition furthers our goal of becoming the nation’s leading provider of reimbursement optimization services for hospitals and health systems.”

“BMG has been growing exponentially,” said Jeff Gold, Founder and Managing Partner, Blackmaple Group. “The time is right to focus our efforts on our consulting and group purchasing businesses, with the knowledge that our underpayment recovery business is positioned to thrive as part of MRA.”Blackmaple Provider Recovery Group, LLC (BMPRG) provides payment integrity and underpayment recovery services delivered through proprietary technology and an expert team of analysts, auditors, and appeals professionals led by industry veteran, Lawrence Rosenberg. Prior to co-founding BMPRG in 2010, Rosenberg was EVP and COO for HealthDataInsights, where he was intimately involved with the CMS Recovery Audit Contractor (RAC) pilot program, and later managed operations for the highest performing CMS Recovery Audit program (Region D). He is now leveraging the knowledge gained from his overpayment recovery experience to help providers identify and recover underpayments from Medicare, Medicaid, and Managed Care payers.

“For 18 years, the people I have worked with helped Managed Care and Government payers identify and recoup overpayments caused by the anomalies in today’s highly complex claims payment systems. In 2010, I decided to use my expertise to build a company focused on identifying the opposite anomalies – the underpayments – caused by these same claims payment systems. After 4 years of development, we are now in position to accelerate growth and help hospitals nationwide identify and recoup additional revenue from claims that are underpaid. Our entire team is excited to join forces with MRA to build a national platform by combining our knowledge and expertise with the extensive resources of MRA.”

About Medical Reimbursements of America

MRA delivers technology-enabled services that ensure optimal reimbursement for healthcare providers. Our innovative accident claims management solution, AcciClaim™, seamlessly resolves accident-related health claims, optimizing reimbursement while eliminating the administrative pain of billing for Motor Vehicle and Workers’ Compensation accidents. Our recently acquired payment integrity business, Blackmaple Provider Recovery Group, LLC, identifies and recovers underpayments from Government and Managed Care payers. Founded in 1999 and based in Franklin, Tennessee, MRA is a recognized leader in reimbursement optimization, serving 300 hospitals and health systems nationwide. To learn more, visit www.medicalreimbursements.com.

About Blackmaple Provider Recovery Group, LLC

Blackmaple Provider Recovery Group, LLC delivers technology-enabled services that ensure optimal reimbursement for health claims underpaid by Government and Managed Care payers. Our expert payment integrity audit team identifies and recovers underpayments using proprietary algorithms developed from decades of overpayment recovery experience working for Government contractors and leading Managed Care companies. Our services are delivered risk-free, with contingency pricing that delivers new revenue and enhanced performance of existing contract management systems.

About Blackmaple Group

Founded in 2007, the Blackmaple Group is a nationally known consulting firm, serving the strategic needs of physician groups, health providers and industry clients. BMG’s executives bring decades of health care, finance, change management and Fortune 500 experience to provide C-suite consulting and drive lasting financial value to our clients. The company is a recognized innovator in the industry, having launched multiple businesses to help clients achieve operational and financial efficiency, including Blackmaple Group Purchasing Solutions. In 2010, BMG launched the Blackmaple Provider Recovery Group, and successfully transitioned it to MRA in June of 2014. To learn more, visit www.blackmaplegroup.com.