Novartis AG (ADR) (NYSE:NVS) and Amgen, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMGN) came face to face on Wednesday in a Washington appeals court, as Novartis tried to get the court to lift the ban on sale of Zarxio, the biosimilar drug version of Amgen’s Neupogen, in the US market.

The two companies have been involved in an intense battle since October 2014, as Amgen has been continuously trying to block the launch of the imitation drug version of Neupogen, which is expected to cost considerably less than the original branded drug.

The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) accepted Novartis’ application for the biosimilar in July 2014. Since then, Amgen has been threatened by the launch of the biosimilar, which has been forecasted to eat up a huge chunk of Neupogen’s sales. Neupogen contributed a hefty sum of $1.2 billion to the overall revenue of the company last year.

Amgen filed a suit against Novartis’ generic drug division, Sandoz, in February 2015 to block the launch of Zarxio. After the move was rejected by the court, the company continued to file cases against the drug-maker in an attempt to get the launch delayed at least, if not blocked. Despite Amgen’s efforts, the FDA approved Zarxio on March 6, marking the approval of the first ever biosimilar drug in the US.

The approval not only dealt a sharp blow to Amgen, but also to all other drug-makers whose blockbuster drugs are nearing expiry and facing threats from biosimilars being developed by generic drug-makers. According to analysts’ forecasts, biosimilar drugs are expected to carry a price tag that is likely to be 20% to 50% cheaper than the price tags of the branded drugs.

After several subsequent rejections, Amgen finally succeeded in getting the court to announce a ruling in its favor in May 2015, when the US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, Washington ruled that Zarxio’s launch should be stopped “effective immediately” until the legal dispute between the two drug-makers is resolved.

Novartis, in response, appealed the court to lift the ban on the biosimilar. The arguments from both the parties revolve around the interpretation of the Patent Protection and Affordable Care Act 2010, which allowed the regulators to approve biosimilar drug versions after a strict scrutiny. Prior to 2010, biosimilar drugs could not be approved in the US as these drugs are not the exact copies of the original branded biologic drugs, due to the differences in the living cells used to manufacture the biosimilars.

The court did not indicate as to when it would announce a final decision; however, the case has been on fast track so a ruling from the court can be expected in the upcoming weeks.

Amgen lawyer Nick Groombridge of Paul Weiss said while addressing the panel of judges that a ruling is “integral to how the regime is going to work going forward.” Mr. Groombridge maintained that Sandoz has failed to disclose the required information, as per the regulatory framework, which allowed the FDA to approve the biosimilar. "Sandoz didn't follow the rules," he said, according to Bloomberg.

However, Sandozlawyer Deanne Maynard of Morrison & Foerster maintained that the company had disclosed the said required information twice, once when the company filed the application for the biosimilar with the regulatory authority, and once upon the approval of Zarxio. The lawyer said Novartis should be given the green light to launch its biosimilar drug in the market now or by September 2, at most.

Why DoesAmgen Feel Threatened?

Amgen has been making tireless efforts to block Novartis from rolling out its biosimilar in the market. Amgen’s Neupogen reached its patent expiration in 2013, but despite the patent expiration, the drug has managed to maintain its blockbuster status. The launch of the biosimilar could threaten Neupogen’s position in the market.

Amgen has already faced competition from a generic drug version of Neupogen, developed by Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. (ADR) (NYSE:TEVA), named Granix. The imitation drug version snatched 5-10% market share from Neupogen, according to estimates compiled by Michael Yee, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets.

Upon the launch of Zarxio, analysts forecast that Amgen would face further decline in its sales. As per the estimates, the drug would face an 8.6% year-over-year (YoY) decline on average, which translates into estimated sales of $1.05 billion for this year. According to the decline rate, the drug would ultimately lose its blockbuster status by 2016, with estimated sales of only $985 million.

Novartis has been selling the same biosimilar in Europe since 2009, under the brand name Zarzio, where it has a market share of approximately 30%. The drug is being marketed in over 40 countries and is one of the leading biosimilar drug versions in the world.