A downtown Columbia gun and knife fight, a home nearly destroyed and a local soldier’s literary work are all part of Maury County’s Civil War history.

Now, these events will be memorialized through new historical markers on the Civil War Trails — a route of historic demarcations dedicated to one of the greatest divides in American history.

The old Nelson Hotel in the 700 block of North Main Street, the Elm Springs home on Mooresville Pike and the grave of author Sam Watkins at the Zion Cemetery are the newest additions to Maury County’s Civil War Trails markers. All the sites are in Columbia’s city limits.

Brenda Pierce, Maury County Convention and Visitors Bureau executive director, said she hopes to place the markers by Spring 2014 in time for better weather and more tourists.

“People who are interested in Civil War history like to travel and follow that trail and go visit the markers to learn about the history that goes along with them,” Pierce said. “It’s another reason for people to visit.”

There are four other locations throughout the county where similar Civil War markers are located, Pierce said.

Columbia City Council’s approval earlier this month was the last step toward getting the markers placed. Council had to approve the marker because the old Nelson Hotel is on city property.

OLD NELSON HOTEL

Maury County Archives Director Bob Duncan is working on the Nelson Hotel sign’s description. A large part of the former hotel’s significance lies in what is known as “The “Forrest-Gould Affair.”

The old hotel is where Confederate Lt. Andrew Wills Gould died after a confrontation with Confederate Gen. Nathan Bedford Forrest in summer 1863, Duncan said.

A downtown Columbia Masonic Hall was the setting where Gould faced Forest, challenging the general about being blamed for losing some artillery pieces.

“Gould confronted Forrest in the hall,” Duncan said. “Now, confronting Forrest took nerves of steel to start with.”

An argument ensued, and Gould shot Forrest in his abdomen. Forrest retaliated and stabbed Gould in his side. The young lieutenant was eventually taken to the Nelson Hotel for medical treatment.

Gen. Forrest was examined by doctors who determined the injury was a survivable flesh wound, Duncan said. Forrest, perhaps, was more wounded by the news his lieutenant was more severely injured, Duncan said.

Forrest recovered, but Gould died from infection caused by the stab wound. The general carried the guilt from killing the young soldier long after the war was over, Duncan said.

ELM SPRINGS

Elm Springs, the current International Headquarters of The Sons of Confederate Veterans, is a Greek revival style mansion in Columbia. The home has a fiery history, and will also get a marker recognizing its place in local Civil War lore.

Duncan said there are several stories related to Elm Springs, but the most memorable tale occurred when Union Troops nearly burned the home in Nov. 1864.

Elm Springs was home to Col. A.M. Looney who commanded a Confederate regiment at The Battle of Shiloh. Looney eventually wound up in the 1st Tennessee Infantry, or Company H (Aytch) of Sam Watkins fame, according to home’s website.

In 1864, Union Gen. John Schofield was trying to slow Confederate Gen. John Bell Hood’s invasion of Tennessee while in Columbia, Duncan said. Two Union soldiers entered the home, set a broom on fire and tossed it underneath a flight of stairs.

Confederate Gen. Frank Armstrong, of Forrest’s Calvary, arrived in time to put out the fire. Two Confederate soldiers shot and killed the fleeing Union soldiers.

SAM WATKINS’ GRAVE

Watkins was born in June 1839 in the Zion community, between Mt. Pleasant and Columbia.

The book, “Co. Aytch,” is highly regarded among historians and enthusiasts alike for its detailed accounts into the soldier’s daily plight, Duncan said.

“We have people coming through here all the time wanting to know where Sam Watkins’ grave is because Sam Watkins is probably the best known private soldier of the Civil War,” Duncan said. “Every Civil War expert or hobbyist has a copy of ‘Co. Aytch’ sitting on his shelf.”

A marker will be placed in front of the Zion Church Cemetery where Watkins is buried.

Duncan said he is not quite sure what draws people to travel far and wide for a chance to trace Civil War history.

“It’s easy to forget that at one time this country was literally tearing itself apart,” Duncan said. “It’s a wonder the country survived.”