Incident created real-life scenario, put training to the test

A woman looks at a letter from the school district as she is escorted from the scene where students were evacuated May 9 after a gun scare at Timberline K-8. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

Related Timberline package

St. Vrain middle schools get emergency toilets

St. Vrain Valley schools hold monthly drills to prepare students and faculty for emergency situations, but the May 9 gun scare at Timberline K-8 school provided a real-life trial run for the district's plans.

That morning, students told the principal, Karrie Borski, that a 13-year-old student had a gun in his backpack, said Stacy Davis, the security and emergency manager for the district and a former Firestone police officer. Within minutes, Borski issued a lock down and notified police.

Police are automatically alerted when any SVVSD goes on lock down, which is the standard response when a threat is reported inside a school, Davis said. A follow-up call was made to police by Timberline staff.

Longmont police Sgt. Doug Ross said the call came in 11:32 a.m. and that the first officers were on scene by 11:36 a.m. Police surrounded the school and set up a perimeter on the campus.

When police arrived, the student was not in the classroom where he should have been, said Ross, who supervises school resource officers at six district schools. Police searched the school before the school interventionist — at 11:50 a.m. — notified the school's main office that the student was in her classroom. Police apprehended him at 11:53 a.m.

"She didn't realize we were looking for that student," Ross said. "She was just following procedure and notified the office that there was a student in the room that would not normally be there at that time."

Lock down protocols

Under lock down protocols, students and teachers are instructed to stay down, stay quiet, turn off the lights and lock the doors, Davis said.

Davis believes that this was the only time a district school has been on lock down this year. Neighboring Skyline High School was put on lock out before the boy was apprehended. A lock out keeps visitors from entering the school when there is a possible threat outside, Davis said.

District officials said they were pleased with the execution of the lock down by students, faculty and staff at Timberline.

Superintendent Don Haddad said that from the immediate action taken by the principal to swift police response, both groups used their training well. But the biggest sign of success came from the students who reported the weapon.

"We spent a lot of time talking with our students, teachers, and community members about the importance of communicating when they see or hear something that doesn't seem right or causes them concern around safety," Haddad said. "That is critically important, and it's our first and best line to address these concerns."

After no weapon was found on the boy who was arrested, police searched the school, Ross said. Because the search could take several hours, police coordinated an evacuation of students to Skyline High School, where Timberline students would be reunited with their parents.

The evacuation began at 1:21 p.m. and took a little more than an hour, Ross said. By the time all 1,066 Timberline students were accounted for at Skyline, high school students were being dismissed for the day, causing the district to delay pick-up for Timberline parents to make it easier for district employees to verify parents' identification and avoid more congestion, Haddad said.

Some parents waited for more than an hour before reuniting with their students.

"I'm a parent as well, I get it," Haddad said. "But we need to take the time and make sure everyone was safe versus just letting them go and hoping for the best."

At about 4:30 p.m., police found a black Airsoft gun in a closet at Timberline, Ross said.

Initial reports said the gun was painted black, but Ross said that the only part of the plastic gun that seemed altered was an orange tip that was removed.

"Unfortunately, manufacturers make these so realistic that you don't have to do much to them," Ross said. "I thought it was a real gun myself when I saw it."

Room for improvement

Meetings among district employees, Timberline staff and police began last week to discuss what went well and what needs to be re-evaluated.

Overall, district and police officials said they were thrilled with the swift but calm response by everyone involved but that there is always room for improvement.

Some Timberline parents complained that information from the district was slow. But student safety took priority over disseminating information to parents, officials said.

"Our first priority is making sure everyone is safe," Haddad said. "We're not going to stop or slow the procedure so we can communicate a minute sooner."

The school is looking into a malfunction of the public address system, which broadcasted information inside and outside of the school when it was supposed to broadcast only inside.

"For example, when we say that we're still on lock down that could be misconstrued as if there was still an imminent threat when we might just be finishing our search and updating teachers and students," Haddad said. "That could also be a problem if there's someone who poses a threat outside of the building that's hearing those updates."

Longmont police are also evaluating procedures after the incident, Ross said.

Several members of the Special Weapons and Tactics team left a training session in Lafayette to assist with security at Timberline, Ross said. Many of them showed up wearing a mix of SWAT training gear and civilian clothing, Ross said, but the SWAT team was never activated.

"It wasn't needed in this case," Ross said. "But we may consider that in the future."

The department is discussing whether radio communications should be divided across multiple channels based on topic, which would make communication more difficult to monitor for the incident commander but easier for team members, he said.

In hindsight, Ross said, he should have called additional school resource officers to the scene from other schools and districts, like Boulder Valley.

"They like kids, they're good with kids and I think that could have been a benefit," he said. "It could have gone a long way in calming the students."

No one would wish for a situation like this, Ross said, but the situation launched productive discussions between authorities and the district and provided good practice.

"This is an amazing opportunity for all of us to put everything we've trained for into a real-life scenario where no one gets hurt," Ross said. "It's a blessing to learn so much from a situation where everyone was safe at the end."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.