SOCHI — Semyon Varlamov saved Russia’s bacon.

With his teammates and country reeling Sunday from a crushing loss on home ice to the United States less than 24 hours earlier, Varlamov made 27 saves, including two huge stops in the shootout, that allowed to Russia to salvage an unexpectedly tough 1-0 victory against Slovakia in the Olympic hockey tournament.

“It was important for me and the team,” Varlamov said. “Not to keep a clean sheet, but to win the game overall.”

After what has been a stellar, breakout season in the NHL with the Avalanche, Varlamov was tabbed for one of the most pressure-packed jobs in the Winter Olympics. He plays goalie for the home country in the one sport that Russia wants to win most at the Games.

Varly, however, watched as teammate Sergei Bobrovski got the start between the pipes in the showcase game against the United States. Bobrovski was generally solid, but short of superb in a 3-2 loss to Team USA that had everybody in the country, including president Vladimir Putin, seeing red.

The Russians started listless and finished frustrated against Slovakia, which had lost two previous games in this tourney by a combined score of 10-2.

“We’re not happy about this game. We wanted to win it in regular time, not to go into shootouts or cause heart attacks,” said Russian star Pavel Datsyuk, who sighed relief when teammates Alexander Radulov and Ilya Kovalchuk converted consecutive penalty shots to win the shootout in two rounds. The shootout might have been the easiest part of the game for Russia, because Varlamov went low to make two blocker saves against Slovakians Michal Handzus and Tomas Tatar.

And now, as the tournament moves into the elimination rounds, it appears Russia might very well have a goalie controversy on its hands.

Varlamov is undefeated in two games for Russia. His goal-against average is a microscopic 0.96. Bobrovski, on the other hand, left way too many juicy rebounds in front of him during his lone start, the stinging loss against the U.S.

Who’s the right man for the toughest job in Russia?

Isn’t it obvious? It’s Varly.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla