This is the week where the Republican party's biggest 2016 challenge takes center stage. You can’t say Republicans haven't seen it coming. They’ve known for ages that Hispanics have the capacity to make or break them in 2016. Right now it’s looking more like break, unless a couple of potential saviors pull off a miracle—which is why former Gov. Jeb Bush went on Tuesday to Puerto Rico, not known for its early primary status.

If the GOP is to make any headway with Hispanic voters, analysts across the spectrum say two Floridians are the key. Sen. Marco Rubio, a Cuban-American, is enjoying a surge of attention and polling popularity after announcing his candidacy this month. Bush is not Hispanic, despite his “oops” moment of checking off Hispanic on a voter form, but he may be an even better bet than Rubio. “He has the most potential,” UCLA professor Matt Barreto, co-founder of Latino Decisions polling, says of Bush. “Historically, he’s been more moderate than Rubio has been on a host of Latino issues. And his family situation can’t be ignored.”

Story Continued Below

That family situation includes brother George W., who as president championed immigration and education reforms important to Hispanics, as well as Bush’s own immediate family. “ I know the immigrant experience because I married a beautiful girl from Mexico. My children are bicultural and bilingual,” Jeb Bush said Tuesday at Universidad Metropolitana in San Juan.

The trip to Puerto Rico was followed Wednesday by a keynote speech to the National Hispanic Christian Leadership Conference in Houston. In San Juan, Bush talked about statehood and rum in Spanish and English. In Texas, it was education and immigration, in Spanish and English. Boxes, checked.

Rubio is an eloquent speaker who can reach “these Latinos who don’t really feel that the party’s talking to them,” says Stephen Nuno, a Northern Arizona University professor who is writing a book about Latinos and the GOP. “Unfortunately for Marco Rubio, Bush can make the same speech in the same language to the same people, and he comes with a little more gravitas.”

A Bush aide notes that in addition to his Mexican ties, Bush spent six months in Puerto Rico running his father’s 1980 campaign, and before that lived in Caracas, Venezuela, where he was a vice president and branch manager for Texas Commerce Bank. “The governor does have the ability to resonate culturally within the different groups in the Hispanic community. He understands how to communicate within the different sectors,” the aide says.

Puerto Ricans have a growing presence in Florida and are key to winning elections there. From Bush’s standpoint, it’s also potentially relevant that there are nearly 34 million Mexican-Americans scattered across the country. That compares with about 2 million Cuban-Americans who are concentrated ( 70 percent) in Florida and who have enjoyed a warmer welcome—residency, green cards, citizenship—than other groups.

Still, Rubio is now discussing his roots in a way that could resonate with the larger immigrant community. He ran into trouble a few years back when it turned out that, contrary to how he understood his family history, his parents did not come to America to escape Fidel Castro’s 1959 Communist revolution. They actually came earlier, to escape poverty and build better lives. As Rubio put it in announcing his presidential bid, “My father became a bartender. My mother a cashier, a maid and a Kmart stock clerk. They never made it big. But they were successful.”

That’s a classic American Dream saga that speaks directly to the aspirations of many a Mexican or Central American immigrants in places like Colorado, New Mexico, Nevada, Virginia, North Carolina and his own home of Florida. In other words, the states that could well decide the 2016 presidential election.

***

Yet the primary and general election seasons are riddled with political traps—some Republicans set for themselves, some laid by President Obama—that could well make gains with Hispanic voters in the 2016 cycle more difficult than ever.

The problem began with GOP recalcitrance on immigration reform, despite pleas from party elders after the 2012 election to get behind comprehensive fixes that included legal status and a complicated path to citizenship for many of the 11 million illegal immigrants in the country. From there, the dominoes fell. The House killed a bipartisan Senate reform bill. Obama responded with a series of executive actions designed to shield millions from deportation. Republicans and conservatives filed lawsuits to stop him. Courts blocked Obama’s actions. Republicans, having backed off comprehensive reform, narrowed their focus to border control and decrying Obama’s executive “overreach.”

Given that history, get ready for a year or more of questions to GOP White House hopefuls about what they would do about all this as president: Revoke permits for undocumented young people—the “dreamers”—who already have temporary legal status under a 2012 Obama policy? Roll back the executive actions now being challenged in court, even if they eventually take effect and millions receive temporary residency permits? Would orders and actions be reversed on Day One? Day 100? The day Congress passes comprehensive reform? And what day might that be? As a famous New Yorker cartoon caption once put it, “How about never—is never good for you?”

And that’s just immigration. The GOP is also out of step with Hispanics on major Obama initiatives such as the Affordable Care Act and re-establishing relations with Cuba, as well as broader questions about the role of government. The chasms will put identity politics—as well as campaign skills, personal connections and policy creativity—to a stiff test.

Mitt Romney failed the test in 2012. He received a paltry 27 percent of the Hispanic vote that year. Pollster Nicole McCleskey published a series of seminal memos on Republicans and Hispanic voters the following year. She concluded that they were largely talking past each other on values and economic issues, and using unhelpful language that obscured common goals on immigration, among them an easier residency process, learning the language and no shortcuts to citizenship.

Education—an issue McCleskey then called “the great equalizer”—today remains a potential point of connection for Republicans and Hispanics. “Latinos are open-minded to conservatives on education. They are open to any approach because their schools are not good,” Barreto says. But citizenship and other shared immigration goals have receded and new wedges have emerged, raising the question of whether even a Bush or a Rubio can repair relations.

Republican strategist Whit Ayres, a Rubio adviser, says the 2016 nominee will need to best Romney by 15 to 20 percentage points among Hispanics in order to win. In his new book, “2016 and Beyond: How Republicans Can Elect a President in the New America,” he writes that Romney’s performance with Hispanic voters was the worst of any GOP presidential candidate in a two-person race since Watergate. He also says it was utterly predictable and tries to send his party a wakeup call: “The idea that Republicans can rip into illegal immigrants without antagonizing Hispanic voters is delusional.”

That sums up why Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, though his father was born in Cuba, doesn’t qualify as a party-expander. He’s a ferocious critic of a path to citizenship and Obama’s executive actions and he opposed Loretta Lynch’s nomination as attorney general because she supported “the president’s illegal and unconstitutional executive amnesty.” He likes to joke that the IRS should be padlocked and its nearly 90,000 employees sent to the Southern border to scare off illegal immigrants. When Cruz entered the race, the DREAM Action Coalition, which represents undocumented young people, predicted that “he may be the most anti-immigration candidate on stage” during GOP primary debates.