Excerpts from recent editorials in the United States and abroad:

____

April 15

China Daily on U.S. Defense Secretary Ash Carter’s visit to the Philippines:

Overseas trips by politicians and military leaders are all about sending messages. So what messages are being sent by US Defense Secretary Ash Carter’s ongoing visit to the Philippines?

The clearest is the US military intends to strengthen its presence in the South China Sea, which poses more threats to regional peace and stability.

As part of its “pivot to Asia” strategy, the United States has been shifting its military back to the region. Carter’s trip reveals the US has put that process back on a fast track, with the expectation it will establish more bases in the Philippines.

Washington and Manila are also considering joint “freedom of navigation” operations, as the US Navy calls them, sailing through the 12-nautical-mile territorial waters around Chinese islands without gaining permission.

And emboldened by US military backing and funding, Manila is more aggressively provoking China.

It was no coincidence that a few days before Carter’s visit, the Philippines resumed construction work to upgrade a military airport on one of the islands it seized from China in the 1970s.

These messages from Carter’s visit have reinforced the belief in China that an encirclement of alliances is taking shape in a bid to contain China.

As well as putting pressure on China to the south, with enhanced military cooperation with the Philippines, the US has done the same to the east.

It has reassured Japan of its support in the event of any conflict over disputed islands in the East China Sea.

If the US continues to focus on military dominance in its rebalancing strategy, it is risking the peace and the security of the region for its own interests.

Online: http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/

____

April 19

The New York Times on statements Republicans have made about health care:

“Disaster.” ”Incredible economic burden.” ”The biggest job-killer in this country.”

Central to the presidential campaigns of Donald Trump and Ted Cruz has been the claim that the Affordable Care Act has been a complete failure, and that the only way to save the country from this scourge is to replace it with something they design.

It’s worth examining the big myths they are peddling about the Affordable Care Act and also their ill-conceived plans of what might replace it.

Millions of people have lost their insurance: In January, Mr. Cruz claimed that “millions of Americans” had lost their health insurance because of the health reform law. He even claimed to be one of them, saying “our health care got canceled” because Blue Cross Blue Shield left the individual market in Texas.

Insurers did stop offering some plans after the law took effect, including those that didn’t provide required benefits like maternity care or that charged higher premiums to older or sicker people. But people with those plans had the opportunity to sign up for others. And over all, the law has drastically reduced the number of Americans who lack health insurance. According to the Census Bureau, the number of uninsured Americans dropped by 10 million between 2010, when the law passed, and 2014. While critics said employers might stop offering health insurance because of the law, three million people actually gained coverage through their employers between 2010 and 2014.

Incidentally, Mr. Cruz never lost his health insurance. Blue Cross Blue Shield did cancel his particular plan, but it automatically moved him and his family to a new one. A Cruz spokeswoman said the senator had been misinformed by his insurance broker.

Millions of people have lost their jobs: Mr. Cruz has called the Affordable Care Act “the biggest job-killer in this country” and said “millions of Americans have lost their jobs, have been forced into part-time work” because of it. This is false. The unemployment rate has fallen since the law took effect, PolitiFact notes, as has the number of people working part time when they would rather work full time. A 2015 study using data from the Current Population Survey found that the law “had virtually no adverse effect on labor force participation, employment or usual hours worked per week through 2014.”

Reduce costs by weakening state regulations: Mr. Trump frequently talks about his plan to “get rid of the lines around the states” to foster competition among insurance companies. Customers in states where insurance is heavily regulated, the thinking goes, would be able to save money if they could purchase coverage from insurers based in states with fewer rules. Mr. Cruz, too, supports allowing people to buy insurance across state borders — it’s one of the few proposals he’s offered for replacing the health law if it is repealed.

But the biggest obstacle stopping insurers from setting up in more states is not regulation; it’s the difficulty of establishing a network of providers in a new market. And such a structure would destroy the longstanding ability of states to regulate health insurance for their populations. Some states, for instance, require coverage for infertility treatment and others have chosen not to. Allowing cross-border plans would encourage insurers to base themselves in low-regulation states, and the result might be a proliferation of poor-quality plans.

The Affordable Care Act is not perfect. Premiums for plans on the exchanges rose between 2015 and 2016 and are likely to rise again next year. A few insurers have left the exchange market, raising concerns in some quarters that more companies might follow.

But the law has helped millions of Americans, especially low-wage workers like cashiers, cooks and waiters who previously struggled to pay for coverage. In inventing problems that don’t exist and proposing solutions that won’t help, Donald Trump and Ted Cruz show that they don’t care about helping Americans get health care, which has never been their interest. They want to trash the Affordable Care Act, and they’re willing to mislead the public any way they can.

Online: http://www.nytimes.com/

____

April 9

The Los Angeles Times on why some voters might be left out of California’s presidential primaries:

This year, it seems, California’s presidential primaries may finally matter. But many voters could lose their opportunity to participate if they don’t act soon. That’s because the June 7 primaries are not open races, in which voters may simply show up and choose among all the possible candidates. Rather, these are party nominating contests, and it is the parties themselves that set the rules about who can participate. Only registered Republicans may cast ballots for Donald Trump, Ted Cruz or John Kasich. The Democratic Party restricts its primary between Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders to registered Democrats and to voters listed as “no party preference.”

With so much interest in this year’s primary, elections officials are concerned that many Californians won’t be able to participate in the presidential primary of their choice because they don’t know the rules, don’t know their party status or have registered for the wrong party. A Times survey recently found, for instance, that three out of four people who had signed up as American Independents didn’t realize they had registered for a real, right-wing political party. Many thought they were simply signing up as lower-case “i” independents (the unaffiliated voters California classifies as “no party preference” voters or, as they were formerly called, “decline to state” voters).

Intentional or not, American Independents will be given an AIP ballot on June 7 with a list of candidates most have never heard of, and they’ll be barred from voting in the Democratic or Republican presidential primaries. And that at a time when California leaders have adopted laws designed to boost turnout and participation. Secretary of State Alex Padilla ought to revisit the voter registration form to eliminate that confusing element and any others that people encounter when they sign up to vote.

California is one of many states where parties have chosen to hold so-called closed primaries. Such rules may be frustrating to unaffiliated voters and anti-establishment candidates. (Trump’s children, for example, missed New York’s deadline to change their party affiliation and won’t be able to vote for their dad in the GOP primary.) But the primaries are held for the benefit of political parties and their members so they can choose the best possible nominee for general election. The parties set the rules. It’s up to the candidates to follow them, voters to understand them and elections officials to implement them as efficiently as possible.

California has made it fairly easy. (registertovote.ca.gov) There is still time for voters to check their registration and, if they want to, change it to participate in their primary of choice. The deadline is May 23 — two weeks before election day.

Online: http://www.latimes.com/

____

April 19

The Washington Post on the Catholic Church and child sex abuse:

IN THREE years at the helm of the Catholic Church, Pope Francis has been a source of inspiration for millions of faithful around the world. In one critical respect, however, he has fallen short of his own promise: to come fully to terms with decades of child sex abuse by clergymen and the institutional cover granted to them by bishops and cardinals.

Francis has pledged “the zealous vigilance of the Church to protect children and the promise of accountability for all.” Yet there has been scant accountability, particularly for bishops. Too often, the church’s stance has been defiance and obstruction.

In his trip to the United States in the fall, Francis told victims that “words cannot fully express my sorrow for the abuse you suffered.” Yet his initiative to establish a Vatican tribunal to judge bishops who enabled or ignored pedophile priests has come to naught. Not a single bishop has been called to account by the tribunal, which itself remains more notional than real.

Meanwhile, church officials have fought bills in state legislatures across the United States that would allow thousands of abuse victims to seek justice in court. The legislation would loosen deadlines limiting when survivors can bring lawsuits against abusers or their superiors who turned a blind eye. Many victims, emotionally damaged by the abuse they have suffered, do not speak until years after they were victimized; by then, in many states, it is too late for them to force priests and other abusers to account in court.

Eight states have lifted such deadlines, known as statutes of limitations, for victims who are sexually abused as minors. Seven states have gone further, enacting measures allowing past victims — not just current and future ones — to file lawsuits in a finite period of time, generally a two- or three-year window.

In many more states, however, the bishops and their staffs have successfully killed such bills, arguing that it would be unfair to subject the church to lawsuits in which memories and evidence are degraded by the passage of time. Quietly, they also say the church, which has suffered an estimated $3 billion hit in settlements and other costs related to clergy sex abuse scandals nationwide, can ill afford further financial exposure.

A typical case is Maryland, where bills to extend the statute of limitations until the alleged victim turns 38 have failed even to come to a vote, owing to opposition from House of Delegates Judiciary Committee Chairman Joseph F. Vallario Jr. (D-Prince George’s) and the Catholic Church, among others.

In his trip to the United States, Pope Francis praised bishops for what he called their “generous commitment to bring healing to victims” and he expressed sympathy for “how much the pain of recent years has weighed upon you.” Yet by its actions, the church’s “commitment to bring healing” has seemed far from generous. And it seemed perverse to address the bishops’ “pain” when the real suffering has been borne by children.

Online: https://www.washingtonpost.com/

____

April 20

The Boston Herald on President Obama’s actions on immigration reform:

Frustrated by his inability to get an immigration reform bill through Congress, President Obama decided to rewrite the law himself.

So in November of 2014, just after the House killed a Senate-passed immigration bill, the president signed an executive order giving some 4.9 million illegal immigrants — many of them the parents of U.S. citizens or legal residents — what amounts to a grant of immunity. Or as the White House Solicitor General Donald Verrilli defined it to the U.S. Supreme Court in argument this week, they were given a grant of “lawful presence.”

That allowed them not merely to avoid deportation but to work and to collect an array of benefits. And that’s where Texas and eventually 25 other states said just wait a darned minute and sued the federal government for a vast overreach.

The issue here is less about a broken immigration system — which we agree desperately needs fixing and a path to legal residence for the estimated 11 million immigrants who are here illegally — than it is about an abuse of presidential power. And it was that issue that the court’s more conservative members pursued during Monday’s argument.

“What we’re doing here is defining the limits of discretion,” Justice Anthony Kennedy said. “And it seems to me that that is a legislative, not an executive act.”

Chief Justice John Roberts asked if the president could grant “deferred removal to every unlawfully present alien in the U.S. right now.” At least Verrilli cited statutory restraints on the president there. But then he’s already defied some of those “restraints.”

A 4-4 decision would allow a lower court ruling against the president to stand and halt this particular assault on the Constitution. But it surely shows how critical the next election, however loony it seems now, has become.

Online: http://www.bostonherald.com/

____

April 19

The Miami Herald on the Cuban revolution:

The cadaverous image presented by Fidel Castro on the closing day of the Communist Party Congress in Havana mirrors the decrepit state of the Cuban government, as well as its increasingly bleak future. Like Marxist ideology, the 89-year-old Castro looked like an utterly spent force as he gazed forlornly into the audience of party members and offered what may prove to be his valedictory to the party.

Castro, in a rare public appearance, was forced to acknowledge on Tuesday that his end is near. “Soon I’ll be like all the others,” he conceded. “The time comes for us all.”

The difference, regrettably, is that Castro knows that his days are numbered, but neither he nor the party’s leadership seems to understand — or is willing to admit — that the revolution long ago lost its vitality. It is the relic of a bygone era that cannot be reinvigorated or revived.

The party congress came as a huge disappointment to Cubans who hoped it would offer a glimpse of a better political future. The meeting failed to resolve key issues and closed the door on generational change.

While Fidel pleaded with party members to allow the revolution to survive even as he fades into oblivion, his 84-year-old brother, Raúl, gave himself one more five-year term as the Communist Party’s first secretary, and allowed feared hardliner José Ramón Machado Ventura, 85, to remain second in command.

The decision means Raúl Castro can hold onto the position of party chairman, the pinnacle of power in the communist system, well past the date of his announced retirement as Cuba’s president in 2018.

All the while, he’ll have by his side an even older henchman known as the enforcer of party discipline and as an implacable foe of economic reform. Even Raúl himself has criticized Machado Ventura for orthodox rigidity, but that apparently is no barrier to power.

Don’t look for fresh faces or younger people associated with free-market reforms — which Raúl Castro himself has blessed — among the five new members named to the powerful Politburo, either. There aren’t any.

All of this amounts to a huge failure by Raúl Castro.

He initiated economic reforms a few years ago not because he’s a reformer, but because he’s a survivor. He did it because he had to, knowing Cuba was obliged to undertake changes or face increasing unrest from the Cuban people.

Those reforms, gradual and incremental as they are, have been sufficient to keep the lid on, but Castro is fooling himself if he thinks that’s enough for now.

Change generates its own momentum, whether or not he likes it. Cuba’s president had the choice of extending reforms into the political realm, despite resistance from Machado Ventura and those who think like him, or face demands for change from the Cuban people. In the end, he couldn’t bring himself to do it.

Whether it was a failure of nerve or a failure of vision matters little: The message from this party congress is that the octogenarians leading Cuba are determined to hold onto power for as long as they can, unyielding until the bitter end. They are foreclosing the possibility of gradual political change regardless of the consequences.

Outside the halls of the party meeting, times are changing in Cuba. So are the expectations of its people. But the leadership seems blissfully in denial. Perhaps they should take a second look at the image of Fidel Castro.

Even he acknowledged that he has one foot in the grave. So does the failed revolution he led for more than six decades.

Online: http://www.miamiherald.com/