Already have a password? Log in here Thank you for reading. Print subscribers have FREE, immediate access to t-g.com and only need to register online. Non print subscribers have limited monthly access with options to read more. Click here to register or learn more » No thanks. I'd just like to keep reading. » The Shelbyville Times-Gazette new paid system is an investment in our community newspaper's future, strengthening our ability to continue our journalistic mission as well as to undertake digital innovations that will provide you with high-quality original reporting on whatever device you choose. We appreciate your understanding and support. If you are not currently a print subscriber, we encourage you to subscribe to the print newspaper today. Not only will you receive valuable coupons, advertising and news features that do not appear online, you will receive uninterrupted access to t-g.com, now optimized for your smart phone and the mobile web. To subscribe to the print product, which includes full digital access, click here. Or, if you prefer to learn more about subscribing to digital access only without print delivery, click here. Recently, hundreds of newspapers - including the Wall Street Journal, New York Times, Chicago Sun Times and dozens upon dozens of smaller newspapers - have started charging for online access. Click here to learn more from our frequently asked questions. Print Email link Contact editor Share: Insure Tennessee fails; session begins

Editor's Note: State Rep. Pat Marsh will write a weekly column that will normally publish each Sunday, beginning Feb. 15. State Sen. Jim Tracy will also write a column, scheduled for the Sunday opinion page. "Coming together is a beginning; keeping together is progress; working together is success." -- Henry Ford Our main reason for being in Nashville two weeks ago was to work on the Governor's Insure Tennessee plan. We spent most of that time learning about the plan and heard testimonies from people from both sides on the positives and negatives of the plan. It was very complex and complicated. The Governor has spent the last 21 months working with his staff and the folks in Washington with the federal health department trying to come up with the best plan possible to help our state. The healthcare industry has experienced constant cuts in their payments and mandated to provide care to those who can't pay. That industry was totally for the plan. But others, who didn't want any part of the Obamacare plan being expanded were totally against the plan. On Wednesday afternoon of last week, the Senate health subcommittee voted to not go forward with this proposed expansion in Tennessee. So, we were adjourned for the week. The regular session of the 109th General Assembly began this week. Last week, I was invited to a small meeting to go over the State's budget by the Constitutional Officers (Comptroller, Treasurer, and Secretary of State). It was very informative and really helped me better understand what is happening in our state's finances. Three main points were discussed: * General fund revenues continue to grow at a slower rate than increases in program expenses. * Program increases in areas such as healthcare, education, corrections, and employee insurance consume most, if not all, current revenue growth. * As cuts continue to be made to discretionary spending, it is difficult to maintain programs throughout state government. We have a $32.9 billion budget that is made up of $14.9 billion from state revenue, $13.1 billion from federal funds, and $4.7 billion from state services and tuition. The top 4 expense items for the state are: * Tenncare, $10.3 billion, 31.4% * K-12 Education, $5.5 billion,16.8% * Higher Education, $4.1 billion, 12.5% * Human Services, $3.0 billion, 9.1% Another surprising fact that they shared with us was that since 2008, the state has cut over 5,000 state employees. The Treasurer, David Lillard, told us that the Tennessee retirement system trust fund has over $50 billion in it and pays out over $2.2 billion in retirement dollars each year. Ninety-two percent of these funds remain in Tennessee. I found out that Lincoln County receives $9.7 million each year and Bedford receives $10 million each year going to retired state employees and retired teachers. This is a huge positive economic impact for our counties each year! I had several people from the district come by my office to discuss many different topics. Chesley Enloe and Christy Jensen came by to talk about their programs with the Tennessee Disability Coalition. I also saw Sarah Hunt, Teresa Winnette, and Anita Teague from the Child Development Center from Shelbyville at their reception. They all do a lot of good work for those less fortunate in communities and I really do appreciate it! I ran into Sam Gates and a group from Lincoln County that were here to voice their opinions on the Insure Tennessee plan. I also had the pleasure of meeting and talking with Scott Dennis and others of Shelbyville on their positions on several pieces of legislation concerning the TN Grocers Association. David Bunch of Heritage Medical and Jamie Guin and Mike Harbor of Lincoln Medical came by to let me know how much these hospitals needed the Insure Tennessee plan for their counties. Dr. Fred Ralston was up here again as a witness from the rural health care position and, as usual, did an excellent job in his presentation. Last Wednesday, I went to the Tennessee bankers' reception and got to visit with my brother, Bill, who is the current chairman of the Tennessee Bankers' Association. After that, Bill and I got to go out with First Community Bank and visit with Scott Cocanougher and Tom Clifford, the bank's leaders. We had a great visit and a great meal. This week has been very busy as we look forward to the regular session. Please feel free to stop by my office at War Memorial Building G-19A or give me a call if you have any questions or concerns. You can reach me at (615) 741-6824 or by email at rep.pat.marsh@capitol.tn.gov. I am honored to represent the people of the 62nd district!

Respond to this story Posting a comment requires free registration: If you already have an account, follow this link to login

Otherwise, follow this link to register