Fantasy football season is finally here — like celebrating that special holiday every Sunday for three straight months. But, much like opening up a gift and finding clothes, drafting a player who becomes a bust is no fun. Luckily for all the fantasy enthusiasts out there, I’ve compiled a list of a couple players owners should watch out for.

Quarterback

Drew Brees, New Orleans Saints — Drew Brees has long been a coveted pick for fantasy owners, an elite quarterback in fantasy for more than half a decade. This year, however, it looks as if the Saints’ quarterback is finally out of gas. Brees lost his top target in Jimmy Graham to a trade to Seattle. The team’s former deep threat, wide receiver Kenny Stills, is now in Miami. Wide receiver Marques Colston is 32 years old, which leaves Brees with a relatively young receiving corps and a rejuvenated run game led by 5th-year man Mark Ingram.

Running Back

DeMarco Murray, Philadelphia Eagles — OK, this is a long one. DeMarco Murray was probably the biggest surprise from last year’s fantasy football season. Murray led all running backs with 1,845 yards and 13 rushing touchdowns while gathering an additional 416 receiving yards. Murray had a whopping 392 carries last year, surpassing the the next highest back — LeSean McCoy, ironically enough — by 80 carries.

Historically speaking, that doesn’t bode well for Murray. From Kansas City’s Larry Johnson, who had 416 carries in 2006 and went on to miss eight games in 2007, to Denver legend Terrell Davis, who also had 392 carries in 1998 only to play four games the following year (though he did have 369 carries in 1997), the NFL’s history books have more than a few tales of running backs who couldn’t come back from having more than 370 carries.

The “Curse of 370” is well-documented when it comes to Murray, but consider it from a different angle. Monday, Chip Kelly held Murray out of practice because he wasn’t hydrated enough (Kelly places emphasis on sports science). It’s not too far-fetched to suggest that Kelly may scale Murray’s carries back this season in order to keep him healthy.

If that’s too much of a stretch, let’s consider Murray’s debut season in Philadelphia, starting with the Eagles’ offensive line. This year, they’re looking to fill the void left by Evan Mathis and Todd Herremans, their two starting guards. Their line is probably not going to be as good as Dallas’ was last year.

Second, Murray’s not the only name in town at the running back position. Darren Sproles and Ryan Mathews aren’t slouches either. Both have been viable fantasy backs in the past.

Finally, remember the shenanigans Kelly pulled with three running backs last year? Sorry to bring up a sore spot for LeSean McCoy owners, but who can forget Chris Polk vulturing two touchdowns on his lone two carries of the night — in Week 15 no less? Chip Kelly favors to be the new Bill Belichick of fantasy football — orchestrating schemes in which a player scores four touchdowns one week and then isn’t heard from the rest of the season. OK, maybe Kelly won’t be that bad, but the point is this: There are many reasons to doubt an encore from Murray.

Wide receiver

Jeremy Maclin, Kansas City Chiefs — Maclin had a breakout season last year, emerging as a top 10 wideout with 1,318 yards and 10 touchdowns with the Philadelphia Eagles. Maclin performed more than admirably as the No.1 wideout in Philly last year, but don’t expect a repeat performance.

Maclin has been reunited with former Eagles coach Andy Reid in Kansas City. Yes, the same Kansas City that didn’t have a single touchdown scored by a wide receiver last year. But that was last year and KC revamped its receiving corps by adding Maclin. But who else is there? Jason Avant, another member of Reid’s Eagles, and rookie Chris Conley out of Georgia, most notably. Also, Maclin’s new quarterback is Alex Smith, who isn’t known for slinging the ball around (unless checkdowns count). As embarrassing as it is for an NFL team to not have a single receiver score a touchdown over the course of an NFL season, look for Maclin to get in the end zone more than once this year. Just don’t draft him expecting to see last year’s result.

Brandon Marshall, New York Jets — This is more of an indictment of the Jets’ offense than of Marshall the player. Reports from New York suggest that Geno Smith is finally looking the part of franchise quarterback and has yet to throw an interception in training camp. There’s still reason to be skeptical of Smith, however, and any shaky play would create problems for Marshall’s production.

There are also concerns about the offensive line. Left tackle D’Brickashaw Ferguson has been on the decline, and the team is looking to fill a void at right guard, though former Seahawk James Carpenter seems to be the man for the job. Also, Marshall wasn’t exactly the pinnacle of health last year, he missed five games last season. He missed one game with an ankle injury and the final four after breaking his ribs. The 31-year-old receiver is no longer among the NFL’s elite. That much is obvious, but he’s still a risky option at best, even as a second receiver on fantasy teams.

Tight End

Julius Thomas, Jacksonville Jaguars — Good on Julius Thomas for landing a 5-year, $46 million contract with Jacksonville ($24 million of that is guaranteed). Thomas has been beastly these past two seasons. He was the third-best tight end in 2013. Last year, Thomas had 489 yards and 12 touchdowns, ranking him seventh among all fantasy tight ends. Unfortunately for Thomas and fantasy owners, Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning had a lot to do with that success. Now Thomas has sophomore quarterback Blake Bortles to catch balls from. Bortles isn’t Manning, and as such, Thomas’ numbers are going to take a dive. And Thomas’ injury history should be a red flag.

WHO TO WATCH

Matthew Stafford, Detroit Lions quarterback — Matthew Stafford isn’t quite a bust, but there is reason for concern. He was looking good heading into the offseason, but Detroit’s offense has changed. Gone are the days of Stafford throwing for 5,000-plus yards and 41 touchdowns as he did in 2011. Lions offensive coordinator Joe Lombardi is entering his second year in Detroit, and he’s looking to implement a more balanced approach. While Lombardi’s approach will certainly mean fewer yards and passing attempts for Stafford, it should also cut down on Stafford’s turnovers. Last year, he threw just 12 interceptions, a career low. Stafford also threw for just 4,257 yards last season — his lowest since 2011.

Bottom line: Stafford may be heading in the same direction as Tony Romo. He’ll be a prolific, efficient passer with the weapons to have some big games, but the balance between run and pass means he’ll struggle over the course of the season to produce at an elite level.

Alfred Blue, Houston Texans running back — As soon as I was typing that Arian Foster would be a bust, Foster went down with a groin injury. This piece was going to say: “Foster has yet as yet to play a full season since the 2012, but despite that, he still managed to be one of the NFL’s elite last year. The volume will likely be there for Foster again this year, especially with wide receiver Andre Johnson in Indianapolis.”

The same is true for Foster’s backup Alfred Blue, but he was able to only tally 88 yards against the Giants, despite them being a team that yielded the seventh most points to opposing running backs last year, according to NFL.com. On the positive side, Blue rushed for 156 yards during Week 11 in Cleveland. This year, Blue is flanked by former Eagles back Chris Polk and Jonathan Grimes and will likely split some carries with them. Polk has been dealing with a hamstring injury and has been sidelined the past couple days. From sheer volume, Blue is worth a look, but don’t overpay for him. He’s likely to lose production after Foster’s return or because Houston decides to commit to a running-back-by-committee approach.

Next week, I’ll look at potential sleepers.

Hugh Johnson: 303-954-1037, hjohnson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/HughJohnsonDP