Owners taking over an Erie pub, but will likely retire their famous Sunday sermon drink specials

Crossroads Tavern owner Pat Wolfe isn't losing faith even though Flatirons Community Church decided not to renew the Lafayette bar's lease for next year.

After 10 years at the Lafayette Marketplace on South Boulder Road, Crossroads will close its doors Sunday following the Bronco's final regular-season game.

"It is what it is, and God has a plan," Wolfe said. "I think it's going to be OK."

In mid-January, Wolfe and his business partner/girlfriend Dixie Prine plan to take over JJ's Pub from former Erie town manager David Stahl.

Stahl opened the neighborhood bar near Erie Parkway and County Line Road in November 2014 after his most recent botched attempt at retirement. He said Wolfe and Prine will be a good fit for JJ's, and he will take yet another shot at slowing down.

"If I get some fishing lures and some good weather it might work this time," Stahl said.

The paperwork is being ironed out, but both sides said the deal should close in the coming weeks.

Wolfe said the pair aims to keep JJ's generally in tact, keeping the name and atmosphere. A few tweaks to the menu and the game room could happen after Wolfe has time to evaluate the business, he said.

"Of course we wanted to stay in Lafayette," Wolfe said. "But we lost out on two locations and so we had to start looking at other options."

Advertisement

The tavern is the latest in a series of closures over the past couple of years at the mall, and the second business to leave since the megachurch purchased the building in February.

The church will combine the tavern space with the former Bistro 503 space where tenant Lafayette Music will move to in February. The current Lafayette Music spot will be used for an expansion that will create offices for church staff.

"Crossroads Tavern, being month-to-month, unfortunately had to be displaced," Flatirons Executive Pastor Paul Brunner said. "We have worked with Pat and Dixie to provide them a six-month window of time before vacating, while offering them some rent relief too."

Despite Wolfe's disappointment with the decision, Crossroads Tavern was still opening early on Sundays to screen Flatiron sermons over half-price drinks.

The final sermon aired on Sunday. Wolfe said he won't show one on closing day.

The regulars said they are sad to see it close, but some said they will make the six-mile trek to Erie. It's the familiar faces Lafayette resident Tom Macurdy said he will miss the most after his regular haunt shuts down. It was their Cheers, he said, where everybody knows your name.

"This place provides that social atmosphere," Macurdy said. "That's why we all come here. To see each other."

Whitney Bryen: 303-473-1113, wbryen@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter