Public asked to attend Tuesday meeting to give suggestions

Linda Poortinga goes for a walk with Lucy, her daughter's dog, on Friday on a trail at Boyd Lake State Park. Officials say in the last 10 years park visits have increased from 350,000 to near 500,000, and they will hold a public input session Tuesday seeking suggestions for changes. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Boyd Lake State Park was established 50 years ago and has become a popular destination for boaters, campers, hikers and beach-goers.

Tucked among neighborhoods in Loveland, the lake offers 1,747 surface acres of outdoor entertainment surrounded by 300 acres of land, fishing derbies and educational programs.

Visitation at the park has grown over the past five decades. In the last 10 years alone, it increased from 350,000 to near 500,000, said Jennifer Churchill, spokeswoman for Colorado Parks and Wildlife.

As the park turns 50, officials are looking to the public for input on what activities should remain and what new offerings they would like.

A redevelopment project at the state park has kicked off, although there are no specific plans yet. Park staff has been working with a design firm and wants to hear residents' ideas and hopes for the state park.

A public meeting will be held 5:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. Tuesday at Pulliam Community Building, 545 N. Cleveland Ave., in Loveland.

The offerings at the park vary widely, including educational sessions, volunteer days, geocaching and the standbys: boating, fishing, camping and picnicking.

Boyd Lake's swim beach is a popular destination on sunny days as are the 90 individual and one group picnic area. People also flock to the marina and boat ramps, fill up the 148 camp sites and hike and bicycle on four miles of trail.

Advertisement

Anglers also take advantage of fishing sites at the lake, and this year, the park has allowed people to ice skate on the lake as long as they check ice conditions for safety.

"There's a lot of different uses for the park," said Churchill. "We want to hear about the things that people use or want to see."

Improvements will be made over the next five years and will depend upon cost as well as the recommendations park staff develop after public input.

The state has not firmed up how much money will be available, Churchill said.

The meeting on Tuesday is the first of two public meetings that will be held during the next six months as parks officials work on a development plan. A preferred option is expected to be released in May or June followed by a final plan sometime between July and September.

As the plans progress, details will be posted online at www.boydlakestatepark.com. At that site, residents can also submit written input on redevelopment of the park.

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, Twitter/@RHPamelaJ.