Grant County, Ind. -- The City of Kokomo’s controversial baseball stadium project is having a ripple effect throughout the entire state of Indiana, including a Grant County trailer park community with more than 400 residents.

In response to Kokomo’s construction of the $11.5 million municipal baseball stadium in a flood-prone area along Wildcat Creek, FEMA recently announced its suspending $6.1 million in hazard mitigation funds for the state of Indiana, impacting approximately 20 communities statewide.

Grant County Emergency Management and the Stone Crest Manor mobile home community were hoping to use FEMA hazard mitigation grant dollars to build an access road that can be used during flood events.

“People can’t get out when it floods,” said Lori Rumple, a resident of Stone Crest Manor. “There’s a lot of elderly and children with health problems that live up here. We really do need an access road up here.”

Applications for some FEMA grants are due April 1, but the Indiana Department of Homeland Security has said that if Indiana is still ineligible at the deadline, the state will lose access to the funds completely.

“It’s very frustrating,” said Grant County Emergency Management Director Bruce Bender. “I don’t know what the politics are in Kokomo. All I’m asking is, please, let it go so I can take care of the people in my county. My job is my county, and that’s what I’m trying to get taken care of.”

Bender said the access road project has been in the works for years.

“This is the closest we’ve ever been to taking care of this,” said Bender. “Who is right or who is wrong (in Kokomo), I don’t know, but the point is it has stopped all of the rest of us from applying for funds to help our local jurisdictions and that’s what’s frustrating.”

The city of Kokomo previously accepted federal dollars through the Hazard Mitigation Grant program and, as part of its requirements, must keep the space open.

PREVIOUS | FEMA to Kokomo: Stop work on baseball stadium | FEMA rejects Kokomo stadium redesign plans

They’ve filed a lawsuit against the Indiana Department of Homeland Security in an effort to finish the project.

Meanwhile, IDHS has appealed FEMA’s decision to suspend hazard mitigation grant dollars for the entire state.

“An access road would be more convenient especially if we have emergencies up here,” said Jeff Burnette, a resident of Stone Crest Manor.

Bender said the access road is not just about getting residents out, but getting emergency crews in.

“We need to get ambulances back here, fire trucks, food and water,” said Bender. “That’s one of the biggest concerns. Once it gets flooded the closest thing we could do is bring a helicopter in.”

Bender said in the past, they’ve used all-terrain vehicles to help people in the trailer park during a flood.

Plans and projects in the following counties are impacted by the withholding of hazard mitigation grants: Boone, Grant, Henry, Knox, Marshall, Miami, Monroe, Ohio, Orange, Parke, Owen, Pike, Ripley, Starke, St. Joseph, Allen, Washington, Tipton, Dubois and Clay.

Randy McKay, operations manager for the City of Kokomo, issued a response in February regarding FEMA’s decision.

“We firmly dispute FEMA’s assertions that the eight parcels in question are not in compliance,” said McKay in a statement. “We believe that the redesign plans are fully compliant with the deed restrictions placed on the parcels; that is why we filed suit against IDHS on January 26.”

McKay said they have offered several alternative designs yet FEMA has provided no guidance or explanation for their position.

“We are in continued talks with IDHS regarding this issue and our related lawsuit,” said McKay in a statement to RTV6. “We know the state understands the overreach of the federal government; Governor Pence and his departments have actively fought, or filed suit against, federal government overreach on the Affordable Care Act, Immigration Reform, Education Policy and other issues. IDHS has indicated a willingness to concur and support Kokomo’s position in recent discussions.”

Follow Kara Kenney on Twitter: @karakenney6 | Facebook: KaraKenneyNews

Digitally produced by Sarah Swiss