As the punt sailed high into the upper-deck background at Sports Authority Field at Mile High, Isaiah Burse stood waiting at his 10-yard line with nothing to worry about except making his first NFL roster.

He caught it.

“I thought I made some good decisions,” said Burse, an undrafted rookie from Fresno State. “The biggest thing is I secured the ball.”

When Peyton Manning is the team’s quarterback and the offense is coming off a record-setting season, priority No. 1, 2, 3 and 4 for a Broncos punt returner is possession. The return is a long way from secondary.

With Jordan Norwood suffering a season-ending knee injury last week and Wes Welker coming off a concussion, Burse can do the Broncos a favor by making their 53-man roster as a returner and No. 6 receiver.

The Broncos might have considered picking up a returner on the waiver wire when the league engages in final cuts this weekend, but now the team is likely to pick up a kicker to replace Matt Prater, who will be suspended from the season’s first four games.

This all gives Burse a great chance to make the final roster.

“I’m not taking anything for granted,” Burse said. “I have to keep working at it. I can do it. I did it in college. Now I have to gain the trust of the coaches here.”

So far, so good. In his big preseason test Saturday against the Houston Texans, Burse corralled all six punts. Two were fair catches and four for returns.

There was a low line drive he let bounce and lost a yard as he discovered his first-step that was so quick in college wasn’t all that explosive against Texans’ special teamers.

His next two returns went for 11 and 16 yards.

“Yeah, I can’t dance,” Burse said. “There might be a time when I can dance a little, but at this level your first move has to be up field, north and south.”

Roster moves. The Broncos reached their 75-man roster limit Monday by placing Norwood on injured reserve and waiving defensive tackle Cody Larsen.

The Broncos must trim their roster to 53 players by Saturday afternoon.

Kayvon returns. Cornerback Kayvon Webster returned to practice at full speed Monday after missing last week with a sprained ankle. Webster and rookie Bradley Roby figure to be the Broncos’ starting corners for the final preseason game Thursday at Dallas.

Ball test. Getting hit never felt so good. Broncos running back Montee Ball got hit eight times Saturday on four carries and four check-down receptions from Manning in the preseason game against Houston. It was Ball’s first action since having his appendix removed on Aug. 4.

“I wanted to get hit again and get that tempo back,” Ball said Monday. “It’s funny. After my plays, I was talking on the sideline, telling them that the speed of the game is fast right now. I have to get that back. I will be ready to go.”