Topics: AlterNet, Barack Obama, Birth Control, Christian Right, Contraception, Evangelicals, Hobby Lobby, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

On July 19, 2011, a report released by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recommended that all American women be provided with free contraception. Catholic charities were immediately in an uproar, knowing that this would like result in a provision for free contraception as part of the recently-passed Affordable Care Act.

In addition to Catholic institutions, evangelical organizations were also sounding the alarm bells. “Yet another untruth about Obamacare has been uncovered,” said Richard Land, head of the Southern Baptist Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission, on July 20. “HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius has recommended mandatory coverage for ‘emergency contraception,’ which is a euphemism for the morning-after pill, which often kills a newly conceived child by not allowing the embryo to implant on the wall of the mother’s womb.”

Land’s strong words mark the first major evangelical objection to the contraception mandate. By the Spring of 2012, evangelicals were the only major religious group where a majority opposed the mandate, according to a Public Religion Research Institute Poll. But the evangelical anti-contraception-mandate movement didn’t gain widespread attention until Hobby Lobby filed a lawsuit against Sebelius, announced in September 2012. Hobby Lobby founder David Green argued that his company was founded on pro-life Christian principles, and thus should be exempt from the mandate. “Being Christians, we don’t pay for drugs that might cause abortions. Which means that we don’t cover emergency contraception, the morning-after pill or the week-after pill. We believe doing so might end a life after the moment of conception, something that is contrary to our most important beliefs.”

The Hobby Lobby lawsuit encouraged other evangelicals to join the battle against the mandate. Lawsuits opposing the mandate, which had previously been filed mainly by Catholic groups, were now being filed by evangelical businesses and universities. Evangelical publishing giant Tyndale House sued Sebelius, followed by three Baptist universities, The American Family Association, and Guidestone Financial Resources (which provides health insurance to Southern Baptist Convention employees.)

With the Hobby Lobby’s case to be decided by the Supreme Court in June, many Americans are still confused about the evangelical role in this fight. Unlike Catholics, evangelicals have not historically been known for their opposition to birth control, and yet, most journalists seem to have taken conservative evangelicals at their word, assuming that if evangelicals say they have always been opposed to birth control, it must be true.

The reality is much more complicated. Technically, evangelicals have been opposed to certain forms of birth control ever since they came to believe life begins at conception. Before the mid- to late-1970s, evangelicals actually had a generally pro-choice attitude, according to Jonathan Dudley, author of “Broken Words: The Abuse of Science and Faith in American Politics.” Dudley pointed to a 1968 document produced at an evangelical conference co-sponsored by Christianity Today and the Christian Medical and Dental Association that said, “Whether the performance of an induced abortion is sinful we are not agreed, but about the necessity of it and permissibility for it under certain circumstances we are in accord. … When principles conflict, the preservation of fetal life … may have to be abandoned to maintain full and secure family life.”

When evangelicals finally got on the pro-life bandwagon on the mid to late 1980s, they adopted much of the pre-existing pro-life ideology, which had been created by Catholic pro-lifers. According to Dudley, “When evangelicals joined the movement full-force in the late 1970s, Catholics had already established what it meant to be “pro-life” in the political world. And being “pro-life” meant believing life begins at conception.”

For Catholics, these pro-life ideas went hand-in-hand with a rejection of birth control, a notion that some evangelicals embraced as well. Catholics believed that anything that prevented children from being born was a violation of God’s will. Some evangelicals adopted a different but related idea, believing that, since life begins at conception, forms of birth control that could prevent a fertilized egg from implanting were essentially abortions or “abortifacients.” This idea was the basis for opposition to the pill in the 1970s (when the scientific consensus was that the pill could prevent implantation, a consensus that has been challenged today) and to Plan B, Ella, and IUDs today. Bruce Prescott, minister author of the blog “Mainstream Baptist,” encountered this idea in 1979, which led him and his wife to switch birth control methods. (Although he no longer supports this idea today.)

Still, the idea that birth control was abortive was rarely talked about among evangelicals, even though the idea that life begins at conception was doctrine at places like the Southern Baptist Convention. “It is evident,” wrote Southern Baptist Ethics Professor Kenneth Magnuson in 2003, “that there is no well-defined evangelical position on contraception.” Others went further. Dr. Allan Carlson of Hillsdale College noted in a 2012 New York Times article that “as recently as “10 or 20 years ago,” rejection of birth control “would have been an immediate no” for nearly all Protestants.” As recently as 2008, evangelical pastor Mark Driscoll argued that “even Focus on the Family and the Christian Medical and Dental Associations (CMDA) are undecided on the issue … As a result, it seems legalistic and inappropriate to declare that use of the pill is sinful.” Polls in 2009 and 2010 showed that 90% of evangelical leaders and the evangelical populace viewed birth control as morally acceptable.

This was even the case in the ultraconservative Southern Baptist Convention, according to Prescott. “Most Southern Baptists don’t know that they have issues with birth control.” The idea that life begins at conception was written into the Southern Baptist faith statement in 2000, but Prescott notes that most Southern Baptists probably saw this as narrowly prohibiting abortion. “People in the pews didn’t have a clue what the significance was — that it would prohibit stem cells and contraception.”

There was thus a direct disconnect between doctrine and practice. And evangelical leaders largely seemed content with this. Some leaders occasionally griped about the evangelical community’s laissez-faire attitude on birth control, but most were apparently equally guilty of this. To the extent that an anti-contraception movement existed before 2011, it was a popular one: evangelicals have no official source of opinion like the Pope, and thus anti-birth control views moved throughout evangelism from the bottom up. Evangelical sub-movements like the Quiverfull movement, which eschews all forms of birth control, played an important role in articulating evangelical anti-birth control beliefs, but they were far from the only ones to do so. Many took issue not only with the “abortifacient” nature of birth control, but also believed that it potentially encouraged promiscuity and treated children as a problem rather than a gift from God.

Abby Norman, a Southern Baptist and writer of the blog “Accidental Devotional”, experienced these beliefs firsthand. In 2006, women in her church discussion group told her birth control was abortive and recommended that she read the 2001 book “Lies Women Believe,” which Norman said convinced most of her church group to stop using hormonal birth control. “Lies Women Believe,” written by conservative Christian Radio Host Nancy Leigh DeMoss, has sold over half a million copies and spawned two “companion guides” to the book.

DeMoss claims that the destructive influence of feminism is largely responsible for the wide use of birth control among Christians. “One of the fundamental tenets of feminist ideology has always been the right of a woman to determine for herself if and when she will have children and how many children she will have…the Christian world has been unwittingly influenced by this way of thinking, leading to the legitimization and promotion of such practices as contraception, sterilization, and family planning. As a result, unwittingly, millions of Christian women and couples have helped further Satan’s attempts to limit human reproduction and thereby destroy life.”

DeMoss quotes Quiverfull activist and famous anti-feminist Mary Pride, who said, “Family planning is the mother of abortion…once couples began to look upon children as creatures of their own making, who they could plan into their lines as they chose or not, all reverence for human life was lost.” (As a side note, the idea that birth control encourages abortion — which is frequently repeated point in the birth control debate — is actually patently untrue. As Dudley notes, “ several scientific studies” show ready availability of birth control has been shown to limit abortions. )