Talk about a sweet deal that keeps getting sweeter.

Orlando Health, one of the region's two large non-profit hospital systems, bought the hospital in Ocoee known as Health Central in 2012.

The sellers? Taxpayers.

A public tax district, which once collected property taxes to build and maintain Health Central, sold the 171-bed hospital plus a nursing facility and doctors' offices for $181 million.

But if taxpayers expected a rebate they are sorely disappointed.

When I first wrote about the West Orange Healthcare District in February, the district had handed back $46 million of that taxpayer money to Orlando Health.

The money was doled out in the form of grants for projects such as a major expansion of the emergency department and a new tower of patient rooms.

Now the tax district is giving Orlando Health another $75 million for more projects that the hospital acknowledges it would have built at some point without a handout.

If you're keeping score at home, that's about $121 million of the $181 million purchase price pledged back to Orlando Health. Or a 67 percent rebate.

Taxpayers in west Orange County should be outraged.

They should be demanding to know why this tax district's board members, who are appointed by the governor, are giving residents' hard-earned dollars to a giant hospital system that's flush with money these days even without the tax district's misplaced generosity.

Orlando Health, which operates five hospitals in Orange and Seminole counties and has interests in or affiliations with two more in Lake and Osceola counties, is on solid financial footing after a string of rocky quarters a few years ago before a management shake-up.

Orlando Health's revenue has shot up nearly 30 percent since 2012, when it acquired Health Central, to $2.3 billion in 2015. The company's excess revenue over expenses last year was $162.4 million, a .7 percent increase over the year before.

The hospital administration boasts about increasing insurance reimbursement rates for medical services, capturing a larger market share of patients against competitors such as Florida Hospital and building or acquiring more facilities.

"The increase is due to increased volumes, rate increases, higher acuity, fewer patients without insurance and the addition of surgical and imaging centers," notes a recent disclosure related to the company's largest-ever bond issue.

Last month Orlando Health announced it would sell $315 million in bonds to refinance some debt, including paying off the remainder of what it owes on the 15-year note to the tax district for the purchase of Health Central.

Another result of flush times when more people are covered by insurance because of the Affordable Care Act: The hospital spent less on charity care — free or discounted treatment to the uninsured who couldn't afford to pay their bills.

Charity care provided by Orlando Health dropped from 2014 to 2015, by 12 percent to $101 million, according to the bond statement.

Tim Keating, chairman of the healthcare district, says the $121 million in grants pledged to Orlando Health are justified because the district board wants to make more services available to people in west Orange County.

The new $100 million project — with $75 million provided by the district — will expand a cancer treatment center, and build a new skilled nursing facility with some beds dedicated to Alzheimer's patients as well as a stand alone emergency room for the growing Horizon West area.

"I think we all felt very strongly about bringing that cancer treatment closer to our residents," Keating said of the board's decision. "We want these services to come sooner rather than later and this is our way to help that happen."

Orlando Health said it would have eventually built the projects on its own, but will do so more quickly with the money from the district.

But unlike other government incentives, which typically come with at least a few strings attached such as a minimum number of jobs that must be created, the money from the tax district to Orlando Health is free of such obligations.

The tax district board did ask that a "plaque or other appropriate form of recognition" be displayed at the new facilities along with boiler plate language such as requiring all of the funds to be used for the project, according to the funding agreements. The board members' names, I can only guess, will be featured on the plaques to mark their giveaway of your money.

I asked Keating if the district was missing an opportunity — perhaps to require that the facilities treat a certain number of uninsured people or set limits on price increases for patients.

"We're not looking at it that way," he said. "We're looking at these public dollars providing more services out there where the residents are."

The need for charity is still great in that part of the county.

"We have a huge, huge need in west Orange County and one of the fastest growing homeless populations," said Scott Billue, founder of Matthew's Hope, which aids the homeless and is based in Winter Garden.

He said he doesn't expect the new facilities will offer much for west Orange County's neediest residents.

"I don't see where that's going to impact people who are homeless or uninsured at all," he said. "These people don't even know how to get access to that stuff."

Orlando Health spokeswoman Kena Lewis said the hospital doesn't expect the decline in the amount of charity care it provides to continue.

"We believe the insurance exchanges available through the Affordable Care Act contributed significantly to more people being insured," she said. "However, the exchange is experiencing some changes and we have already started to see charity care return to pre-2015 levels."

Lewis said the hospital needed to raise the reimbursement rates it receives from insurance companies because it has some of the lowest rates in the region and more revenue is needed to recruit top talent as well as absorb soaring drug costs.

"Unlike other companies that increase rates to benefit shareholders, our financial decisions are made in order to live up to our mission of improving the health and quality of life of the individuals and communities we serve," she said.

Certainly, the health care industry is undergoing change. And non-profit hospitals must prepare for the future.

But members of the taxing district should note that other hospital companies, both for-profit and non-profit, are expanding without tax handouts.

Orlando Health's own bond documents note that for-profit HCA, for example, has increased its local market share by a couple percentage points while Florida Hospital and Orlando Health have dropped one or two points.