Topics: ABC news, Brian Williams, broadcast networks, broadcast news, cbs news, Editor's Picks, Edward R. Murrow, Katie Couric, NBC, NBC News, network tv, Peter Jennings, Television, TV news, Walter Cronkite, Media News, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

In the space of less than a week, NBC News anchor Brian Williams went from debonair multimedia superstar to celebrity roadkill, an instant has-been and laughingstock whose career in the “news business” is presumably over. We’ve moved on, am I right? Do you even remember who I’m talking about? It’s exactly the kind of story that Brian Williams himself would have covered at great length, pulling a long face and intoning soberly in his sonorous baritone about the integrity of the news media, but not quite masking the hint of a Schadenfreude smile: Can you believe this guy?

If Williams is to resurrect himself as a media icon, a lengthy course of ritual self-abasement will be required. While the celebrity comeback is always an appealing cultural narrative in American life, this is Brian Williams we’re talking about, and not someone actually interesting or important — like, say, Robert Downey Jr. Does anyone care enough about Williams to watch him don sackcloth and ashes and struggle to find his authentic self, with the help of Ellen or Dr. Oz? Authentic selfhood was never his brand, and neither was caring about anything. Williams represented the triumph of something else, an impervious, self-congratulatory cool as theorized long ago by media-studies pioneer Marshall McLuhan, and as embodied in the late ‘80s by the then-futuristic artificial intelligence Max Headroom.

What I’m getting at here is that while there’s a certain poetic justice in the downfall of Williams, his metamorphosing war stories are not really where the problem lies with him or his show or his network or TV news as a whole. As Jon Stewart amusingly diagnosed last week, Williams appears to suffer a low-grade case of “Infotainment Confusion Syndrome,” but the disorder evidenced by the massive media pile-on is far worse. It represents an impressive athletic feat of Freudian suppression or evasion, on a vast collective scale, for the media to treat the question of who rode in which Chinook helicopter on a particular day in 2003 as if it were some smoldering scandal, or represented tenacious self-policing. It’s a hell of a lot easier to confront Williams’ misstatements of fact — which have no practical consequences, except for him and his employer — than to think about the cascade of lies and cheerleading and propaganda and incurious circular groupthink that smoothed the way for America’s invasion of Iraq and characterized nearly all coverage of the war for years.

To insist that the Brian Williams story was news, in the face of all the other things the media declines to notice, requires accepting a perverted definition of what news means, and what function it is supposed to serve. The subject of this not-so-new kind of news is the surface of things, the smoothness and drinkability (as they used to say in Budweiser ads) of the media narrative itself, which has become the text, subtext and metatext of contemporary existence. To quote the 1960s Situationist Guy Debord, the “spectacle,” by which he means not just the mass media but the system of social relations constructed by mass media, “presents itself simultaneously as all of society, as part of society, and as instrument of unification.” (Debord’s epigrammatic 1967 treatise “Society of the Spectacle” can be read as a key to l’affaire Williams, and many other things besides.)

Nothing could be more newsworthy, in this universe, than the misdeeds of people who read the news. So we get news as the “gotcha” story, the gaffe story, the story about the celebrity who makes an ill-considered drunken tweet or tells an offensive joke near an open microphone. It’s no good mythologizing the past, which was full of different kinds of bad things, but can you imagine Brian Williams, or any other blanched and manicured TV news presence, confronting Joe McCarthy the way Edward R. Murrow once did? (Actually, let’s be fair: Katie Couric, endlessly pilloried for being too girly and lifestyle-oriented to read the news, would totally do that. Which is kind of why she didn’t last long in the anchor chair.)

There have been previous news anchors who attained celebrity, but Williams was the fulfillment of the anchor-as-celebrity, a difficult balancing act. We want famous people to have “real” personalities in private, or at least simulated real personalities, but we also demand a harmonious performance matched to their public persona. As my Salon colleague Sonia Saraiya explored last week, NBC tirelessly shaped Williams into an all-purpose brand identity that blended gravitas with coolth, like a delicious summer cocktail at the East Hampton yacht club. He could deliver straight news, such as it is, to the senior set and wry self-parody to the Jimmy Fallon audience and the YouTube generation. It was an inherently unstable or contradictory combination that required fine adjustments in Williams’ on-air persona and an unimpeachable performance as the character of himself. He violated the terms of that contract, and has paid the price.

I felt a moment of tenderness toward Williams for his increasingly exciting tales of helicopter peril, because it made him seem, albeit momentarily, like a real person. OK, it made him seem like a specific variety of real person: an insecure, blustery guy who was reaching for an authenticity or legitimacy he wasn’t sure he possessed. (I too have caught small sunfish that later became large and delicious trout.) It’s a highly recognizable human failing, which was a large part of the problem. The one thing someone in Williams’ position cannot do is display vulnerability, and that was the fatal flaw on which his media colleagues pounced.

Williams’ ideological function, if we view it through the extreme long lens of cultural history, was to make the delivery of news as a succession of disposable McMemeNuggets that alternately alarm or delight us and carry no sense of past or future – Muslims, Ebola, blizzard, “American Sniper,” Kardashian, repeat – seem both natural and inevitable. “The spectacle presents itself as something enormously positive, indisputable and inaccessible,” writes Debord. It is “the existing order’s uninterrupted discourse about itself, its laudatory monologue.” The revelation that Williams is just some dude given to spinning tall tales, so insignificant in itself, hints at the further and deeper revelation that the news business itself is a human concoction shaped by a particular ideological context and a specific understanding of reality.

In trying to decode the hidden meanings of the Brian Williams story, beyond its most obvious bait-and-switch qualities, I find myself drawn back to the late cultural critic Lionel Trilling, and the dichotomy or dialectic he observed in the early 1970s between “sincerity” and “authenticity.” (Trilling and Debord would have agreed about almost nothing, but they were dissecting the same cultural phenomena.) I can’t possibly do justice to Trilling here, but the tl;dr version might be that sincerity is about meaning what you say and saying what you mean, especially as a means of furthering public discourse and social cohesion, whereas authenticity involves accessing and expressing your true innermost self, while declaring you don’t give a crap about social convention. (“Mad Men” can be read as documenting Don Draper’s journey from sincerity to authenticity.)

Trilling thought he was trying to rescue an ideal of civil society founded on sincerity, but that the radical politics and emerging postmodern literature of the time had dumped sincerity as a bourgeois relic of the button-down 1950s, to pursue a doomed Marxian-Freudian-existentialist quest for authenticity. He didn’t live long enough to see the mannered, pseudo-authentic performance of Ronald Reagan – an actor playing a cowboy playing the president – sweep away the awkward sincerity of Jimmy Carter. Nor did he see sincerity make its big comeback in the “post-ironic” writing of David Foster Wallace and Dave Eggers, or in the political persona of Barack Obama, who ascended from the discredited authenticity of George W. Bush and Bill Clinton.

In the news business, we’ve seen a related process of evolution. Anchors from the glory days of network news, like Murrow or Walter Cronkite or John Chancellor, presented themselves as staid, reliable and deeply sincere, in a way that looks embarrassingly gauche today. We were not supposed to know anything about their boring private lives, see them trailed into fancy restaurants by paparazzi, or watch them swapping risqué cracks with Johnny Carson. Trilling acknowledged that sincerity was always a performance intended for public consumption, but saw its purpose as serving the public good, and believed it was best executed when it expressed “a congruence between avowal and actual feeling.” Again, I don’t want to stumble into a nostalgic haze: Murrow and Cronkite were “instruments of unification” or social glue within a Cold War narrative of universal progress and growing affluence that was at best a half-truth. It wasn’t the decline of sincerity that led to Vietnam and Watergate and the Black Panthers and the rise of feminism and the LGBT movement, even if Trilling halfway seems to think so.