Bloomberg News

The bankruptcy of Caesars Entertainment’s largest unit could take months–or years–to resolve. But some hedge funds that sought to influence the course of the restructuring are already tallying up profits and losses.

Elliott Management Corp., which bought credit-default swaps on the unit’s debt, made paper profits on that trade with the Caesars filing, according to people familiar with the firm’s CDS trading. Blackstone Group’s GSO Capital Partners LP, which sold default protection, is on the losing side of the trade, other people said.

[RELATED: Read more about how Elliott gained an edge on Caesars credit-default swaps here and here.]

Some hedge funds, like Elliott, bought CDS contracts expiring in late 2014 and the first half of 2015, and others, like GSO, sold swaps expiring over the same period. CDS buyers pay sellers an upfront fee and periodic premiums in exchange for payouts from the seller if default occurs within the term of the swap. Sellers of the swaps bet borrowers won’t default before the contracts expire.

Credit traders have long expected a Caesars bankruptcy, and the CDS wagers hinged not only on whether the unit would default, but when. Pinpointing when a default will happen has become a common way of expanding on CDS bets, much like gamblers make over-under wagers on a sporting event in addition to betting on its outcome.

But unlike sports bettors, CDS investors can deal directly with the players on the field.

Caesars and its private-equity backer, Apollo Global Management, have been in informal talks with creditors for more than a year and began negotiating a bankruptcy plan with some of them over the summer, public filings show. Because many of the funds trading Caesars CDS also own the company’s debt, they have been party to the talks.

GSO owns Caesars bank loans and supported Apollo’s controversial reshuffling of Caesars’s assets in the first half of 2014. More recently, Apollo has been bargaining separately with bondholders, including Elliott, and loan holders, including GSO, people familiar with the talks said.

A key point of contention was when the company would file for bankruptcy.

A group of senior bondholders that recently agreed to support Apollo’s plans, including Elliott, required a guarantee Caesars would put the unit in bankruptcy protection by Jan. 15, according to a regulatory filing. The bondholders set the deadline to prevent Apollo from transferring further assets or cash out of the company and to trigger a default event before CDS contracts they owned expired in March, people familiar with the group’s thinking said.

Loan holders like GSO had also been in talks with Apollo but broke off negotiations in mid-December. They pulled out over dissatisfaction with Apollo’s negotiating style and the terms it offered, and because they hoped that withholding their support might pressure Caesars to postpone bankruptcy until after the CDS contracts they had sold expired, people familiar with the talks said. That didn’t happen.