TALLAHASSEE – Attorney General Pam Bondi says she acted properly in not following up on numerous complaints about Trump University in part because most were made before she took office and involved a separate Trump-backed entity.

Thousands of documents released Friday by Bondi's office detail complaints from customers of the real-estate seminar classes owned and promoted by GOP presidential front-runner Donald Trump, including one filed the day before Bondi took office.

"Have had a mentor for a couple of years and he is not much help at all. Still owed sessions but have been given no direction ... haven't even had communication. Wish to get $ owed back at least for the mentor," Aaron O'Brien of Tampa wrote to the Florida Attorney General's office on Jan. 3, 2011.

Bondi was sworn into office the next day.

Bondi and her staff have maintained that she only received three complaints against Trump University during her tenure, and only one before her political committee, And Justice for All, received a $25,000 donation from the Donald J. Trump Foundation in 2013.

Pam Bondi Steve Cannon / AP Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi speaks to the press during a pre-legislative news conference on Wednesday, Jan. 28, 2015, in Tallahassee, Fla. (AP Photo/Steve Cannon) ORG XMIT: FLSC119 Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi speaks to the press during a pre-legislative news conference on Wednesday, Jan. 28, 2015, in Tallahassee, Fla. (AP Photo/Steve Cannon) ORG XMIT: FLSC119 (Steve Cannon / AP) (Steve Cannon / AP)

Bondi's predecessor, Bill McCollum, received several dozen complaints about the Trump Institute. The allegations were similar to those against Trump University — that customers were promised instruction from experts "hand picked" by Trump to teach them how to invest in real estate. At a free seminar, potential clients were asked to pay to learn more.

In an email, McCollum stated that he was generally aware of complaints against several for profit universities but that he didn't recall speaking to Bondi about Trump University during the transition period.

According to Bondi spokesman Whitney Ray, Trump University and the Trump Institute were separate entities, with the Trump Institute going out of business in 2010, so there was no need for further investigation of the group.

"To claim that the Trump Institute complaints are related to the allegations against Trump University would not be accurate," Ray wrote in an email.

Yet complaint after complaint to the Florida Attorney General's office bears the same hallmarks, regardless of the company name.

The complaints and the 2013 contribution to Bondi's committee have made national headlines in recent weeks.

Bondi has said she did nothing wrong and that aggrieved Trump University customers can join an ongoing lawsuit brought by New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman.

The New York Supreme Court ruled Tuesday the case can go to trial, raising the prospect of Trump being called to testify during the presidential campaign.

Democrats have scolded Bondi for not doing more to help the case against Trump University, since she has joined lawsuits brought by other states, including actions against the Affordable Care Act and a ruling allowing the Environmental Protection Agency to enforce a cleanup plan for Chesapeake Bay.

"Florida's Attorney General has not hesitated to join losing, transparently partisan lawsuits around the country because she felt it was the best way to score political points,'' said Florida Democratic Party spokesman Max Steele on Friday. "But when Donald Trump defrauded Floridians with his sham Trump University, Bondi shrugged off the complaints and did nothing except collect a $25,000 check from none other than the Donald Trump Foundation."

Trump campaign aides said the political donation made by his charity — an apparent violation of tax laws governing nonprofits — was a mistake, according to the Washington Post.

When asked whether Bondi planned to give back the $25,000 donation or give it to charity, Ray referred a reporter to Bondi campaign aides, who did not return an email.

grohrer@orlandosentinel.com or (850) 222-5564