Monday’s green light for same-sex couples to legally wed in Oklahoma makes it easier for those couples to qualify for federal tax, Social Security and other benefits that already have been approved for couples who wed in states that allow same-sex marriages. But it doesn’t mean that same-sex spouses who marry here necessarily will qualify for dependent health insurance benefits.

Private sector employers with self-funded plans still can decide whether they want to extend health insurance benefits to same-sex spouses, said Alison Howard, a health care attorney with Crowe & Dunlevy law firm.

Traditionally, those workers are covered under the federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), which has no requirement to cover any spouse, Howard said.

“An employer can do what they want,“ she said. “What governs is the plan document, and employers need to amend those documents as they wish.”

For its part, Schnake Turnbo Frank public relations firm “is happy to extend the benefit,” president and chief operating officer Russ Florence said on Monday.

“We encourage employers across Oklahoma to embrace it,” said Florence. “We think it’s the right thing to do.”

Insurance changes

Meanwhile, Tami Marr-Crum and fellow independent insurance agents in Oklahoma City believe Monday’s ruling will open up benefits to unmarried same-sex dependent partners on individual policies.

“Heterosexuals currently can sign an affidavit representing themselves as unmarried partners by presenting joint checking accounts or tax returns,” Marr-Crum said.

“We think it will be the same for unmarried, same-sex partners.”

The Affordable Care Act requires coverage on the same terms and conditions be extended to same-sex spouses that is offered to opposite-sex spouses. Consequently, Edmond-based Group & Pension Planners LLC sent out a notice allowing the coverage, effective May 1.

“Many employers have already added the provision for same-sex coverage this year,” principal Wayne Pettigrew said. “Although it affects only a few employees, many of the employees affected have been with their companies for long periods of time and generally the employers have felt that it was crucial to keeping them in their employment.”

“Other CEOs have commented that they felt that this option was coming anyway and that they did not intend to go out of their way to curtail the option for coverage,” Pettigrew said.

Legal marriage provides rights

Howard said same-sex couples legally married in Oklahoma or elsewhere now may file joint income tax returns, are covered by qualified retirement plan distribution options and consent rules, are eligible for tax-free reimbursement of qualified expenses from health and dependent care flexible spending accounts, are subject to health savings account annual contribution limits for married couples and, if they work for a company that employs 50 or more, may qualify for rights under FMLA (the Family and Medical Leave Act) and continuation health insurance coverage under COBRA (the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act).

Integris Health’s health plan currently recognizes spouses “as defined under Oklahoma law,” spokeswoman Brooke Cayot said.

“We are evaluating our enrollment procedures and encouraging employees to call the Integris human resources customer service line with questions,” Cayot said.

“We are in the process of internally reviewing and adapting, as appropriate, our current polices related to health care decision-making,” she said. “Visitation by same-sex spouses at Integris has been permitted by written policy for several years pursuant to federal law and accreditation standards.”

OU Medical Center spokeswoman Vallery Brown said the hospital didn’t change its policies as a result of the Oklahoma decision. “OU Medical System is a member/leader in LGBT health care equality as of Aug. 1,” she said.

Ashley Hudgeons, spokeswoman for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Oklahoma, said the insurer is in the process of reviewing Monday’s decision to “determine what impact, if any, it may have for our members.”

Working it out

Meanwhile, kitchen designer Jennifer Miller and health care professional Dena Bleeker of Edmond, who’ve been together since 1995, got their marriage license on Tuesday afternoon and are planning “a big reception, but not a wedding,” Miller said.

“The Supreme Court’s decision caught me by surprise,” Miller said. “We’d believed the decision would be winter or next summer.”

“We are keeping our own insurance for now,” she said. “We are wondering about our taxes, and sending out lots of emails to our accountant.”