Marcia Meeks fields dozens of calls every day from people trying to enroll in health insurance. But when one woman called about her dying husband, Meeks saw firsthand the tragedy a lack of health coverage can bring.

In November, the woman called for her husband, who had not enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan when he had first become disabled, and who had been diagnosed with cancer. “I knew I couldn’t help her right then — I could sign him up for coverage starting Jan. 1, but I started asking if he might qualify for extra help,” Meeks said. “I took their income — no, they were over. I asked if there was anyone else living in the house, and she said she had sons, so that put them in range. I filled out her application, never promising her anything, but giving her a little bit of hope.”

Meeks checked every other day to see whether the application had been approved. The woman called again to tell Meeks that her husband had received two pain medication prescriptions they couldn’t afford to fill, and so she checked again, but the application had yet to be approved. Later the same night, Meeks said something told her to check the application again, and she found that it had been approved. The family got two prescriptions valued at more than $180 for less than $7.

“She called me back and said, ‘If I had found you four or five months ago, I really think he wouldn’t be dying,’” Meeks said.

The same woman called Meeks again last Friday to tell her that her husband had died.

“I though to myself, ‘I wasn’t able to help him for very long, but at least I helped him get that pain medication,’” she said.

Meeks, director of the West Virginia State Health Insurance Assistance Program and the Senior Medicare Patrol Program, deals primarily with Medicare recipients, but her office also has an in-person assister trained to help people enroll in expanded Medicaid and individual coverage through the Affordable Care Act.

She was one of nearly 100 health insurance navigators gathered in Charleston Tuesday to celebrate the more than 200,000 West Virginians who have gained insurance coverage since 2013 under the ACA. The event fell 18 days ahead of the deadline for 2016 ACA health insurance enrollment on Jan. 31.

This is the third year of ACA open enrollment. According to West Virginians for Affordable Health Care, the organization that coordinated the event, more than 34,450 West Virginians have newly enrolled or re-enrolled for individual insurance coverage through the ACA marketplace, and more than 165,000 have enrolled in expanded Medicaid. West Virginia has seen a huge drop in the rate of uninsured, from 14 percent in 2013 to 8.6 percent in 2014.

“We know that in those last couple of weeks everyone will be coming out, and I think it’s important to remind people of the penalty,” said Joanne Grossi, regional director of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

This year, the tax penalty for forgoing health insurance is 2.5 percent of a person’s income or $695 per adult, whichever is higher.

According to Scott Streator, vice president of CareSource, an Ohio-based nonprofit managed care organization that now operates in 10 West Virginia counties, a market study the company conducted before entering the state revealed that while only 9 percent of West Virginians characterize their health as “excellent,” a full two-thirds believe it could be improved, and most cited health-care affordability as the second-most important barrier to wellness behind lack of exercise.

To counteract that, CareSource is offering $0 copays on generic drugs for its silver plans, as well as $0 copays for primary care visits, with no limit on how many primary care visits a consumer can have in a given year, Streator said. CareSource is offered to residents in Brooke, Cabell, Hancock, Kanawha, Lincoln, Marshall, Mason, Ohio, Putnam and Wayne counties.

For Colleen Anderson, health coverage has been her single biggest expense in her 40-year career as a self-employed graphic designer and writer who was diagnosed with high blood pressure early in her career.

“I never had to use it; I’m very, very lucky, because I don’t know where that $10,000 or sometimes $20,000 deductible would have come from, but it was a constant source of stress for me,” she said. “Then, two years ago, I got affordable health care, and for the first time in my working life, I could afford it, and it was good insurance. I actually had a copay for the first time in my life.”

Many federally-qualified health centers, hospitals and state agencies offer in-person assisters trained to help people navigate the health insurance marketplace and select a plan. West Virginia NaviCare has several enrollment events scheduled across the state, including on Thursday from 1 p.m. to 7 p.m. at Summersville Regional Medical Center, Thursday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. at Davis Medical Center in Elkins, and on Tuesday from noon to 7 p.m. at the Bridgeport Conference Center in Bridgeport. More events will be held on Jan. 20 from noon to 7 p.m. at the Hilton Garden Inn in Morgantown, Jan. 21 from noon to 7 p.m. at West Virginia Northern Community College in Wheeling, Jan. 25 and Jan.26 from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. at the Wood County Courthouse in Parkersburg, Jan. 29 from 3 p.m. to 8 p.m. at Disability Action in Fairmont, and on Jan. 30 and Jan. 31 from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. at Raleigh County Convention Center in Beckley.

Reach Lydia Nuzum at lydia.nuzum@wvgazettemail.com, 304-348-5189 or follow @lydianuzum on Twitter.