When Tulsa basketball fans looked at the schedule for the 2015-16 season and saw a home game against Little Rock, many probably automatically penciled in a win in their minds.

For the first half of Saturday’s game, it looked like it would be an easy win. But Tulsa then seemed to fall asleep, and Little Rock caught fire. The result was a 64-60 Golden Hurricane loss in front of a mostly quiet crowd of 3,821 at the Reynolds Center.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

“Our defense was not good in the second half,” TU coach Frank Haith said. “I thought we were very good in the first half. Once they are making their run, we missed open shots, and we weren’t able to get stops consistently.”

Tulsa (4-2) led by double digits much of the first half, and by as many as 15 points, at 26-11. The Golden Hurricane took a 33-24 lead into halftime in what was the fewest points they had allowed in the first half all season.

But the Golden Hurricane’s offense went dormant in the second half, and Little Rock seemed like it couldn’t miss. The Trojans hit 6 of 7 3-pointers in the second half, and 14 of 22 shots from the field (63.6 percent) after halftime.

“They made some really tough shots, give them credit,” Haith said. “Tough shots over guys’ hands, 28-footers, That happens.”

Little Rock (5-0) shouldn’t have been taken lightly despite going 13-18 last season. First-year coach Chris Beard’s team gained attention earlier this season with a victory at San Diego State, a team that won an NCAA Tournament game last season.

Tulsa was led by James Woodard with 16 points, followed by 14 from D’Andre Wright, and 11 by Rashad Ray.

Shaquille Harrison had only four points, however, and Pat Birt, averaging 10.8 points coming into the game, was held scoreless.

The key for the school formerly known as Arkansas-Little Rock was stopping Harrison, Tulsa‘s leading scorer with a 23.4 average coming into the game. Harrison was credited with only one field-goal attempt — a 3-pointer. He got fouled driving to the basket a few times, but he couldn’t knock down his free throws, either, hitting only 4 of 10 from the line.

With the Little Rock defense sagging off Tulsa shooters, daring them to shoot from the outside, TU continually missed open shots, especially in the second half. Tulsa made only 9 of 31 from behind the arc for the game (29 percent).

“We did get some good looks; we just didn’t make them,” Haith said. “We have to fix some things defensively.

Tulsa saw its nine-point halftime lead turn into a 36-33 deficit. Tulsa finally broke the 15-0 run that went back to the first half, and reclaimed the lead by as many as four points, 42-38, at just over the midway point in the second half.

But Little Rock’s Josh Hagins kept making shots. He led the Trojans with 17 points and eight rebounds.

Little Rock took the lead back for good at 51-49 with 7:18 remaining on a layup by Hagins.

Tulsa trailed by as many as seven points with just under two minutes left, but it still had a chance to tie the game with a 3-pointer in the final minute. But a Tulsa turnover and basket by the Trojans followed, and Tulsa was doomed.

“Once we took the lead, once we got back into the game, that’s when we needed to clamp down our defense, and we weren’t able to do that,” Haith said.

The Trojans shot 63.6 percent from the field in the second half and outscored the Hurricane 40-27.