Newcastle Knights 52 First Nation Goannas 12

Goannas prop James Livock is tackled by Joe Boyce of the Knights. Photo: Getty Images

THE Newcastle Knights have got their 2014 campaign off to a winning start with a crushing 52-12 win over the First Nation Goannas at Hunter Stadium on Saturday night.

With the Goannas made up of a selection of amateur Indigenous players and a handful of former NRL stars, the Knights were expected to prove too strong, however they did not have it all their own way despite scoring ten tries to two.

The Knights got the jump on the Goannas, scoring the first three tries in the opening quarter, with Alex McKinnon, Joseph Tapine and Corbin Sims stretching the margin to 18-0 at the first break.

Just as it looked like the Knights would run away with things, the Goannas came to life. Davin Crampton stormed over Dane Gagai to score late in the second quarter, before former NRL player Rod Jensen touched down a short time later to put the Goannas back within a converted try.

Advertisement

Any hope of an upset was swiftly extinguished after the half-time break, as the Knights superior conditioning began to show. Wayne Bennett's men gave us an early indication of what to expect at next week's Auckland Nines, crossing for five unanswered tries in the second half.

Holden Cup graduate Jake Mamo has been included in the Knights squad for the Nines and he showed just how dangerous he will be in the new format, with the speedster scoring a hat-trick.

Fellow young gun Joseph Tapine also crossed twice, with the New-Zealand born forward looking to make the jump into the senior ranks in 2014.

Former Mackay Cutters half, Matt Minto, who remains only on a “train and trial” contract with the Knights, had a hand in a number of tries, before crossing the line himself in the 63rd minute, in what was a solid debut.

Ex-Raider, Michael Dobson, who has returned to the NRL from the English Super League, didn't quite have the impact of young Minto and it remains to be seen where he lies in Bennett's plans, with Tyrone Roberts and Jarrod Mullen performing solidly at the back end of last season.

Newcastle head to the Auckland Nines having named a strong squad for the inaugural event, with Mullen, Willie Mason and Akuila Uate to make their first appearance in a Knights jersey for 2014.