SMOOCHING POOCH: Bubba,owned by Dana Oughton, won the Best-Dressed Dog contest in his kissing booth costume. Also pictured is Jordan, "Snow White Paws", owned by Kristina Majzner. ( David R. Jennings / Broomfield Enterprise )

Broomfield Days is chockfull of fun for people, but dogs had more than a moment or two on Saturday. They donned their costumes, ran their courses and jumped great distances.

There were honors for best-dressed, praise for quick times in the Dogs for a Cause race and loads of applause for long jumps into the Rocky Mountain DockDogs pool.

Dogs even had a corner of Midway Park devoted just to them — BowWow Broomfield, which featured a host of pet-centric vendors and is where the dock dogs did their jumping.

At the Best-Dressed Dog Competition, pugs, whippets and chihuahuas took on alter egos as superheroes, princesses, heroes and villains.

The dog dress-up competition drew a dozen dogs and their creative owners, who competed for the grand prize of free medical care for a year from The Animal Doctor. Dogs could win in the small dog, large dog and overall categories.

The overall winner and small dog winner was Bubba, a pug dressed in a tuxedo and sparkly top hat. His owner, Dana Oughton, smothered him in lipstick kisses and sat him behind a dog-sized kissing booth.

The audience liked Bubba so much that his kissing booth's prop tip jar began to fill up with real tips.

"We were thinking of ideas like holidays, love, kissing, and we just thought it would be a fun costume," Oughton said.

Advertisement

The prize of free veterinary care will come in handy for Oughton and her family — she's expecting her first child soon and announced on stage that she was having a girl.

"We wanted to surprise my parents and thought that was a good way to do it," she said.

In the large dog category, the winner was Rhiley, a deaf white boxer dressed as a fluffy sheep.

Rhiley's owners, Rick and Kelly Whitcomb, wanted to dress him in something that would match his white fur.

MAGNUM MAKES A LEAP: Magnum owned by Merrel-Albritton makes a jump in the Dock Dogs competition at Broomfield Days Saturday. (David R Jennings / Broomfield Enterprise)

Kelly Whitcomb thought her dog had definitely earned his prize after panting in the heat.

"Ok, we won't sell you on Craigslist after all," she joked as she helped her dog out of his furry, hot costume.

Both Bubba and Rhiley are repeat winners. Both dogs won in their categories last year with other creative costumes their owners had hand-made. Bubba last year was dressed as the board game Operation, while Rhiley went as a chicken.

This year's competitors dressed their pets as everything from Darth Vader to a bunch of purple grapes.

Christina Robledo, who entered her chihuahua/cairn terrier mix, Roxy, in the competition, said the competition was a fun way to be around "the other crazy dog people" who love their pets.

Roxy was dressed in a hand-made Cruella De Vil costume from the film "101 Dalmations."

"Roxy's ex-boyfriend was a dalmation," Robledo joked. "So he'd better watch out."

The Rocky Mountain DockDogs extreme jumping competition, which also runs Sunday, includes three types of jumps. The most recognizable is the big air competition, in which owners coax the greatest horizontal distance out of their dogs. But the human-canine teams also are tested in the extreme vertical competition and the timed speed retrieval.

Dogs leaped into a special inflatable pool in front of a big crowd that cheered as dogs splashed into the water.

A BIT SHEEPISH: Rhiley, a deaf white boxer owned by Rick and Kelly Whitcomb, was dressed as a fluffy sheep for the Best-Dressed Dog Contest. He won the large dog division in the contest. (David R. Jennings / Broomfield Enterprise)

Meanwhile, smaller dogs got their own competition: Dogs For a Cause, a race organized by the Broomfield Crossing Rotary Club for canines weighing 25 pounds. Proceeds go toward the club's upcoming projects, including support for Broomfield FISH, said Broomfield Crossing Rotary member Stan Harding.

In the past, the club has put together projects, such as collecting mobility devices for Crutches 4 Africa, an organization that works with disabled people in African countries.

About 20 dogs participated in the short races, in which they could sprint, wander or chase each other down an enclosed race course of about 30 feet.

"They never want to stay in their lanes, but they are just here to have fun," Harding said.

Todd Williams and his two children , Peyton and Sophia, said they wanted to let their papillion/chihuahua mix, Little Pete, run free in a competition for dogs his own size. Little Pete had already won a dog race at the Denver County Fair in August.

"This is for a good cause, so we thought, 'why not?'" Williams said.

Little Pete certainly loves to run, but the race course wasn't enough for him. Instead of finishing a few practice runs, he escaped from the race course in order to run full-speed in the grass instead.

As of press time, the Rotary was still tallying its final fundraising numbers because of some late entries. Each dog raised at least $15 per entry, Harding said.

Dana Cabot, a Broomfield Days organizer, said the Dogs for a Cause event came about when the Broomfield Crossing Rotary approached her with the idea to get more involved in the festival.

A small dog race fits right in with the weekend's other dog-themed events, while raising money for community causes, said Jan Stokes, a Rotary member and employee of Camp BowWow, one of the event sponsors.

"We wanted to make sure there was something for smaller dogs to do," she said.

Contact Enterprise Staff Writer Megan Quinn at 303-410-2649 or quinnm@broomfieldenterprise.com