This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

since the ECA has started health care cost growth has been that one of its ... historically low levels ... how much of that is because of the ECA and how much of that means the ... because of other factors out there I knew was to the industry's to credit the ACL opposites historically low cost growth but they're all kinds of other horses ... to forget me like one of the AC plans are all primed and transports ... we get away from the oven for six fee for service to cap it even third party payers that is a spectacular change ... direction ... I was ... much money in them ... but that's what's happened of us has cause costs ... were going away from the fishers medicine much to its word skeptic to ... bubble ... no third party payers who was somebody has the rest of the taxpayers has been a huge chance last ten years this has probably helped that the that started long before that ... and yes of health care is positive and am I with the health care costs will that it was a cute eleven officials this is I think the the higher deductible plan to roll ALM that have different studies that shows that have some impact in terms of people spending less on their own health care ... and I think he meant CMS itself the thing that we do expect ... the outbreak of health care spending to increase again I think it was projected for around five percent in two thousand fourteen year protections play ... whether it will ever get to kind of weather we levels I don't think see that happening but I do think that this could be something it's ... a bit to say I think there's some really basic challenges we face up on health care ... costs ... even with the its two plates ... of another one of ... them exploded number of people with multiple chronic conditions ... so um they up five percent population accounts for half of our total pollsters ... so we need ... of much more concentrated focus on those ... people that are very frequent ... users are euro softened up record ... I think part of care organizations medical homes are positive steps up for auction ... secondly ... we have demographics that if you ... do with the baby boom is going to reach her ... is retiring ... Medicare rolls or cargo of dramatically inquiries that we're gonna have to pay more for medical worker and that's because older people use for healthcare were gonna have to pay more for health care even if we keep ... per capita costs level ... so we didn't happen but financing challenge management challenge of nature ... of the bench and just because the demographics ... and then finally ... up ... in a week to stop thinking about what ... supports good health ... options to health care ... and that up that's about to Devitre behavior it's about the economy it's about the environment ... it's about our communities ... it's about public health ... and we need to do ... a whole lot more in public health and we are now between ... if we want to actually ... reduce the level of unnecessary ... politics