Turnovers, sacks allowed pile up in defeats

Colorado quarterback Sefo Liufau looks for an open receiver while under pressure from Arizona State linebacker Viliami Moeakiola during the first half Saturday in Tempe, Ariz. ( Matt York / Associated Press )

CU opponent glance Opponent: Arizona Wildcats Game time: Saturday, 7 p.m., at Folsom Field in Boulder Coach: Rich Rodriguez, 4th season (30-16; 150-100-2 career) Record: 4-2, 1-2 Pac-12 Last week: Beat Oregon State, 44-7, at home Key players: QB Anu Solomon, So. (92-of-145, 1,121 yards, 11 TD, 0 INT); RB Nick Wilson, So. (115 carries, 683 yards, 8 TD); QB Jerrard Randall, Sr. (37 carries, 453 yards, 4 TD); WR Johnny Jackson, Sr. (22 catches, 328 yards, 4 TD); WR David Richards, Sr. (22 catches, 303 yards, 4 TD); S Will Parks, Sr. (41 tackles, 6 pass breakups); FS Jamar Allah, Sr. (34 tackles, 1 INT); S Tellas Jones, Jr. (29 tackles, 4.5 TFL, 1.5 sacks). Notable: The Wildcats snapped a two-game losing streak with its win against Oregon State. ... Ranked No. 22 to start the season, Arizona fell out of the rankings with back-to-back blowout losses to UCLA and Stanford.

TEMPE, Ariz. — After many of Colorado's Pac-12 losses over the years, there was a helpless feeling coming from the Buffaloes.

Last year, as the Buffs lost several close games, the postgame feeling seemed to shift toward disappointment.

On Saturday night, the Buffs walked out of Sun Devil Stadium feeling anger and frustration. Their 48-23 loss to Arizona State was their 13th consecutive loss in conference play and dropped them to 3-3 on the season (0-2 in Pac-12 play).

Advertisement

"We know we're better than what we're showing people," defensive end Derek McCartney said.

Colorado came into the season a confident bunch because it had its best offseason in years.

A loss to Hawaii in the opener was a punch to the gut. Last week's 41-24 defeat to Oregon left the Buffs disappointed because they felt they let a great opportunity slip away.

This time, however, the Buffs were whipped by the Sun Devils. It was the first time this season they were blown out and, after two consecutive defeats, there's a sense that this season could slip away from the Buffs in a hurry if they aren't careful.

"You've got to put a ... big chip on your shoulder (going into next week's game against Arizona), because I don't want to take any steps backwards," quarterback Sefo Liufau said. "I think we had a pretty good start to the season and I don't want to go back to last year or even the year before that, because that's really frustrating and really upsetting because I know how talented this team in all phases.

"We're just missing something and I think we just have to believe in ourselves and push ourselves to fight because we can compete with these teams."

That belief that they can compete in the Pac-12 is at the root of the Buffaloes' frustration.

"There's just a different attitude towards (losing)," McCartney said. "People know that we're going to be good, we're going to be OK and that we're going to turn it around.

"I feel like there is just an attitude that needs to be shifted in a different direction, and we're headed that way."

Asked when the Buffs lost the confidence and self-belief they carried into the season, McCartney said, "I don't know that it's gone away, but we're realizing there's a whole other level we can reach and that we will reach."

How to reach that level is the question the Buffs must answer as they go forward.

The common theme in their three losses this season is the amount of mistakes they have made as a team.

Eight of the nine turnovers they've committed this year have come in losses. Liufau has been sacked a combined 17 times in the losses, and zero times in the wins. Punter Alex Kinney has had a punt either blocked or tipped in each of the losses.

"Everything we've been working on in practice, the kids have to go do it in the game," head coach Mike MacIntyre said. "We've got to quit shooting ourselves in the foot to be able to have an opportunity to win against good football teams. (As coaches), you find a way to uplift them and keep pushing them. But, they have to go out there and make the plays."

MacIntyre's postgame comments pointed the finger at his players a bit — although he also said the coaches need to do better. None of the players who talked to the media after the game disagreed with their head coach.

"If we don't execute it, nothing is going to get done," running back Phillip Lindsay said. "That's on us. It's frustrating, because we're on the right track, and you don't ever want to feel like you took a step back."

To avoid that feeling, Lindsay said, the Buffs need a win against Arizona on Saturday. In fact, their season might depend on it.

"There definitely is something missing, whether it's the spunk of it, whether it's just some kind of team chemistry," Lindsay said. "But, we need to come together, we need to talk about it and we need to come up with something. Something has to be done, and it's on us."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.