TALLAHASSEE — Despite having one of the most powerful state legislators behind the project, funding for the proposed UCF downtown campus isn't specifically set out in the budget — at least not yet.

Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, said the uncertainty surrounding a federal Medicaid program for low-income patients that expires June 30 means it's too early to say whether the $60 million needed for the first phase of the campus will make it into the final budget. He is a major supporter of the $200 million proposal.

The House and Senate budgets include money for university construction and maintenance projects throughout the state but don't specifically set out UCF downtown-campus funds. The Senate includes an alternative to a more than $2 billion low-income-patient program in its budget, but the House does not.

"That's the $2 billion question. In the Senate we think it's important to know where we stand," Gardiner said.

There is $5 million in the Senate budget, however, for a coordinating center for disabled students and their parents seeking higher-education options. Gardiner wants to place the center, named the Florida Center for Students with Unique Abilities, in the UCF downtown campus.

The message from UCF's Tallahassee lobbyist Dan Holsenbeck was, "Don't jump off the bridge." But "don't cash a check," either.

Holsenbeck briefed UCF officials early this week, warning that the university should not have expected the downtown campus to appear in budget discussions because of the magnitude of the project.

And during a UCF trustees meeting Thursday, Holsenbeck said, "You shouldn't interpret it as 'Oh, my goodness. What are we going to do?'"

Instead, there is room for negotiating, he said.

What could free up state dollars will be what happens in the debate on health-care spending, Holsenbeck said. The House and the Senate are more than $4 billion apart in their spending plans, mainly because the Senate includes a plan to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, and the House does not.

President John Hitt reminded trustees about the other schools competing for dollars. The University of South Florida, for instance, is aiming to build a new medical school in downtown Tampa.

"Folks, we're not alone. Some would like to portray it that way," Hitt said. "There are other worthy projects in here that are very large. I hope they can all be funded."

Holsenbeck said Gardiner's support and UCF's other construction projects present an opportunity and a challenge in securing funds.

"It puts us in a good position, and it puts us in an awkward position," Holsenbeck said about the string of high-profile projects UCF is seeking to get funded.

Trustee Clarence Brown III lamented that if state leaders knew about the behind-the-scenes work that has gone into the downtown campus, there'd be more momentum to get funding.

UCF and community leaders have regularly met to develop the downtown logistics, from student housing to which academic programs could move, and the university has hired a consultant to help with the planning. Officials have reiterated their goal is to open the campus for the fall 2017 semester.

"You hate to say it's wasted time and effort and money," Brown said.

"Yes, I think most people are well-aware of the effort that's gone in this," Holsenbeck told him.

grohrer@orlandosentinel.com or 850-222-5564