"Without the stay granted today, we would have been in the position of..."

Advertisement - story continues below

A Catholic ministry focused on the right to life scored a victory Wednesday against the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), otherwise known as Obamacare.

Attorneys with Priests for Life filed a writ of certiorari Tuesday in the D.C. Court of Appeals which would exempt the organization from complying with the Obamacare mandate. It was granted Thursday.

This stay was granted as the ministry has a lawsuit pending against the United States Supreme Court.

Advertisement – story continues below

Priests for Life challenged the administration on the constitutionality of the mandate in the D.C. Court of Appeals, but lost in November. “The U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit granted our motion to stay the mandate, meaning that the injunction protecting us from the mandate will remain in place while the Supreme Court considers our case,” Priests for Life national director Rev. Frank Pavone said in a statement.

Without the stay granted today, we would have been in the position of being fined for failing to comply with the mandate. But no matter what happens, we will not obey the mandate, nor will we pay fines to the government.

President Obama on Wednesday spoke to the Catholic Health Association, an organization that has backed both the ACA and contraception in recent years–even though Church teaching explicitly forbids it. The president praised the group and its CEO, Sr. Carol Keehan. “We would not have gotten [the ACA] done without Sr. Carol…I want to thank the Catholic Health Association,” Obama told the group. “Without your moral force, we would not have succeeded.”

Advertisement – story continues below

“My first job in Chicago–when I moved after college to work as a community organizer–my first job was funded by the Campaign for Human Development, an anti-poverty initiative of the Catholic Church,” Obama said. He added later on:

I saw the power of faith–a shared belief that every human being, made in the image of God, deserves to live in dignity; that all children, no matter who they are or where they come from or how much money they were born into, ought to have the opportunity to achieve their God-given potential; that we are all called, in the words of His Holiness Pope Francis, ‘to satisfy the demands of justice, fairness, and respect for every human being.’”

Do you want Obamacare repealed? Share your thoughts in the comments section below.

Advertisement – story continues below