Share 0

Resting at the intersection of Jamaica Avenue and the Van Wyck Expressway, Jamaica Hospital Medical Center remains the predominant source of care for Southern Queens, serving about 1.2 million residents of Queens and Southeast Brooklyn. The hospital was established in 1891 in a rented four-bedroom home.

With much of the Borough’s healthcare system contracting, Jamaica added the Trump Pavilion, an adult nursing facility, in 2009.

The hospital saw more than 300,000 patients in its Ambulatory Care Centers in 2012, while the Emergency Department saw 130,000 patients. The Level 1 Trauma Center and Stroke Center rank among the City’s busiest.

Michael Hinck, director of public affairs at Jamaica Hospital, said that the facility has spent the last several years focusing on the wellness of the surrounding community, as well as providing better education for residents and the opportunity for patients to manage their care better.

“We want patients staying healthier so they don’t have their conditions worsen and avoid unnecessary hospitalization,” Hinck said. “We’re also addressing the conditions that affect our community.”

Hinck said that diabetes, hypertension and smoking cessation are some of the major health issues Southeast Queens residents are dealing with.

The hospital boasts a host of specialties and centers, geared at treating various illnesses.

Jamaica has also started using different models of care to elicit better outcomes such as the group model where patients receive regular care and treatments as well as meeting with other patients who have the same condition.

“It’s facilitated by a doctor who runs the group,” Hinck said. “People gain comfort and become empowered by knowing that others have similar conditions.”

The Department of Orthopedic Surgery expanded to include a total joint replacement program.

The hospital’s Radiology department has an MRI and 64-slice CT scanner, ultrasound and mammography, among other technologies.

Jamaica also offers mental health treatments. Inpatient and outpatient help is available, as well as a psychiatric Emergency Department. It provides professional counseling to adults, young children, adolescents and foster-care children, among others, treating anything from marital stress to depression.

The hospital’s Pediatrics Department provides a wide variety of care for kids from birth into adolescence. The department consists of a Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU), a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU), a nursery and a playroom.

The Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation contains “The Brady Institute,” which is nationally recognized for treating brain injury and assisting coma recoveries. There is also the Margaret T. Palomino Inpatient Rehabilitation Unit, which specializes in physical disabilities. The department also offers outpatient rehabilitation services.

The Palliative Care Consultation Program services patients facing life-threatening illnesses and their families. Jamaica added a four-bed hospice unit to care for those with less than two weeks to live.

The Cardiology Department has a cardiac catheterization laboratory and a non-invasive laboratory.

Jamaica’s Department of Anesthesia began a Pain Management Practice, which explores treatment options for patients suffering from chronic pain.

There is a state of the art sleep center that monitors and treats patients suffering from sleep apnea.

The hospital also provides dental services at its recently added Department of Dentistry. The center features a 15-chair dental clinic as well as a separate, four-chair faculty practice within its 11,000 square feet of space.

The multidisciplinary staff includes obstetricians, gynecologists, surgeons, technicians, radiologists, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, certified nurse midwives, registered and licensed practical nurses.

The hospital has recently tidied up its records-keeping practices. The Department of Health Information Management maintains medical record facilities for every individual evaluated and treated at Jamaica Hospital Medical Center.

Cash-strapped patients have the services of the Medicaid eligibility unit at no cost to the patient. They will perform an initial income evaluation and, if you qualify, will assist you with providing a list of necessary documentation, setting up appointments, completing and filing a Medicaid application.

Jamaica has also embraced and prepared for the changes that the Affordable Care Act instituted by providing special designated navigators to help people who have questions about how to enroll. It has contracts with nine out of the 10 healthcare plans.