SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Adding injury to insult.

Rockies’ right-hander Jon Gray, the club’s top prospect and the key to their future, got beat up on the mound Saturday against the Cubs, lasting just two-thirds of an inning and giving up seven runs (six earned). Sunday morning, Gray was limping slightly as he walked around the Rockies clubhouse at Salt River Fields. He has what he describe as a “mild” groin strain.

“I’m just a little bit sore from everything, from playing and from lifting,” Gray said. “It’s just a little bit of soreness in my groin. I’ll be fine. There will be some treatment.”

Gray said he anticipates making his next start.

The biggest question now becomes whether Gray pitched himself out of a chance to be part of the starting rotation coming out of spring training. Will the Rockies choose to go with right-hander Christian Bergman instead? That’s a distinct possibility. Or perhaps they go with hard-throwing right-hander Chad Bettis.

Gray said he still believes he’s ready for his big-league debut, but admitted he’s got work to do.

“If I pitch the way I can, I’m definitely ready, but there are still things I have to learn,” Gray said. “It’s far from perfection. There are obviously going to be thing I pick up as I go, but there is a lot of stuff I need to work on as well.”

For instance?

“Being able to get out of things and help my teammates get out of an inning. It can’t let it drag on like that,” Gray said. “I never did anything to help us get out of that — making big pitches, executing bunt plays and anything like that. Things to help us get out the inning there and give us a fighting chance.”

Gray has appeared in six Cactus League games, pitching 13 2/3 innings with a 5.93 ERA. He’s struck out 11 and walked only two.

Injury updates

* Left fielder Corey Dickerson, who left Saturday’s game with a tight lower back, was scheduled to travel to Mexico and play in a split-squad game Sunday. He is staying back in Scottsdale and is not playing, but he said his back is fine.

“It feels good, I’m good to go,” Dickerson said. “Actually, it feels good to get a little break before the (regular) season starts.”

* Right fielder Carlos Gonzalez said his surgically repaired left knee is much better. CarGo said he could have played Sunday but trainer Keith Dugger advised him to sit out one more day.

The two-time all-star felt pain in his knee on Friday night early in a game against San Diego. The jolt of pain scared him at first, but he said he now realizes the injury was just fatigue.

Gonzalez expects to play again Monday when the Rockies face Oakland. CarGo has played in only 180 of a possible 324 games the past two seasons because of a sprained right middle finger, a tumor on his left index finger and an injured patella tendon that ended his season last August.

* Right-hander David Hale, sidelined by a strained oblique, threw from 90 feet Sunday for the first time since shutting down last week. Hale said he’s not feeling pain, but the Rockies are going slow with his recovery. Hale is on a similar timeline as Jorge De La Rosa (groin strain).