One year after the Affordable Care Act's rocky rollout, a majority of Pennsylvanians have come to believe President Barack Obama's signature health-care reform has had little impact on their lives, according to a new Morning Call/Muhlenberg College poll.

Asked if they were better or worse off under Obamacare, 51 percent of respondents — twice as many as a year ago — said it had made "no difference."

Perhaps people now realize they will continue to get health insurance through their employers, just as they always have, suggested Chris Borick, director of Muhlenberg College's Institute of Public Opinion.

Even so, most respondents had opinions about the law, and those opinions had barely budged. While 40 percent of respondents said they view the law very or somewhat favorably, 42 percent said they view it very or somewhat unfavorably.

"It's a lot about perception," Borick said. "People really built up a fortress around their opinions."

The poll, based on the views of 423 adults throughout the state, had a margin of error of plus or minus 5 percentage points and was conducted in late October and early this month.

Borick will explain the poll results at 7 p.m. Friday in "Obamacare Ready or Not" on PBS39. The TV show is the third installment of a special, joint production from The Morning Call and PBS39's "Focus."

Joining Borick in a panel discussion about the politics and impact of the ACA will be Laura Olson, The Morning Call's Washington correspondent, and Shawn Hughes, vice president at BSI Corporate Benefits of Bethlehem.

The ACA is back under the spotlight as a new open enrollment period begins and employer mandates loom.

On Sunday night, a reconfigured HealthCare.gov website went live, giving users an advance look at insurance policies and prices a week before the start of open enrollment.

The site, through which people in most states, including Pennsylvania, may buy health insurance, has been revised to include new, user-friendly features — most notably, anonymous window-shopping. This means people no longer have to complete an extensive questionnaire, as was the case last year, in order to compare policies.

The actual enrollment period begins Saturday and will last until Feb. 15. During this time, new customers may sign up for coverage and existing policyholders may switch providers. Those policyholders who don't make changes automatically will be re-enrolled under their existing contracts.

Employers, meanwhile, are racing to comply with the ACA's many and often complex requirements. Under the law's employer mandate, businesses with 100 or more full-time employees must provide health insurance by Jan. 1 or pay a fine of $2,000 per employee.

Businesses whose insurance benefits are too generous under the law could be penalized, as well. A so-called Cadillac tax on such coverage is due to take effect in 2018.

According to Hughes, many employers could be inadvertently exposed to the Cadillac tax as rising health care costs drive up their rates. Those who want to avoid the tax may have to reduce those costs, perhaps by trimming benefits in advance.

"Employers need to start looking at this now, because you can't just turn a switch in 2018," he said.

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130

What's next for Obamacare

What: "Obamacare Ready or Not," a special production from The Morning Call and PBS39's "Focus."

When: 7 p.m. Friday

Where: PBS39