Here’s a joke that liberals might appreciate: Why are Republicans so adamantly opposed to the individual mandate? Answer: Because Republicans would never force anybody to buy the kind of coverage that they want to provide.

It’s meant to be funny, but there’s an element of truth to it — and that’s not intended as criticism.

Sometimes high deductibles make sense. As Bloomberg View columnist Megan McArdle notes, health insurance that people rely on to pay most routine medical bills — as well as to cover emergencies like a trip to the hospital — is more of a prepayment plan than insurance against the unexpected.

“If ObamaCare forces people away from ‘first dollar’ coverage with low or no deductible, and toward plans that cover people only for unanticipated emergencies, that would be a win for economic logic,” McArdle writes.

Very-high-deductible plans may not be well-suited to people with low incomes or expensive chronic conditions, but young and healthy people who are trying to save up to get married and start a family, for example, should have an option to select a lower-premium, high-deductible plan.

So, if high-deductible plans are a reasonable way of making health insurance more affordable to people who don’t expect much in medical expenses, what exactly makes ObamaCare’s high deductibles “indefensible,” as the headline of this piece suggests?

For starters, it’s a pretty huge leap from thinking that high-deductible plans may be sensible to declaring that their purchase should be mandatory.

Once you factor in that mandate — and the threat of a tax penalty for those who go uncovered — the reality is that the program, which was supposed to be an antidote for inequality, turns out in far too many cases to make inequality worse.

To really understand what is wrong with ObamaCare’s high deductibles, one has to look closely at the options that the law provides to modest-income individuals and families.

Consider single 27-year-olds who live in St. Louis and earn $24,000 a year, just over 200% of the poverty level. The cheapest silver plan would cost them about $1,400, nearly 6% of income, and come with a $2,100 deductible that is daunting, even if it is fairly modest by ObamaCare standards. But how is a $24,000-earner supposed to come up with $1,400 to spend on health care — even before the deductible?

Data from Avalere Health and HealthCare.gov suggest that among those eligible for exchange subsidies with income between 200% and 250% of the poverty level, only about 1 in 5 people selected silver coverage in 2015.

There’s also an option to buy bronze coverage, but the cheapest policy available would still cost just under $1,000 and come with a $6,850 deductible.

The question that needs to be asked is whether it is fair and acceptable to require people earning just above 200% of the poverty level to pay 4% of their income for coverage that is likely to yield very little in benefits, or else forfeit nearly 3% of their income to pay a tax penalty.

This outcome, it must be emphasized, couldn’t be any further from the way that the administration sold ObamaCare and advertised the mandate penalty. It also bears little resemblance to RomneyCare, ObamaCare’s forerunner, which mandated zero-deductible policies for households up to 300% of the poverty level.

The options that ObamaCare requires people to choose among make little financial sense for millions of members of the working class. That’s why the group of insured is both much smaller and sicker than expected, resulting in double-digit premium hikes for 2016.

With results like these, the financial pain that ObamaCare prescribes for far too many individuals and families with modest to moderate incomes looks to be an example of overtreatment rather than tough but necessary medicine.

For a couple age 30 in Richmond, Va., with income of $40,000 (200% of the poverty level) and a child covered by Medicaid, a silver plan costs about $2,500. Kevin Drum of Mother Jones highlighted this option and advised families in such a position to “scrimp” and pay for silver, but it would be a huge financial stretch, to say the least.

The family could instead buy the cheapest bronze plan for $1,000, but it carries a $12,900 family deductible, which means that a trip to the hospital could be financially devastating — just the situation that ObamaCare was supposed to fix.

Silver-Bronze Chasm

The silver-plan deductible for this family, by contrast, would be a more realistic $1,500. The great chasm between silver and bronze deductibles is intentional, at least to some extent. The architects of ObamaCare decided to attach extra support to silver plans that effectively turn the plans to platinum for low-income beneficiaries. Sadly, those who can’t afford to buy silver plans lose out on that extra support if they buy bronze, hence the $12,900 family deductible.

Ultimately, one’s view of whether this state of affairs is “indefensible” is in the eye of the beholder. But it’s worth noting that few people defend it. Certainly not Hillary Clinton, who proposes a new tax credit to offset high out-of-pocket costs that will cost the government a whole lot more.

Republican politicians are, not surprisingly, piling on the criticism of ObamaCare deductibles — despite the consensus among right-of-center policy wonks that high deductibles are not so bad.

Texas Sen. John Cornyn, for example, tweeted out this data point: “Obamacare Bronze individual plan deductible is $5731; $11K for a family. #whatisthepoint?”

It would be unfortunate if the backlash over ObamaCare deductibles makes high deductibles too politically toxic. That’s because low-deductible coverage for all would cost the government a whole lot more — and likely more than it’s worth, because it’s more efficient for people to save for future medical care than for the government to raise taxes. High deductibles also can, at least in theory, lead people to be more price-sensitive purchasers of health care.

There is a logical middle ground, however. The key is giving people flexibility over how they use their subsidies instead of stacking the deck in favor of low-deductible silver coverage, as ObamaCare does.

The government could provide a low-deductible option for people with very low incomes or chronic conditions that make large out-of-pocket bills unmanageable, as well as much more affordable options that combine high deductibles with a Health Savings Account deposit for low-income households.

Follow Jed Graham on Twitter @IBD_JGraham.