Health calendar (Photo: Stock)

Classes and events

Breastfeeding Class Monday, 6 p.m. Sacred Heart Hospital, 5151 N. Ninth Ave.,Women’s Education Classroom. This two-hour class, taught by one of Sacred Heart Hospital’s lactation consultants, offers techniques for breastfeeding success and addresses common concerns to make your experience as smooth as possible. Partners are encouraged to attend. Space is limited, and pre-registration is required. $20 per couple, only one registration needed per couple. Scholarships are available. List of available dates on the website. Park in the Ninth Avenue garage or in the lot in front of The Children’s Hospital. Snacks and drinks are welcome. Details, call 416-6378, or visit www.sacred-heart.org/childbirth.

Epilepsy Foundation of Florida offers Affordable Care Act Navigation Assistance Monday, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Pensacola State College Warrington Campus, 5555 W. Highway 98; Monday and Wednesday, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. West Florida Hospital, 8383 N. Davis Highway; Monday and Tuesday, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. The Epilepsy Resource Center, 2401 Executive Plaza Road, Suite 3A. Meet personally with a non-profit certified navigator for enrollment assistance in the ACA marketplace. Navigators provide education and information so consumers can select a plan that meets their health care needs and financial budget. Navigators will not steer you toward any specific plan and do not represent any insurance companies. Walk-ins welcome, but appointments are highly recommended. Services are free and open to the public. For details or to schedule an appointment, call 877-553-7453, or visit www.efof.org.

Fitness

Restorative Yoga Tuesday, 6 p.m. West Florida Budokan, 5719 U.S. 90, Chantilly Plaza, Milton. A gentle, restorative class for people with impaired range of motion and flexibility due to injury, accidents, surgery, chronic pain (physically, mentally, emotionally), cancer treatments, MS, overweight,chronic pain, insomnia, anxiety and similar ailments. All poses are done on the floor.

Zumba with Karina Cokesbury United Methodist Church - Summit Park, 3300 Summit Blvd., McClain Hall. Mondays and Wednesdays, 9:30 a.m. Zumba for seniors, low impact and invigorating exercise to keep seniors moving and flexible. All fitness levels are welcome. $5 per class. Thursdays, 6 p.m. A nonstop party-style Zumba workout that is energizing and fun. This class is followed by a 20 minute core workout on a yoga mat with light weights. $5 per class, no membership required. Karina Miller, 712-4772, www.karinamiller.zumba. com.

Support groups

Alzheimer’s Caregivers Support Group Monday, 3 p.m. West Florida Rehabilitation Institute, 8391 N. Davis Highway, Community Rooms A and B. To assist caregivers with understanding the needs and behaviors of the person diagnosed with progressive memory loss. Caregivers will learn about community resources and important steps in planning and managing care. Reservations required, 494-3212.

How to submit an event

To have your health event listed, go to http://events.pnj.com and enter your event. Items that are not submitted through the Eventful calendar system will not be considered for publication. In addition, items that do not include full details – event name, date, time, place, contact information – will be rejected. When entering your information, make sure the details make sense. The items may not be edited. You may want to refer to a past print edition of the Health Calendar. IMPORTANT: Choose only the Health and Wellness category. Failure to choose this category will result in your event not being pulled into the correct calendar for our print products. Information must be entered by 5 p.m. Monday for inclusion in the Health Calendar on Thursday. If you have questions, contact Ginny Hollingsworth at 435-8530, or vhollingsworth @pnj.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1Op3h89