The American Dream is dead. The idea that if you work hard and stay out of trouble you will be all right no longer applies.

The dream of coming to America is quickly becoming a thing of the past as current political rhetoric becomes more and more xenophobic.

Senator Bernie Sanders is promoting policies to reform education, healthcare and immigration with the singular goal of saving the American dream.

Imagine needing to go to the hospital to treat a broken arm and it setting you back $10,000. This is the situation many Americans face.

Healthcare in America is only available to those who can afford health insurance, and to obtain health insurance you must have money.

Sen. Sanders believes that healthcare is a human right and should be available to everyone, regardless of their income.

He argues that while the Affordable Care Act was a small victory for the uninsured, it is not doing nearly enough. The Affordable Care Act has not created healthcare for everyone and thus the need for universal healthcare still exists.

Sen. Sanders endeavors to create a universal single-payer healthcare system. This system will save taxpayers about $500 billion per year even including the initial costs.

The U.S. spends more on healthcare per person and as a percentage of gross domestic product than any other advanced nation in the world. However, Americans are not healthier than the rest of the world.

Quite simply, in our high-priced healthcare system that leaves millions overlooked, we spend more and end up with less. People are frequently concerned with the cost of a single healthcare system.

Sen. Sanders proposes amending the tax code to create the American Health Security Trust Fund. This will be paid through several new taxes including things like: new healthcare income tax, an employer payroll tax, a surcharge on high-income individuals and a tax on security transactions. Creating a single-payer system would free both the employer and their employees from the burden of healthcare. This would allow both groups to have more financial freedom and give them more options in terms of both their business and their personal lives.

We are a country of immigrants. Many people dream of one day escaping violence, oppression and poverty by coming to the United States, which is considered the land of opportunity. These people face a very difficult road in pursuit of the chance of improving their own lives or their children’s lives.

Coming to America was once a feasible goal and once you got here you had the opportunity to achieve anything if you worked hard enough. It seems that now, instead of continuing to welcome immigration, which has always stimulated our economy, we are closing our borders and exploiting those who manage to get in.

Sen. Sanders believes that the immigration policy should be reformed to create a path to legal status,and, in some cases, citizenship. He also supports waiving deportations for those who were brought to America by their parents when they were children. He believes immigrants “have been routinely cheated out of wages, held virtually captive by employers who have seized their documents, forced to live in unspeakable, inhumane conditions and denied medical benefits for on-the-job injuries.”

These immigrants are already an integral part of our economy and should have a path to citizenship that will allow them to be fully participating members of American society and contributors to the economy.

The issue of securing American borders is important, but it can and must be done without building a wall. Rather than focusing on a barrier, Sen. Sanders proposes that we focus on creating pathways to citizenship for immigrants already in the country.

In order to have a decent job, one must have education. To obtain an education one must also have money. This means that people with money will continue to have money and those without will continue to be without.

The main problem is with the exorbitant cost of the current education system. Sen. Sanders aspires to reform education by making tuition to public universities free, reducing the interest on student loans, expanding work-study programs and increasing the number of educators.

Sen. Sanders said that quality education is part of our basic human rights. The enrichment we receive by studying what we choose as well as the economic and employment opportunities we get, higher education is an integral part of the pursuit of happiness.

Everyone has that right, not only those who can afford to buy it. This leads to the only reasonable conclusion that college tuition, at least for public universities, must be free.

The issue of how much making education free will cost often comes up.

Sen. Sanders said that it would be an estimated $70 billion dollar investment, of which states would pay 30 percent. The rest could be paid for in the same manner that was proposed in the College for All Act, which Sen. Sanders sponsored; a “Robin Hood” tax would be implemented on Wall Street– a 0.5 percent speculation fee on investment houses, hedge funds and other stock trades; as well as a 0.1 percent fee on bonds and a 0.005 percent fee charged on derivatives.

By making tuition free, you create a more educated workforce, which leads to higher incomes and a higher GDP for the country. This leads to increased wealth, prosperity and consumer spending. Furthermore, by removing the burden of saving for college or paying back student loans, people are able to spend their money freely, which will also stimulate the economy.

However, there is still hope for the American Dream.

Through universalizing healthcare and making public universities tuition-free, every American will have the ability to achieve anything they are willing to work for. This equality that we, as a country, strive for should be extended to immigrants.

Sen. Sanders proposes policies that will save the American Dream. He aims to create a more balanced country supporting the idea that if you work hard you can achieve, rather than being a country where you must already have money to achieve.