Business Honors for May 3, 2015

Business Honors for May 3, 2015

BATON ROUGE AREA

Mona Laird-Rafeedie, chief executive officer of Corporate Resources, has been named the American Business Women’s Association La Capitale Chapter Woman of the Year for her dedication and involvement in the chapter. She is chapter president.

The Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality recognized Charmaine Sandolph as the Outstanding Level B Operator for solid waste facilities at the recent Louisiana Solid Waste Association convention.

Sandolph, of Darrow, is the sales coordinator for special waste at Republic Services’ Colonial Landfill in Sorrento. She was cited for her role in earning Colonial the company’s World Class Landfill designation and the landfill’s previous award as the LDEQ Outstanding Class A Landfill in the state.

Kean Miller received the Dutch Morial Award from the Louis A. Martinet Legal Society, recognizing the law firm’s commitment to diversity and inclusion in the legal profession.

Forty percent of its attorneys are women and 11 percent are minorities, and 25 percent of its partners are women and 9 percent are minorities.

LSU Continuing Education’s Certified Occupational Safety Specialist program has been selected for the Association for Continuing Higher Education’s 2015 South Distinguished Program Award.

COSS is a five-day, 40-hour certification course designed for safety requirements and safety implementation, delivered in partnership with the Alliance Safety Council. Graduates receive the OSHA 10-Hour card of completion for construction and general industry.

The Water Institute of the Gulf was recently certified as a Delft3D Modeling Center by Deltares, a leading, independent, Netherlands-based research institute for matters relating to water, soil and the subsurface. The Water Institute is the first North American-based organization to receive such a certification.

Complex coastal and deltaic areas require advanced modeling to find solutions for challenges resulting from environmental changes and human intervention in natural processes. Delft3D is a 3-D modeling suite developed by Deltares to investigate hydrodynamics, sediment transport and morphology and water quality for fluvial, estuarine and coastal environments.

LAFAYETTE AREA

University Hospital & Clinics and Lafayette General Medical Center have earned Quality Respiratory Care Recognition under a national program of the American Association for Respiratory Care.

The designation recognizes the quality of the respiratory care services available in hospitals that meet national standards and guidelines.

Judy Morgan, fourth-grade teacher at Charles Burke Elementary School in Lafayette Parish, has been honored by the Louisiana Farm Bureau as Ag in the Classroom Teacher of the Year for her school 4-H garden project.

She is coordinator of the LSU AgCenter 4-H School Garden Initiative Program at Charles Burke Elementary School.

NEW ORLEANS AREA

Janet Rhodus received the Coalition to Restore Coastal Louisiana’s 2015 Coastal Stewardship Award.

Rhodus, a Baton Rouge native, founded the nonprofit Launch Leeville as a forum to highlight the ecology and erosion of the fishing coast of lower Lafourche Parish.

Teresa Lawrence, owner and CEO of Delta Personnel, received a 2015 Women’s Business Enterprise Star from the Women’s Business Enterprise National Council.

Lawrence was recognized for her business achievements and leadership as a woman business owner. She was selected out of 13,000 women-owned businesses for the national honor by WBEC South, one 14 regional partner organizations.

David Harms, a graduate student from New Orleans in LSU’s E.J. Ourso College of Business Department of Finance, finished with the highest score worldwide in the month of February on the Bloomberg Institute’s Aptitude Test.

Harms’ score of 750 placed him in the 99th percentile and 10 points ahead of the next person.

Harms has spent the past eight years working in affordable housing in New Orleans, currently with Stirling Properties LLC as a finance/development analyst. He previously obtained a bachelor’s degree in economics from Rice University.