Idea lifted from San Francisco meets 'nothing but positive reviews'

Dave Rocha, right, and Jonathan Sharpe check out the parklet at 1203 13th Street. Boulder's first parklet, on University Hill, is officially open. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

High on University Hill, settled modestly across two shady Pennsylvania Avenue parking spaces, is a new structure that threatens to shake the very concept of common space in Boulder, challenging those who stop by to question their most basic beliefs surrounding the timeless practice of sitting outdoors in the summertime, iced beverage in hand.

Behold the "parklet," a new brand of urban relaxation, popularized on the streets of San Francisco and now available to anyone in Boulder possessing a rear end and a taste for the chill.

Parklets can take many forms, from the grassy to the wooden, the chair-y to the bench-y. The Boulder version, now in its second official week, is themed "Opportunity Knocks," and is walled with repurposed doors and windows that hang behind a zig-zagging stretch of wooden bench, also recycled.

Dave Rocha, left, and Jonathan Sharpe, check out Boulder's first parklet on University Hill. These types of small pop-up parks are popular in other cities, including San Francisco, and the city is looking to this one to see whether the program should be expanded to other areas in Boulder. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

It was designed on a $5,000 budget by a seven-person group calling itself Doors Open, who beat out 32 other entries for the right to build the city's first parklet, as part of a five-month temporary pilot project.

"It's an artistic element, I'd say, that the Hill is missing," said Kaira Schachter, manager of University Hill's Cafe Aion, situated on Pennsylvania Avenue between 12th and 13th streets, only a few feet north of the parklet. "The Hill has some areas that you feel are a little neglected, so I think it's cool just to have the city paying a little more attention."

Ashlee Herring, who works in the city's management and parking services division, said the location was very intentional.

"We're trying to activate that as a space for holding more events right there on 13th between College and Pennsylvania," she said. "We want to revitalize the fun in the area, so we thought it was the perfect location to try the parklet."

If, when and where the city would add other parklets hasn't been determined, as the pilot is still in its infancy. The success or failure of Opportunity Knocks, Herring said, will largely inform the city's next move.

"We're going to look at what went well with this one, what can be improved on, and then we'll make a decision," she said.

The problem with expanding is that parklets take up parking spots, and, particularly downtown, it's not as if Boulder has many of those to spare.

"There's absolutely got to be a balance," Herring said. "We can't just take over all the parking spaces. So we'll look at what's the added value of the parklet as opposed to the loss of the parking space."

Those conversations will take place in five months. For now, Boulder's handsome new hangout is doing what it does best.

"Yeah, I see people go sit there," Schachter said. "Sometimes they'll eat here, then go over there."

"We've gotten nothing but positive reviews," said Sandy Brown, spokeswoman for Doors Open. "People have spoken beautifully of it."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Alex Burness at 303-473-1389 or burnessa@dailycamera.com. Follow him at twitter.com/alex_burness.