Kaven Flowers, left, and K’Moira Jackson are two of the thousands of patients who have received free meals from Arkansas Children’s Hospital in Little Rock.

At Boston Medical Center, physicians write prescriptions for food when patients don't have enough to eat. Doctors in the center's emergency department and more than 20 clinics screen all patients for hunger, writing those who struggle to feed themselves a script to the on-site Preventive Food Pantry. They write a lot of food prescriptions – enough to keep the food pharmacy serving 7,000 people each month.

"A hungry child will have more ER visits than a healthy child," notes Latchman Hiralall, manager of the center's food pantry. A registered dietetic technician, Hiralall gets a copy of each food prescription via the center's electronic health record, and compiles each patient a bundle of medically and culturally appropriate foods, including fresh produce and meat, to last several days. "We provide food for the whole family, not just the patient," he says, adding that patients can return twice a month for as long as they are receiving care from BMC providers. Three staffers and many volunteers run the pantry, which relies on the Greater Boston Food Bank to provide the food.

The need is great, as 48 million Americans live in food-insecure households, according to Feeding America. In 2014, hunger and food insecurity drove up U.S. health expenditures by $160 billion, an amount equal to one-third of the national debt, according to a recent study by Bread for the World Institute. Food insecurity is associated with higher rates of depression, cardiovascular disease, high blood pressure, diabetes, HIV, osteoporosis and other conditions.

[READ: Food Insecurity Not Yet Down to Pre-Recession Levels]

"Food insecurity can impact health in at least two key ways," says Dr. Seth Berkowitz, an internist and faculty member at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School who studies the effects of unmet basic needs on chronic disease. "The first may be causing disease directly – for example, by constraining dietary choices to calorie-dense, nutrient-poor food that results in obesity or Type 2 diabetes. Secondly, it may make conditions that are not initially related to food insecurity harder to manage." Consider a food insecure cancer patient going through chemotherapy; improper nutrition jeopardizes recovery.

Students from a Little Rock, Ark., high school help pack the free meals that are distributed to kids at Arkansas Children’s Hospital.

Around the country, a handful of hospitals and health systems have taken steps in their communities to chip away at the problem of hunger, a so-called social determinant of health. Largely via community partnerships, Boston Medical Center, Arkansas Children's Hospital and Toledo, Ohio-based ProMedica are among those hospitals that understand the impact hunger, housing and other social determinants of health have on health – they play a far larger impact on people's health than the medical care and services hospitals and doctors deliver.

With its focus on prevention and population health, the Affordable Care Act is a catalyst for some of the new thinking among hospitals. The health reform law includes assorted payment carrots and sticks, such as hospital readmission penalties, accountable care organizations, risk-based payment changes and stronger community benefit requirements for nonprofit providers.

Specifically, the IRS last December finalized and clarified a rule on the actions nonprofit hospitals can take to improve local community health beyond charity care to preserve their nonprofit tax status. This includes addressing social determinants of health, including "access to adequate nutrition" for people in the community, not just patients.

"A hungry child will have more ER visits than a healthy child," says Latchman Hiralall, manager of the Boston Medical Center food pantry.

For the one-third of the nation's nonprofit hospitals in 2016 updating their community benefit programs – a detailed plan that involves assessing a community's health needs and then providing steps to show how the hospital will address those needs – this is something new. (The rule's release late last year came too late to affect hospitals' three-year community assessment in 2015.)

ACA requires all nonprofit hospitals to do an in-depth community health needs assessment, accounting for social determinants of health, once every three years and to complete an implementation strategy to meet the community's needs. This must be done to protect the hospitals' nonprofit tax status. Hospitals are encouraged to work with other groups in the community to tackle issues that fundamentally impact health.