2,000 students in 12 schools now learning Mandarin

Xuejiao Zhang, left, gets ideas on how to remember a Chinese symbol from Juliette Molina, right, and Zach Maki, middle, during a Chinese language class at Red Hawk Elementary in Erie on September 16. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

Third-graders at Erie's Black Rock Elementary recently competed to see which team could identify the Chinese characters for blue, yellow, green and red, with bonus points if they could also say the Chinese name.

They're learning basic Mandarin, practicing how to say basic phrases and learning to recognize Chinese characters.

"I look forward to learning Chinese every day," said third-grader Juliette Molina. "It's just a beautiful language."

St. Vrain boasts one of the larger Chinese language programs in the state. Erie High School was the first to offer the language in 2008, with more schools coming on board in subsequent years and a coordinator position added last school year.

This fall, Chinese coordinator Yinyan Huang said nine teachers are teaching Mandarin to about 2,000 students in 12 schools.

"The program has great potential," she said.

Jon Zeljo, a senior staff associate with the Teaching East Asia program at the University of Colorado at Boulder, called St. Vrain's commitment to teaching Chinese "visionary."

He helps organize a summer workshop for K-12 Chinese teachers through a federal grant and has been disappointed that most of the teachers who participate are from other states.

Challenges for getting Chinese classes in more schools in Colorado include the lack of a central person at the state level who can help with organization and communication and the limited availability of people who are fluent in Mandarin Chinese and qualified to teach, he said.

Advertisement

"Part of the problem is understanding what it takes to sustain a Chinese language program," he said. "There are no standards for how it's taught or what is taught."

Without standards, he added, some classes may end up teaching more "holidays and festivals" than language.

In Boulder Valley, Boulder's Fairview High School offers Chinese, but there wasn't enough interest to keep a class going at the neighboring Southern Hills Middle School. At least three area private schools also offer Chinese classes — Dawson School in Lafayette, Shepherd Valley Waldorf School in Niwot and Broomfield Academy.

Fairview International Baccalaureate, or IB, coordinator Darren Besset said the school's program started through a grassroots effort of IB parents.

They applied to Hanban, a partnership with China's Ministry of Education in which China's government will recruit teachers from China to teach in the United States for two to three years and pay their salaries.

"They kick start the Chinese language programs," Besset said.

Fairview's world languages department agreed to pilot a Chinese program, with a promise to switch to district support after two years if there was enough interest. For the first two years, the parent group also raised money to cover the cost of the textbooks and learning materials.

Students were enthusiastic, Besset said, and Fairview now offers five levels of Chinese.

Fairview also hosts the non-profit Bohua Chinese School, which teaches language and culture on Sundays to children and adults, and administers the advanced placement Chinese exam to students throughout the area.

Fairview's Chinese teacher, Susan Wang, grew up in Boulder and is in her third year teaching at the school. She became fluent in Mandarin by studying the language in college and traveling.

"I want to build an enthusiasm for east Asia," she said.

She said it helps to start learning the language in high school or earlier because "you need a lot of time" to learn Mandarin.

Several of her students said they took the class to improve their Chinese because it's spoken by family members.

Sophomore Angela Zhou said her family is fluent in Chinese — and while she speaks fluently, writing is a challenge.

"I need a formal Chinese education to learn to write," she said.

Others said it looks good on college applications and should prove useful for future careers.

"Chinese is more applicable in the world of business than other languages," said sophomore Brant Smith.

In St. Vrain Valley, all the teachers are from China, brought here to teach through Hanban's exchange program. They're interviewed over Skype and are all experienced teachers who are fluent in English, said Huang, the district coordinator.

She said she provides continuity, training and coaching, helping the teachers from China learn classroom management skills and what students are expected to learn by the end of the year. She's also a cheerleader, talking the program up to school principals.

"Chinese is the most widely spoken language," she said. "It's the new world language. If you don't learn it, others will."

Along with finding qualified teachers fluent in Chinese, another challenge is convincing students that they want to take on a language that's considered difficult to learn.

"There's a myth that students cannot succeed in learning Chinese," Huang said. "That is not true. If it's taught the right way, this language is very fun to learn. It encourages creativity and critical thinking. It just totally opens the students' eyes to a changing world."

Elementary school, she said, is the best time for students to start learning.

"If you make the classroom fun, they'll fall in love with the Chinese language," she said.

At Erie's Red Hawk Elementary, teacher Xuejiao Zhang said teaching here requires a more student centered approach.

"In China, the students think the teacher is a god," she said. "Here, they think the teacher is a friend. The way of teaching here is totally different. You need to know what the students like."

She said she uses gestures, songs, Chinese dance, pictures and videos to help the students learn Chinese and to teach them about her country's culture.

Her third-grade students were enthusiastic about their lessons.

"It's really cool to learn how to speak another language," said Rowan Olson. "We learn about their traditions. They're so different than ours."

Classmate Niles Johnston added that he likes the idea of communicating with people from a different country.

"I was really excited because I want to talk to people in China when I get older," he said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.