In 1966, the Beatles played their last-ever concert, the AFL and NFL merged, and an actor named Ronald Reagan was elected governor of California.

And, of course, millions of children were born in the United States that year. Those youngsters will turn 50 in 2016.

To quote a rock band that was just hitting its stride in 1966, “What a long, strange trip it’s been.”

Few of us look forward to the Big Five-O — but perhaps we should. After all, 50 is the age when we can join AARP — for a mere $16 — and finally qualify for great money-saving discounts at countless stores and restaurants.

We’ve even included a few price breaks that begin at age 50 for people who are not AARP members.

So instead of sitting around wondering when all those wrinkles arrived — or where all that hair disappeared to — celebrate your birthday by taking advantage of the following types of price breaks you can enjoy after turning 50.

Remember: You’ve earned ’em.

Dining discounts

With age comes the ability to appreciate a fine meal. And you can save all over town as a card-carrying member of AARP.

Discounts include 15 percent off meals at restaurants such as Outback Steakhouse, Bonefish Grill and Carabba’s Italian Grill. Or perhaps you prefer a free doughnut with the purchase of a large beverage at Dunkin’ Donuts. Either way, scrumptious savings abound for those ages 50 and over. Bon appétit!

Entertainment deals

You’ve worked hard for a half-century — now’s the time to start reaping rewards in the form of discounted entertainment!

AARP members can “save up to 25 percent off movie tickets” and enjoy snack discounts from Regal Entertainment Group.

Regal also offers these price breaks to people who are not members of AARP, but you’ll need to be patient — discounts for nonmembers do not begin until you turn 60.

Members can also save at least 25 percent on a “ticket 4-pack to great events” including “some of the biggest live performances, your favorite sports teams or artists at venues and arenas around the U.S.” through Ticketmaster/Live Nation.

Retail savings

With age comes wisdom, and hopefully you’re smart enough to avoid paying full price whenever you shop. If you are 50 or older, you can join AARP and catch a price break at many popular national retailers.

Members can save on apparel from leading brands, such as Reebok (20 percent off at Reebok.com), floral deliveries from companies like 1-800-Flowers.com, gift baskets and more.

There are even discounts on monthly phone services and accessories from industry leaders. For example, you can get a 10 percent discount on the monthly service charge from AT&T.

Travel perks

Don’t put off that vacation you desperately need and deserve. AARP makes it easier for you to get away by offering discounts at leading hotel chains, including Hilton, Sheraton, Wyndham and W hotels. You can even save 5 percent off your room at Waldorf Astoria Hotels & Resorts.

But that’s just the tip of the iceberg! Members can also save on flights and cruises.

And though you’ll have to wait a little while, you can also get reduced admission at national parks. U.S. citizens and permanent residents who turn 62 qualify for a lifetime pass to the parks, all for the cost of just $10 — no AARP membership necessary.

Automotive savings

Having an AARP membership pays off big time when it comes to wheels. In addition to rental savings from companies like Avis Rent A Car and Budget Rent-A-Car, members can enjoy services such as discounted oil changes as well as deals on automobile, motorcycle and RV insurance. Sounds like it’s time to hit the road!

Enhanced retirement tax breaks

Tax Day is approaching, a reminder of how much we love our money — and how we hate handing it over to the government. But if you are turning 50 this year, you can reduce next year’s tax bill through “catch-up contributions” to your 401(k) or IRA.

People age 50 and older are able to contribute an additional $6,000 to their 401(k), or an additional $1,000 to their IRA. Best of all, the money you contribute to a 401(k) or traditional IRA is tax-deferred, meaning you won’t have to pay taxes on the cash until you withdraw it in retirement.

Do you know of other great price breaks that arrive with your 50th birthday? Share them in our Forums. It’s a place where you can swap questions and answers on money-related matters, life hacks and ingenious ways to save.

This story contains affiliate links, which means Money Talks News may get a commission if you decide to purchase anything from some of the companies in this story. However, we only recommend products we love. Using affiliate links helps us keep the lights on, and allows us to continue to offer you great money-saving tips every day.