This undated image from video released by PBS shows host Tavis Smiley on "Tavis Smiley Reports." Credit: Associated Press

Tavis Smiley has been very outspoken on President Barack Obama, and last week when he was on "Hannity" on Fox News to debate the shutdown, the African-American author and liberal political commentator took another shot at the Obama administration.

When Sean Hannity asked Smiley if black Americans were better off five years into the Obama presidency, Smiley said, "No."

"The data is going to indicate, sadly, that when the Obama administration is over, black people will have lost ground in every single leading economic indicator category," he said. "On that regard, the president ought to be held responsible."

Smiley's comments remind me of the 2012 debate on the question, "Are you better off today than you were four years ago?"

I disagree with Smiley. Things are bad, but blacks are better off than we were before Obama took office. I wrote a column in September 2012 from the Democratic National Convention addressing this issue. After Obama's first four years, I said we were better off because Obama had stopped the bleeding. At the time, I said Obama had 29 straight months of job growth and the country was safer.

As of September, 2013, we have had 42 straight months of private-sector job growth, and the economy has added more than 7.5 million private-sector jobs during that time. Some of these jobs were filled by minorities.

I realize that we still have a long way to go. There are too many black men out of work, and we need more jobs programs to prepare them for some of the jobs when they come back.

I also believe that the Affordable Care Act is a step in the right direction, but it is only a part of Obama's efforts to right the nation's economic ship over the past five years. Obama needs to explain how health care, food stamps and his other political ideas fit into the big picture.

There are still too many children living in poverty in America. The latest study says that the national poverty rate among children stands at 23%. While the poverty rates for minority children have dropped since the 1990s, more than one in three black and Hispanic children live in poverty.

Does Obama deserve some of the blame? Yes. But he is not solely responsible. There is plenty of blame to go around. Many companies have outsourced their jobs overseas. Congress can't seem to get along on anything, and we have lost too many black and brown men to the correctional system.

We appear to be headed in the right direction, but the next several years will be critical. Obama needs to explain his economic vision clearly to the public and execute it.

These next few years will determine his legacy.

James E. Causey is a Journal Sentinel editorial writer, columnist and blogger. Email jcausey@journalsentinel.com. Facebook: fb.me/james.causey.12 Twitter: twitter.com/jecausey