Democrats hope the tough budget choices required to deal with Oklahoma’s $1.3 billion shortfall will help them wrest seats from Republicans in November’s elections. That’s a plausible theory. But it relies on the Republican majority self-destructing and giving voters a reason to vote against the GOP. If Democrats want to become a force in state politics again, they need to give voters a reason to vote for Democrats.

Instead, they have provided little leadership and even engaged in stunts that undermine the idea that Democratic governance would be an improvement, such as demanding multiple votes on virtually identical amendments.

On the budget, Democrats have been eager to take potshots at Republican leaders, but less excited to offer counterproposals. Instead, House Democrats filed a resolution asking the Legislature to “issue a disaster declaration for the state of Oklahoma due to leadership failure …”That resolution cited budget shortfalls, funding cuts to state agencies, low rankings in health outcomes and high rates of mental health disorders, among other problems. Notably, some of those problems are longstanding and far predate Republican control of the Legislature.

Basically, Democrats want Republicans to take credit for problems that have only weak ties to legislative policies. The resolution’s naked partisanship undermines any claim of seriousness. It’s the equivalent of Ford demanding that GMC declare GMC products to be inferior.

The few proposals Democrats have endorsed are hardly comprehensive. They’ve called for increasing the income tax rate by a quarter-point. But that would fill only a very small fraction of this year’s shortfall.

This week, Democrats invited Republicans to attend a “budget meeting” — three months into a four-month session — yet failed to provide their own comprehensive budget plan. To do so would have required proposing either massive tax increases or significant cuts to some areas of government, which Democrats apparently found too painful.

Whatever criticisms may be leveled at Republican leaders this year, they have not ignored the budget. Lawmakers have been working for months to address the budget shortfall and minimize its impact. Democrats have been mostly AWOL from those efforts, as House Speaker Jeff Hickman noted in late March.

“We haven’t seen a budget proposal from the House Democrats. We’ve haven’t seen any suggestions to our problems from the House Democrats,” Hickman said then. “They’ve criticized, but they’ve not offered aAnd even when Democrats appear to have won budget concessions, they’ve pretended otherwise. For years, Democrats have called for expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act to obtain new federal matching dollars. That plan requires roughly $100 million in new state spending to qualify for the federal match, which has been problematic.

Yet Republican leaders have largely embraced Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion in recent weeks, albeit in a slightly modified version they refer to as “Medicaid Rebalancing.”

The Oklahoma Policy Institute, which has enthusiastically championed the Affordable Care Act, has hailed the rebalancing proposal. In contrast, legislative Democrats who typically side with OK Policy have been muted in their response.

No one expects Democrats to hold hands and sing Kumbaya with Republicans. But is it too much to hope they will propose serious policies and accept victory when they win major concessions?