Topics: Brian Williams, meet the press, NBC, NBC News, The Today Show, Tom Brokaw, TV, TV news, Vanity Fair, Media News, News, Politics News

The May issue of Vanity Fair features an unforgiving in-depth report on NBC News, focused in particular on anchor Brian Williams’ fall from grace. However, the article, written by Bryan Burrough, reveals a series of ill-advised managerial and business decisions that plagued the network long before Williams admitted that he had invented one of his memories.

Here are some of the most fascinating tidbits:

Comcast didn’t really know how to run a news network:

While NBC’s primetime lineup has famously struggled to remain competitive in recent years, NBC News remained an industry leader, thanks to the success of programs like “Meet the Press,” the “Today” show, and “NBC Nightly News” with Brian Williams. However, when Comcast took over NBC News with the acquisition of its parent company, NBC Universal, it appointed its own leadership — including Patricia “Pat” Fili-Krushel and Steve Burke, neither had experience in journalism — and stuff started to hit the fan:

“You have to understand something about Comcast,” says another recently departed NBC executive. “There’s practically no attention paid to actual domain expertise—like, zero. The fact of the matter is, in certain businesses, certain things matter. If you’re going to be made the head of a shoe business, you need to actually know that shoes need to be sourced and designed. In the big corporate vision of NBCU, there’s almost no regard for that line of thinking. If you fit into a mold, if you fulfill a loyalty obligation or a don’t-make-waves obligation, or if you can just be pegged into the Comcast pegboard, you get to be in charge of stuff. That’s Pat.”

They in turn appointed people who didn’t know how much about the division they were running:

One senior NBC executive said that Deborah Turness, the newly-appointed head of NBC News — who had never worked in American television (she is British) — was flailing:

“News is a very particular thing, NBC is a very particular beast, and Deborah, well, she really doesn’t have a fucking clue. She’s letting the inmates run the asylum. You have kids? Well, if you let them, they’ll have ice cream every night. Same thing in TV. If you let the people on air do what they want, whenever they want, this is what happens.”

Another former executive said,

“I have seen no evidence [Turness] knows what she’s doing, but in fairness, she walked into a complete shitstorm there. ‘Today’ is a horror show. Brian Williams? He didn’t give a rat’s ass what Deborah Turness says. But this is fundamentally not a Deborah Turness problem. She’s just a symptom of the problem… This is a Comcast problem.”

Brian Williams doesn’t care about politics — something even “Meet the Press” legend Tim Russert was wary of

Take the following quote, for example:

“What always bothered Tim [Russert] was Brian’s lack of interest in things that mattered most, that were front and center, like politics and world events,” said a source who knew both men. “Brian has very little interest in politics. It’s not in his blood. What Brian cares about is logistics, the weather, and planes and trains and helicopters.”