There's a tendency to believe that the Supreme Court's validation (again) of Obamacare will lead to a major shift in public opinion in the law's favor. Based on the past five years of polling on the law, however, that scenario seems very unlikely.

The invaluable Kaiser Family Foundation has been polling on the Affordable Care Act since it was passed into law -- and provides a great illustration of how the public has viewed the bill over that time.

And, this from the June tracking poll conducted by Kaiser:

There remains a large partisan divide with 65 percent of Democrats saying they have a favorable view and 69 percent of Republicans saying the opposite. Independents fall more in the middle with 37 percent reporting a favorable view and 45 percent reporting an unfavorable view. Views also continue to diverge along party lines for perceptions of the law’s personal impact and what should happen next with the law.

The reality is that opinion on Obamacare has effectively become just another way of asking for opinions on Obama himself. Compare the Kaiser chart above to this one from HuffPost pollster that tracks Obama's job approval ratings over a similar time period:

When Obama dipped -- in 2011 and again in 2014 -- support for the law dropped, too. When he started to trend back upward, same for approval of the law.

What does that tell you? That polling on Obamacare has very, very little to do with the actual elements of the law and almost everything to do with the man whose name is attached to it. That fact also explains why external events -- whether it's the first court ruling on the individual mandate in June 2012 or the subsequent presidential election that November -- tend to have very little effect on how people view the ACA.

Opinions about Obama have long since been decided with very little fluctuation in his job approval numbers. Since "Obamacare=Obama" for people, it's not surprising that numbers on the law barely fluctuate.

In short: Don't expect the Obamacare numbers to move much now -- or anytime in the foreseeable future.