When you kick off your Demo Day with a box of candy, you know this isn’t going to be a typical business-pitch event.

MergeLane, the Boulder female-friendly business accelerator, approached its first graduation day with flair at Friday’s sold-out event at St Julien.

And chocolate!

Gluten-free Chocolate Ganache from ZaZa , to be specific. Samples were shared. There was also fashion show to showcase TomboyX clothing . Daughters of mentors, staff and companies said a few words. And later, a guy played banjo while the sponsors were thanked by the men of MergeLane. The presentation kept the crowd entertained and cheering. And Sue Heilbronner, Mergelane’s co-founder and CEO, faced her fears.

“I feel proud of myself today,” said Sue Heilbronner, Mergelane’s co-founder and CEO. “Just being here many of you know required me to take a few giant leaps to directly face my fear. And in some cases, my loathing that if I started MergeLane, I would be labeled for the rest of my career a female entrepreneur, or a female investor.”

She’s okay with that now. Because she’s also brought a spotlight to eight women-led start ups that may not have gone much further without a force like MergeLane, which counts Seth Levine of the Foundry Group (and honorary Man of MergeLane); Lucy Sanders, CEO and co-founder of National Center for Women & Information Technology; and many, many others as mentors.

And from the first week MergeLane launched its mentor program back in February, the eight companies have come a long way. The 5-minute pitches were nearly perfect. Some already have revenues. Others have raised seed funding.

A quick roundup:

Mapistry has figured out how to help contractors and builders who need to figure out storm-water permitting and government regulations. Instead of spending five days on the process, Mapistry’s software can do it in an hour, according to Allie Janoch, Mapistry’s CEO and co-founder. Mapistry has already been selling to customers and in its first month, generated $20,000 in revenue. Next month, she expects $40,000. And storm water is just the beginning.

Elizabeth Sopher, a co-founder of The QuickZip Sheet Co., summed up her product in four words: The fitted sheet 2.0. Before MergeLane started, Sopher and co-founder Caroline Portis were already selling the crib sheets, which zip off for easy cleaning. Sales were mostly online. Fast-forward 12 weeks and QuickZip is now working with BabiesRUs, Walmart and Wayfair. Sopher said she projects sales to reach $1.7 million this year, from $400,000 last year. The goal is to expand into sheets for adults. “Fitted sheets are reviled,” she said. “We grab our customers on day one.”

Idaciti wants to make financial data usable to everyone — a hard pitch when the actual task is pretty snoozeworthy. But Idaciti co-founders Emily Huang and Christine Tan tag teamed for the pitch and kept it moving. “We are the dream team to solve this problem,” Tan said. They had ditched their earlier pitch of how Idaciti helps tell a story of financial data. Rather, they focused on an example: drilling into the details of Twitter’s acquisitions — buried in footnote 8 on page 84. Needing to know the important bits in a financial report is what Idaciti can spit out fast and help financial analysts, researchers and others get to the facts they need faster.

TomboyX, a lifestyle and women’s clothing brand for finding inspiration from men’s clothing, had fun with its pitch by starting with a fashion show. Fran Dunaway, its co-founder and CEO, even poked fun at the tech industry: “Women’s apparel is a $187 billion market, which by the way is more than four times the entire global SaaS market,” she said. “That’s a little tidbit I like to call sassy.” The company honed in on the lifestyle appeal as women everywhere posted pictures of themselves in TomboyX clothes. And the goal is to expand beyond into more lines. “We hit a home run and tripled our revenue in six months,” she said. Customers, on average, spend $94 per order.

Then there was ZaZa, the healthy dessert maker started by Elisabeth Saucier. “I believe the world would be a much better place if only we could eat desert at any time of the day without any of the guilt,” she started. Enter Zaza, which is all about creamy, sweet treats that are Paleo, vegan, gluten free, dairy free and soy free. Saucier, a chef, created the desserts because her children had allergies. And then all her friends wanted some. And Whole Foods. Last year, ZaZa had $170,000 in revenues and anticipates hitting $650,000 this year and $2 million in 2016. Everyone in the MergeLane audience on Friday got a taste. But for seconds, you had to find Saucier after the show.

The pitch from Intelligent Eyes, a company from Berkeley, Calif., also made a lot more sense then the pitch from February. Led by Debbie Taylor, its founder and CEO, Intelligent Eyes is another software as a service company. But you know all those clinical trials the healthcare industry does? Intelligent Eyes helps those guys see if they are getting good results, following protocol and staying on budget. Making decisions mid-trial can actually save money, speed up the trial and get drugs to the patients faster. Beta testers “are eager,” Taylor said.

Sugarwish also clarified its pitch: A gift that lets recipients literally pick their favorite candy. Pure happiness! “At Sugarwish, we know that’s the whole point of giving a gift is to deliver that feeling. To make someone feel happy,” said Elisabeth Vezzani, co-founder and CEO of the Denver company. Quite impressive were other stats Vezzani shared on how they know Sugarwish makes people happy: 15 percent of recipients sent one to someone else. Last year, sales were $170,000 and shipped 9,000 gifts and never had a return. Sugarwish is also expanding into the $54 billion corporate gift market. One of its first customers in the three weeks since it launched? Google.

And lastly, Havenly, which started out with a bang pre-Mergelane (it had revenues!) also ended its 12 weeks with big news: It received $1.5 million in seed funding. The company created a portal connecting interior designers with people who are either clueless about how to decorate a room or just don’t have time or the money to hire someone. “We’ve done this for thousands of people across the United States,” said Lee Mayer, Havenly’s co-founder and CEO. Customers pay $185 for the service and suggestions and get a discount on products if they choose to move forward. Typical post order? On average, $1,000, she said.