Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

This article is part of a feature we also send out via email as The Edge, a daily roundup of events and ideas in American politics written specially for newsletter subscribers. To sign up, please enter your email address in the field provided here.

Today in One Paragraph Donald Trump said he might not “have a very good relationship” with David Cameron following the British prime minister’s critique of Trump’s proposed plan to ban Muslims from entering the United States. The U.S. Supreme Court delayed a ruling on a major challenge to the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate. The office of the CIA inspector general said it accidentally destroyed its copy of the Senate torture report. Mark Zuckerberg will host a meeting with several prominent conservatives after Facebook was accused of having a political bias. And President Obama awarded 13 police officers with the Public Safety Medal of Valor. Top News Trump vs. the Brits. Donald Trump defended himself against criticism from British Prime Minister David Cameron. During an interview with Piers Morgan, Trump said, “I’m not stupid, OK? I can tell you that right now—just the opposite,” referring to the way Cameron described his proposed Muslim ban. The presumptive GOP nominee also had a warning for London’s newly elected mayor, Sadiq Khan, who recently called Trump ignorant: “I will remember those statements,” Trump said, challenging Kahn to take an IQ test. (Alexander Smith, NBC News)

More Delays on Contraception. The U.S. Supreme Court sent a challenge to the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate back to the lower federal courts to try to reach a compromise. The case, Zubik vs. Burwell, includes challenges from seven religious nonprofits to the law’s contraceptive mandate; the organizations claim that even the government’s procedure for providing religious exemptions would compromise their beliefs. Sending the case back to the lower courts will likely delay the major ruling until after November’s election. (Matt Ford, The Atlantic) The Disappearance of a Torture Report. The CIA’s Office of Inspector General admitted to “mistakenly” destroying its sole copy of the Senate’s Select Committee on Intelligence’s 2014 torture report. The office is the the CIA’s internal watchdog. But other offices have copies of the massive report, which runs to several thousand pages and details years of brutal and illegal practices. (Michael Isikoff, Yahoo News) Facebook Does Damage Control. Mark Zuckerberg will host several conservative leaders at Facebook’s headquarters in California for a meeting on Wednesday, including the radio personality Glenn Beck, the Fox News co-host Dana Perino, and the Trump campaign advisor Barry Bennett. The meeting comes one week after the company was accused of manipulating the site’s Trending Topics section to exclude conservative news. Facebook has denied the allegations. (Shanika Gunaratna, CBS News) Obama Awards Police Officers. The president presented 13 police officers—one posthumously—with the Public Safety Medal of Valor, recognizing them for exceptional courage in protecting citizens. "To a person, each of these honorees acted without regard to their own safety," Obama said. The ceremony came just after Obama signed two bills concerning police and first responders. (Gregory Korte, USA Today) Tomorrow in One Paragraph. Voters head to the polls in Oregon and Kentucky holds its Democratic primary. Bernie Sanders will campaign in California.