UW running back James White evades a tackle by Purdue linebacker Sean Robinson. Credit: Mark Hoffman

Michael Hunt In My Opinion SHARE Video Loading... Player videos Post-game video interviews following Wisconsin's 41-10 win over Purdue. Loading...

Madison — Gary Andersen is as straight-up as a Wisconsin power play, and as soon as his first game as a Big Ten coach had stopped taxing the stat keepers he dealt with the Debacle in the Desert accordingly.

"An interesting week to say the least," he said Saturday after the Badgers had laid a 41-10 beating on Purdue. "We put it to bed, put it to rest. We didn't miss a beat."

So enough of the Arizona State affair, except to mention that perhaps this weekend was "karma" for all you Arkansas-minded re-tweeters out there. But the real issue was the Badgers themselves and how good they might be before venturing into the Horseshoe.

Three hundred eighty-eight yards rushing tells pretty much all you need to know about their tendencies.

Of course, Wisconsin has earned a smash-mouth reputation in the last 20 years, beginning with Brent Moss and Terrell Fletcher, to Ron Dayne and right on up to John Clay, Montee Ball and James White recently. Now it's White, Melvin Gordon and a really good freshman by the name of Corey Clement, a group that has a chance to be as good as any that have put the Tailback before the U.

Andersen believes he has two NFL running backs. It would not be a stretch to project Clement as a pro, either. "Two special kids," said Andersen, who also had two NFL backs at Utah State. "And that third guy jumping out there on the field is not too bad, either."

After three games, there might have been a public outcry to give Gordon, the Kenosha Komet, most of the work. But it looks like Anderson has a nice grip on the situation. Gordon and White each had 16 carries. And if anyone dared dismiss the senior, White showed how good he's always been and will be by putting the moves on a pair of Boilermakers safeties to start a 70-yard touchdown sprint.

And anyway, Andersen says he has nothing to do with the tailback rotation. He leaves that to assistants Andy Ludwig and Thomas Hammock, whom he trusts to have a feel for the hot back. So far, they are doing things the right way with one of the most gifted backfields in the country.

White and Gordon handle the rest themselves.

"Friendly competition," said White.

"Friendly competition," said Gordon. "James is my best friend off the field."

What you've got is a couple of guys who push each other and live to one-up each other. After White's 70-yard score, all Gordon said to his pal was, "I've got to go get me one of those."

The chance for the Badgers to win nine or 10 games this season is enhanced by a typical Wisconsin line — big, smart, complementary and complimentary of their backs.

"It's awesome," said right guard Kyle Costigan of Wind Lake. "They make us look good. Even if you don't do a perfect job, they can break one."

The best thing about Wisconsin's running game is that it isn't a stereotypical Big Ten running game.

"You can't really do the cloud-of-dust thing anymore," Andersen said. "You have to get yards in chunks."

The Badgers assuredly do that.

I'm not sure how far the Badgers can go with an offense that leans so heavily on the run. "We've got to pitch it and catch it better," Andersen said. Dropped balls and Joel Stave's inability to hook up with a wide-open Jared Abbrederis on what would have been an easy score raises early red flags.

The Badgers will be as ready for Ohio State as any team could for the Buckeyes in Columbus, but pounding it on Ohio State is not the same as gouging Purdue. To be a special team, the Badgers are going to have to find more balance.

But one thing is for sure. They will play with an edge.

And one more thing about Arizona State...

"I don't want them to forget," Andersen said of his players. "Did I want them to be mad (against Purdue)? Uh huh. I did. I want them to have a chip on their shoulders.

"I am (mad). Still am. I want to carry that edge throughout the season."

Send email to mhunt@journalsentinel.com