<p>Misty Hart</p>

By Thomas B. Langhorne

The message is front and center in candidate Misty Hart’s yard signs, social media, endorsements, campaign literature, vehicle decals and frequently in her own words.

Hart, who is running for Evansville city clerk in the May 5 Democratic primary election, sells herself as an “Operation Iraqi Enduring Freedom veteran.”

But that doesn’t mean Hart served in Iraq or Afghanistan, the primary theater of Operation Enduring Freedom. It’s not mentioned in her campaign material, but Hart acknowledged last week that she never left Indiana during a nearly four-month stint supporting overseas-bound military police and medical personnel of the Indiana Air National Guard’s 181st Fighter Wing. She was a member of the 181st, a reserve component of the Air Force.

From February until June 2003, Hart said, she worked from the unit’s base in Terre Haute, Ind., “to help them get their equipment, help them get their gear together, help in any way, shape or form.”

And that’s where she gets into trouble with C. Larry Rhodes, a Newburgh, Ind., resident who said he saw combat in the Vietnam War as an airborne ranger in the Indiana Army National Guard.

Rhodes said he appreciated the service of military personnel who supported U.S. soldiers in Vietnam from stateside posts and they are unquestionably veterans — but if one of them called himself a “Vietnam War veteran,” there would be a problem.

“Number one, they weren’t subjected to enemy fire. They did not have to suffer through the environment, the heat, the bad living conditions, the hostile population at times, the separation of family being deployed at 10,000 miles away versus maybe being in the United States,” Rhodes said.

Rhodes, a military support activist who works with local veterans, spent two weeks in Iraq in 2006 producing a television documentary about Evansville-area soldiers there. He said there is tremendous sensitivity among veterans who served overseas about claims of war veteran status by those who served stateside.

“She never set foot on foreign soil,” Rhodes said of Hart.

Hart declined to make available her DD Form 214, a U.S. Defense Department-issued document that verifies veterans’ duty assignments. Hart said her DD214 contains too much personal information, including her Social Security number. The Vanderburgh County Recorder’s Office, where the document is on file, declined to release it on the grounds that it is not a public record. Many veterans and records repositories argue that the Privacy Act of 1974 limits access to a veteran’s DD214 to the veteran himself or his legal guardian.

Debate

Hart’s campaign did say in a January news release announcing her candidacy that she worked “for support of Operation Iraqi Enduring Freedom,” but it did not indicate whether she was overseas. Last week, she drew a distinction about her service, which she said ended with an honorable discharge as a staff sergeant in 2006.

“I’ve never said I was a combat veteran. A combat veteran is completely different. A combat veteran is the one that’s actually on the front line, going overseas,” she said. “A veteran’s a veteran, no matter if you’re combat or if you’re stateside in support. We’re all on the same mission.”

Don Montgomery, an Evansville resident who said he served as a vehicle driver for convoy operations in Iraq in 2005 and 2006, does not agree.

Montgomery, who served with the Indiana Army National Guard’s 163rd Field Artillery, said it is misleading for reserve soldiers who played stateside support roles to claim the status of war veteran.

“Being stateside, I don’t believe ‘Iraqi/Enduring Freedom veteran’ terminology is correct,” he said. “Hearing the phrase, ‘Iraqi or Enduring Freedom veteran,’ automatically assumes that they were deployed overseas.”

Hart, a 32-year-old West Side resident, is the daughter of City Councilman Al Lindsey and a deputy in the Vanderburgh County Treasurer’s Office. A photograph of her wearing her Indiana Air National Guard uniform appears prominently in her campaign literature. Her signs proclaim, “Let’s not forget ... Let’s elect a vet!”

Hart’s opponent in next month’s Democratic primary, incumbent Clerk Laura Brown Windhorst, claims no military service. Windhorst declined to comment on Hart.

There is some support for Hart’s view in the military community.

Lucas Worthington, an Evansville resident who was part of a 163rd security force training Iraqi police, said military service is military service regardless of deployment.

“Regardless of in what capacity anybody serves the military in, I strongly believe that whether they go to Iraq, they go to Guantánamo Bay, they go to guard the border — it doesn’t matter to me,” Worthington said. “Ninety-eight percent of the population don’t make that decision (to serve). I don’t base anybody’s military service or career on what they accomplished in the military or whether they deployed or not. They still had the guts and the courage to just raise their right hand and say, ‘I’m willing to’ — so to me it doesn’t matter what (Hart) claims she did or claims she didn’t do.”

Master Sgt. Darin Hubble, Fort Wayne-based spokesman for the Indiana Air National Guard, said any service member who supports a war effort is a veteran of that war.

“We’re in a very wired world these days, and much of the horsepower of the Air National Guard is brain power, not necessarily dropping thousand-pound bombs,” Hubble said. “It comes down to precision type of exercise of engineering and computer support — everything that they can think of that makes it possible, people somewhere are doing and not all those things have to be done from a very sandy location.”

At times Hart has claimed to be a veteran of the Air Force. Hubble said those claims are legitimate.

“Just like someone who’s in the Army National Guard is part of the Army, someone who’s part of the Air National Guard is part of the Air Force,” he said.

‘M. Hart’

On a separate front, Hart is accused by political opponents of trying to perpetrate a deception on voters — a charge she denies.

At her own request, her name will appear on next month’s Democratic primary ballot as “M. Hart” -- a designation that state election law allows.

But Windhorst’s supporters call it an obvious ploy to deceive primary voters into thinking they are voting for longtime Pigeon Township Trustee Mary Hart, vice chairman of the Vanderburgh County Democratic Party and Misty Hart’s campaign chairman.

“It’s just one more of the silly games that they play,” said Coroner Annie Groves, a Windhorst supporter whose mother, Mary Ann Eickhoff, is on Pigeon Township’s advisory board.

In her news release, Misty Hart called Mary Hart a “Democrat party icon” and a lifelong friend. The two women are not related.

Misty Hart said she asked to appear on the ballot as “M. Hart” because her campaign committee advised her to do it. She said she didn’t ask why.

“I went and took the advice of people that are older than me that know more about this stuff than I do, and we’ll see where it takes us,” she said.

Asked whether she inquired why she would want to present herself to voters as M. Hart, Hart said she has faith in her campaign committee.

“I don’t really question stuff that’s not a big deal to me. As long as my last name’s on that ballot, that’s the only thing I really care about, is that people vote for it, so either way,” she said.

Hart rejected the idea that voters casting ballots for “M. Hart” may think they are voting for Mary Hart.

“I could have put, ‘Misty Hart,’ and they still would have voted for me, knowing it wasn’t Mary Hart,” she said.

Mary Hart said the “M. Hart” designation was indeed strategic — but not as a ruse to make primary voters think they are voting for her and not Misty Hart.

“It’s so she’s at the top of the ballot,” Mary Hart said, noting that Misty Hart’s name will appear above Windhorst’s that way.

“As her campaign chairman, I’m going to do what’s best for her,” Mary Hart said.

But County Clerk Debbie Stucki, the county’s chief elections officer, was baffled by that explanation. Misty Hart’s name would appear above Windhorst’s anyway, Stucki said, because her last name comes before Windhorst’s in the alphabet.