For six legislative sessions, state Sen. Linda Newell has been a champion for those in need. She sponsored, co-sponsored or supported bills that deal with human trafficking, transitional housing for those with traumatic brain injury and establishing the Suicide Prevention Commission.

State Rep. Steve Lebsock, meanwhile, devoted countless hours to the 2014 Pet Animal Care and Facilities Act, shepherding it from sunset review through the legislative process by helping state agencies and stakeholders reach agreement on acrimonius issues regarding animal welfare.

For their efforts, Newell and Lebsock were named Legislators of the Year by the Colorado Nonprofit Association and were honored at a luncheon that brought Gov. John Hickenlooper and 680 community leaders to the Marriott City Center.

Melanie Snyder, chief of staff for state Attorney General Cynthia Coffman, and Suzanne Staiert, Colorado’s deputy secretary of state, presented Newell and Lebsock with their awards.

In his welcoming remarks, Colorado Nonprofit Association president Renny Fagan joined board chairman Kevin Seggelke in congratulating organizations for “representing the spirit of optimism” that carries Coloradans through tough times. They also encouraged those in the audience to keep the spirit of volunteerism alive.

State Treasurer Walker Stapleton presented the Nonprofit Impact Award to Rep. Brian DelGrosso, whose accomplishments include sponsoring HB 11-1014, which restored the Child Care contribution Tax Credit, and SB 13-029, which created a tax check-off for the state’s Habitat for Humanity chapters.

Boettcher Foundation vice present Katie Kramer introduced Jeannine Truswell, president and chief executive officer of United Way of Weld County and recipient of the Steve Graham Award for Building Nonprofit Capacity. Kramer also presented the William Funk Award for Building Stronger Communities to Mary Hoffman, founder of the Adams State University Community Partnerships, and Julissa Molina Soto, an executive working with the American Diabetes Association to ensure that Colorado’s Latino population is educated about a disease that can be fatal if not managed or treated properly.

David Miller, president of The Denver Foundation, presented Excellence in Media awards to KKTV 11 News in Colorado Springs and KDEN Telemundo Denver. Accepting were general managers Nick Matesi and Andres Chaparro, respectively.

Joanne Davidson: 303-809-1314, jdavidson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joannedavidson