Mannie Colon and Lisa Hyams dress for the occasion Saturday during the Cajun Crawl sponsored by the Fremont Community Foundation at the Quality Inn. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

» Peggy Brown and Lois Kaplan dress for the occasion Saturday during the Cajun Crawl sponsored by the Fremont Community Foundation at the Quality Inn. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

They're probably the best party planners in Fremont County.

The 11-member, all-volunteer board of the Fremont Community Foundation knows how to have a good time, and they work tirelessly to raise money for a number of good causes while they're at it. In fact, the yearlong work they do to plan and facilitate events is done in their "spare" time, outside of their own full-time jobs.

Since 1999, and known formerly as the Belvedere Community Foundation, FCF has raised about $180,000 and given it right back to local community non-profit groups.

Saturday's fourth annual Cajun Crawl, Mardi Gras celebration was the first to sell out two weeks before the event. About 180 participants enjoyed cajun food, live music and a silent auction at the Quality Inn.

"This is a great event," said Dan Brown, president. "This is our biggest, small event. Less than 200 people come to this; some of our other events draw thousands of people. This is one of the most fun events."

Brown said he appreciates the sponsors who help make it possible to continue hosting such events.

"If we weren't doing this, we'd be doing something else," he said. "We do it because we can't help it, and we want to give back to our community."

Board member Pam Marietta said fundraisers are held throughout the year to support non-profits.

"Last year we gave away $19,967," she said. "All our profits are given away, we don't keep anything."

Advertisement

The board meets annually in October to plan the next year's events and review applications of organizations requesting funds. The board has "hundreds" of volunteers who help organize and staff the events, Marietta said.

The FCF has dates set for the 2014 events: Flashback on Main Street, May 16; seventh-annual Holy Smoke BBQ Showdown, which will be held at Veterans Park, May 30 - 31; Royal Gorge Whitewater Festival, June 20 - 21; and the John Wells Memorial Bike and Poker Run, Sept. 7.

Marc Black and Sheryl and Lobo Loggins perform Saturday during the Cajun Crawl sponsored by the Fremont Community Foundation at the Quality Inn. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Sometimes other events are thrown into the mix, such as last year's Ride the Rockies event that raised more than $6,000 to give to local firefighters and first responders.

Board treasurer John Marietta said the group came into existence after the local United Way left Fremont County in 1999.

"Our group wanted money raised at events to go back to the charities in Fremont County," he said.

In 2013, the FCF awarded funds to 18 local organizations, including Penrose Senior Center, VFW-Penrose, Cañon City Pregnancy Center, Cañon City High School Senior Fun Fest, Colorado Mounted Rangers and Fremont County Search & Rescue.

On Saturday, the group presented $700 to the Fremont County Department of Human Services and $500 to the Boys & Girls Club of Fremont County.

John said the FCF also conducts Operation Grinch each year, which is when they bring gifts and food items to local families in need who may not qualify for the DHS holiday program.

Also on Saturday. Billy Bergin was awarded an official Fremont Community Foundation sweatshirt for being recognized as the Volunteer of the Year.

For more information on FCF, or to learn about donating time or money, visit http://fremontcommunityfoundation.org/" title="fremontcommunityfoundation.org">http://fremontcommunityfoundation.org.