ENLARGE

The Festival

Fleshdance

The 17th annual World Bodypainting Festival kicks off in Pörtschach, Austria, celebrating living, breathing art. This world championship for bodypainters features artists from over 40 countries, more than 50 workshops and demonstrations, fireworks, music, awards for best facepainting and special effects, and loads of body paint. June 29-July 4; bodypainting-festival.com EH

ENLARGE

The Celebration

Shalom Krakow

Poland's Jewish history is a long and tangled one, so Krakow's Jewish Culture Festival is a blast of positive energy, focusing onJewish cultural contributions over the centuries to Poland and beyond. The festival, started back in 1988, takes over a chunk of the city with events such as art projects, photography workshops for kids and an all-night jam session featuring musicians including New York-based Frank London and Israel's Liron Amram. June 27-July 6; jewishfestival.com GB

ENLARGE

The Hotel

Cycle friendly

When 17-time Tour de France competitor George Hincapie retired from professional cycling in 2012, he didn't take a vacation from riding. He instead opened a vacation destination for cycling enthusiasts in South Carolina's Blue Ridge Mountains. Celebrating its first anniversary, Hotel Domestique is so named because Mr. Hincapie, left, is arguably cycling's most famous "domestique" or helper, having been an essential support rider to Tour de France teams.The hotel caters to both cycling novices and hard-core riders. Mr. Hincapie offers four-day packages, where he leads guests through various training programs. hoteldomestique.com JM

ENLARGE Snarling tiger, attributed to Matsushita Otoman, HG.700 British Museum/Professor John and Mrs Anne Hull Grundy

The Book

Carved beauties

Few objets d'art combine functionality with intricate craftsmanship as beautifully as netsuke, the toggles worn by Japanese men of the Edo period to secure small bags or boxes to the obi, or sash, of their kimonos. The astonishing skill of the carving and workmanship has made them highly prized by collectors. The British Museum, which holds more than 2,300 netsuke in its collection, has just published a guide to 100 of the finest of these miniature masterpieces by Noriko Tsuchiya, a curator who specializes in Japanese decorative arts. £14.99; britishmuseumshoponline.org AM

The List

Setting a high bar

GONG at Shangri-La in London Named after the interlocking wooden brackets used in traditional architecture in China, GONG features a cocktail bar, champagne bar and an infinity pool. Opens July 1. the-shard.com/shangri-la/gong

The Dome in Bangkok Located at the top of lebua at State Tower hotel, it offers pricey food but entertaining views over the city. It's the world's highest open-air bar at 442 meters. lebua.com/the-dome

At.mosphere in Dubai This funky and stylish bar is on the 122nd floor of one of the tallest buildings in the world. atmosphereburjkhalifa.com

360 Restaurant in Toronto Don't worry. This revolving restaurant goes slow enough so you can appreciate the food and the view. cntower.ca JE

ENLARGE

The Show

Storied performance

British writer Danny Braverman inherited a shoebox from his great-uncle. In it was an unexpected treasure: thousands of his uncle's drawings on the back of his wage packets, documenting key bits of 20th-century history he witnessed, including the Blitz. At London's Battersea Arts Centre, he will be presenting "Wot? No Fish," narrating the discovery of the shoebox. July 1-19; bac.org.uk JE

—with contributions from Ginanne Brownell, Javier Espinoza, Emma Hurt, Andrew McKie and Jen Murphy. Email BigSmallTalk@wsj.com