El Paso First Health Plans, the only local full-service, managed care organization and health plan administrator in El Paso, recently achieved a perfect score in its first bid for national accreditation.

A non-profit subsidiary of University Medical Center and the El Paso County Hospital District, El Paso First began operations in 1999 as a third-party administrator, a line of business it continues as Preferred Administrators.

That means it is the group health-care provider for its own employees and those of UMC and El Paso Children’s Hospital.

“We probably offer the lowest premiums in town,” said Frank Dominguez, El Paso First’s president and CEO since 2013.

Today, El Paso First has 92,000 customers and is the No. 1 medical administrator in the El Paso market for Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program, or CHIP, with 71,000 participants, Dominguez said.

“We also rank No. 1 in the state in many of the preventative services and well-child visits for Medicaid,” he said.

El Paso First also administers a unique network through UMC for mostly adult medical indigents who are ineligible for Medicaid but tend to be heavy users of the county hospital’s expensive emergency room services.

“We treat them like the Medicaid population where they get a benefit card and a schedule of covered services, but it’s not a health insurance plan,” Dominguez said.

The plan’s 14,000 members don’t pay premiums but are charged co-payments and have deductibles for doctor visits and other medical services.

The program is meant to encourage members to take advantage of preventative care services, visit their doctor when necessary and to keep them from making unnecessary visits to the emergency room.

“We believe preventative care is the key to reducing health care costs,” Dominguez said.

Two other Texas counties are in the process of starting similar programs, but El Paso County is the first and only community that has one up and running, he said.

El Past First received notice April 1 of its accreditation by URAC, formerly known as the Utilization Review Accreditation Commission.

URAC is the only agency in the country that accredits health care organizations, administrators, health plans, health call centers and health websites.

While the March inspection of El Paso First’s operation only took two days, Dominguez said, the preparations took about two years and were expensive.

“Accreditation means customers will receive due process,” he said. “There will be transparency in the services we provide through the health network or in dealing with health plans directly, and there will be an appeal process if they have a complaint.”

It also means El Paso First must adhere to established standards for health care and customer service.

Dominguez said El Paso First had to seek accreditation because the federal Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare, requires it.

But being accredited now opens the door to participation in the national health exchanges.

“Accreditation would allow us to be a health-plan carrier for network accessibility, allowing individuals to come in,” Dominguez said.

Venturing into the Obamacare exchange market would require approval of El Paso First’s board and a name change.

“We decided to choose a name while we’re looking into the pros and cons of it,” Dominguez said. “We’re even having a contest for the best new name.”

Dominguez conceded that the initial market would be limited because El Paso First only has agreements and negotiated rates with providers in El Paso and Hudspeth counties.

But, he said, it would be possible to buy into another health plan’s provider network.

Email El Paso Inc. reporter David Crowder at dcrowder@elpasoinc.com or call (915) 534-4422, ext. 122 and (915) 630-6622.