Health officials in Glenn County said that three residents have been identified as having the West Nile Virus.

According to the Glenn County Health and Human Services, these are the first cases in Glenn County in 2015. The cases are all adults and range in age from late twenties to seventies.

Health officials said cases are not located in a specific city, but lie in the valley at multiple points along the Interstate 5 corridor within the county.

They explained all three people were symptomatic. Two were hospitalized for treatment and both those patients have been released from the hospital and are recovering at home.

Health officials added that one person is experiencing severe illness, which they said may be the neuroinvasive form of the disease.

Officials said last week Glenn County Mosquito and Vector Control District reported 35 percent of the mosquitoes trapped and tested were positive for West Nile Virus. This is the highest percentage the District has seen in recent years, they added.

Although mild for most, this disease can become very serious and even fatal for some that become ill, health officials said. Approximately 20 percent of people who are infected with the West Nile Virus will develop mild symptoms that may include fever, headaches, body aches, joint pain, vomiting, diarrhea or rash.

Less than one percent of infected people will develop serious illness such as encephalitis or meningitis (inflammation of the brain and surrounding tissues).

Health officials said the public can utilize the 5 “D”s as an easy way to remember how to prevent mosquito bites. Use DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus or IR3535 to repel mosquitoes to prevent bites; avoid going outdoors at dawn and dusk when the mosquitoes that carry WNV are most active; ensure screens on doors and windows are not broken or torn; drain all standing water around the outside of your house – gutters, jar lids, tires, and flower pot trays are common places where water collects; and call the District Office of the Glenn County Mosquito and Vector Control to report a mosquito problem, a dead bird or a neglected swimming pool.

Additional information on the West Nile virus and activity around the state by county can be found on the State of California West Nile virus webpage.