This Tuesday night, The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon marked a special occasion, the first year anniversary of when Fallon took over the reins. The show was an evening of fun and music, with Fallon’s guests, the lovely and mega-selling musical artist, Taylor Swift, and HBO talk show host and comedian, John Oliver. The musical guest on the Tonight Show was one of the hottest bands around, Imagine Dragons. Also, later in the episode, Taylor Swift and Jimmy Fallon were in a skit together, called Jumbotron Dancers.

Jimmy Fallon welcomed the studio audience, who gave him a standing ovation. He said “You’re at a hot show right now!” He then joked about topics ripped from today’s headlines in his monologue, such as the North Eastern states experiencing their roughest winter in decades. He said that “Schools and Federal offices were shut down after receiving four inches of snow — or, as Boston residents put it, are you kidding me?”

Fallon said that “Michelle Obama has banned boxed macaroni and cheese from the White House — which was tough on Joe Biden, as then he couldn’t make his wife any jewelry for Valentine’s Day.” He urged Hillary Clinton to pick Biden as her running mate, so that Biden could still be the butt of his jokes.

Then, Jimmy Fallon joked about UFOs, aliens, and the possibility that Rick Scott was an alien. He also said that George Washington might have been the first president to have smoked weed, to help him deal with the pain of his false teeth. He called Washington the “Lil Wayne” of presidents.

The Tonight Show house band, The Roots, played him to his desk, and Jimmy Fallon said it was the show’s one year anniversary. He thanked the staff and crew and everybody who watched the show. Tomorrow, Kevin Bacon and Martin Short will be on. Tonight, Fallon announced that Taylor Swift will be on, and “she will be showing off her dancing skills.”

Then, he took a look at the Pros & Cons of Watching the Academy Awards. “Pro: The awards celebrate the most artistic and thought-provoking movies of the year. Con: In other words, movies you haven’t seen. Pro: Whiplash was nominated for Best Picture. Con: Fifty Shades of Grey was nominated in the category of Best Whiplash. Pro: Robert Duvall was nominated for his role in The Judge. Con: Judge Ruth Ginsberg was nominated for her role in The Hangover.”

Once again, Jimmy Fallon mentioned that the show was celebrating its one year anniversary. He said that there used to be a Ben & Jerry flavor named after the Late Show when he hosted it, called Late Night Snack. He said he will unveil a new Tonight Show Ben & Jerry ice cream, and the actual Ben & Jerry behind the brand were on the show. Fallon said about the new ice cream that “Our ice cream is made with all Fair Trade ingredients.” All Ben & Jerry ice cream is now made that way, Ben and Jerry said.

The name of the new ice cream was The Tonight Dough. It had peanut butter cookie dough and chocolate chip cookie dough in it, caramel, and other yummy ingredients. Jimmy Fallon gave everybody in the audience containers of the new ice cream, and said that Taylor Swift will be the first guest after a commercial break.

Back from the break, Jimmy Fallon held up the latest issue of Vogue, which has Taylor Swift’s picture on the cover, along with Carly Rae Jepsen. He said her album 1989 has sold over 6 million copies. When Swift came onstage, she hugged Fallon. Then, she wished him happy anniversary, and they talked about the SNL After Party. Taylor Swift and Paul McCartney played I Saw Her Standing There. Then, Taylor Swift and Paul McCartney both sang Swift’s huge hit, Shake it Off. McCartney knew how to play it on his guitar, of course.

Taylor Swift is the first artist, ever, to have three consecutive albums that have sold over a million copies each. Fallon said that now they were both “on the list of Beatles.” Swift said her record label asked her if she would consider having both country albums and pop albums out. She said she was going to stick with pop songs, comparing it to “chasing two rabbits at once — if you try to do that, you will end up losing both of them.”

They then tried to draw pictures of each other without looking down at the paper. Swift drew a heart, also, so that “No matter how badly it looked, the heart would allow me to redeem myself.”

Jimmy Fallon asked if she would be in a skit with him. After another commercial break, they were in a skit called Jumbotron Dancers.

Fallon said “I was a little upset seeing you dancing at the Grammys.” They talked back and forth, saying that they used to dance just with each other, in Jumbotron footage. Then, Fallon played a clip showcasing both of them dancing together. It was extremely cool! They even did the dance from the movie, Flash Dance, to the song, Maniac.

John Oliver was the second guest on the Tonight Show. He has dealt with quite a few controversial topics already on his HBO talk show, Last Week Tonight, and last Sunday, he took on big tobacco companies, like Philip Morris International, and their instigating lawsuits against countries like Australia to do away with “plain packaging” laws.

John Oliver wished Fallon a happy anniversary, and he said on Sunday, he kind of felt that nobody was watching him, as the SNL 40th Anniversary Special was airing. Fallon asked him about if he had been born in England, and if Oliver liked American comedy. Oliver said he was born in England, and he loved listening to American comedy albums, like those of Richard Pryor. He memorized some of the routines, and did a couple of lines from Pryor’s “Why do black people never get bitten by snakes?” routine.

Jimmy Fallon then wished John Oliver “Congratulations,” because HBO picked up Oliver’s show for two more seasons. John Oliver said that he “owed Jon Stewart everything — literally, everything.” Fallon asked him who could possibly replace Stewart, and at first, Oliver said a “hologram Jon Stewart.” Then, he suggested a combination of himself and Tupac, with his torso and the bottom half of his body being Tupac’s.

After another commercial break, Jimmy Fallon introduced the musical guests of the show, Imagine Dragons. The group performed the song Shots from their latest album Smoke + Mirrors. It sounded AMAZING, and it will likely be a big hit for Imagine Dragons. The electric guitarist and bassist did a fantastic job, and Jimmy Fallon said the album is available in stores right now.

The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon celebrated the show’s one year anniversary tonight, in a big way, with Fallon’s very cool guests, Taylor Swift and John Oliver. Taylor and Fallon were even in a skit together, called Jumbotron Dancers. Then, to top off the night, Imagine Dragons, who are currently on tour, blasted the roof off of 30 Rock with the song, Shots.

Written By Douglas Cobb

Sources:

NBC Universal Media Village

Imagine Dragons Tour Site

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr