Other October events Itinerant black bears raid garbage cans and climb trees to nap. Western rattlesnakes converge on communal hibernating sites in rocky hillsides and prairie dog colonies. Marmots, ground squirrels, and meadow jumping mice enter hibernation. Elk bulls bugle to attract harems of does. Bottle gentians, gumweed, and asters bloom in the foothills.

Autumn in Colorado: You probably picture golden aspens and cottonwoods.

Few people extol the lowly hackberry with dull yellowish leaves. But this widely ignored shrub that is halfway to being a tree is worth a close examination.

Hackberries host a plethora of fascinating bugs that, in turn, attract a multitude of birds. Entomologist David Leatherman says two of the most common hackberry insect galls in Colorado are nipplegalls (bumps on the underside of leaves) and blistergalls (dark greenish or purplish blotches). Both may occur on the same leaf.

Psyllid nymphs developing in these galls are relished by squirrels, chickadees, house finches, kinglets, nuthatches, creepers, evening grosbeaks and more. Adults emerge from the galls in September and October, just in time for fall migrating warblers.

Leatherman has seen more than 30 species of passerine birds including such rarities as Blackburnian, Cape May and bay-breasted warblers gobbling up hackberry psyllids.

Advertisement

Later, the tiny insects resembling cicadas search for crevices in the bark of either hackberries or nearby trees to overwinter and are snapped up by various insectivorous birds. Although most of Leatherman's observations were on planted northern hackberries (Celtis occidentalis), he thinks similar activity is likely on our native netleaf hackberries (C. reticulata) that range from 4,000 to 7,300 feet,

Netleaf hackberries also provide shelter for the hackberry emperor butterfly, which lays its eggs only on hackberries. Although you may not see them, yellow-green caterpillars of this orange-winged butterfly are probably overwintering now snuggled together inside rolled-up hackberry leaves. August is the best time to see the adult butterflies.

Although Pliny called hackberry "the lotus with sweet berries," the fruit is actually a drupe (fleshy fruit with a single seed), not a berry. Humans have eaten fruits from various hackberry species for hundreds of thousands of years, as evidenced by charred seeds found in caves at the Peking Man Site in China.

The Osage, Chiricahua, Navajo, Apache and other Native Americans ate hackberries either fresh or made into cakes that could be stored for winter. The Comanche mixed fat into the pulp and rolled it into balls, which they roasted.

As Halloween approaches, children might enjoy finding "witches brooms," the deformed bushy growths often found on hackberries. Viruses, fungi and mites are thought to introduce micro-organisms into the branches, resulting in dense tangles of twigs that resemble mistletoe but are, apparently, harmless to the tree.

In the American Forestry Association's list of big trees, the champion netleaf hackberry, located in Catron, N.M., is 69 feet tall with a crown spread of 75 feet.

In Boulder County, our netleaf hackberries — in the same family as stately elms — tend to grow stunted and misshapen.

Although they are non-natives, northern or eastern hackberries, taller than the netleaf, are often planted in Colorado urban areas and have been suggested as a hardy replacement for the green ashes attacked by the emerald ash borer.

Look for netleaf hackberries and the creatures associated with them in arroyos and on rocky hillsides at the south end of the Mesa Trail and near the Mount Sanitas Trailhead.

Ruth Carol Cushman and Stephen Jones are authors of "Wild Boulder County" and "The North American Prairie."