“We never stop investing in innovation at RHJN,” Dr. King said. “And Babyscripts is the first of many innovative experiences that we want to give to patients to empower them during their pregnancy.”

Babyscripts has begun delivering its pregnancy app to Reiter, Hill, Johnson & Nevin (RHJN), one of the largest OBGYN private practices in the DC area, continuing RHJN’s investment in healthcare innovation.

Babyscripts is a pregnancy app which can only be obtained by prescription. It is intended to ex-tend prenatal care beyond the four walls of the clinic by delivering evidence-based, OB-approved guidelines in the form of daily nutritional, medical and lifestyle action items.

With Babyscripts, patients receive the additional benefit of increased quality of care using connected health devices. A wireless weight scale and blood pressure cuff are packaged as part of Babyscripts “mommy kit” and are delivered to each patient following her confirmation of her pregnancy visit. Regular home use of these devices can help identify a patient’s trend lines for weight gain and blood pressure as compared to evidence-based normal healthy ranges.

For physicians, Babyscripts helps to better educate their patients on pregnancy guidelines. And by identifying patient trends, it offers providers the ability to give quick feedback, potentially optimizing a patient’s visit schedule. These benefits reduce costs and help physicians comply with the Affordable Care Act.

“With our agreement with RHJN, Babyscripts is one step closer to proving that the Internet of Things and connective technology can revolutionize healthcare,” said Juan Pablo Segura, Babyscripts co-founder and president. “To gain the interest of such a leading-edge organization has great implications for the future of Babyscripts as the go-to solution for doctors and patients to achieve better pregnancies.”

Where too many healthcare solutions focus on either just the patient or the provider, Babyscripts is notable for its inclusion of both, in the greater healthcare equation.

“There’s a huge movement in healthcare to use wearable technology and apps to improve health and fitness, with Fitbit® and other devices,” Segura said. “But there are very few technologies that engage the doctor and patient directly. We’re creating new approaches to pro-mote wellness and manage patient care beyond the traditional clinical setting.”

Dr. Matthew King, a practicing OBGYN at RHJN, is focused on the future of medicine and how Babyscripts can help his practice better deliver OB care.

“We never stop investing in innovation at RHJN,” Dr. King said. “And Babyscripts is the first of many innovative experiences that we want to give to patients to empower them during their pregnancy.”

Since its founding last year, Babyscripts has received increasing recognition. Recently, Babyscripts won the 1776 regional Challenge Cup competition, a global startup competition that took place in 16 cities across 11 countries to identify the most promising startups solving the biggest challenges in education, energy, health and cities. This victory puts Babyscripts in the Global Finals.

Babyscripts is also a member of the Startup Health Academy and partner of GE’s Healthymagination Fund. In addition to on-boarding RHJN, it is involved in an ongoing pilot with George Washington University Hospital, which includes over 100 patients, and continues its expansion with additional academic medical centers, like Medstar Health and Duke Medicine.

About BabyScripts

Babyscripts delivers patients and providers the only clinical mobile solution for a better pregnancy. Connected devices delivered to a patient’s home watch patient weight and blood pressure trends, while a user-friendly mobile application helps providers administer medical, nutritional and lifestyle guidelines to their patients. The intelligent connectivity between the wireless devices and mobile app improves the quality of care and increases administrative efficiency. It also creates better-informed and more satisfied patients. For more information, visit http://www.getbabyscripts.com.

About RHJN

Reiter, Hill, Johnson & Nevin is a comprehensive obstetrics and gynecology practice with 17 physicians, five nurse practitioners, two midwives, one physician assistant, a team of sonographers, a large support staff, and the most-up-to-date equipment. For over 30 years, they have helped women in the Washington, DC metropolitan area deliver healthy babies and live healthier lives. For more information, visit http://www.rhjn-obgyn.com.