The horrific Paris terror attacks that were carried out by ISIS last night could have been much worse if one of their bombers was able to get inside the soccer stadium. France and Germany were playing an exhibition match at the Stade de France. A man was stopped by security upon discovery that he had an explosive vest. The intent was to detonate inside the stadium to provoke a mass stampede, according to the Wall Street Journal:

The guard—who asked to be identified only by his first name, Zouheir—said the attacker was discovered wearing an explosives vest when he was frisked at the entrance to the stadium about 15 minutes into the game. France was playing an exhibition against Germany inside. While attempting to back away from security, Zouheir said, the attacker detonated the vest. Zouheir, who was stationed by the players’ tunnel, said he was briefed on the sequence by the security frisking team at the gate. A police officer confirmed the sequence, adding that police suspect the attacker aimed to detonate his vest inside the stadium in order to provoke a deadly stampede. Around three minutes later, a second person also blew himself up outside the stadium. A third suicide attacker detonated explosives at a nearby McDonald’s, police said. One civilian died in the attacks, police said. The account sheds light on why the suicide attacks on Stade de France failed to cause the carnage that occurred at the Bataclan concert hall and restaurants across Paris.

Terrorists murdered more than 120 people last night. It’s been described as the worst terror attack to ever occur in Paris, and the deadliest since the 2004 Madrid train bombings. Katie wrote earlier this morning that ISIS claimed responsibility, and that a Syrian passport was found on the body of one of the suicide bombers, according to the Associated Press. An American student studying abroad from California State Long Beach was also identified as one of those killed during the attack.

Eight extremists dead following deadly #ParisAttacks – as many as 120 Parisians dead: https://t.co/k7NGIOWro9 pic.twitter.com/Z56qt6tg9Q — AP Interactive (@AP_Interactive) November 14, 2015

Terrorists struck six locations. The Bataclan Concert Hall being the bloodiest site, where 100 people were taken hostage while attending a rock concert. It was a scene of pure horror. It was originally reported that over 100 were killed, as the terrorists inside detonated their explosive belts. It was later revised down to 87, though still a horrible death toll. The gunmen inside reportedly shouted “Allah Akbar” before firing on the crowd, according to the Guardian. France has placed extreme restrictions regarding border security and enforcement. A state of emergency was declared, military units were deployed, and a curfew was imposed for the first time since 1944.

Nevertheless, this security guard at the Stade de France certainly saved lives last night.