Buy Photo Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum in the Des Moines Register Studio on Tuesday, December 08, 2015 in Des Moines. (Photo: Brian Powers/The Register)Buy Photo

If Iowans want a candidate who has a history of standing up for the working man, of working around and against the “establishment” to secure real achievements, of real success in opposing amnesty and weak borders, and of productive leadership against America’s most dangerous enemies, they should avoid Donald Trump like the plague and instead ratify their wisdom from four years ago: Rick Santorum is the only candidate who legitimately fills that bill.

First, why not Trump?

The bumptious billionaire inheritor has jetted into Iowa’s caucuses like the flim-flam "Music Man" into the fictionalized version of Mason City, having as little real familiarity with conservatism or constitutional government as the character Harold Hill had with sheet music or how to blow a trombone.

But at least the famously blithe character created by Iowa playwright Meredith Wilson had the human grace to be redeemable by a lovely local woman; Trump, with his vengeful persona, is more like that other famous man who brought music specifically to youngsters: the Pied Piper of Hamelin, who led all the town’s children to a horrid doom.

Trump is a man with a long record of trampling the “Ordinary Joe” underfoot: His four corporate bankruptcies, the result of wildly extravagant and unwise sweetheart deals gone awry, left literally thousands of small vendors, contractors and workers with as little as pennies on the dollar while his “punishment” (in one case), poor guy, was a court-ordered personal living allowance of $450,000 per month; his strong-arming of a local government came within a whisker of forcing a widow and an Italian family restaurant off their land so he could build another parking lane for limousines; and his bogus “Trump University” promised students his own personal attention that he never came close to providing, while bilking them of thousands of dollars for near-worthless instruction in borderline-unethical tactics.

Trump has a long record of calling for lenient treatment of illegal aliens, a long-expressed admiration not just for Hillary Clinton but for the job she did as secretary of state, and a long-expressed contempt for traditional values marked by a personal life nearly as tawdry as that of Hillary’s husband.

Santorum, on the other hand, actually has accomplished significant victories for the American people (Trump’s intermittent victories almost have always served himself, not others) in the rough-and-tumble world of national politics. He remained a steadfast conservative even while getting thrice re-elected from a liberal-leaning state.

It was Santorum who led the way in exposing Democratic congressional corruption in the early 1990s, setting the stage for the Gingrich revolution. It was Santorum who carried the fight to replace welfare with work, overcoming two Clinton vetoes to end the biggest program of pure dole in American government. And long before Trump decided to pose as the working man’s champion (despite Trump’s record of being the target of workers’ lawsuits for maltreatment), it was Santorum who insisted that Republican economic policies must serve workers as well as investors, families as well as corporations.

Trump intermittently talks tough against America’s enemies (when he isn’t praising them, as he has consistently praised Vladimir Putin and even supported the Chinese government’s slaughter of innocents in Tiananmen Square), but it was Santorum who successfully pressured a slow-acting Congress and a reluctant President George W. Bush into putting sanctions on Iran while supporting its pro-free-world dissidents.

And while Trump has changed his position on almost every issue as it suits his momentary needs, Santorum has remained remarkably consistent in principles and actions through 25 years of public life, always as an underdog who nonetheless doggedly gets results.

I’ve also seen Santorum on a more personal level, when I as a journalist covered a small delegation he led to Israel — and I saw that the man’s bedrock decency is palpable, his faith deep, his energy unflagging, and his consideration for fellow pilgrims profound.

Donald Trump is the man who loudly promises 76 trombones to lead a big parade; Rick Santorum is the man who actually plays the music — without great fanfare, but with all the right high notes.

Quin Hillyer is a contributing editor of National Review Online and a senior editor of The American Spectator.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1WQuikV