Photo

WASHINGTON — The growth of federal spending on health care will continue to decline as a proportion of the overall economy in the coming decades, in part because of cost controls mandated by President Obama’s health care law, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said on Tuesday.

The budget office said in its annual 25-year forecast that federal spending on major health care programs would amount to 8 percent of gross domestic product by 2039, one-tenth of a percentage point lower than its previous projection.

With the latest revision, the budget office has now reduced its 10-year estimate for spending by Medicare, Medicaid and other health programs by $1.23 trillion starting in 2010, the year the health care law took effect. By 2039, the savings would amount to $250 billion a year today, or about 1.5 percent of the economy.

Many factors contributed to the change, including lower anticipated economic growth and a downward projection for interest rates over time. But another factor was a finding that the federal government might be able to sustain a low growth rate of payments to providers in line with requirements set by the health care law.

“Evidence suggests that hospitals and other providers may be able to achieve significant productivity gains or to restrain the growth of their costs in some other way,” the C.B.O. report said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Despite the improvement, federal health care spending is still projected to grow faster than any other budget category as baby boomers retire and begin drawing from Medicare. Health care is on track to become the government’s biggest expense by around 2030.

Over all, the budget office still sees federal budget deficits and the government’s outstanding debt growing at rates it calls unsustainable. Deficits are projected to remain at their current level of about 3 percent of G.D.P., or about $500 billion — a level that economists consider maintainable in a growing economy — through 2018 before rising to 4 percent and higher after that.

By 2039, the federal debt is expected to reach more than 100 percent of G.D.P., under current law, from about 74 percent today.

Budget office officials acknowledge that any long-term forecast of government spending is tricky because of changes in the economy or federal law that cannot be anticipated.

For example, health care spending growth was in line with G.D.P. during the 1990s economic boom, when there were budget surpluses. But forecasters at the time could not have predicted the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, or the depth of the most recent recession, both of which changed the course of politics and the economy.

The budget office’s latest forecasts were largely unchanged from last year. On Wednesday, the office’s director, Douglas W. Elmendorf, is scheduled to testify about the report to the House Budget Committee, which is led by Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin. Mr. Ryan has pushed to privatize federal health care programs like Medicare.