A robust market is shaping up for defensive tackle Terrance Knighton.

In the legal contact period of free agency, Washington, Oakland, Chicago and Indianapolis have expressed interest in the Broncos’ run stuffer.

The Redskins have made Knighton a top target, making a strong push to land the free agent, who can’t sign with another team until Tuesday. Washington featured a porous defense last season and is looking for leadership.

Knighton served as one of the Broncos’ team captains last season and won the “Good Guy” award for his professionalism in dealing with the media. The Broncos said last month they were willing to let Knighton hit the open market and have not yet made any counterstrikes to keep him.

The Raiders and Bears feature strong Broncos ties. Former Broncos defensive coordinator Jack Del Rio, who drafted Knighton out of Temple when he coached the Jacksonville Jaguars, identified Knighton as a favorite weeks ago. He refers to Knighton as a “dancing bear” because of his strength and mobility, and he admitted at last month’s NFL combine that the Raiders required players like Knighton to become successful.

Former Broncos coach John Fox, who mutually departed from Denver after the Broncos’ stunning playoff exit and accepted the Bears’ top job, watched Knighton develop into a force the past two seasons. Knighton posted his highest grade by the Broncos’ staff in the AFC championship game win over the Patriots two seasons ago.

Knighton ranked ninth against the run as a defensive tackle last season, according to Pro Football Focus.

Tamme update. The Broncos have interest in re-signing backup tight end Jacob Tamme, who will become a free agent. To date, no contract offer has been extended. A “receiving” tight end who had 67 catches for Indianapolis in 2010 and 52 for the Broncos in 2012, Tamme selflessly accepted a reduced offensive role the past two seasons in Denver.

For the most part, Tamme’s receiving chances went to slot receiver Wes Welker.

As Tamme prepares to celebrate his 30th birthday Sunday, he would like to find a team for which he would have a larger role in the offense. That team might be the Broncos now that starting tight end Julius Thomas is expected to sign with Jacksonville and Welker is a free agent.

Irving update. The Broncos also have interest in re-signing linebacker Nate Irving as a backup to Danny Trevathan and Brandon Marshall. Irving, though, is hoping free agency lands him a starting job.

Carter update. The Broncos will decide Monday whether to tender a one-year, $1.542 million contract to restricted free agent Tony Carter. A backup cornerback who was inactive in nine of 17 games last season, it doesn’t make sense for the Broncos to pay $1.542 million to Carter, although there’s a slight possibility the Broncos may tender him the contract knowing they can rework the deal later.