BALTIMORE — The snowfall may be over, but now the shoveling out begins.

After the Washington D.C. region recorded one of the heaviest snowfalls in recent memory, the city remained at a standstill, with the entire transit system closed through Sunday. The Metro system said it would reopen Monday with very limited underground service on only three lines, and local authorities said it could take days for snowplows to reach some residential streets.

"This is unlike anything many of us have seen in our lifetimes," Metro spokesman Dan Stessel said of the blizzard's impact on the Metro system, which reaches 730,000 trips on the typical weekday, according to The Washington Post. "It’s going to take days to fully recover."

See also: Here are all the records that the snowstorm set over the weekend

Totals in the region ranged from 10 inches to more than 35 inches, with the heaviest accumulation recorded to the north and west of Washington, D.C.

Federal government offices in the Washington area will be closed on Monday, the Office of Personnel Management said. Many state and county governments in the region also announced that they would be closed on Monday.

JUST IN @GovernorVA authorizes #VA govt to shutdown MONDAY. @nbcwashington pic.twitter.com/GAGhOA96Ug — David Culver (@David_Culver) January 24, 2016

Throughout the course of the storm, local and regional authorities repeatedly urged drivers to stay off the roads and projected that it would take days to dig out from the snow and restore movement to the region.

"Two feet of snow is a lot to move," Christopher Geldart, the director of the city's Homeland Security and Emergency Management Agency said, calling the snow removal a "major operation."

“We’re going to be in our response phase for at least 24 to 36 hours, and the recovery phase for much longer than that.”

DC officials say there has been 1 death in the city so far due to the snow storm. An 82 yr old man went into cardiac arrest while shoveling — Abigail Hauslohner (@ahauslohner) January 24, 2016

School systems and colleges in the Washington, D.C. region said they planned to close on Monday, with some closures already extending into Tuesday.

Airline passengers up and down the East Coast were stranded due to the storm, including at the D.C. region's three major airports. Reagan National and Dulles International airports were expected to resume limited operations on Monday.

We're digging out of 29.3" of snow at IAD, and we plan to gradually restart operations there & at surrounding airports on Monday afternoon. — United (@united) January 24, 2016

Even Congress's plans were snarled by the weather. House lawmakers will no longer be in session this week due to the "severity of the winter storm in the D.C. area," a notice sent to lawmakers Sunday morning said. The House will stay out of session until Feb. 1, delaying a vote on whether to override President Barack Obama's veto on the GOP reconciliation bill, which would have repealed Obamacare.

The Senate could return to Washington on Wednesday, as a vote set for Tuesday afternoon has been rescheduled for then.

The storm also stopped Vice President Joe Biden from returning to Washington D.C. from Turkey, where he had been meeting with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and other officials there.

Biden had planned to return to Washington on Saturday, but White House officials said Air Force Two would redirect to Miami and that Biden would return to Washington, D.C. once the weather cleared up.

Defense Secretary Ash Carter, who was returning from the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland was also diverted to MacDill Air Force base in Tampa, Fla.

Have something to add to this story? Share it in the comments.