After his inauguration Monday morning, Gov. Bill Walker announced two more commissioner appointees, however, not just the governor’s cabinet is being rebuilt.

Two hundred state employees received letters asking them to resign to make room for Walker’s hires, the governor’s spokeswoman said.

The State of Alaska employs 16,000 people statewide. The 200 asked to resign were exempt employees, including commissioners, deputy commissioners and directors, spokeswoman Grace Jang said.

“There were about 200 resignation form letters that went out,” Jang said at a press conference at the capitol building Monday afternoon. “Not everyone’s resignation will be accepted.”

The Walker administration might decide to keep on some of those asked to resign, she explained. As for the rest of the positions, “there have been hundreds of applications” to fill the vacant spots. This kind of restructuring “is pretty standard when it’s an administration change,” she said.

Just hours after taking office, Walker appointed former Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium director and Medicaid expert Valerie Nurr’araaluk Davidson as commissioner of the Department of Health and Social Services.

In his inaugural address, Walker said he would “begin the wheels in motion today to begin expanding Medicaid.” He had promised during his campaign to expand the program to as many as 40,000 Alaskans — mostly low-income adults — who fall into the health insurance coverage gap. Appointing Davidson was the first step, he said at the afternoon press conference.

With new leadership in the department, “we will move (Medicaid expansion) as aggressively as we can,” Walker said.

Former Gov. Sean Parnell announced a year ago that Alaska would not participate in Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act. Davidson, a Yup’ik from Bethel, said she and Walker do not yet have a plan for rolling out the delayed expansion. She said the state has “lost out on considerable federal revenues” by waiting to participate in the program — 2014, 2015 and 2016 are the only years the federal government will foot the entire bill. After that, the state must pay a portion of the coverage.

Providing health insurance for all will strengthen Alaska’s economy as a by-product, Davidson said.

“(People) can’t hunt, they can’t fish if they’re not healthy,” she said. “My first job will be sitting down with the governor and talking about priorities.”

Marty Rutherford was selected as the deputy commissioner for the Department of Natural Resources. She held the position previously during former Gov. Sarah Palin’s administration. Rutherford will serve as acting commissioner of the department until newly appointed Commissioner Mark Myers begins work Jan. 1.

Former state legislator Sam Cotten was selected by Walker as acting commissioner of the Department of Fish and Game. Cotten has served on several fisheries-related boards, including the North Pacific Fisheries Management Council. He was born in Juneau and lives in Eagle River.

Cotten is in the running to keep the job permanently, Walker said. The new governor is constitutionally obligated to appoint at least an acting commissioner to every department on his first day in office. Out of the list of Walker’s appointees, only a few are permanent, as long as the Legislature approves them. The rest are considered “acting” or “interim.”

Four commissioners were carried over from the Parnell administration: the Department of Education and Early Development’s Mike Hanley; the Department of Environmental Conservation’s Larry Hartig; the Department of Public Safety’s Gary Folger; and the Department of Transportation and Public Facilities’ Patrick Kemp. Hanley, Hartig and Kemp are all listed as “acting” commissioners.

“If it says ‘acting,’ it’s a process and it’s not finished,” Jang said of the list of appointees. Another person could still be hired for the job.

The inauguration

From the moment the Yakutat dance group filed into Centennial Hall’s Sheffield Ballroom and began Walker and Lt. Gov. Byron Mallott’s inauguration ceremony with a song that drew spectators out of their seats, it was clear that history was being made.

Donning his clan’s traditional regalia, Mallott was sworn in as Alaska’s second lieutenant governor of Alaska Native heritage, the first of Tlingit heritage. Former Lt. Gov. Loren Leman, who served under Gov. Frank Murkowski, was of Alutiiq heritage.

Piggybacking on the Alaska Federation of Natives Convention’s “Rise as One” theme, both Mallott’s and Walker’s inauguration speeches riffed on togetherness — racial and political.

“We can reach out, we can understand, we can empathize,” Mallott said during his speech.

Mallott’s words drew a standing ovation and cheers from the crowd. Juneau was a strong backer of the former candidate for governor and continued to support him in his bid for lieutenant governor alongside Walker.

Mallott said after the inauguration that the day had been emotional for him.

“To be able to wear my clan regalia on a day like this,” he said, smiling.

Native elder and leader David Kingeisti Katzeek gave a traditional welcome, delivered partially in Tlingit, at the ceremony. He asked the audience to join him in a chant of “wooch.een” — “working together.”

“Wooch.een, wooch.een, wooch.een,” the crowd said, getting louder with every repetition.

Katzeek said after the ceremony that electing Mallott is fulfilling a prophecy of sorts made by the Board of Indian Commissioners after the U.S. Army’s 1869 bombardment of Wrangell. The board told the U.S. secretary of war after the attack that assimilating Native people was necessary to avoid them holding high office “because of the discipline that they have,” Katzeek said.

“It did not mean we were better than anyone,” he said. “It meant we had the ability to bring people together.”

• Contact reporter Katie Moritz at 523-2294 or at katherine.moritz@juneauempire.com. Follow her on Twitter @katecmoritz.