Buy Photo The Kentucky Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice (KRCRC) members and supporters protest deceptive and coercive tactics they say are being used by Crisis Pregnacy Centers (CPCs) in Kentucky and across the nation. Here KRCRC members picket the CPC’s “A Woman’s Choice Resource Center,” which the KRCRC said is a non-medical facility trying to convince women not to have abortions. 21 June 2014 (Photo: David R. Lutman/Special to The CJ)Buy Photo

Forty abortion-rights supporters demonstrated against what they called "deceptive tactics" of a counseling center located next to a downtown Louisville abortion clinic Saturday morning.

The protesters were from the Kentucky Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice, a statewide nonprofit that group president Caitlin Willenbrink said unites people of faith who believe women have the right to control their reproductive health.

"We are here to draw awareness to the practices of crisis pregnancy centers," she said during the hourlong protest at First and Market streets. "We believe that people who may or may not want to have a child deserve to have all their options shared with them in a way that is non-judgmental and non-shaming."

"When a woman comes into a crisis pregnancy center, she may arrive there expecting a free pregnancy test but her receiving those things might be predicated on her getting counseling that draws incorrect connections between abortion and cancer and abortion and mental health issues," she said.

Willenbrink said she herself underwent a pregnancy test at the Woman's Choice crisis pregnancy center recently as a ruse and was told she would have to receive counseling.

She said that included questions about her relationship to God and information that abortion is linked to breast cancer and suicide.

The Woman's Choice center was closed Saturday afternoon and a call seeking comment was not immediately returned.

Anti-abortion activist Donna Durning, who said she has protested abortion every weekday for the last two decades, arrived at the tail end of the demonstration.

"We are talking about babies here," she said. "We are trying to save lives."

Anne Ahola, director of the EMW Women's Surgical Center next door, said most of its practice involves dispensing a regimen of "morning after" medication that results in at-home miscarriage and the surgical termination of early, first-term pregnancies on site.

The clinic has treated patients as young as 12 and as old as 51, Ahola said.

The protest took place before the National Right to Life convention begins Thursday at the Galt House downtown. Activists from around the U.S. who oppose abortion will converge on Louisville during the three-day meeting, which will include remarks next Saturday morning by U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky.

Jere Downs can be reached at (502) 582-4669, Jere Downs on Facebook and Jeredowns on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/T0aMqe