No More Vitamins, No More Drug Money, and Infected Jailhouse Wine

A Handy Attachment

A factory employee in China got his arm mangled in a machine, fully severing his hand. But here is where the wonder of modern medicine comes in — even though his arm was so destroyed his hand could not be immediately attached, docs were able to come up with a smooth alternative. They simply sewed the hand onto the guy’s ankle so that his leg’s blood supply could keep it alive while they fixed his arm.

After a month, they were able to successfully reattach his hand to his arm, WTKR reported. No word on whether he could move it while it was on his leg.

Drug Giant Stops Paying Docs to Endorse Meds

GlaxoSmithKline, a British drug maker, announced on Monday two groundbreaking decisions — they’ll no longer pay doctors to endorse their drugs, and their sales reps will no longer be compensated based the number of prescriptions docs write, the New York Times reports. These changes, long called for by critics of the drug industry, is a first, but it may not be coming simply from Glaxo’s desire to do right in the world. The company has been investigated for bribery in China, though the company’s chief executive denied a connection. Another suspect cause of the change of heart? The companies have to make these payments public starting next year, thanks to the Affordable Care Act.

Whatever the reason, medical experts are rejoicing at the news, and are hopeful that it could help prevent an onslaught of unnecessary medical prescriptions. Glaxo’s decision, as one of the world’s largest drug companies, may even motivate others to follow suit.

“As a physician, I periodically meet with these sales reps and they usually come in armed with information about me that I don’t even know,” Raed Dweik, MD, of the Cleveland Clinic told the Times. “I feel that’s not really a comfortable interaction to have.”

Just Stop With the Vitamin Studies Already

Do you take a daily multivitamin? Well, you might as well stop, according to recent research from Brigham and Women’s Hospital published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, USA Today reports. The journal published two new studies on vitamins, along with an opinion piece arguing that because studies done on vitamins have consistently shown that they do not help and may in fact harm, it’s time to throw in the towel — on vitamins and on research.

The research found that vitamins neither prevented cognitive decline nor did they have any effect on the progression of heart disease. But still, 53 percent of consumers pay $28 billion a year for their vitamins and supplements. Everyday Health will be discussing this in a #HealthTalk on Friday, from 3-4 pm, and you can check out our own list of what vitamins and supplements to skip here.

Skip the Wine in Jail

In jail, a wine connoisseur is someone who’s made something vaguely resembling the substance from juice and canned fruit, mixed together in a plastic bag and stored until it ferments. Unfortunately, for some inmates of a Utah prison, one of these guys decided to get a little fancy and add in a potato — isn’t that where vodka comes from, after all? Unfortunately, in this circumstance, the potato addition lead to a nasty spread of botulism, an infection that causes the person to lose control of their muscles, ABC news reported.

-Susan E. Matthews, Everyday Health Staff Writer