Topics: Birth Control, Catholicism, contraception mandate, Little Sisters, Religion Dispatches, Sonia Sotomayor, Supreme Court, Life News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Religion Dispatches

Justice Sonia Sotomayor’s New Year’s Eve granting of the request by Little Sisters of the Poor and other Catholic organizations to enjoin (temporarily) the Obama administration from enforcing the birth control coverage requirement made for overblown headlines like “Supreme Court Halts Birth Control Mandate for Catholic Group” and “Birth-control rule a hitch as health law takes effect.”

In reality, Justice Sotomayor only stayed the court of appeals’ denial of Little Sisters’ request for an injunction; in other words, her ruling only temporarily stops the government from enforcing the regulation against Little Sisters and its co-plaintiffs. How the case will ultimately turn out is far from clear.

But as Georgetown Law School’s Marty Lederman points out in a new post at Balkanization, the hitch is not in the law, but in Little Sisters’ case itself.

Little Sisters of the Poor, an order of nuns that operates nursing homes for the poor, is, like other religious non-profits, subject to the accommodation that the administration crafted last year in response to objections that religious non-profits, like houses of worship, should be fully exempt from the rule. The accommodation requires them to self-certify as objecting religious organizations, thus placing the onus on their insurance plan’s third-party administrator to offer the coverage separately to employees. Objecting non-profits claim this arrangement still makes them complicit in providing the coverage they consider sinful, in that the self-certification would “authorize” and “direct” the coverage through the third-party administrator.

But Lederman, who last month pointed out a potential pitfall in the cases of the for-profit companies that will be heard by the Court later this term, is out with a new post suggesting a big hole in the Little Sisters’ case as well. In short, the Little Sisters’ argument that their self-certification would “authorize” and “direct” the third-party administrator to provide the coverage, thereby making them complicit, falls flat, since it is the government, not the plaintiffs, who is authorizing and directing the third-party administrator to take the action. (As Lederman notes, this argument also applies to the University of Notre Dame, which has raised similar objections in a case pending in the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit.)

But the particularities of Little Sisters’ insurance arrangement, Lederman argues, make its case even less compelling than Notre Dame’s, because its insurer is not even required to provide the coverage at all, even if Little Sisters were to set the process in motion by self-certification. Little Sisters’ coverage comes through a “church plan,” issued by Christian Brothers Trust. Under federal law, even if their insured organizations fill out the forms that would otherwise require the third-party administrator to arrange for the coverage, “church plans” are not required to provide it.