PUEBLO, Colo. (AP) — Since at least 1976, Pueblo Rape Crisis Services has been around to advocate for and support victims of sexual assault.

While PRCS officially became a nonprofit in 2001, officials said they recently discovered a PRCS letter at its offices that dates back to 1976. It was a discovery that came as a big surprise.

“The bigger picture of the history goes back farther than people realize, including us,” said Kristi Roque, the director of PRCS. “We don’t know who formed it then. We just know now that Pueblo Rape Crisis Services has existed since at least 1976. If whoever ran it then is out there, we’d love to hear from them.”

The letter that was discovered was one advertising an open house for PRCS on April 28, 1976.

The letter also mentioned the formation of a “friends” group for the center.

“Our goal is one of support. We want to express an interest in the continued existence of the center, support the staff in their activities and become aware of the community’s role in preventing sexual assaults. The center offers direct victim assistance, community outreach programs, research and information dissemination and other services aimed at reducing the number of sexual assaults in Pueblo County,” the letter read.

While it appears some of the core services of the PRCS were around in 1976, the agency has no doubt morphed through the years into what it is today.

In 2014, PRCS served 159 primary victims (someone who is directly affected by sexual violence) and served 487 total victims, including the 159 primary victims, hotline calls and secondary victims (loved ones seeking ways to support someone who has been through sexual violence).

Supporting and empowering survivors

Pueblo Rape Crisis Services’ mission is to empower sexual assault survivors, provide victims advocacy and build community awareness to reduce sexual violence. The agency’s vision is a community free of sexual violence.

PRCS currently has 12 volunteer victim advocates who are available 24 hours a day.

Roque said the agency would ideally like to have about 20 to 25 volunteers.

The volunteers are available to take calls on the center’s 24/7 confidential hotline and are available to respond to hospitals at all hours of the day to provide victim advocacy and support to survivors of sexual assault.

The center also offers case management services to provide many types of immediate and long-term assistance to the victims of sexual assault and an eight-week survivor support group.

“We ask for volunteer support all hours of the day to respond to hotline calls. That could be a survivor calling in, a loved one calling in maybe seeking ways they can help support their loved one that’s experienced sexual violence and then our advocates also respond to the hospital 24/7,” said Niki Sosa, a volunteer coordinator and outreach coordinator for PRCS. “So when a sexual assault comes into Parkview, we’ll have an advocate that goes and responds to let them know about their rights, talk to them about the process of going through a SANE (sexual assault nurse examiner) exam, reporting to law enforcement and really just be that support piece for them through a very difficult time that can be very scary, especially at the hospital.”

All volunteer victim advocates go through an application process, interview and 35 hours of training.

A lot is covered during the training, including having guest speakers come in and talk to volunteers, but a lot of it has to do with how to offer support to someone who has just been through such a tragic experience.

Sosa said how to approach each victim varies on a case by case basis.

“We serve children, men and all ages and backgrounds so when we do respond we’re walking into a room and introducing ourselves as advocates and letting them know our role there is to support them and help make sure that they are feeling empowered to make whatever decision they want to,” Sosa said. “There have been a lot of times we’ve been to the hospital and it’s been very emotionally charged with whoever is in there and so it’s just really being empathetic, compassionate and not taking their power away and letting them be OK with what they’re doing.”

Challenges and rewards

Providing support to sexual assault victims is rewarding, but it can also be challenging.

Advocates are seeing the victims after a tragic experience that is often times the worst moment of their lives.

Roque said one of the toughest parts of the job for her is thinking about how someone could do something as awful as sexual assault to another person.

“Sexual violence for me is such a despicable crime, it’s awful, and for me what’s challenging is to have to wrap my mind around the fact that somebody would do this to another person. It’s hard sometimes,” she said. “We’ve gone to the hospital or have had hotline calls, and it’s really hard to understand how another person could do something so horrible. And keeping in mind, too, that oftentimes the perpetrator is somebody that’s known to them so not only are they doing this awful, despicable thing they’re doing it to somebody they know and that otherwise would claim they love and care about.”

For Kaci Garcia, a case manager and outreach coordinator, seeing child victims is difficult.

“That’s a sensitive area for me,” she said.

Sosa said the realization that victims will have to deal with what they’ve been through the rest of their life is tough.

“With the case management that we do and long-term follow up, we see that’s it’s not just that night at the hospital, it’s not just that call to the hotline, it’s continuous,” she said. “It’s weeks, months, years out of their lives afterwards that they’re dealing with this.”

Despite that, the job can be rewarding.

Sosa said those moments in which she realizes the agency has made a difference in someone’s life is one of those rewards.

“There are moments speaking with clients when I’ll hear it in their voice and they’ll just make mention of kind of a big moment that they have in being able to move forward,” she said. “Not saying everything is put behind them and they’re able to live like they used to live, but they just have a moment where they say, ‘Well, if I didn’t have this intervention with this agency I might be in a worse place’ so there’s some moments like that that are very rewarding and I appreciate.”

Sosa said seeing volunteers give their time to the cause is also rewarding.

“I really do appreciate them and all the time that they give us and that’s a big deal for me,” she said. “It’s really cool thinking that there are people out there that will volunteer their time to be on call at midnight to respond to the hospital. They’re just very giving of themselves and I think it’s really cool to see that kind of community support from volunteers.”

Law officers appreciate efforts

The agency’s work is an asset to local law enforcement officials who, when a sexual assault occurs, are devoted to investigating the case and making sure the victim is safe but don’t necessarily have the resources to offer support and ongoing assistance to victims.

“I believe Pueblo Rape Crisis is an extremely valuable asset to not only the community but to local law enforcement. The services they provide fill a gap for us,” said Sgt. James Olonia with the Pueblo Police Department. “Our officers are tasked with investigating the criminal portion of these types of calls and they are also responsible for ensuring the victim’s well-being. That being said, PRCS helps us with the second part of that by providing immediate crisis intervention the night of the incident. They additionally provide ongoing services for these victims.”

Olonia continued, “The police department is not equipped to handle this very critical part of the victim’s recovery. I also believe their message to the community is encouraging, and it empowers other victims to come forward and report an incident they might have otherwise let go. We all know rape is underreported and the PRCS helps with the message. The staff is dedicated to working with local law enforcement to deliver the best service to victims. They do all of this on a very limited budget, and very small staff. PRCS is necessary in our community and they are definitely necessary to help us be more effective.”

———

Information from: The Pueblo Chieftain, http://www.chieftain.com