Topics: Daily Caller, Editor's Picks, Gay Marriage, Gay Rights, GOP, Jan Brewer, LGBT, LGBT Rights, Religion, SB 1062, The Right, Politics News

Back in 2012, a full two years before conservatives insisted that religious freedom entailed the right to discriminate against gay people or gay spouses in both private and public workplaces, Republicans in Washington trotted out the same religious liberty line for the arguably narrower purpose of defending religious employers who wanted to be exempt from the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate.

That effort ultimately ran aground, because the issue became the domain of the courts, but also because it ended up inviting a bunch of retrograde public pronouncements from conservatives about birth control and reproductive rights that ultimately dwarfed whatever political advantage Republicans hoped to gain by positioning themselves as tribunes for the religiously devout.

But for that ancillary damage, conservatives of all stripes really did seem to think that they’d gotten the framing right, and could apply it generously to future culture war battles.

The events of the past week have been especially fascinating in light of that history. The effort to apply the same religious freedom argument to anti-gay measures in states across the country has encountered tremendous resistance, not just from liberals but from business leaders, statewide Republican elected officials, and GOP celebrities who, for different reasons, seem to get that stomping away from a growing majority of the population with a middle finger hoisted overhead isn’t a smart thing to do.

On Wednesday night Arizona’s conservative governor Jan Brewer decided which camp she was with and vetoed her state’s version of the right-to-discriminate bill.

She joins a significant faction of powerful conservatives who seem to understand that religious liberty isn’t an all-purpose exemption from every law and norm conservatives don’t like, and can’t succeed politically as such. The threat to religious liberty can’t be tenuous or imagined. Brewer underscored that fact when she effectively admitted that the Arizona bill — SB 1062 — was a spasm of right-wing cultural panic.

“Senate Bill 1062 does not address a specific and present concern related to religious liberty in Arizona,” she said. “To the supporters of the legislation, I want you to know that I understand that long-held norms about marriage and family are being challenged as never before. Our society is undergoing many dramatic changes. However, I sincerely believe that Senate Bill 1062 has the potential to create more problems than it purports to solve. It could divide Arizona in ways we cannot even imagine and no one would ever want. Religious liberty is a core American and Arizona value, so is non-discrimination.”

In other words, I feel your pain, change is terrifying, but your remedy is bulls***.

Her veto carries momentous significance. It will resolve lingering ambivalence about similar efforts in other states and draw reluctant but influential players off the sidelines. I expect it’ll prove to be the pivotal moment when this particular uprising began to die.

But to my eye there are two revealing things about how this all unfolded. One pertains to a faction of conservatives who continue to articulate an absurdly expansive view of religious liberty; another pertains to a subset of liberals who are drawing over-broad lessons from this and a whole series of recent culture war victories.