Buy Photo Nick King, left, talks with Kristen Rollserson and her mother, LaTonya Rollerson, at a holiday party. (Photo: Photos by Bill Luster / Special to The C-J)Buy Photo

Orphaned during the genocide in her native Rwanda, Sylvie Umuhoza and her sister, Pacifique Uwayezu, lived in refugee camps in Kenya and Senegal for years before they came to Louisville in 1999 with their grandmother.

Sylvie was 10. She spoke Rwandan and French, but little English, when a teacher told her about the King Scholar Program.

She had to take two TARC buses each way to get to Sacred Heart Academy from her home near the Americana Apartments. "It was like two different worlds," she said.

She says it was difficult at first but that she was well-received by other students. "I loved everybody there, and the teachers were great," she says.

She graduated with a 3.8 grade-point average, according to Nick King, who has guided 53 girls through the challenging college-prep program, and won a full scholarship to attend St. Louis University.

There, she majored in English and international studies, with a minor in philosophy, studies in England and graduated in 31/ 2 years, again with a 3.8 GPA.

She moved to Richmond, Va., worked a couple of years in health administration, and now, at age 24, is pursuing a master's degree in public administration.

Uwayezu, who is two years younger, is a senior at the University of Louisville and in a combined program with the dental school, studying to be a dental hygenist.

"Sylvie and Pacifique are spectacular in every way," King says. "Both are kind, caring, thoughtful, possess a magnificent work ethic and are dedicated to bringing about positive change in our world.

"Where most others would have stopped or surrendered, Sylvie and Pacifique, through discipline, determination and perseverance, have thrived and prospered," King adds. "They are inspirational and I feel privileged to know and interact with them."

INFORMATION

•To learn more about the King Scholar Program and the King Foundation for Social Justice, see: http://www.nickking.org/

•To apply, visit http://www.nickking.org/king scholarprogram/ howtoapply.html

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Bc5J6C