Small businesses and families across Florida are feeling the enormous burden of increased health care costs thanks to the Affordable Care Act. Unfortunately, rising premiums and higher deductibles are just the beginning of the problems.

Floridians who have preferred provider organization health plans — that's more than half of the state's consumers — are getting hit at an alarming rate with balance bills, a practice where health care providers bill consumers for the balance of the retail charges for medical services after various payments to the health care providers are made.

Balance billing most often occurs after an individual who, in an emergency situation, is treated by an out-of-network provider. The result is a surprise medical bill ranging from hundreds to tens of thousands of dollars or more, well above the individual's co-payment and the amount the insurer has reimbursed to the provider.

Outside of emergencies, so many Floridians who do their due diligence — ensuring that they go to an in-network hospital and are to be treated by an in-network doctor — are still becoming victims to surprise balance bills. Any physician performing services on them in an in-network hospital may be out of their network — an anesthesiologist, a radiologist, etc. With no warning, these vigilant consumers are being hit with surprise balance bills.

Take an example from Florida's Insurance Consumer Advocate who represents Florida consumers on behalf of CFO Jeff Atwater. Following an MRI, a Boca Raton woman was diagnosed with a brain tumor and sent for emergency surgery by her doctor. She went to an in-network hospital and was operated on by an out-of-network neurosurgeon. The result: a surprise balance bill of $81,890, despite having health insurance and going to an in-network hospital.

Why does it seem like well-informed, insured Floridians are always left holding the bag? Leaving Florida's employees with astronomical surprise bills is exactly the type of abuse that Gov. Rick Scott has been standing up against, and we hope to see the governor add balance billing to the health care billing grievances he'd like to correct.

Representative Carlos Trujillo, R-Miami, has taken an important step by filing House Bill 221. HB 221 would prohibit health care providers from balance billing for PPO plans and give Florida consumers much-needed relief from these surprise balance bills when receiving emergency care — a protection that's already in place in Florida for consumers who have health maintenance organization insurance plans.

At the National Federation of Independent Business, the largest small business advocacy association in Florida and Washington, D.C., we have a record of standing up against Obamacare. We took our case all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court; and now, we're standing up to protect Florida's business owners and their employees by putting an end to surprise balance billing.

We thank Rep. Trujillo for making Florida's consumers one of his top priorities, and we urge the Legislature to stand with us and adopt the good public policy in HB 221 during the 2016 Legislative Session.

Bill Herrle is the executive director of the National Federation of Independent Business.