Caption + Neurosurgeon Jonathan Slotkin, center, meets with Karen Hull and her husband, Shaun, before her spinal-cord surgery in January at the Geisinger Medical Center in Danville, Pa. MUST CREDIT: Washington Post photo by Ricky Carioti

DANVILLE, Pa. - At Geisinger Health System in Pennsylvania, hospital officials want to keep their customers happy. So when patients are upset about a long wait in the emergency department or a doctor's brusque manner or a meal that never arrived in a room, Geisinger is doing more than apologizing.

It's offering money back on their care, no questions asked.

The hospital system is the first in the country to adopt what has long been a basic tenet of retail business: customer refunds. This focus on customer satisfaction is a relatively new concept for health care, in which doctors have typically called the shots. And it's one that Geisinger's staff questioned when president and CEO David Feinberg came up with the refund idea last fall.

But the novel approach is in keeping with health care's shift to improve the experience of patients. Under the Affordable Care Act, government payments are increasingly tied to the quality of care and patient satisfaction as opposed to the quantity of services provided.

"We want to make sure we not only have the right care that is high quality and safe, but we also want to make sure our care is compassionate, dignified and delivered with a lot of kindness," said Feinberg, who took over Geisinger in May after running the UCLA health system.

One 49-year-old patient received a $210 refund in February after an appointment left her in tears. Karen Hull, 46, was upset, too. Before her successful surgery in January, the Geisinger Medical Center finance department had blindsided her with a call for a "down payment" on her operation, for a herniated disk that had caused crippling pain.

"I remember thinking, it's not like I'm going to skip out on my back surgery," she said. She wound up paying $100 toward her $2,375 co-payment.

After she got home, she asked for a $150 refund - an amount that reflected her distress but didn't make her look "hoggish."

Hers was among the 74 requests that Geisinger received between October and mid-March. In response to those requests, the system refunded or waived charges of nearly $80,000, officials said. Only co-payments and deductibles can be considered.

When Feinberg announced the program, which began as a pilot and then was expanded to all patients systemwide in early April, other industry executives told him it was "a dumb idea," he said. But there is less skepticism now given how the feedback already has boosted patient satisfaction scores, a key metric the federal government uses to pay hospitals.

In recent years, hospitals nationwide have sought to make care more customer-friendly, with staff retraining and new programs. Yet Geisinger's move is perhaps the boldest innovation by a system long known for reinventing medical care. A decade ago, for example, Geisinger introduced a 90-day warranty for surgery patients.

Its size and its integration of hospitals, doctor practices and insurance help to make that possible. It is one of the country's largest health systems, with 10 hospitals serving more than 3 million residents in Pennsylvania and southern New Jersey, and it claims more than 500,000 members in a health coverage plan it offers. The refund program is in place only at the Pennsylvania facilities.