When he’s not in the boardroom, John Nietzel can probably be found in a soup kitchen or at a charitable community event.

In addition to his work at Investors Bank, where he is a senior vice president, Nietzel also serves on the board of the Paper Mill Playhouse, the Newark Regional Business Partnership and on New Jersey’s Autism Education Foundation and March of Dimes chapter.

Now, he will add to his resume chairman of the 2013 Greater Newark Holiday Fund. The charity raises money throughout the year — especially during the holiday season — to serve the needs of homeless New Jerseyans, abused and neglected children, people living below the poverty line and the elderly.

“While writing a check is of course a generous act, at Investors Bank we often ask ourselves: What can we do beyond?

“For me, this means going out into the community, speaking with people face-to-face and helping out with the extra work that comes along with fundraising,” Nietzel says.

And this time, Nietzel is going it alone.

“The Greater Newark Holiday Fund is making a difference and I am honored to be associated with this outstanding organization,” he says.

Nietzel served as a co-chair of the Holiday Fund in 2012 and helped raise $365,000 — an 11 percent increase from 2011. Nietzel says he hopes to surpass that number this year.

“As chair, I plan to be involved in as many facets of the fundraising process as possible — attending events, making calls and getting out in the community to promote the Greater Newark Holiday Fund’s message of caring.”

Nietzel has already secured a $10,000 donation from Investors Bank as the fund celebrates the launch of the 2013 campaign.

The Greater Newark Holiday Fund, now in its 77th year, distributes its donations among social service agencies in Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Morris, Passaic and Union counties.

“It supports a wide array of services to so many people in need,” Nietzel says of the fund. “However, it takes a great deal of energy to make an impact — one that can only be achieved through the support of many.”

Donations can be made by calling (866) 292-HOPE (4673) or going online to holidayfund.org.

RELATED COVERAGE:

• In tough times, Greater Newark Holiday Fund giving rises 11 percent

• Hurricane Sandy puts a new burden on social services agencies