What do a Fort Morgan thrift shop and Denver’s Larimer Square have in common? Facebook says they’re places where fans of Congressman Cory Gardner and Democrat Mark Udall like to shop, respectively.

Facebook had a little fun analyzing data from users who “like” Udall and Gardner, embroiled in a hot race for the U.S. Senate. It also looked at data based on “likes” for Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper and his GOP challenger, Bob Beauprez.

Facebook, the social media giant, provided the information to “Meet the Press,” which is looking at critical swing states, including Colorado. One section analyzed the issues that were important to users, another looked at where Coloradans like to eat or shop, based on their likes.

Mercury Cafe in Denver was the No. 1 restaurant liked by Udall supporters. Farm House Market in Yuma was the No. 1 liked by Gardner supporters. Three of the top Gardner restaurants were in Yuma County. In case you’re wondering whether the Eastern Plains locale is some sort of culinary oasis, Gardner happens to hail from Yuma.

The top issues for users who liked Hickenlooper were economic equality and mobility. The top issues for users who liked Beauprez were foreign policy and international relations.

Here’s a look at the entire survey, and here are some of the finds:

Restaurants

Top restaurants disproportionately liked by Udall supporters:

1. Mountain Sun Pub & Brewery (Boulder)

2. Mercury Café Denver (Denver)

3. Root Down (Denver)

4. Snooze (Denver)

5. Racine’s (Denver) Top restaurants disproportionately liked by Gardner supporters:

1. Farm House Market (Yuma)

2. Shooters Grill (Rifle)

3. Paper Moon Entertainment (Yuma)

4. 4th & Main Downtown Grille (Wray)

5. Nordy’s BBQ & Grill (Loveland)

Local shops

Top local shops disproportionately liked by Gardner supporters: 1. Thunder Mountain Harley-Davidson (Loveland)

2. Bear Arm (Windsor)

3. Greeley Hat Works (Greeley)

4. Edwards Flowerland (Fort Morgan)

5. Odds & Ends Thrift Store (Fort Morgan) Top local shops disproportionately liked by Udall supporters: 1. I Heart Denver Store (Denver)

2. Larimer Square (Denver)

3. Twist & Shout Records (Denver)

4. Colorado Mills Mall (Lakewood)

5. Wax Trax Records (Denver)

Political topics