Bedside is a series about health care from a nurse’s-eye view.

It’s an odd thing, to take care of someone who is chained to a bed, guarded 24/7 by bored corrections officers idling away time with TV and card games, who cannot receive visitors or even phone calls. But it happens when prison inmates are sick enough that they need care that only a hospital can provide.

As a nurse caring for such patients, the first rule I learned — or figured out, because no one said it aloud — was not to ask what the prisoner had done to land him (they were all men) in jail. Better not to know that he is a serial murderer, a vicious rapist. It was easier for me to think of the prisoners as people, just like the rest of our patients, rather than to condemn, because condemnation and compassion are tough impulses to reconcile.

I cared for one prisoner over several weeks, and I got to know him in a vague “don’t ask, don’t tell” way. He had an above-the-knee amputation and could walk only with an artificial lower limb, which we kept propped against the wall whenever he lay down. His other leg, the whole one, was handcuffed to the bed. He was very sick from cancer and chemotherapy. It seemed absurd.

“He’s a nice guy,” I told a corrections officer one day after the prisoner and I had talked.

“No he’s not,” the officer replied, fixing me with a level look that suggested he knew things about the prisoner that I didn’t.

The guard’s intimation about the prisoner’s troubling past didn’t change how I treated him, or even how I felt about him. But it did make me wonder if I should be more wary around him. The violent prisoner who feigns illness to break out of a hospital, killing staff members as he goes, is a recurring plot element on TV crime shows (and actually happened, in 2006, when a prisoner receiving care at a hospital in Blacksburg, Va., killed a guard and a police officer in an unsuccessful escape attempt). Was the one-legged prisoner just waiting for his moment? I have no idea. He was discharged and was readmitted several times, eventually dying in the hospital unvisited and, except for some of us nurses, unmourned.

The conundrum posed by prisoners in the hospital was most challenging when we had two child molesters who were long-term patients on the floor. I would have preferred not to know their crimes, but the National Sex Offender Registry, which makes such information easily available to caregivers, made ignorance impossible. One was an older adult we all knew from multiple admissions, the other basically a kid himself, who’d done to a younger member of his family what had already been done to him.

They were both hospitalized for weeks, and their continuing presence tested the empathy of all of us nurses. A sense of unease permeated the floor. Was it wrong to give understanding care to the violators of children?

In the end, of course, I decided it was not. The job is the job. Being a nurse should mean we care for everyone, even criminals, with the best in our hearts. Child molesters are almost universally loathed, but when I am at work, in the hospital, those loathsome criminals became patients.

I’ve put off writing about prisoner-patients because I imagined the overwhelming response from readers would be anger at the idea of convicted criminals’ receiving free health care that many Americans cannot get or afford, even under the Affordable Care Act. Prisoners with cancer do not have co-payments or deductibles. They receive the same treatment regimens as our other patients, and are cared for by the same oncology nurses and doctors.

Prisoners receiving free health care may seem morally objectionable. But let’s reverse that ethical formulation and instead ask why anyone in this country has to financially struggle to obtain health care that the least free among us receive without paying a dime.

A lot of what’s wrong with our health care system has to do with money and the profit motive being injected into every possible health care experience. In these prisoner/nurse encounters, though, the task was very different. I had to hold on firmly to my humanity in order to recognize theirs. A dose of similar soul-searching might be just what our ailing health care system needs. If we give needed, accessible care to the most despised and potentially violent among us, surely we can try a little harder to provide it to all.



Theresa Brown is an oncology nurse and the author of “Critical Care: A New Nurse Faces Death, Life, and Everything in Between.”