The right way to empty prisons

Manhattan: So John Legend (photo, right) calls the U.S. “the most incarcerated country in the world” and says there are now “more black men under correctional control than there were under slavery in 1850” (“Rockin’ roles,” Feb. 23). As someone who watches too many true-crime programs, I know well that many of those men are in prison for violent crimes. Yes, there are undoubtedly innocent people in prison right now. For the most part, however, violent offenders need to be kept away from the general public.

One solution to the problem of young people being incarcerated would be a Works Progress Administration-style program, based on the one FDR had back in the day. Maybe such a program could repair our decaying infrastructure, and at-risk men and women could feed their families without resorting to crime.

Yes, it would take firm will, money and perseverance. Didn’t we in the U.S.A. once have those qualities? John Early

Where was Joe?

Orange, N.J.: The Daily News rightfully reported how the Academy Awards broadcast totally snubbed icons such as Joan Rivers and Elaine Stritch in their “In Memoriam” reel. However, I would like to cite another glaring New York-centric omission: The late, legendary Joe Franklin, though known primarily as a TV personality, occasionally made forays into motion pictures with cameos in films such as “Ghostbusters,” “Broadway Danny Rose” and “The Aristocrats.” At least Joe is in good company. Derek Tague

History repeats

Flanders, N.J.: What Rudy Giuliani said about the President is disgraceful. Ever since Obama was elected, I have never seen so much hate in this country, and Republicans like Giuliani are good examples of that. They talk about patriotism — but so did the Nazis, and we know what happened to the world then. Thomas Boyle

Rudy, Rudy, Rudy

Manhattan: To Rudy Giuliani: Thank you for your comments on President Obama. For many years, I have had to suffer through people who are not from New York telling me how great you are. By saying absolutely hateful things about the President, you have proven me right that you are nothing more than a bully. Mary Jo Pane

Take it from Rudy

Bronx: Rudy Giuliani was completely right when he said President Obama does not “love America.” From his associations with America-hating far leftists (e.g., the Rev. Jeremiah Wright, Bill Ayers, Bernardine Dohrn), his apology tours about America overseas, his discourtesy to our allies (e.g., Benjamin Netanyahu), his disrespect for our Constitution, his lies about the Affordable Care Act, his doubling of the national debt, to his lack of interest in securing the borders to stop illegals from flooding this country, Obama has been a complete disaster as President. Thank you, Mayor Giuliani, for speaking the truth about this man. Geraldine Voelkel

Little big man

Manhattan: Linda Stasi got it right in “Rudy is one crude dude” (column, Feb. 22). But she forgot one thing: Rudy ranted about how much he loves America, that he would fight for America anytime, anyplace. I guess six Vietnam deferrals don’t count. Oh, well. You were just following the pattern of your uncles who dodged the draft in World War II. H.D. Kayne

What’s up with Rudy?

Manhattan: Linda Stasi’s column on Rudy Giuliani’s recent public statements was 100% on target — and this comes from someone who voted for the former mayor twice. His comments are not only out of line but seem to come from some dark and twisted recess of his psyche. Indeed, one has to wonder if the former mayor isn’t suffering from some kind of brain damage or mental disease. Bruce Eder

Dump O’Reilly

Fire Island Pines, L.I.: Linda Stasi’s defense of Bill O’Reilly is not convincing. Buenos Aires was not a combat zone . Descriptions of his experiences in El Salvador are also inaccurate exaggerations. Exactly when did he narrowly escape death three times, as he claims? He deserves the same fate as Brian Williams — suspension in contemplation of dismissal. Peter LeVasseur

Take a hike, Mike

Miller Place, L.I.: While reading Mike Lupica’s column on Rudy Giuliani (“Has-been making a pathetic bid to be relevant,” Feb. 22), I couldn’t help but smirk at the asinine hypocrisy. Lupica is “nothing more than a crackpot member of the bullhorn media” — with articles meant to enrage and embitter rather than enlighten and educate. Spencer Charles Clasper

Mike likes Mike

New Hyde Park, L.I.: I’m a faithful reader of Mike Lupica’s columns. About five years ago, I remember him being very critical of Mayor Mike Bloomberg. But now, he manages to praise him in every column — even when the subject is not Bloomberg. Anyone know the reason for his change of heart? Just wondering. John Viola

Hands off Andy

Manhattan: I am amused by Mike Lupica’s decadeslong visceral hatred for Andy Pettitte (“The Liars Club,” column, Feb. 22). It comes across as nothing more than inadequacy on Lupica’s part. Andy made a mistake and owned it from day one. It’s a classic case of a youngster — maybe not a particularly bright one — who became enthralled with his boyhood hero, Roger Clemens. When this “hero” took him under his wing, Pettitte followed like a puppy dog — straight to the wrong side of the tracks. His unfortunate decision may cost him a spot in the Hall of Fame. But he can hold his head high knowing that he admitted his mistake — and moved on to set a fine example for young people everywhere. Carol Hopkins

Winter of discontent

Manhattan: Will everyone please stop whining about the cold and snow? Soon enough, you’ll be whining about the heat and humidity. Personally, I’d rather deal with this weather than be dripping with perspiration and slogging through the horrible heat waves that beset us in the summer months. Marcia Epstein

Say no to suicide

Brooklyn: Re Voicer Donald Kerr: There is no reason whatsoever, given proper medical care, that his brother should have died an agonizing death. My father died of lung cancer. At no point was he ever in agony or even distress. Also, anyone who wants to die can just stop their treatment, medication, etc. That’s different from the act of committing suicide, assisted or not, that Timothy Cardinal Dolan, given his religion, is against. Adelaide Verponi

Legal vs. illegal

Brooklyn: Voicer Jaclyn Garcia is correct on one point — the ancestors of Americans were all immigrants. My paternal grandparents were immigrants. They entered the United States legally. They had to be sponsored by an American citizen and ready for employment. My grandfather worked and supported his family with no help from the government, and there were 11 children in the family. Too many of today’s immigrants show no respect for our laws by entering the country illegally. If they choose to break the immigration laws, how can they be trusted to abide by all the other laws of our country? Susan La Regina

The end of an era

St. Albans: I would like to offer my condolences to the family and friends of Bob Simon (“Opera, tears at Simon farewell,” Feb. 18). He will be missed by all of his adoring fans. In my opinion, he was the greatest investigative reporter of all time. God bless you, Bob. Rest in peace. I will miss your fantastic stories on “60 Minutes.” Leslie Langer

Written on her face

Hopewell Junction, N.Y.: I received my Ash Wednesday ashes in Hopewell Junction. When I looked in the mirror, I scared myself. My cross was stretched in high definition across my forehead. Well, it was good for people who were nearsighted. Amen. Celia Oliva

Look both ways

Bronx: As a retired MTA bus operator , I say if the law makes failure to yield to a pedestrian in a crosswalk an “arrestable misdemeanor” when the driver kills or injures a pedestrian, then all crosswalks should have crossing gates. At what point are pedestrians responsible for their actions? Cindi C. Williams