A Preview of Hillary Clinton's 2016 Presidential Campaign

If you happen to be in Las Vegas on 13 October and need a break from the blackjack tables or want to catch up on some sleep, head on over to the university. Hillary Clinton will be speaking at a University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) Foundation fundraiser. UNLV will be paying dearly to have the presumptive Democratic Party nominee in 2016 bore the audience to tears with the usual litany of her “accomplishments” as Secretary of State – or whatever. Remainder copies of her book will be made available in the lobby.

The Las Vegas Review-Journal obtained a copy of Clinton’s contract with UNLV and related documents and has spilled the beans . And what beans they are! Clinton’s initial asking price for appearing at the fundraiser was $300,000. They must know a thing or two about bargaining in Vegas because Clinton agreed to a discounted fee of “only” $225,000.

Clinton and her staff will not be staying at Motel 6. Only the “presidential suite” of a luxury hotel will do, with up to five other rooms for her travel aides and advance staff. (Free late-night massages?)

Clinton and her staff will not be flying to Vegas in a commercial airliner. The UNLV Foundation is to provide a private plane; only a $39 million, 16-passenger Gulfstream G450 "or larger" will do. (Château D’Yquem 1967 for dessert?)

Clinton will be the only person allowed on stage while delivering her pearls of wisdom. (An empty chair is completely out of the question.) Clinton will decide who is to introduce her and will pick moderators for the event.

Clinton will be at the event no longer than 90 minutes. (It is unclear who will be in charge of the stopwatch or what will happen if the 90-minute limit is exceeded. Perhaps this is a way for Clinton to recoup part of the $75,000 discount.)

Clinton will pose for no more than 50 photos, with no more than 100 people. (The identity of the bean counter has not been revealed. If these limits are exceeded, Clinton may be able to recoup the rest of the $75,000 discount.)

Clinton will not allow any press coverage or video- or audio-taping of her speech. The only record allowed will be made by a stenographer whose transcription will be given only to Clinton. The stenographer’s $1,250 bill will be paid by UNLV.

The UNLV Foundation is prohibited from advertising the event on radio, TV or billboards. Mail and website ads are allowed, although Clinton staffers must approve in writing any promotional material. I for one can’t wait to see how MSM toadies will cover this event. They should be paying close attention because the Vegas gig is a preview of 2016. Clinton will seek to exercise even greater control once the presidential campaign is underway.