This week, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit is expected to release a decision that could have important ramifications for President Obama's health care reform law, the Affordable Care Act. The case, Halbig v. Sebelius, has the potential to once again place the courts squarely in the middle of the law's ability to succeed.

At issue is whether federal subsidies for the purchase of health insurance, in the form of health insurance premium tax credits, should be available for people who are buying insurance from the federal health insurance exchange. The law established these subsidies to assist those who otherwise wouldn’t be able to afford to buy a health insurance plan. The challengers in the suit argue the health care law established the subsidies only for individuals enrolled in health insurance exchanges established by the states. The federal government argues those subsidies can be made available to individuals in the federal exchange as well. The administration has implemented the subsidies for both the state and federal exchanges, and people have been taking advantage of them.

[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

So far, two lower courts have ruled for the government, but it's unclear which way this most recent ruling will go. Even if the provision is struck down in this newest decision, because of the judicial process, there will not be an immediate impact on the health care law or the people who are currently receiving the subsidies. Further, many speculate that the issue will not rise to the level of the Supreme Court.

However, the challenge continues to receive scrutiny because, if it should go further and eventually succeed, the impact on the Affordable Care Act would be substantial. Reports indicate that more than 5 million people who receive insurance through the federal exchange are already taking advantage of the subsidies. Further, 90 percent of the people on the federal exchange are eligible for them.

If the subsidies are voided, millions of people would be left without the ability to purchase insurance that may be too costly for them. Further, fewer beneficiaries in the federal exchange could negatively affect the ability of the exchange to offer good plans at reasonable prices. The effect would be a serious weakening in the reform of the individual insurance market, one of the key problems the health care law sought to resolve. The law’s employer mandate could also be affected, since it applies penalties to employers whose full-time employees receive subsidies through the exchanges.

[ READ: The GOP Targets Obamacare's Achilles' Heel]

Since the Affordable Care Act was signed into law, Congressional Republicans have tried numerous times to either change it or repeal it. However, the courts have had more of impact on the law than Congress. Although the Supreme Court kept most of the law intact in its decision in Florida v. Department of Health and Human Services in 2012, it also altered the law significantly when it ruled that the law's Medicaid expansion should be optional for states. As of today, only 26 states and D.C. have decided to expand their Medicaid programs, leaving millions without access to insurance. If the challengers in Halbig v. Sebelius do ultimately succeed, the result would be less access to insurance for millions more.

In each case, the individuals affected have little to no ability to buy health insurance on their own. As The Commonwealth Fund’s Sara Collins told The Hill, these are the people who the health care law is helping the most. Although the future path of the case is uncertain, it is a good reminder that the courts may have the ultimate say on the Affordable Care Act’s implementation and ability to provide coverage for those who truly need it.