Buy Photo Peter Sterling, a Vermont Health Connect Navigator, explains the health care exchange in Montpelier in October 2013. (Photo: FREE PRESS FILE)Buy Photo

I noticed that, like most press coverage, the recent article “Dropping Vermont Health Connect has consequences” (March 21) made no mention of the support available to Vermonters experiencing challenges. Unfortunately, most Vermonters don’t seem aware that free help is available.

Before getting “fed up,” individuals like Amanda can make use of local Navigator programs. Vermont Health Connect navigators provide information, in-person enrollment and advocacy support to all Vermonters, regardless of income. While I’ve not yet met a customer like Amanda, who believes she was enrolled in a health plan without her knowledge, I think it’s safe to say that many people don’t understand what they signed up for.

The confusion is understandable. Having to comprehend health insurance and make plan decisions is new for the vast majority of us and both health insurance and the health insurance system are undeniably complex. Frustration can be prevented or minimized, however, by connecting with a local Navigator, either at the time of enrollment or after signing up.

Before making the drastic decision to drop coverage, someone like Amanda can see whether a navigator can help them to resolve their issue and fully understand their options. One reason that Vermonters are choosing to maintain coverage is because the cost of a basic plan is often now less than the increasing tax fee for going uninsured, because of the financial help available. For higher income households ineligible for subsidies, the tax penalty can in fact equal the cost of an average Bronze plan. However, for many people weighing such a decision, the financial risk of going without health insurance is the major concern, not the tax penalty. W

hatever the motivation, changing plans is typically a better option than dropping coverage altogether. There are a number of life changes that not only allow someone without coverage to enroll after open enrollment, but also offer an opportunity for those signed up to change their plan. The change in income and potential marketplace error that Amanda reported most likely qualify her family for a special enrollment period, a 60 day period during which a plan can be changed.

Special enrollment and open enrollment periods are times when Vermonters can work with a navigator to look more carefully at their coverage and options. For someone eligible for a cost sharing reduction, this could mean moving to a lower cost Silver plan, with out of pocket costs comparable to or less than the Gold or Platinum plans. Based on the $2,500 deductible, Amanda was likely enrolled in one of the Gold High Deductible Health Plans. Those new Gold plans may be helpful to someone who thinks they will meet or exceed the relatively high deductible, as they will benefit from the relatively low annual out-of-pocket maximum.

Someone like Amanda, who considering dropping coverage, likely has low health care needs and may want to consider buying less insurance, rather than going without. While the deductibles and annual spending limit will be higher, someone who visits their doctor only once or twice a year could save hundreds if not thousands on premiums with a Bronze plan, compared to a Gold plan. Going without coverage also means no free preventive care or the protections from medical debt, which even the cheapest plan provides. A low-cost Bronze High Deductible Health Plan will offer an additional opportunity to receive a tax savings on funds set aside in a Health Savings Account.

While issues with our insurance marketplace persist, Vermonters can expect a whole new host of challenges if we move to the federal insurance marketplace. Instead of throwing up our hands, we can take advantage of the resources available and work together to make improvements. At some point, perhaps the focus will shift from technical glitches, to some of the many amazing Affordable Care Act success stories which navigators also see on a regular basis.

I hope we can celebrate the greater financial stability that expanded access to health coverage has provided to millions of people and the progress we’ve made. And whatever the remaining challenges, Vermont Health Connect has successfully helped us to achieve the highest rates of health coverage in the nation.

Tatum O’Malley, of Burlington, is a Vermont Health Connect navigator.

Read or Share this story: http://bfpne.ws/26vkKSk