Photo

Indefinable: Poetry doesn’t hit the lists very often, but when it does, it can hit big. In 2015, Claudia Rankine’s “Citizen” stayed on the monthly race and civil rights list all year; it’s currently No. 5. A hard-to-classify volume of prose poems, or lyrical essays, about daily encounters with racism — “I wanted to replicate the sense of having these stories come at you,” Rankine told The New Statesman — the book has also spent time on the paperback nonfiction list and, more counterintuitively, the monthly relationships list. (One place it hasn’t appeared yet is the monthly politics list, although that may change now that a young woman in Illinois was spotted reading it at a Trump rally.) The people who compile the Times lists aren’t the only ones who have struggled to define Rankine’s book. Last winter, “Citizen” became the first title ever nominated for a National Book Critics Circle Award in two categories: A finalist in criticism, it won in poetry. So what is this book, exactly? And how does Rankine feel about efforts to pin it down? “If we leave the structural hybridity of ‘Citizen’ aside,” she told me via email, “I want to believe there is a recognized veracity of experience for the people categorizing the book. Each feels ‘Citizen’ satisfies some truth or intention for their category. I am a poet, and I didn’t fictionalize the accounts told to me or taken from my life or from the news; I simply submerged my thinking into the ‘ethical loneliness’ (a phrase taken from the title of Jill Stauffer’s excellent book) that the sentences accumulated. The lyrical reflection of lives struggling to negotiate racism in our culture apparently feels authentic to many categories. That seems right.” Then she quoted a line from “Sentences and Paragraphs,” by Gertrude Stein: “Never ask any one what a sentence is or what it has been.”

Off the Leash: Another best-selling poet this year was Mary Oliver, whose collection “Dog Songs” hit the monthly animals list three times. True to its title, the book gathers poems (and one essay) about dogs. “I think they are companions in a way that people aren’t,” Oliver told The Times when it was published in 2013. “They’ll lie next to you when you’re sad. And they remind us that we’re animals, too.” In the essay that closes the volume, “Dog Talk,” Oliver allows herself a bit of a rant against leashes: “The other dog — the one that all its life walks leashed and obedient down the sidewalk — is what a chair is to a tree. It is a possession only, the ornament of a human life. Such dogs can remind us of nothing large or noble or mysterious or lost. They cannot make us sweeter or more kind. Only unleashed dogs can do that.”

Photo and Verse: What was the most expensive work of poetry in 2015? According to the used-books website AbeBooks, it might have been a 1930 edition of “The Bridge,” by Hart Crane, with photographs by Walker Evans, that fetched $10,000.