Outwardly, US healthcare is a mess. It doesn’t matter how you look at the topic, there are problems on all sides. Patients often say healthcare is too expensive, providers complain that they’re not paid enough while other says that for as long as healthcare in the US is a for profit business then there will always be intractable tensions.

Add in the new pressures brought about by the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare as it is more widely known) and it is easy to see how it can be hard to please a few of the people any of the time. Manish Tandon, who leads Infosys’ healthcare and life sciences business takes a different view.

The role of government and of society is to try and level the playing field enough to bring down overall costs and improve outcomes. In the American system that primarily happens through competition and some government intervention. So now we are seeing curbs to profit making behavior under ACA, with health insurers only allowed to make 16-17% margin. Government can be highly effective. When Valleant was arbitrarily increasing prices, the share price was hit hard once Congress took action against them.

High profile cases are one thing but what about the general market? Tandon notes it is estimated that some 17% of US GDP can be attributed to healthcare and health related costs. Tandon sees opportunities for this industry to be much more efficient and effective:

If you look at the sector, the biggest opportunity we see come from the lessons of productivity gains in other sectors that have not been used to a large extent in healthcare. It is one of the laggards overall on technology adoption – particularly in preventive and predictive which can focus on activities you should or should not be doing. But of course the overall fact that each human is very different needs to be built into solutions, yet we are doing treatment courses that are an average of averages. That’s not sustainable.

Tandon believes that the rise in the use of personal connected devices like the FitBit and Apple Watch have at least raised awareness of the need for healthier lifestyles:

The question now comes, how can we use those kinds of generalized data to develop lifestyle plans that help keep people healthier and away from the doctor’s surgery? It won’t surprise you to know we believe technology has a huge role to play but first, we need to get past the problems of data privacy.

Alongside, Tandon notes that pharmaceutical companies are responding by developing personalized medicines. In oncology for instance, it is expected there will be much more research to refine and develop drug treatments that work with specific genome sequences.

But what about the insurance side of the house? Here, we are starting to see companies like Optum trying to harness analytics derived from many sources in an effort to identify predictors for the incidence of diseases. Some are highly critical of these efforts because they force doctors and pharmacists to collect information from patients in circumstances where there is very little control over data quality and where there are no recognized standards for data collection.

While Tandon agrees there are plenty of challenges, he argues that the economics of providing cover on the one hand and then treatments and care on the other hand, combined with the restrictions imposed by government act as indirect checks and balances.

The entire healthcare ecosystem is moving towards prevention and pay for performance rather than pay for service. Those are good incentives for making sure the data is as good as it can be. Is there room for improvement? Absolutely but then the way the healthcare business model is changing forces a re-evaluation of what’s being measured and why.

So what is the way forward in what is unquestionably a complex and evolving landscape?

We have to think about connected care. I run our business on a ‘care, cure, cover and technology’ way of thinking. And with the industry moving to pay for performance, I should do the same. I want to offer ‘per member per month’ solutions because that is something that is understood in the industry.

How well this plays out remains to be seen but I hope to catch up with Tandon at the upcoming Confluence event to discover what else can be added to this prescription for change.

Image credit - Main story image, via LinkedIn - featured image via fotolia.

Disclosure - Infosys is a premier partner at time of writing