Please enable Javascript to watch this video

ST. LOUIS, MO (KTVI)-- ConnectCare, a healthcare hub for the less fortunate in St. Louis, confirms it will close its doors on November 15th. The move comes on the heels of layoffs and cuts that were supposed to allow them to maintain the busy Smiley Urgent Care Center on Delmar. Those cuts, apparently, did not work.

Annette Weaver is 99 years old, and was shocked by the news that this place, where she has been coming for so long, would soon be shuttered.

“Well it meant a lot to me because this is the only place I’ve been coming for years,” she said. “And I’m just surprised that they’re gonna leave here.”

But that’s exactly what’s happening. It was August that the non-profit announced nearly 100 layoffs and the end of specialty care they offered. But ConnectCare said the urgent care center and some other operations would keep going. At the time they said the State of Missouri’s refusal to expand Medicaid to comply with Obamacare was the reason they had to make cuts. The cuts apparently weren’t enough.

Officials from ConnectCare wouldn’t appear on camera or answer questions, but they did issue this statement from President and CEO Melody Eskridge:

“St. Louis ConnectCare (ConnectCare) announced the closing of all operations effective close of business on November 15, 2013.

“ConnectCare recently underwent a major restructuring of its services to concentrate on community health, urgent care and related services to reduce the amount of subsidy needed to support its care to the uninsured and underinsured in the region. Despite the restructuring, financial support for the organization was not moving forwardand the Board made the difficult decision to close.

“In its last fiscal year ConnectCare provided over 19,000 specialty medical visits, 16,500 urgent care visits, 6,000 communicable disease encounters, 12,000 radiology exams, and filled 34,000 prescriptions.

“With the downsizing announced in August, ConnectCare expected to, and was on track to provide 23,000 medical visits, 10,000 radiology exams, and 25,000 prescriptions to approximately 17,000 people.”

They did not say how many people would lose their jobs.

Patients at the Delmar location are frustrated. Many aren’t sure where they will go next.

“For the elderly people in the area it’s very important because they don’t have to go so far out,” Linda Dean said. “So I think it’s kind of a shame to have to move it out. I wish it could stay open.”