No. 7 seeded Denver Cougars end Sterling's season one win shy of NBC World Series

Xpress outfielder Joe Haddox hugs Michael Moffatt (No. 16) after Moffatt hit the go-ahead home run in Saturday's Rocky Mountain Baseball League Tournament game against the Colorado Sox. The Xpress won 6-5 over the Sox, but had their season come to an end with a 7-5 loss to the Denver Cougars on Sunday. ( David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

ARVADA — As Sterling Xpress players, coaches and supporters filed out of Long Lake Ranch Park complex in Arvada on Saturday night, optimism about the team's chances of going to Wichita, Kan. for the National Baseball Congress World Series warmed the chilly mountain air.

The Xpress had done their job, going 2-0 on the day in a pair of Rocky Mountain Baseball League Tournament elimination games to make it to Sunday's final rounds.

And with the top-seeded Arvada Colts already guaranteed a spot in the NBC World Series for winning the RMBL regular season title, the second available World Series spot — awarded to the RMBL tournament champion, or runner up if the tournament winner is also the regular season champ — was within Sterling's grasp.

A win by Arvada over the Denver Cougars, the tournament's Cinderella story as the No. 7 seed, to begin play on Sunday would have sent Sterling to the NBC World Series without the Xpress ever having to step back on the field.

But the playoff picture changed drastically when the Cougars instead handed Arvada its first loss of the tournament Sunday morning, and followed that up with a stunning 7-5 victory over the Xpress to steal Sterling's ticket to Wichita.

Advertisement

"It's hard to rely on other teams to win to get you to the World Series. But in the back of your mind, you're hoping Arvada wins that game (against the Cougars). And you expect Arvada to win that game, but it just didn't play very well," said Sterling Xpress manager Tom Myers. "And we ran out of gas against the Cougars, quite honestly. We kind of threw it all out there in Saturday night's game, hoping Arvada would get the job done (against the Cougars) since they had done it all season long. So to see them not play very well was a tough situation for us. That said, we needed to do a better job than we did against the Cougars, but we gave it all we had."

Due to a shortage of available arms, Xpress pitching coach-player Jordan Quinn was asked to take the ball on Sunday.

Quinn moved safely through the first two innings, and was spotted a 1-0 lead by his offense in the top of the third, but ran into trouble in the bottom half of the inning.

The North Carolina Central University graduate allowed a one-out walk, RBI double, RBI single, and two-run double in succession as part of a five-run frame for the Cougars.

Sterling climbed back within two runs on three different occasions, the last time on a homer run by Michael Moffatt leading off the seventh inning to cut the deficit to 7-5. But the solo shot from Saturday night's hero wasn't enough to spark a comeback as the next three Sterling hitters went down in order to end the ballgame.

The loss was a disappointing end to what was otherwise a tremendous season for the Xpress, who finished the year 27-16 overall, second in the RMBL during the regular season, and third in the RMBL Tournament.

The 27 wins are a franchise record, surpassing last year's 26-16 overall mark the team set in the four-team, and substantially weaker, Mountain Collegiate Baseball League.

Sterling Xpress starter Tyler Vandenbark delivers a pitch during the first game on Saturday against the Colorado Black Bears. Vandenbark went all seven innings, allowed three runs, and struck out eight in Sterling's 8-3 win. (David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Myers, who called this summer the most fun to date that he has had in coaching, said Sunday's loss stings, considering how close the Xpress were to keeping their summer going. But he added the season as a whole was a tremendous success not only in the win column, but also in player development.

"You sit back and look at the win total and it tells you how well we did. But it really comes down to the types of guys we have on the team and how much fun we had. Hopefully they all had a good experience, were able to get better, and can carry that into their spring seasons because that's the most important thing," Myers said. "You want to win and make it to the World Series since we were right there. And to have that chance taken away is tough right now. But you hope these guys improved and can go help their college teams."

Saturday games

Following a disappointing 6-3 loss on Friday night to the Colorado Sox, the Xpress entered Saturday's action with their backs against the wall, needing a pair of wins in elimination games to stay alive in the RMBL Tournament.

Carried by a tremendous, complete-game effort on the mound from Tyler Vandenbark, Sterling got win No. 1 out of the way with ease as it cruised to an 8-3 victory over the Colorado Black Bears in its first game of the day.

Vandenbark was a bit shaky to start, allowing two runs to cross the plate in the top of the first inning. But the left-hander was nothing short of dominating the rest of the way as he limited the Black Bears to one run over his final six innings of work while striking out eight.

"The big thing was him going the complete game and saving our arms for the rest of the weekend," Myers said. "The way he started, we had a guy up and throwing because he was struggling, but he settled in. I don't think Vandy had gone longer than four innings in his last couple of starts, so for him to go all seven and do what he did was perfect."

The Xpress offense, and some suspect defense by the Black Bears, gave Vandenbark a lead to work with in the bottom of the second as Sterling plated four runs, two earned, to take a 4-2 lead. Dugan Shirer and Eddie Sanchez drove in two of the runs on an RBI single and RBI groundout, respectively.

Sterling added a run in the fourth on an RBI single by Sanchez, two in the fifth on RBI singles by Lucas Lingreen and Croix Sedillo, and an unearned run in the sixth on an errant back-pick throw by the Black Bears catcher that helped seal the 8-3 final.

With the win, Sterling advanced to the semi-finals later in the evening for another meeting with the Colorado Sox.

The Sox, coming off of an extra-inning loss to the Arvada Colts just a few minutes early, got after Xpress starting pitcher Blake Phelps in the top of the first inning, hitting for the cycle as a team and tallying five runs in the process.

Former Northeastern Junior College infielder, Brandon Baeckel, delivered the big blow with a three-run homer to left field that chased Phelps after just 2/3 of an inning.

It was a lone bad outing of the summer for Phelps, who entered the contest as the team leader in wins (6). But the Xpress bullpen picked him up.

Sterling natives Josiah Lindstadt (3 1/3 innings) and Jay Kiel (one inning), and ace Damon Jones (two innings), combined to throw 6 1/3 of no-hit baseball the rest of the way to keep the Xpress in the ballgame.

"We were initially going to start Joisah, but Phelps had pitched so well and was available. He had earned this start, but he just struggled, obviously," Myers said. "But Josiah came in and cleaned it up for him. Jay threw a really good inning, and then there was Damon on the back end. It was just one of those days for Phelps... We knew we were going to score some runs, it was just a matter of when and if we could hold (the Sox). The bullpen did everything they needed to do."

The Xpress got on the board with a three-run second inning on an RBI walk from Sanchez, RBI single from Tyler Blood, and an RBI double from Cooper.

Blood added another RBI single in the bottom of the fourth inning to get the Xpress back to within a run.

Michael Moffatt then provided the fireworks in the fifth.

Following a leadoff walk by Joe Haddox, Moffatt, who was 0-for-6 on the day despite scorching the baseball all around the diamond, deposited a two-run, no-doubter home run over the left-field fence to give the Xpress a 6-5 lead.

"I think everyone in the park who knows Mike and what he'd done the last two days knew he was going to hit that out," said Myers of the home run. "When he hit it, he knew it was gone. It was perfect timing because we also knew we had Damon coming in."

Jones, working on two days rest, slammed the door shut on the Sox over the final two innings to secure the 6-5 victory and get the Xpress to Sunday.

David Wilson: 970-526-9285, dwilson@journal-advocate.com