JONATHON DAWE-jdawe@dailystatesman.com Southeast Regional Hub Manager C.J. Smallwood (right) reviews information with Katilyn Yates (middle) before signing her up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act. Yates' grandmother, Shirley Duncan (left) said she brought Yates to the Regional Health Center in Dexter seeking an insurance plan.

Katilyn Yates is almost 21 years old. She works as a waitress and she hasn't had health insurance since she was 18. By the time she finishes answering questions at the Regional Health Center in Dexter, she will be insured with a plan that will cost her less than $20 a month.

C.J. Smallwood, a contract specialist with the Delta Area Economic Opportunity Corporation (DAEOC), said that she has signed up approximately 2,500 people for insurance through the Affordable Care Act since November.

"There are some misconceptions about how this all works, but things are getting better," Smallwood explained. "More people are getting interested and looking into this, so we're having a good response to this."

Smallwood and her colleague, Rivian Hill, were at the Regional Health Center in Dexter all day Monday to answer questions and sign people up for insurance; and, while they were able to navigate the system fairly easily, it was clear that some difficulties remain.

"I would say the biggest challenge we face with this is the Medicaid gap," Smallwood remarked. "The state of Missouri decided not to expand Medicaid last year, so there are several people that fall in that gap and don't qualify for any tax credits."

The Affordable Care Act is designed to provide Americans with better health security by putting in place comprehensive health insurance reforms that expand choices for the consumer, hold insurance companies more accountable, lower health care costs, and guarantee choice. Since becoming law, the act has met with stiff opposition from Republican legislators in Missouri.

Though designed to open the market to more competition -- and, thus, more options for the consumer -- the Missouri Legislature decided to regulate the law by allowing only two insurance providers to be part of the exchange in 2014.

"This year, the state has allowed for United and Cigna to participate; but that's only in certain parts of the state. Those two aren't state-wide," Smallwood explained. "Anthem Blue Cross/Blue Shield is still the biggest."

Smallwood said she hopes to see more insurers allowed to participate in the exchange, simply because that would allow more options for customers.

"One of the biggest misconceptions that we seem to deal with concerns tax credits," Smallwood said. "Like, if you live in a household with multiple incomes, that is taken into consideration as far as whether or not you're eligible for any credits," Smallwood explained.

"Some people think the worse off you are, the more help you get," Hill commented. "That isn't the case. You need to be working. You need to have an income. That's why we tell people to be honest with us during this process; because not everyone will qualify for credits."

Smallwood went on to explain that she has been signing up all kinds of people from all age groups and walks of life.

"I would say that things have gotten a little smoother this year," Smallwood remarked. "We're definitely signing up more people than we did last year."

Smallwood said she encourages people to just contact her if they have any questions about the program.

"Even if you already have insurance, you can check with us and see if you qualify for a better plan," Smallwood commented. "If you have any questions at all, just call us and ask."

As Smallwood finishes putting together the information for Yates, a sigh of relief is breathed.

"It is such a relief to finally have insurance," Yates commented. "It feels really good to have this piece of mind."

Yates qualified for a silver plan, and she also qualified for a credit that put the cost of her plan at $15.91 per month.

"This plan does absolute wonders when you qualify for a credit," Hill remarked.

DAEOC will be hosting and participating in several events this week. DAEOC in Portageville will have extended office hours on Thursday Feb. 12, and will have the office open until 7 p.m. The office will be open from 8-4 on Friday, Feb. 13. Smallwood will be at the Caruthersville Library from 9:30 a.m., to 1:30 p.m. on Saturday, Feb 14; and, at the Missouri Bootheel Regional Consortium on Sunday, Feb. 15 for the final days of open enrollment. There will also be assisters at the Cape Girardeau Library on Feb 12 and 15.