Employees appreciate the expanded space and downtown amenities.

Buy Photo Reid Patient Financial Services’ Sharrie Harlan, who does community outreach, talks with Sherry Platt, patient advocate, in the department’s new office in the 600 Building at 600 E. Main St. in Richmond. Platt said the individual office provides more space and privacy for her and her clients. (Photo: Rachel E. Sheeley/Palladium-Item)Buy Photo Story Highlights Reid Hospital's Patient Financial Services department has moved downtown to the 600 Building.

It is the home to bill payment and inquiries for the hospital and Reid Physician Associates.

Health care program sign-up assistance and Reid Hospital medical records requests also are in the building.

About 80 employees moved from 1501 Chester Blvd. to the renovated office space.

Reid Hospital's Patient Financial Services department has a new home and employees are loving the extra space and improved privacy for assisting patients.

The new location, in the 600 Building at Sixth and East Main streets downtown, also makes the department's services more accessible to area residents.

"Many families we serve have transportation challenges that sometimes inhibit their ability to access our financial support services, said Craig Kinyon, Reid President/CEO. "This location provides more room and also brings these services to the heart of downtown, which offers some of our customers more convenience."

The office opened April 27. Customers can make or arrange bill payments for Reid Hospital or Reid Physician Associates. They can sign up for insurance programs, such as HIP 2.0 or the Affordable Care Act and they can request and receive copies of Reid Hospital medical records.

The new location, accessed by the East Main Street entrance, houses about 80 employees who work on Reid billing or Reid Physician Associates billing and Reid's central scheduling department. Most of the employees formerly worked in the Reid building at 1501 Chester Blvd., which was much smaller and built for a physician practice.

"We were packed in (there) like sardines," said billing manager Charity Gutierrez. "It's like an ocean (here). You can reach out and not touch someone."

"We have meeting space," said cash and collections manager Jennifer Yates. "We can have really constructive meetings. We have our own training room that we did not have before."

Patient advocate Sherry Platt has a larger office with more space, and more privacy, for her and the patients she is assisting.

"I love this office. I feel happy in this spot," Platt said.

There is room for expansion and additional employees in the new location. One reason the departments moved was because Reid recently added employees to its billing staff.

Tricia Ours, Lean facilitator, enjoys being able to walk downtown during her lunch hour.

Sharrie Harlin, community outreach, said downtown businesses have welcomed them.

"The Main Street merchants are very excited about this influx of activity into the 600 Building, which has been mostly vacant for many years," said Jason Whitney, executive director of Center City Development. "This increased activity will help to sustain existing businesses and will help to entice new development to the area."

Harlin hopes that when people come to pay Reid bills, they'll spend some extra time downtown.

She said the 600 Building offers greater access to those with limited transportation because of its proximity to the city's bus hub at the downtown parking garage. Harlin said that while the city bus went to the main hospital campus, it didn't stop at 1501 Chester Blvd.

Central scheduling employees like Bertha Rice and Lori Curtis like their new upstairs space. Their department had been in the basement.

Sonnie Clifton, who works in the Reid Physicians Associates department, feels like she's come full circle. When she was child, she and her mother would come to the same floor in the building, formerly Bartel's Hoosier Store, to buy her Girl Scout uniforms.

"I remember shopping in the Hoosier Store. It was a wonderful store," Clifton said.

The Bartel family opened its initial store on the same corner in 1900 and built the present building in 1927. The building survived the 1968 downtown explosions, but the Bartel family closed the store. The building's facade was renovated in 1973 to its current appearance.

What's next

The vacated office building at 1501 Chester Blvd. is being redeveloped for a doctor's office.

Kinyon said that space serves as a recruiting tool to make Reid more competitive in ongoing efforts to attract doctors to the area.

"We are currently recruiting for almost 40 physicians or mid-level providers," Kinyon said. "We need to be able to share with candidates potential locations for their practices when possible as a way to distinguish ourselves from other health systems who are also seeking providers in a very competitive market. From a local economic perspective, success in physician recruitment means more jobs for our community."

Reid also is renovating the former Ruby Tuesday restaurant property on West Eaton Pike for doctor's offices.

What Reid Hospital departments you can find in the 600 Building downtown

•Bill payment for both Reid Hospital and Reid Physician Associates accounts.

•Patient Benefit Specialists available to set up payment plans or seek help with financial need.

•Sign-up assistance from ClaimAid for such health coverage programs as Medicaid or the Healthy Indiana Plan.

•Picking up copies of Reid Hospital medical records from Health Information Management

What you don't see: Reid's Central Scheduling department upstairs

Lobby hours: 8 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Monday-Friday. Use the East Main Street entrance.

Where: 600 E. Main St., Richmond

Need more information? Need to schedule an appointment for billing or health coverage program sign-up assistance?

•Reid Hospital billing, (765) 983-3184 or (855) 753-7125

•Reid Physician Associates billing, (765) 935-8895

•ClaimAid health coverage program assistance, (765) 935-8591

Read or Share this story: http://pinews.co/1GOPuQP