Senior Republicans who are worried they’ll be blamed for killing health insurance for millions of Americans have been busy assembling a range of options if the Supreme Court strikes down the law’s subsidies in 34 states.

But the GOP senators running for president — starting but not ending with firebrand Ted Cruz — threaten to stymie their leaders’ carefully hatched plans. Any whiff that the GOP’s Plan B is a continuation of Obamacare is bound to spark furious protests from the conservative base, putting pressure on the presidential hopefuls to respond. Cruz, for one, would press for a wholesale repeal of the law — or to allow states to opt out of Obamacare — if the high court provides the opening.

Story Continued Below

Top Republicans warn those conservatives are playing with fire.

“Things can’t be turned on a dime,” said Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn of Texas. “People can run for president, but we’ve actually got to solve a problem.”

It’s the latest example of how presidential politics continues to be the biggest wild card facing Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) as he tries to work his will in a body where any one senator can upset his plans. Already, White House hopefuls have altered McConnell’s strategy on Iran and the PATRIOT Act. The aftermath of the King v. Burwell case could be next.

“Corralling our presidentials on a plan or a solution is going to be a bit of a challenge,” said John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 3 GOP leader. “Everyone is going to be running away from — lock, stock and barrel — any connection whatsoever to the current program.”

For Republicans in the Senate, the issue is particularly urgent since GOP seats are in contention in next year’s elections in states like Wisconsin, Ohio, Florida, Missouri and North Carolina — all of which adopted the federal exchange and are at risk of losing the subsidies depending on how the court rules. If Congress can’t find a resolution, Republicans in these states worry they’ll face a sharp backlash from people who rely on the subsidies to defray their health care costs.

“It would hurt real people. That’s something any member of Congress, any public elected official, has got to respond to,” said Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson, who faces a tough reelection next year. He’s the author of a leading Republican plan to respond to the court’s ruling by extending the subsidies for 18 months, but scrapping the employer and individual mandates, a nonstarter for Democrats. “You just can’t stop something cold turkey. It’s not responsible. It’s not a fair thing to do.”

If the Supreme Court rules against Obamacare — a decision is expected within weeks — it would strike down subsidies for millions of people who are enrolled in states with a federally run exchange. Though some experts believe the high court is more likely to preserve the law, the possibility that it won’t has Senate Republicans scrambling for a replacement strategy.

GOP senators have discussed several proposals behind closed doors but are nowhere near consensus. After vowing for years to scrap the law and replace it, the party is rife with tension over what it would do if the onus was suddenly on it to come up with an alternative. Even if Republicans could settle on a legislative response, President Barack Obama would almost certainly veto it.

With a ruling expected this month, McConnell has signaled his preference by signing on to Johnson’s plan. McConnell also has signaled an interest in a separate approach by freshman Sen. Ben Sasse, a conservative from Nebraska who has proposed offering financial assistance through tax credits over 18 months but reducing them gradually over that time period.

The Johnson proposal is supported by a majority of GOP senators, no small feat for a party that has struggled to find consensus on the health care law. But despite the support of 32 GOP senators, the proposal faces stiff headwinds from presidential hopefuls like Cruz and Sen. Rand Paul, as well as House conservatives.

Forget a temporary patch of Obamacare, the Kentucky Republican said in an interview: The party should push for a whole new law.

“I would like to legalize inexpensive insurance policies, give more choice, let people choose their doctor, expand health savings accounts, help people save for their insurance,” Paul said. Asked if his plan would involve extending the subsidies, the Kentucky Republican replied: “A better way would be to try to legalize inexpensive insurance policies. … The president has made it illegal to buy inexpensive insurance in our country.”

In a separate interview last week, Cruz said a victory for his side in the court case would be a “real opportunity for Congress to lead.”

He added: “In a perfect world, we would take that opportunity to repeal Obamacare. At a minimum, we should allow states to opt out.”

Cruz has his own Plan B: Scuttle the entire health care law, though he would allow for a six-month transition period in order to let the markets and states adjust to a full-scale repeal.

Another GOP hopeful, Marco Rubio of Florida, has praised Sasse’s plan as a “credible” alternative. The senator’s spokeswoman pointed to a March op-ed published on Fox News’ website laying out a four-point health care plan, when asked how he’d like Congress to respond to a court ruling against the White House.

One Senate Republican who is running for president is firmly in favor of Johnson’s approach.

“I don’t think we should terminate them until we have a plan,” Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) said of the subsidies.

McConnell and Senate Republican leaders have little margin for error. The most likely legislative vehicle to push their health care alternative will come through the so-called budget reconciliation process, which can pass with just 51 votes since the legislation would not be subject to a filibuster. That means McConnell can lose no more than three Republicans — no sure bet in a caucus with a band of conservatives and presidential hopefuls. Even then, whatever the GOP approved would be subject to a presidential veto.

“It may be a problem,” Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) said of presidential politics.

But some conservatives have left their names off of Johnson’s bill out of reluctance to associate themselves with Obamacare, even though his legislation would knock out central planks of the law. That opposition may only harden if presidential hopefuls like Cruz and others whip up fervor among the grass roots and the conservative rank and file.

GOP leaders say they’re aware of the problem they could face, though they argue it won’t be clear how stiff the opposition is until the ruling comes down.

If the court rules against Obamacare and Republicans are under pressure to fix the subsidy issue, some House and Senate conservatives are worried they’ll be accused of salvaging a law they’ve voted dozens of time to repeal. Nevertheless, the thinking in some conservative circles is that the president is going to veto whatever Republicans pass anyway — because the plan is likely to gut Obamacare’s mandates — so they might as well go big to show what the party stands for rather than pass “Obamacare-lite.”

“That’s a very strong argument, particularly when it gets vetoed anyway,” said Rep. John Fleming (R-La.). “Let’s just bring up our replacement bill and vote on it and send it to the president and he can veto that.”

In 2013, the government shut down when Senate conservatives, led by Cruz and Mike Lee (R-Utah), rallied the right in the House to back only spending bills that attempted to defund the president’s signature domestic policy initiative. But conservatives hope things will be different this time: They aren’t tying their efforts to a spending bill — at least not yet.

But even if they can’t get the votes of all the senators running for president, GOP leaders are at least hoping that the presidential politics leave some room for governing.

“Every Republican has great concerns about the law,” said Sen. John Barrasso (R-Wyo.). “I want to do nothing to protect this law. I do want to protect the people who have found that they thought they were following the law and now find out the president is acting illegally.”