The decision rests in the hands of Republican leaders, including the new chairmen of the House and Senate budget committees as well as the House Ways and Means and Senate Finance committees. Representative Tom Price, a Georgia Republican and a strong conservative, will be writing the House’s budget next year, while Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin moves to the Ways and Means Committee, which originates tax bills and has the dominant role in health care legislation.

Both men argue that the budget office should use more “dynamic scoring” when assessing the cost of tax cuts, saying the impact on the Treasury would be mitigated greatly by the additional economic growth they contend the cuts would engender.

Such a change in scorekeeping, based on the supply side theory popular among conservatives, would ease the push to overhaul the tax code and produce an ostensibly balanced budget while lowering top individual and corporate tax rates.

That has Democrats worried.

“If they’re bringing in a C.B.O. director with the intention of getting someone who’s going to apply voodoo economics to the budget, that’s a real problem,” said Representative Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, the ranking Democrat on the House Budget Committee. “If they’re looking for someone who is going to cook the books, that’s a real problem.”

So far, no director has taken the C.B.O. down a partisan rabbit hole.

“Every time, people worry about politicization,” said Mr. Holtz-Eakin, who has become increasingly aligned with conservative politics since leaving the budget office. “It is in the statute that it be nonpartisan, and I generally don’t fall out of bed wanting to break the law. And it’s in the DNA of the staff.”

Ms. Rivlin said it was possible for a director to warp the institution, asserting more partisan leadership, prompting staff departures and replacing them with more partisan appointments.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But, she said, “It never has, because both parties have appointed directors who understand the mission of C.B.O. is to be very nonpartisan and have made an effort to not inject their own views into the picture.”

This transition has been more perilous than most. Mr. Elmendorf has told congressional leaders and committee chairmen that he wants another term. But aides close to the budget committees say the incoming leadership is looking at a host of new names.

The Capitol Hill newspaper Roll Call has already floated possible replacements. Some, like Jeffrey R. Brown of the University of Illinois and Katherine Baicker of Harvard University, are respected Republican academic economists. Others are more partisan, such as Warren Payne, the House Ways and Means Committee’s Republican policy director; J. D. Foster, the deputy chief economist for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, formerly of the Heritage Foundation; and James C. Capretta, a frequent contributor to National Review.

That list prompted an outpouring of concern among an eclectic group of economists on the right. N. Gregory Mankiw of Harvard, a former chairman of George W. Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers, called for Mr. Elmendorf’s reappointment on his blog: “I understand that G.O.P. leaders may be tempted to put their own stamp on the Congressional Budget Office. But sometimes the benefits of continuity transcend ideology and political affiliation.”

“Dynamic scoring is more realistic, because the path of the economy responds to changes in tax policy,” Mr. Mankiw said in an email response to questions last week. “The problem is that there is substantial disagreement about which models are most appropriate for estimating those responses. Static scoring makes the clearly wrong assumption that tax policy does not influence the economy, but it has the virtue of being less model-dependent and thus more easily understood.”

Casey B. Mulligan, a conservative economist at the University of Chicago, laid out his “reasons to continue the Elmendorf era.” Keith Hennessey, a top Bush adviser, weighed in, as did Charles Murray and Alan D. Viard of the American Enterprise Institute.

Still, like his counterparts in the House, the incoming Senate Finance Committee chairman, Orrin G. Hatch, also believes the C.B.O. should be taking another stab at dynamic scoring. Currently, the budget office and the White House Office of Management and Budget use “static scoring” on most bills, assessing the cost of tax cuts and spending bills primarily as simple subtraction from revenue or addition to spending totals.

“What’s wrong with C.B.O. and O.M.B. doing both a static report and a dynamic report?” Mr. Hatch asked. “It’s stupid to do the one and not do the other.”

Given that perspective among prominent Republicans and continuing conflict over the Affordable Care Act, congressional aides say the betting is against Mr. Elmendorf, whose positive assessments of the cost and impact of the health care law have angered conservative activists for years. His replacement, they say, would signal that Republicans are serious about change.