Medicaid expansion has shifted more of Colorado hospitals’ charity care costs to federal taxpayers, and advocates are pointing to the stimulating effects of the new federal spending.

Colorado’s decision to take funding offered by the 2010 federal health law for expanding Medicaid to working-age adults with no kids and no disabilities has created more than 30,000 jobs, a recent Colorado Health Foundation study concluded.

In an announcement of the study’s results, Colorado Health Foundation president Karen McNeil-Miller called the Medicaid expansion “a fiscally sound decision that is helping to make our state more economically competitive.”

RELATED: Colorado Medicaid rolls double after expansion

But Linda Gorman, director of the Health Care Policy Institute at the free-market Independence Institute in Denver, questioned the methodology of the Colorado Health Foundation study, noting that a Tennessee study published in the National Bureau of Economic Research showed Medicaid eligibility for working-age adults with no kids and no disabilities discourages employment.

“Then there’s the problem of substitution and waste,” Gorman said. “Students who had coverage through college mini-med plans are now eligible for Medicaid. So are many part-time workers.”

“It is likely that a great deal of Medicaid enrollment is the result of substitution from the private sector,” she explained. “This does not necessarily increase economic activity. It may simply substitute less efficient tax-supported health spending for more efficient private health spending.”

Findings from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment published in 2013 suggest Medicaid coverage doesn’t improve health outcomes, Gorman said. And, she added, “the additional federal dollars have to come from somewhere.”

The national debt exceeds $19 trillion, but Obamacare promises federal funding for 100 percent of Medicaid expansion benefits through 2016. Starting in 2017, states will have to pay for 5 percent of benefit costs. The state share is set to increase to 10 percent by 2020.

Hospitals support Medicaid expansion as a way to secure additional federal money to pay for care they provide to the poor, and the Colorado Hospital Association says charity care costs dropped sharply when the Obamacare expansion took effect in 2014.

From the first quarter of 2013 to the first quarter of 2014, average charity care costs at Colorado hospitals dropped from $4.6 million to $2.9 million — a decline of more than 36 percent.

Patients receiving charity care pay hospitals nothing, which makes expanded Medicaid coverage appealing for care providers despite the Medicaid program’s low reimbursement rates.

“As of 2013, Colorado hospitals receive $0.66 in government payments for every $1.00 spent providing services to Medicare patients, $0.80 for every $1.00 spent providing care to Medicaid patients and $1.51 for every dollar spent providing care to patients with private insurance coverage,” CHA’s website explains.

Chris Tholan, chief financial officer and vice president of financial policy at CHA, told Watchdog.org that expanding Medicaid has improved health care in Colorado.

Whether it’s had any effect on patient outcomes in Colorado remains to be seen. But it has improved the health of nonprofit hospitals’ bottom lines.

CHA members saw charity care costs drop “almost instantly” after Medicaid expansion took effect, Tholan said. “What we’ve seen is a steady drop through 2014 in uncompensated care.”

“I think we’ve stabilized where we’re going to be now,” Tholan added. “We expect that 35-40 percent lower than pre-[Affordable Care Act} level to hold going forward.”

Obamacare expansion has increased hospitals’ unreimbursed Medicaid costs — the gap between what hospitals charge and what Medicaid pays — but the previously uninsured are receiving additional services through the program.

“Even though the financial effect within providers may be relatively minimal, I think we’re seeing a better health care system,” Tholan said.

Colorado hospitals pay a provider fee to cover the state share of Medicaid expansion costs, and CHA expects Medicaid expansion will continue without major changes regardless of the outcome of the 2016 elections.

“There’s always that risk in federal government that reimbursements will change,” Tholan said. “Hospitals have been dealing with that since Medicare went in in 1965, and have been able to adapt.”

The federal government pays for 50 percent of Colorado’s traditional Medicaid benefits, a much lower match rate than the 90 percent promised for the Obamacare expansion from 2020 onward.

Before the Obamacare expansion took effect, unreimbursed Medicaid was already more of a burden than charity care for many of Colorado’s hospitals.

Based on a Watchdog.org review of 2012-13 financials from 19 of CHA’s nonprofit members, charity care averaged 2.3 percent of total expenses and unreimbursed Medicaid averaged 5.8 percent of total expenses at Colorado nonprofit hospitals.

Bad debt — incurred when patients are billed but fail to pay — averaged 5.5 percent of expenses for Colorado’s nonprofit hospitals.

Details about Colorado nonprofit hospital’s uncompensated care costs before Medicaid expansion are included in the following table, from IRS Form 990 filings available at GuideStar.org.