STONY BROOK, N.Y., Feb. 23, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Softheon.com, a proven leader in health insurance marketplace integration and certified Web Broker Entity, will be a major sponsor and exhibitor at the 2016 HIMSS Annual Conference & Exhibition. Held at the Sands Expo Center in Las Vegas, Nevada from February 29th-March 4th, HIMSS16 brings together over 40,000 health IT professionals, clinicians, executives, and vendors from around the world.

With more than 300 education programs that include keynotes, thought leader sessions, roundtable discussions, and e-sessions, HIMSS16 provides attendees with the opportunity to network and connect with thousands of industry leaders and other health IT professionals.

"Our team is thrilled at the opportunity to participate at HIMSS16. As it is our first time sponsoring and attending this event, we are excited at the opportunity to spark new connections with fellow thought leaders," said Eugene Sayan, Softheon CEO & Founder.

Softheon will have a major presence as a First Time Exhibitor during the event, offering multiple opportunities to meet their team.

An Exclusive HIMSS16 Afternoon Break:

Who: presented by Softheon CEO & Founder, Eugene Sayan

What: a conversation surrounding Distribution Platform Optimization

When: Tuesday, March 1, 2016 | 3:00-5:30 PM

Where: Sands Expo and Convention Center, Las Vegas, Nevada- room 103

Interoperability Showcase Session:

Who: presented by Softheon CEO & Founder, Eugene Sayan

What: Healthcare delivery platform. A Single Source Solution in a Consumer Driven Ecosystem

When: Thursday, March 3, 2016 | 1:20-2:00 PM

Where: Sands Expo and Convention Center, Las Vegas, Nevada-both 11954 | Hall G

* Extra fees and registration may be required for this event.

Softheon can be found at booth 8460 in the main exhibit hall during HIMSS16, as well as in the Innovation Vignette during the Interoperability Showcase. For more information on Softheon's presence at HIMSS16, or to schedule a meeting with Softheon during this event, please visit Softheon.com/HIMSS16.

About HIMSS

HIMSS North America, a business unit within HIMSS, positively transforms health and healthcare through the best use of information technology in the United States and Canada. As a cause-based non-profit, HIMSS North America provides thought leadership, community building, professional development, public policy, and events. HIMSS North America represents 61,000 individual members, 640 corporate members, and over 450 non-profit organizations. Thousands of volunteers work with HIMSS to improve the quality, cost-effectiveness, access, and value of healthcare through IT. Major initiatives within HIMSS North America include the HIMSS Annual Conference & Exhibition, National Health IT Week, HIMSS Innovation Center, HIMSS Interoperability Showcases™, HIMSS Health IT Value Suite, and ConCert by HIMSS™.

About Softheon

Empowering the nation's first state health benefit exchange since 2008, Softheon's vision and strategic direction address healthcare payer, provider, and government agencies' goal of meeting Affordable Care Act (ACA) milestones. Softheon provides HIX Integration, Direct Enrollment, Premium Billing, and Edge Server solutions for insurance carriers of all sizes participating in Federal and State Health Insurance Exchange (HIX) Marketplaces. Softheon's Marketplace Connector Cloud (MC2) has been trusted by health plans, in all 50 states, as an accelerated federal, state, and private exchange integration platform. Softheon MC2 is a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) solution where insurers pay a one-time activation and ongoing PMPM fees for exchange members only, while eliminating most, if not all, risks associated with ACA enrollment compliance and other mandates.

To find out more about Softheon, visit www.softheon.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160223/336423LOGO

SOURCE Softheon