Melbourne Victory fans celebrate a goal. Photo: Getty Images

It could hardly have been a better start to the season for the navy blue half of the city, but Melbourne Victory boss Kevin Muscat knows all too well that not much can be read into the result of one game – even when it is as impressive a scoreline as that posted by his team on Friday night.

Victory smashed four goals – and it could have been more – past a hapless Western Sydney Wanderers side that looked a shadow of the team that had recently earned its place in the Asian Champions League final. New Victory signings Besart Berisha and Mathieu Delpierre were on the scoresheet inside the first 20 minutes.

Victory played well, very well. As Muscat observed afterwards, just about everything he had planned, from a high-pressure, pressing game in the opponent's half of the pitch to set piece routines came off.

And the Wanderers were poor, an uncharacteristic effort from the Tony Popovic-coached team which has become a byword for relentlessness and ruthless efficiency in its two seasons in the competition. Not surprisingly the Wanderers boss made no excuses afterwards and said he simply hoped it was "one of those nights".

Advertisement

Muscat will be hoping that it wasn't, and that his side will be able to replicate this performance when it travels to South Australia for next Friday's big clash with traditional rivals Adelaide United. It then faces local rivals Melbourne City in a derby game that will take the existing competition between the two up a notch given the investment that Manchester City has made in its new Australian affiliate.

Lest anyone at Victory is tempted to run away with themselves after this result it is worth remembering a similar game in the very first A-League season. Victory put five past Sydney FC at the old Olympic Park without reply. Fans were dreaming of first season championships, but the reality was rather different. Sydney won the title and Victory didn't make the play-offs.

Still, it was a highly impressive performance by a Victory team that had been straining at the leash to get under way.

Although a centre-back, Delpierre's size and technique will make him a threat in the opposition penalty box from corners and free kicks, as he showed on Friday. Carl Valeri will bring consistency and solidity to the midfield, his discipline and tactical understanding likely to make him a crucial part of the mix in the centre of the park.

And of course Berisha gives the team a sharper point, a central focus that it perhaps lacked last season. The irrepressible Albanian bubbles with confidence and self-belief, and he won't care that his first goal for the club came from the penalty spot. In fact, it was entirely in keeping with his character that he took responsibility for converting the spot kick so early in the game.

Mark Milligan, the club captain, was away with the Socceroos in the Middle East, but he was barely missed. Leigh Broxham took the armband and put in a sterling shift, capped off with a fiercely struck goal. Milligan will be back in time for the game against Adelaide but Muscat need have no concerns about rushing him, jet-lagged back into the team: Broxham and Valeri did more than enough to be given the chance to continue their partnership in the middle.

"I am very very proud, it was one of the most complete performances," Muscat said after the game and it was hard to disagree with him.

This was the first time in an A-League game that the normally parsimonious Wanderers had conceded four goals, and with the firepower at their disposal Victory have the capacity to do the same to almost any opponent.

Nevertheless Muscat counselled caution. "Everyone wants to try and win silverware. We are a game into 27 games, we are not getting ahead of ourselves. That's a standard we have set and we have to meet it consistently."