From his insurance agency in Stillwater, Dennis Conger has seen in recent weeks how the St. Croix River can divide Minnesota and Wisconsin in unexpected ways.

As Conger has worked with clients shopping for individual health insurance policies, he’s been surprised by premium rates on the Minnesota side of the border that aren’t as high as he feared, considering all the changes with the federal health care overhaul.

State government officials, in fact, have heralded the 2014 Minnesota rates as among the lowest in the country.

But because Conger also works with clients in western Wisconsin, he’s witnessed an even more surprising flip side to the premium story. Cross the St. Croix River, and health exchange premiums in Pierce, Polk and St. Croix counties are nearly twice the rate as in the Twin Cities.

“Is it because they eat too much cheese, and drink too much beer over there?” Conger joked. “I don’t think so — I’m from Wisconsin, I’m a cheesehead.”

The contrast in exchange premiums on opposite sides of the St. Croix River comes through loud and clear from a Pioneer Press analysis of premiums available on health exchanges operating in the two states plus 34 others.

The federal Affordable Care Act calls on health insurance companies to establish premiums within set geographic boundaries called “rating areas,” so the 36 states in the newspaper’s analysis are divided into 406 rating areas.

Of those, the Twin Cities rating area has the absolute lowest “benchmark” premium for a 50-year-old who doesn’t smoke, according to the analysis of data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services plus the states of Maryland and Minnesota.

The rating area that covers Pierce, Polk and St. Croix counties in western Wisconsin, meanwhile, has the second-highest benchmark premium for a 50-year-old nonsmoker, according to the Pioneer Press analysis.

The findings mirror unpublished research being conducted by the California-based Kaiser Family Foundation, which has compiled data from 50 states and the District of Columbia.

Looking at the cost of the benchmark premium as well as the cheapest “bronze”-level plan available to a 40-year-old nonsmoker, the foundation determined the Twin Cities have the lowest-priced exchange premiums in the country on both measures. But in Pierce, Polk and St. Croix counties, a 40-year-old consumer shopping on the health exchange would pay the fourth-highest premium in the country for the benchmark plan and the highest premium in the country for the bronze offering.

“That’s probably one of the greatest disparities in cost for neighboring regions,” said Cynthia Cox, a researcher at the Kaiser Family Foundation.

The foundation has not yet done an analysis looking for other similar cases, said Cox, who looked at the contrast between the Twin Cities and western Wisconsin after being contacted by the Pioneer Press.

The benchmark premium in a given rating area is important because federal officials use it to calculate tax credits that will be available to many people shopping on the health insurance exchanges. Tax credits are available to individuals with incomes below $46,000, and families of four with less than $94,000 in income, so the subsidies are expected to significantly discount out-of-pocket insurance costs for many consumers.

The geographic variations that show up when looking at the price of benchmark premiums for 40-year-olds and 50-year-olds in particular regions should hold up across other age groups, Cox said, because of how health insurers set rates in most states.

“Changing the age should not substantially change the analysis in terms of where a region’s premium falls relative to other regions, with the exception of in New York and Vermont,” Cox said. Those states aren’t included in the Pioneer Press analysis.

WHY SO DIFFERENT?

Why might premiums on opposite sides of the St. Croix River be so different?

The answer, health insurance experts say, is a unique convergence of policy decisions in each state with regard to high-risk pool programs, the state-federal Medicaid program and when people in the individual health insurance market can renew their policies.

The contrast apparently has almost nothing to do with the fact that Democrats in Minnesota opted to create a state-based health insurance exchange, while Republicans in Wisconsin left exchange operations to the federal government. Minnesota is one of 16 states plus the District of Columbia operating their own health insurance marketplaces; the federal government is operating one massive marketplace for the remaining 34 states, including Wisconsin.

The Pioneer Press analysis found that across eight of nine rating areas in Minnesota, the benchmark premium for a 50-year-old nonsmoker falls within the lowest quartile of all those being offered across 36 states. In Wisconsin, such a person will find only one rating area with a benchmark premium that falls into the lowest quartile.

Even so, Minnesota rates aren’t always cheaper. The benchmark premium for a 50-year-old in southeast Minnesota, for example, is more expensive than the comparable rate in 11 rating areas across Wisconsin.

More broadly, the Pioneer Press analysis shows that four states — Maryland, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Utah — have benchmark premiums for a 50-year-old nonsmoker that are in the least-expensive quartile across all regions of the state. The Maryland health insurance exchange is run by the state government, but the other three are operated by or in partnership with the federal government.

“I don’t know that there’s evidence to suggest that state-based exchanges have average lower premiums,” said Ceci Connolly, managing director of the Health Research Institute at Pricewaterhouse Coopers, a consulting firm.

HANDLING THE HIGH-RISK POOL

A key factor in the price differences is that Minnesota in 2014 will continue its high-risk pool for individuals who in the past haven’t been able to obtain coverage on the private market, said Danette Coleman, a vice president of Minnetonka-based Medica. People in the program typically have costly pre-existing health conditions that drive up insurance costs and make them unattractive to insurers.

Among insurance companies selling policies through the new marketplaces, Medica is the only insurer selling exchange policies in both the Twin Cities and the three Wisconsin counties.

Starting next year, the federal health law makes it illegal for insurance companies to deny coverage based on pre-existing conditions, but Minnesota officials have opted to continue the state’s high-risk pool, nonetheless. Currently, the majority of people in the program are expected to stay put, Coleman said.

But in Wisconsin, the state is shutting down its high-risk pool. So, many will likely find coverage through private policies sold on Wisconsin’s health insurance exchange.

“That’s going to drive a significant difference,” Coleman said.

There are other factors. Minnesota is expanding public health insurance programs for low-income people, while Wisconsin is contracting eligibility for the programs. There’s a correlation between health status and income, Coleman said, so the Wisconsin market will be riskier as more low-income people turn to private coverage.

Finally, insurance companies in Wisconsin have the option of renewing large blocks of individual market consumers on Dec. 1, prior to when new insurance market rules kick in under the Affordable Care Act. That means a lot of relatively healthy individual market consumers in Wisconsin won’t be shopping for policies that start on Jan. 1, Coleman said, while their counterparts in Minnesota will be looking at options on the health exchange.

‘SOME OF IT DOESN’T RING TRUE’

To some extent, the premium differential between the Twin Cities and western Wisconsin should moderate in 2015, Coleman said.

By that point, Minnesota likely will have closed its high-risk pool and healthier individual market consumers in Wisconsin will have merged into the individual market operating under Affordable Care Act rules.

Back in Stillwater, insurance agent Dennis Conger said he’s heard a lot of the explanations being offered for the difference between rates in the two states. But the extent of the variation remains surprising, Conger said, though he admits to lacking full information about how insurance companies are setting premiums.

As an example, a Medica health plan that’s available to a 50-year-old nonsmoker through Minnesota’s health exchange sells for $347 per month in Stillwater. But just across the river, the same plan comes at a price of $649 per month through the health exchange in St. Croix County.

“Are the providers there charging almost twice as much as across the border in Minnesota? I don’t know, but I doubt it,” Conger said. “I don’t think the population, utilization and demographics are really that different.”

“Some of it doesn’t ring true,” Conger said, “but I don’t have access to all the numbers.”

Christopher Snowbeck can be reached at 651-228-5479 and csnowbeck@pioneerpress.com.

MaryJo Webster can be reached at 651-228-5507 and mwebster@pioneerpress.com.