NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. -- The American Medical Association is standing by the Affordable Care Act despite its rocky start and many troubles.

The group's policy-making House of Delegates voted at its interim meeting Monday to defer on a resolution that would have the AMA recommend several changes to the 2010 health law.

The resolution -- entitled "Improving the Affordable Care Act" -- would have the AMA support replacing the ACA's individual mandate with a refundable tax credit to purchase individual health insurance, repealing the employer mandate, and allowing health insurance to be sold across state lines.

The motion, which would also repeal the many taxes, subsidies, and exemptions of the law, called for a minimum one-year delay in the ACA's implementation.

However, the AMA's Reference Committee on Legislation made a recommendation to refer the resolution to the Board of Trustees for further study, and delegates agreed. The committee said the motions seemed to either repeat some aspects of AMA policy or ask for the AMA's "consideration" on the 20 recommendations it makes.

"Your reference committee believes that in recommending referral, the objective of the resolution is essentially accomplished, but in a manner that allows for a more comprehensive consideration of each item," the committee's report read.

AMA membership dropped nearly 5% following the AMA's decision in 2009 to support the ACA. In the years after the ACA's passage, opponents have continued to debate the law and have pursued changes in the AMA's position.

There was no debate before the full House of Delegates on Monday, but there was mixed testimony from those who spoke before the reference committee on Sunday.

Those who favored recommending ACA changes noted the problems the ACA has created for physicians and patients' access to care.

While some noted it was critical for the AMA to create a strong position on the ACA's rollout at its interim meeting, others pointed out that it may be premature given that numerous programs are in early stages of implementation.

The AMA House of Delegates, at its June annual meeting in Chicago, directed the organization to submit a report at this interim meeting that assessed implementation progress based on AMA policy. The Council on Medical Service said in that report that the ACA embodies many of the AMA's policies, adding that "significant provisions of the law need to be addressed to promote the interests of physicians and patients."

The Obama administration reported last week that just over 100,000 were able to sign up for private health coverage through the ACA's health insurance exchanges in the first month -- well short of its goal of 7 million during the 6-month enrollment period.

The troubled Healthcare.gov website crashed in the early days with error messages for those seeking to buy coverage and the Obama administration has mounted a major effort to correct those glitches.