Student achiever news from: Albright College, Alvernia University, Becker College, Washington University, Widener University

Union County Freeholder Chairman Mohamed Jalloh (2nd R) and Freeholders Bruce Bergen (left) and Alexander Mirabella (right) present a resolution to Union County Vocational-Technical Schools Superintendent Peter Capodice, Future Farmers of America (FFA) advisor and horticulture instructor Bonnie Baldasare, FFA member Aaron Etnine and FFA president Margaret Hopkins designating the last week of February as Future Farmers of America Week in Union County. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM LOWNEY/COUNTY OF UNION) Story Highlights TESC Honor Society Makes Donation to The Children's Home Society of New Jersey.

County Schools Cook Off Challenge.

Scholarship for New Jersey College Students--Deadline to apply April 17.

Wardlaw-Hartridge varsity cheerleaders capture first state championship.

Two Spotswood High School students, Mary Grace Hager and Shivani Vyas, were selected as New Jersey Affiliate Award recipients of the 2015 NCWIT Award for Aspirations in Computing.

The NCWIT Award for Aspirations in Computing honors young women at the high-school level for their computing-related achievements and interests. Awardees are selected for their computing and IT aptitude, leadership ability, academic history, and plans for post-secondary education.

Hager and Vyas were recognized for their accomplishment at the NJ Affiliate Award ceremony on April 1 at Kean University in Union.

Albright College

North Brunswick resident Emily Carey, a student at Albright College in Reading, Pennsylvania, will spend two weeks studying in Ireland, following the conclusion of the spring semester.

Alvernia University

The following Central Jersey residents have earned merit scholarships to attend Alvernia University in Reading, Pennsylvania, in the fall:

Amanda Julve of Bishop George Ahr High School, Carteret, Presidential Scholarship.

Julianna Norris of Bishop George Ahr High School, Edison, Presidential Scholarship.

Margaret Johnson of Edison Township High School, Presidential Scholarship.

Victoria Marino of Monroe Township High School, Monroe Township, Presidential Scholarship.

Rhea Tata of Piscataway High School, Piscataway, Presidential Scholarship.

Sarah Kramer of High School, Middlesex, Presidential Scholarship.

Sara Rustemeyer of Colonia High School, Colonia, Trustees' Scholarship.

Victoria Quercia of Monroe Township High School, Monroe Township, Trustees' Scholarship.

Caitlin Kelly of Carteret High School, Carteret, Veronica Founder's Scholarship.

Justin Lipinski of East Brunswick High School, East Brunswick, Veronica Founder's Scholarship.

Matthew Junio of John P Stevens High School, Edison, Veronica Founder's Scholarship.

Anita Demaj of Keyport High School, Keyport, Veronica Founder's Scholarship.

Natalie Jacobs of Notre Dame High School, Dayton, Veronica Founder's Scholarship.

Becker College

Fawina Lesman of Edison was inducted into the Alpha Lambda Delta honor society chpater at Becker College in Worcester, Massachusetts.

Bob's High School Heroes

High school students in New Jersey are helping maintain the community blood supply by donating 7,319 lifesaving units of blood so far this school year. Students have three more months left in the academic year to make a meaningful difference for hospital patients and aim to win a scholarship from the Bob's Discount Furniture $250,000 High School Heroes Scholarship Program. The Bob's High School Heroes Scholarship Program recognizes students who make exceptional contributions to the American Red Cross blood donation program in their schools, and helps encourage young people to become involved by helping patients in need.

"High school students are inspired to roll up their sleeves to help patients, thanks to the Bob's High School Heroes Scholarship Program," said Robert Kessler, CEO, American Red Cross Penn-Jersey Blood Services Region. "The scholarship program helps the Red Cross make a difference in the lives of patients and empowers high school students to take a leadership role."

"Since this scholarship program launched in 2009, we've awarded nearly $650,000 to hundreds of students in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Jersey and New York, and we look forward to awarding students again this year," said Bob Kaufman, president emeritus of Bob's Discount Furniture.

Kaufman knows the crucial importance of a sufficient blood supply. Medical crises required two of his family members to receive many blood transfusions. He lost his father Leo Kaufman and his 16-year-old nephew Scott Mulready to leukemia. The Kaufman family is forever thankful for the extra time with them made possible, in part, by blood donors. Through the efforts of Bob, employees, customers and members of the community, Bob's Discount Furniture blood drives have collected more than 38,000 units of lifesaving blood.

Students who host at least two high school blood drives throughout the year and achieve an annual participation rate of at least 30 percent of age-eligible students at their schools qualify to win a base scholarship of $250. Students who meet those initial requirements are also eligible to win additional scholarships, including up to eight $1,000 grand prize scholarships per winning school, which is determined by totaling the blood units donated from each school. The winners in each state are determined by the number of students who donate and the total units collected. For complete contest rules and details, visit http://www.mybobs.com/outreach/highschoolheroes.

Cranbury schools

The Schools Development Authority has executed a grant through its Regular Operating District (ROD) grant program to provide funds for communications and security upgrades at Cranbury Elementary School.

The project in Cranbury Township School District represents $1,103,615 in total estimated costs including a state grant of $441,446 which leverages the local contribution of $662,169. The SDA has executed more than $4 million in grants to the Cranbury Township School District since program inception a few years ago.

The Department of Education, which determines the selection of school projects to receive grant funds, has approved more than 1,600 ROD Grant projects in 335 school districts throughout the state since May 2013. Between state and local contributions, the total project costs of the eligible projects are estimated to exceed $1.2 billion.

The Upsilon Rho chapter of the Honor Society of Nursing, Sigma Theta Tau International, at Thomas Edison State College in Trenton recently made a $500 charitable donation to The Children’s Home Society of New Jersey. Pictured are (from left to right): Donna C. Pressma, president and chief executive officer, The Children’s Home Society of New Jersey; Christine Saltzman, secretary, Upsilon Rho Chapter; Holly Leahan, nursing program and graduate practicum advisor, W. Cary Edwards School of Nursing, Thomas Edison State College; Maritza Raimundi-Petroski, director, Maternal/Child Health, Family and Community Support Services, The Children’s Home Society of New Jersey; and Gary Fassler, treasurer, Upsilon Rho Chapter. The donation will help provide additional programming and services for two of the society’s support services programs, CUNA and Body and Soul. These programs help to provide prenatal health education and a holistic approach to address the cultural and linguistic needs of Latina women. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF TESC)

Linden High School

NJROTC Drill & PT team members from Linden High School were honoed at the Elizabeth H.S. Admiral William Halsey Leadership Academy drill competition conducted during the weekend of March 14 and 15.

Team members earned the following trophies: second place, Place Physical Fitness Team; second place, Unarmed Platoon Inspection; second place, Armed Platoon Inspection; third place, Armed Platoon Regulation; third place, Unarmed Exhibition; and third place, New Cadet Squad.

New Jersey Association of Counties

The New Jersey Association of Counties (NJAC) is hosting the 4th annual county vocational-technical school cook-off challenge at 12:30 p.m. May 8 at Caesar's in Atlantic City.

Culinary art students from county vocational-technical schools in Bergen, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Mercer, Middlesex, Morris, and Passaic counties have been selected to compete for titles in taste, creativity, and food presentation. Each team will consist of five to six students and two staff members, and must produce 400 samples of appetizers at a total cost of less than $500.00. NJAC officials, Atlantic City chefs, and convention guests will have the task of judging the stiff competition, which will close NJAC's 65th annual celebration of county government.

"The cook-off challenge is the convention's premiere event and I look forward to enjoying each of the fantastic dishes prepared by these remarkable young men and women as future restaurateurs and chefs," NJAC President and Mercer County Freeholder Ann Cannon said in a prepared statement.

Visit www.njac.org for additional details.

New Jersey Conversation Society scholarship

A $1,000 scholarship will be awarded this summer to a New Jersey student majoring in natural resource conservation, environmental science or a related field of study, announced the Firman E. Bear Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation Society (SWCS). The Edward R. Hall/Robert R. Hanna Scholarship is awarded annually to acknowledge New Jersey college students for their academic and personal accomplishments in the field of conservation and/or natural resources.

To qualify for the scholarship, an applicant must be: a full-time student in good standing at any New Jersey accredited university/college, or a New Jersey resident attending any accredited out-of-state university/college; and an undergraduate enrolled in a curriculum related to natural resources, including but not limited to: agriculture, agronomy, conservation, ecology, environmental science, fisheries, forestry, geography, journalism, plant science, soil science, and/or wildlife. Other areas related to conservation may also qualify; and have successfully completed at least two semesters of study.

To apply: Go to www.njswcs.org to download application form. Then complete it and mail it, with a postmark by April 17, to: Firman E. Bear Chapter, SWCS, C/O USDA-NRCS, 220 Davidson Ave, 4th floor, Somerset, NJ 08873.

The scholarship winner will be announced by May 29.

New Jersey State Bar Foundation's Law Fair and Law Adventure Mock Trail competitions

With the judging completed, the winning schools and classes in the New Jersey State Bar Foundation's 2015 Law Fair and Law Adventure mock trail competitions have been selected.

In each of the two competitions, students and their teachers were asked to create and write original cases focusing on legal issues of interest to their contemporaries and which could be used as a tool to teach about the law.

This year's winning Law Fair cases dealt with negligence, attractive nuisance, ebola, discrimination and intellectual property. Local Law Fair 2015 competition winners included: Grade: 3; Teacher: Bethanne Augsback; of Woodland School, Monroe Township; First Place and Second Place; and Augsback and Selime Kaufman, Honorable mention

In May, Law Fair participants in grades 3 to 6 and Law Adventure participants in grades 7 to 8 are slated to present their winning cases before judges, attorneys and juries of their peers — other elementary and middle school students —at the home of the Bar Foundation, the New Jersey Law Center, One Constitution Square off Ryder's Lane in New Brunswick, New Jersey. For more information, visit njsbf.org.

Raritan Bay Catholic Prep’s Sacred Heart Grades 3 & 4 Girls Basketball Team won the championship game and took first place in the Central Jersey Basketball League. The team from South Amboy defeated Monroe by a score of 19-6 on March 15 to clinch the championship. The team members pictured are, from left to right, Gabriela Mieczkowski, Ashley Ament, Madison Freudenberg, MaryKate Brew, Kamryn Miller, Haley Higgins, Erin McCabe and Ashley Solfilkanich. The team is coached by Judy McCabe and Deirdre Resch. (Photo: COURTESY RARITAN BAY CATHOLIC PREP)

Raritan Valley Community College

Local high school seniors interested in learning more about Raritan Valley Community College's (RVCC) Honors College are invited to attend upcoming information session on either April 9 or May 7. Both sessions will run from 6 to 8 p.m. in the atrium at the college's Branchburg campus.

The evenings will include information about admissions to RVCC's Honors College and transfer opportunities after graduating from the program. Current Honors College students will be on hand to share their experiences at RVCC. Students in the top 20 percent of their high school class with a cumulative SAT score of 1700 or greater (or have a 3.5 grade point average or higher) are encouraged to attend.

Launched in 2011, RVCC's Honors College features a cohort-based program with smaller, seminar-style courses that have an interdisciplinary focus and afford students the opportunity to develop a close working relationship with their professors. The program serves highly qualified high school graduates who are entering college for the first time.

Students who are admitted to the Honors College have various opportunities for academic, social, and personal growth. Honors College students enjoy several benefits, including opportunities to transfer to four-year colleges and universities. Honors students also may enhance their college experience through various leadership and volunteer activities as well as through service learning. For additional information about RVCC's Honors College, visit http://www.raritanval.edu/academics/honors/index.html.

To register for either session, email honors@raritanval.edu.

Somerset County Vocational-Technical High School alumni Luis Angulo (left) and Tia Sheridan (right) pose with instructor Linda Weber-Smith (center) during their recent visit to the Bridgewater-based school. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF SCVTHS)

Somerset County Vocational & Technical High School

Two alumni of the Somerset County Vocational & Technical High School Graphic Communications program returned to the Bridgewater-based high school recently to speak with current students about their career paths and current jobs in the field.

Luis Angulo, a 2007 graduate and SkillsUSA state gold medal winner, is currently a manager at Designer Greetings in Edison, where he oversees a graphic design team creating greeting cards. Also visiting was Tia Sheridan, who currently works with Angulo and is a 2009 graduate. They spoke with the students about the work they perform and processes involved in creating greeting cards, showed the students some of the artwork and cards they have created, and Sheridan shared parts of her personal portfolio to give an example of what the students should be creating to prepare themselves for college and beyond. Angulo also drew back on his experiences at SCVTHS to remark on how Instructor Linda Weber-Smith's teachings helped in his in post-secondary classes and at his current workplace.

At the end of the presentation, Weber-Smith said that she is working with Angulo to create a Teen Birthday Card contest, where the winner would have the opportunity to win an internship at Designer Greetings during the upcoming summer break.

For more information about the school's programs, call James Strickhart at 908-526-8900, ext. 7169, or jstrickhart@scvts.net.

South Amboy Schools

The Schools Development Authority has executed a grant through its Regular Operating District (ROD) grant program to provide funds for a roof replacement at South Amboy High School.

The project in South Amboy Public Schools represents $254,440 in total estimated costs including a state grant of $101,776 which leverages the local contribution of $152,664. The SDA has executed $193,955 in grants to the South Amboy Public Schools since program's inception a few years ago.

The Department of Education, which determines the selection of school projects to receive grant funds, has approved more than 1,600 ROD Grant projects in 335 school districts throughout the state since May 2013. Between state and local contributions, the total project costs of the eligible projects are estimated to exceed $1.2 billion.

Union County Freeholder Chairman Mohamed Jalloh (third from right) and Freeholders Bruce Bergen (third from left) and Alexander Mirabella (right) present a resolution to Union County Vocational-Technical Schools Superintendent Peter Capodice (second from right) and students from the Scotch Plains-based school designating February 2015 as National Career and Technical Education Month in Union County. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM LOWNEY/COUNTY OF UNION)

Wardlaw-Hartridge School

Chess fever has hit The Wardlaw-Hartridge School in Edison and everyone is enjoying it. In a recent W-H Chess Blitz Tournament consisting of 80 students, three outstanding students of the game remained standing.

John Anderson-Schmitt of Scotch Plains and Charlie Silver of Rahway fought a valiant fight and both were awarded second place trophies. Standing alone on the top of the chess hill is fourth-grader Jack Silver of Rahway, who is undefeated in all his matches throughout Wardlaw-Hartridge, which now has more than 100 students participating in its various chess programs. Jack has been recommended by the USCF as one of the top 100 9-year-old chess players in the country.

Upper and Middle School Latin students at The Wardlaw-Hartridge School received awards for their performance on the National Etymology Exam. The test, which is sponsored by the National Junior Classical League and based on English vocabulary words derived from Latin and Greek, was given to Latin 3, 4 and AP students as well as seventh- and eighth-grade Latin students. Medal winners were:

• Advanced Level: Roshun Menon of South Plainfield (silver)

• Intermediate Level: Anuva Goel of Piscataway, Ellena Son of Woodbridge (silver), Jake Payami of Scotch Plains (bronze)

• Novice Level: Jordan Borst-Ortiz of Colonia, Robert Brandl of Plainfield, Sarah Ivanov of Woodbridge, Alexandra Lack of Westfield, Kelly Lawrence of Scotch Plains, Briella Payami of Scotch Plains, Julia Rothar of Metuchen (bronze).

Washington University

The following Middlesex County residents at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, were named to the fall dean's list: Adedamola Adedokun of East Brunswick, Kierstan Marie Carter of Woodbridge, Jennifer Sarah Greenberg of Edison, Hillary Sarah Kroll of East Brunswick, Austin Jiazhi Niu of Edison, SiddharthVanamamalai of Dayton, Casey Zheng of East Brunswick, Eric Dowhong Chao of East Brunswick, Alice Wang of East Brunswick.

Widener University

The following local residents at Widener University in Chester, Pennsylvania, participate din Alternative spring break through Habitat for Humanity. During their week of service, students participated in a range of activities from building houses for Habitat for Humanity to weatherization projects in locations including Oklahoma City, West Palm Beach, Florida, New Orleans and Houston: Nicholas Gudzk of East Brusnwick, provided service in Houston, Texas, Lauren Robson of Avenel, provided service in Houston, Texas, Zahra Azhar of Princeton, provided service in New Orleans, Louisiana, and Lavanya Nagappan of Edison, provided service in West Palm Beach, Florida.

At St. Stanislaus Kostka School in Sayreville, third-grade student Emilia Dolinski and fifth-grade student James Kelly were awarded first place in the Knights of Columbus Substance Abuse Awareness Poster Contest at the local level and will be competing at the state level. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF ST. STANISLAUS KOSTKA SCHOOL)

William Paterson University

William Paterson University has introduced a new master's degree in middle level education, the first in New Jersey and offered fully online, and a new master of arts degree in higher education administration designed to meet the occupational growth for education administrators.

The new master's in middle level education is a 30-credit online program designed for practicing educators. The program offers active professionals substantial experience in the theory, research, and practice related to middle level education. The program ams to prepare graduates to achieve in the highly data-driven culture of school accountability and will be grounded in theory and best practice.

The new master of arts in higher education administration is a 36-credit program with a choice of four distinct specializations within higher education contexts: assessment and planning, academic administration, leadership studies, and student development. Each of these concentrations consists of 15 credits of coursework in addition to the 21-credit core. The program is aimed to help students start or advance a career in: student affairs, alumni affairs, residence life, career services, financial aid, admissions, academic advising, and institutional research.

For more information, contact the William Paterson University Office of Graduate Admission and Enrollment Services at 973-720-3641, visit wpunj.edu/graduate or email graduate@wpunj.edu.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1anjOHp