Topics: Ac DC, Colin Meloy, Decemberists, Depeche Mode, Editor's Picks, Music, Sandy Hook, Entertainment News

For some of us, this coming Tuesday feels a little bit like the best day of the 1990s or the early 2000s: It’s release day for the first albums in many years by Belle & Sebastian, Sleater-Kinney and the Decemberists. If the fortysomethings in the office all arrive with ear buds and the volume turned up just slightly louder than tasteful, well, maybe everyone was cranking the Belle & Sebastian too loud on the F train from Brooklyn. Middle-age, wasted on the middle-aged and all.

Sleater-Kinney’s return might have the loudest buzz, but the Decemberists are following up a No. 1 album. They took a multi-year hiatus after the triumphant “The King Is Dead,” and “What A Terrible World, What A Beautiful World” is the Portland collective’s first since 2011. Colin Meloy and his wife Carson Ellis had a second son during that hiatus, and also added second and third books to their popular young-adult fantasy series, Wildwood.

Though Meloy clearly didn’t rest much, this was his first extended break from the band in a decade — and perhaps with the books to feed the wild narrative side of his brain, the side that has delighted in sea shanties and historical odes and proggy concept albums, let alone the most literary set of characters and rhymes in indie-rock — the new album feels as direct, personal and tuneful as anything he’s done.

Salon caught up with Meloy late last month to talk about the terrific new album, indie nostalgia, pop songs about oral sex, and being 17 and terminally fey.

So there’s a break of several years after “The King Is Dead.” You go off and write young-adult novels and have another child — and you return with side one, track one — “The Singer Addresses His Audience,” and sing “We know you built your lives around us. And would we change? We had to change some.” How tongue in cheek are we to take this ? Or is this a statement from Colin Meloy?

This is a real statement. (laughs) It can be both things. And to be honest, I had kind of written it intending it to be. I mean, of course, it is a reflection of my trying to make sense of the relationship between singers or entertainers and their audience, but also I wanted to try and write in the voice of what I imagined was, like, the lead singer of a boy band who was just trying to figure it all out — who had never known any other life other than being onstage and being the sort of property of a fan base. How would they sort of view their lives and live their lives? But then, you know, of course its populated with my own weird ideas about what that relationship is. But in the end, it’s a different character as opposed to myself, and it’s an exploration of the loneliness of the singer, and why did they do this in the first place — sacrifice or give themselves up to the needs and the expectations of people who don’t know them, complete strangers — and construct their lives and the decisions they make creatively around what those expectations might be. And in the end, they do belong to them– it’s kind of this idea of possessiveness. They don’t necessarily belong to themselves. But the reason the singer was even doing it in the first place was just really like the refrain in the end: “to belong, to belong.”

Had you felt that paradox when The Decemberists would change — and there were lots of changes over the years, from 17-minute songs to prog-rock concept albums and then jangle-rock perfection — that there was resistance from people who wanted you to keep you writing the same kinds of songs on “Castaways and Cutouts”? And that you had found a way to belong, but also had to change?

Right. I don’t know that I was very much aware of it. I think I was just kind of following whims. Maybe it would’ve behooved me to pay a little bit more attention to what people wanted of me.

You really should’ve spent more time in those old AOL Decemberists chat rooms, or on the indie-pop list.

I know. If only I had spent more time hearing criticism! I think also I have a weird thing about kicking against expectations in a sometimes self-destructive way. (laughs) I guess I myself am trying to figure out where I exist between those two ideas — between satisfying my own creative needs and the creative needs of others. Kind of like a sexual thing. (laughs)

We’ll get back to the sexual thing! But there’s also a funny line in this song about selling your songs for advertisements: “When your bridal processional is a televised confessional to the benefits of Axe Shampoo, you know we did it for you.” Have you heard from the fine folks at Axe yet? Can they spin this into viral gold?

Well, I don’t know that they would. It’s really not a positive spin.

And people might look at photos of The Decemberists in those Pacific Northwest outfits and think, “Maybe that’s not who we want shilling our sweet-smelling teen body wash.”

(laughs) Right. Right. Exactly.

One of the other centerpieces, the song which gives the album its title, is the Sandy Hook song, “12/17/12.” It sounds like a truly personal reaction, as if you wrote this as an emotional pouring-out, trying to make sense of this at a time when children were on your mind.

Yeah. Hank was a first-grader, so he was the same age as those kids. And there was even one kid who was an autistic kid, and Hank is autistic. The closer you can map your own life onto these things — is that what makes them real? There’s something really superficial about that.

So I’m hesitant to say that this is any kind of centerpiece because I don’t think it is. And in fact, I didn’t initially want to put too much of a point on the fact that it was written about that incident because I didn’t feel as if I could really communicate what was happening. I don’t know that I have any place trying to write a song that’s directly about what happened. I don’t think it’s in my powers. I don’t think I’m good enough.

I think that that was just what a lot of people did at that time, and I think it wasn’t until hearing the names read… It took several days to process. I feel like when the names were read at that press conference, suddenly I was able to start processing it in a way that I think was helpful, in that I think a lot of people were taking stock of their own surroundings in their own world. I was doing that and wanting to bring my family closer to me and bring in the protective embrace — but then also feeling sort of unmoored from what that pain must be for someone else.

It almost seems staggering the first songs have arrived, and that the responses from artists and from the culture, these two years later, are faster than the political responses — which have been next to none, really.

Yeah. And even maybe moving in the other direction, I think that the other side has been so entrenched. That’s another story all together. It’s been really frustrating.

I’m going to make the world’s most awful segue and shift from that song to “Philomena,” which appears to be the Decemberists’ ode to oral sex. “Open up your linen lap and let me go down.” I wasn’t an English major, but I think I might know what that means. Your attempt at an AC/DC song?

(laughs) You are not mistaken. I think this is my attempt of making a portrait — a bundling idea of what human sexuality is and could be. It started out as this very innocent chord progression and a melody that was so pristine and ‘50s innocent that it felt like it needed to be dirtied up significantly, and out came the dirtiest Decemberists song ever written.

It just might be. I mean, “I’ll be your lashing loop of leatherette”?

I know.

Bawdy stuff, Colin Meloy.

Bawdy stuff through like, the eyes of a 12-year-old, discovering what it is to be a sexual person.

But 12-year-olds are not opening linen laps. How did you personally discover those terms in song? I think back to camp counselors playing AC/DC songs in the summer of 1980. But then there’s Quiet Riot, and we totally sang that in the backseat of the car somehow without knowing exactly what it meant. It’s still horrifying to think about it. Did you have a similar experience?