J.P. Morgan has finished second to Deutsche Bank in the European investment banking fee rankings since 2010. Reuters

The banker who helped co-lead J.P.Morgan Chase & Co.’s European M&A business during the dealmaking boom years has returned to the bank after a six-year stint in private equity.

Dag Skattum, who spent more than two decades at the U.S. bank before leaving in 2007, will rejoin in January to launch and chair a global strategic advisory council within J.P. Morgan’s investment bank, according to a memo sent by Daniel Pinto, London-based head of J.P. Morgan corporate and investment bank. The memo was seen by MoneyBeat.

He will become a vice-chairman of the bank’s business in Europe, the Middle East and Africa and report jointly to Carlos Hernandez and Jeff Urwin, co-heads of global banking. A spokeswoman for the bank confirmed the contents of the memo.

Mr. Skattum, a dual national of the U.S. and Norway, began his career at J.P. Morgan in 1986. Over the next 20 years he held a number of roles in New York and London including chairman of European M&A and co-head of European M&A. He rose to become co-head of global mergers and acquisitions in 2006.

After leaving, he became a partner at the private equity firm TPG, where he remained until 2013. He has most recently worked for investment businesses focused on Africa.

Mr. Skattum will lead a strategic advisory council that will help mentor J.P. Morgan’s future dealmakers as well as improve cross-border deal flow at the bank, according to the memo. In his new role, he will work closely with Sjoerd Leenart, chief executive for J.P. Morgan in the Middle East and North Africa.

The U.S. bank has made a number of senior hires in Europe this year as it seeks to overtake Deutsche Bank at the top of investment banking fee rankings in the region. The bank has finished second to the German bank each year since 2010 – and currently sits just behind its rival for the year-to-date.

Other senior figures to have the U.S. bank this year include ex-Goldman Sachs veteran Dorothee Blessing as head investment banking in Germany; and Italy’s ex-economy minister, Vittorio Grilli, as chairman of the bank’s corporate and investment bank division in Emea.