Lamar Community College men's basketball announced that six players from the previous year's roster will be moving on to play at four-year institutions and that one more has joined the U.S. Army.

"I am proud to announce that six former players will all be competing at the National Collegiate Athletic Association level for the 2015-16 season and another has joined U.S. Army forces," commented LCC head coach Serg Fenerci. "Tiwian (Kendley), Elijah (Bradley), Devante (Anderson), Shane (Fox), Ga'briel (Chandler), Bryon (Wood), and Garrett (Hyde) were all key players last season. We are proud of their accomplishments and know that this next step in their careers will be just as successful."

LCC Lopes signing to four-year universities:







Tiwian Kendley from Greenbelt, MD, signed his National Letter of Intent to play for Division 1 Morgan State University (MD) this upcoming season. Kendley averaged 16.4 points, 5.5 rebounds, and 1.8 assists a game this year. He scored in double digits 24 out of 28 games. He scored 20-plus points in 6 games with a season high 36 points vs. Northeastern Junior College. Kendley was honored 2nd team All-Region IX.

Elijah Bradley from Philadelphia, PA, signed his National Letter of Intent to play for Division II Claflin University (SC). Bradley averaged 8.1 points and 6.0 rebounds per game this year. He posted four double-doubles and scored in double digits eight times this year.

Devante Anderson from Columbia, SC, signed his National Letter of Intent to play for Division II Claflin University (SC). Anderson averaged 6.0 points, 2.4 rebounds, and 1.6 assists per game this year. He had a season high 32 points at Colby Community College.

Shane Fox from Colorado Springs, CO, signed his National Letter of Intent to play for perennial Division II power house Metro State University (CO). Fox averaged 4.8 points and 2.8 rebounds per game as a freshman this year. He scored in double digits five times this year.

Ga'briel Chandler from Atlantic City, NJ, signed his National Letter of Intent to play for Division II Nyack College (NY). Chandler led the team in taking charges this year.

Bryon Wood from Dulce, NM, signed his National Letter of Intent to play for Division III Pine Manor College (MA). Wood shot 75% from the field while shooting 50% from 3pt line.

Garrett Hyde from Littleton, CO, chose to serve for our country and joined the U.S. Army as a cadet. Hyde proudly received NJCAA Academic All-American award this year.

For more information on the men's basketball program at Lamar Community College, visit www.lamarcc.edu/athletics or call Coach Fenerci at 719.336.1675.