OBAMACARE, AMNESTY, JUDGES, NSA, BLACKMAIL & COVER-UPS

By: Devvy

June 1, 2014

NewsWithViews.com

It is alleged Chief Justice John Roberts wrote both opinions for the decision for what's known as Obamacare or the false official title: Affordable Care Act: How Roberts Was Blackmailed To Support ObamaCare. That particular piece covers the likely illegal adoption of two infants, a boy and a girl by Roberts and his wife from Ireland in 2000. (Marriage is always a good cover) Under Ireland's adoption laws, it appears Roberts' and his wife ran afoul of the law. Roberts was confirmed to the high court, September 29, 2005.

Then, there are those who believe John Roberts, a strict Catholic is a closet sexual deviant. According to two people I know who work in downtown DC in the legal field, Roberts' sexual preference has been the talk all over town since he became Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. In the mid-90s while my husband and I lived in Colorado, there was a huge war over a constitutional amendment pertaining to sexual deviants:

"Romer v. Evans, 517 U.S. 620 (1996), is a landmark United States Supreme Court case dealing with sexual orientation and state laws. It was the first Supreme Court case to address gay rights since Bowers v. Hardwick (1986), when the Court had held that laws criminalizing sodomy were constitutional.

"The Court ruled in a 6-3 decision that a state constitutional amendment in Colorado preventing protected status based upon homosexuality or bisexuality did not satisfy the Equal Protection Clause. The majority opinion in Romer stated that the amendment lacked "a rational relationship to legitimate state interests", and the dissent stated that the majority "evidently agrees that 'rational basis' - the normal test for compliance with the Equal Protection Clause - is the governing standard". The state constitutional amendment failed rational basis review."

As Wikipedia so aptly put it: "The decision in Romer set the stage for Lawrence v. Texas (2003), where the Court overruled its decision in Bowers, and for the Supreme Court ruling striking down Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act in United States v. Windsor (2013)." Stage is an accurate word because Lawrence v Texas was deliberately staged: "The Lawrence case was a set up to catch two males engaging in sodomy to test the courts and it worked. Even though Sandra Day O'Connor didn't deny sodomy is a chosen sexual practice, the "high court" ruled against states rights, decency and mankind. In other words, it doesn't matter if sodomy is a chosen behavior, that's okay. Equal protection under the law and soon will come protection for pedophiles and every other sexual deviancy known on this earth."

In the end, the choice of the citizens of Colorado was 'over turned'. Now, act surprised. Who was butt deep in dumping on the voters in Colorado? "The Los Angeles Times reports that Roberts was "instrumental" behind-the-scenes in working to get the Supreme Court to declare a Colorado state constitutional amendment unconstitutional in the case of Romer v. Evans. The amendment prohibited all legislative, executive and judicial action designed to protect homosexual persons from discrimination...Roberts performed his work on the behalf of his law firm's pro bono department at Hogan and Hartson. Hogan and Hartson allow their employees to refuse help on pro bono cases if they find them "morally repugnant". Apparently, Roberts doesn't have a problem with two men putting their Johnson in each other's feces (sodomy) as he not only did that case, but others in favor of individuals who claim discrimination for sexual activities they prefer since they are not born that way.

On January 14, 2009, the impostor who usurped the office of president, Barry Soetoro aka Barack Hussein Obama, met with Chief Justice John Roberts in private:

"A 'ceremonial' meeting between a president elect and justices of the Supreme Court is somewhat traditional. However, in this instance, it's flat out wrong. Chief Justice Roberts has cases on the docket where Obama is the defendant or is the subject of the litigation. Roberts and the other eight justices have already held two 'Distribution for Conferences' on the Donofrio and Wrotnoski cases on Obama's citizenship ineligibility. They just turned away one of Phil Berg's cases a few days ago; that one is still in the Third Circuit. Tomorrow is the fourth case; another from Phil Berg.

"On Wednesday, Roberts meets with the man at the heart of that case in private. Two days later, he sits down to discuss the case with the other justices after having a closed door meeting with the defendant! There is still the Lightfoot v Bowen case to be heard in conference, January 23, 2009. Again, Chief Justice Roberts will sit in that private meeting to discuss whether the case should go to oral arguments. Does anyone see major conflict of interest here? How can Chief Justice Roberts meet with Obama behind closed doors under such circumstances?"

John Boehner, Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives has been pushing hard to betray the American people by rewarding tens of millions of liars, cheats and thieves, illegal aliens, by giving them amnesty and citizenship. Boehner represents big mega corporations, the high tech industry who want more cheap labor and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. The push against amnesty by we the people has been constant and massive, yet Johnny is hell bent on selling us out. National security means nothing to him nor does his "Grand" Old Party. If any form of amnesty goes through, well, I explained it all in these columns: If Obama's amnesty goes through, within 5 years, America is finished and It's War: Stop Any Form of Amnesty Now.

Only three percent of the American people feel there's any need for immigration reform. We all know the last disaster signed into law by Ronnie Reagan opened the flood gates for the invasion that's been underway for over 30 years. Why would Boehner risk destroying the Republican Party and this country to reward those who sneak into OUR country, steal jobs and resources, bankrupting hospitals and burdening our judicial system? Could it be the allegations he's a drunk which have stuck to him like glue over the past two decades? Could it be a 'honey pot' trap drunken incident?

Johnny has been in the U.S. House since 1991. Contrary to one of the popular every election cycle false emails pumped out, members of Congress do not receive a full pension after one two year cycle: " A full pension is available to Members 62 years of age with 5 years of service; 50 years or older with 20 years of service; or 25 years of service at any age." The grape lover (wine) is 64; he will be 65 in November. Johnny will likely go on to win in November. That would be 20 years at age 65 making him eligible for a full pension. The life of luxury awaits him upon retirement in his $835,000 condo in an exclusive community in Marco Island, Florida.

Boehner has been selling out this country for decades. He's been in bed with Nancy Pelosi in voting for every "free" trade agreement that's come down the pipeline - including the ones pushed by the impostor in the White House. Millions and millions of secure, good paying jobs in manufacturing and industrial destroyed by dogs like John Boehner.

I mentioned Sibel Edmonds in my last column on 9/11. Ms. Edmonds knows all about the spying of government officials having worked for the FBI. Another whistle blower is a man named Russ Dice. Please go to this page and begin reading at this sentence: "Russ let's visit a June 20, 2013, The Blaze post under the headline: Bush-Era NSA Whistleblower Makes Most Explosive Allegations Yet About Extent of Gov’t Surveillance — and You Won't Believe Who He Says They Spied On" (To make it easy in case you don't know - hold down the Control and F on your key board. Type in Bush-Era and it should take you right to that sentence.) Please do take the time to read that posting because it is information too many have never seen and it's all true. There's no question the NSA has been spying on judges, high ranking politicians and members of the U.S. military for decades.

And, consider this latest release from attorney Orly Taitz (quoted in part), who has had many cases regarding Barry Soetoro's eligibility, using a stolen Social Security number, a forged birth certificate and submitted a forged Selective Service registration card - a federal felony: Update: multiple meetings with US Congressmen and voters, the issue of Obama’s bogus IDs was repeatedly raised and answered



"Attorney Orly Taitz has spend the last several days in her campaign for AG of CA before June 3 primary meeting with voters and three US Congressmen: her Congressmen Dana Rohrabacher, Chair of the foreign relations committee Congressman Ed Royce and former judge Texas Congressman Ted Poe. Taitz also met with voters in the Diamond Bar, Costa Mesa, Pacific Palisades, Westminster and Huntington Beach area....

"At the meeting Taitz questioned Congressman Poe when will the US Congress address the issue of Barack Obama using fabricated IDs and a stolen Social Security number, which failed E-verify. As Taitz wasn't heard well by others at the meeting, her question was reiterated by Congressman Rohrabacher, who stated that people are called name, called birthers, but nobody is answering a legitimate question: why doesn't Obama have a valid Social Security number and valid IDs, why isn't it asked and answered?..

"Congressman and former judge, Ted Poe, acknowledged that members of Congress know about the issue and talk about it. He did not give a definitive answer when will it be heard officially. After speeches and during refreshments and cake time Congressman Rohrabacher approached Taitz and told her: I do feel bad that people are called names, called birthers. I feel this is a legitimate issues, this question should have been raised and answered long time ago, at the very beginning."

Really, Rohrahacher? It should have been raised and answered a long time ago at the very beginning? Really? Where the hell have you been? Those questions have been raised since late 2008. Not only did all of you ignore them the first phony presidential election in 2008 by accepting the electoral college vote, you and your colleagues also ignored the mountain of evidence and again accepted the electoral college vote for the second round allowing Barry/Obama to usurp the office of president - twice. And, look where it's gotten us because of your cowardice: GOP: Pay Back for Ignoring Obama's Ineligibility

Now that we've established those issues are legitimate, just when do you and the other boys and girls in the GOP controlled house expose the lies and fraud? Well, Mrs. Taitz also addressed that in her press release: "Taitz feels that GOP does not want to rock the boat before the November general election, as it is in a tough battle to take over the Senate." All for power and if anyone thinks anything will change if the GOP takes back the senate, they need a reality check.

Americans paying attention to this monstrous betrayal of the American people, thanks to individuals like Russ Dice, Sibel Edmonds and Edward Snowden, are aware of the huge lawsuit brought by Larry Klayman against the NSA: Did NSA blackmail Roberts to OK Obamacare? - Klayman: 'Tyranny is greater today than in 1776': “I'm a lawyer. I have an attorney-client privilege, and I can no longer talk to my clients on the telephone and expect that there's any confidentiality. It changes the whole nature of how you operate." If anyone thinks those liars in the Outlaw Congress are going to stop all this spying, think again:

'USA Freedom Act' and bipartisan tyranny

"Last Thursday, as proposed by President Barack Hussein Obama, the so-called commander in chief who has since 2008 presided over and directed a National Security Agency which has been found in a lawsuit I filed to have violated the constitutional rights of hundreds of millions of Americans by accessing their every telephone call, the Republican-run House of Representatives, led by another compromised establishment politician, Speaker of the House John Boehner, pushed through the “USA Freedom Act.”

"This act is indeed just what it says, “an act,” by the compromised political hacks. Insofar as it merely allows the telephone companies like Verizon, Sprint and AT&T to retain call information of nearly the entire U.S. citizenry, and provides that to the feds – now the government controlled by President Obama and his equally corrupt Attorney General Eric Holder can secretly ask the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, or FISC, to hand over our most private telephone information to the government – there is little that is subject to change.

"Moreover the definitional section of the statute, which has not yet been voted on by the U.S. Senate, was significantly changed at the last minute by the Boehner-controlled House, with the complicity of Obama’s Democratic allies, to add the words “such as” with regard to persons and entities subject to government surveillance. This opens the barn door to continued abuse by the NSA and its collaborators of both political parties.

"The bottom line is this: The American people are being fed false and misleading information by the establishment in Washington, D.C., that the “almost Orwellian” surveillance and spying, as the judge put it in our lawsuit, is being ended. To the contrary, given the history of lying to courts, Congress, and the American people by President Obama, Republican allies like Reps. Peter King and Mike Rogers (who is head of the House Intelligence Committee) and others who have a vested interest in maintaining the tyrannical status quo, any change in the law to cover their derrieres for past complicit criminal acts, even if meaningful, would not be adhered to by the NSA and its sister agency, the Central Intelligence Agency.

"This is why Speaker Boehner’s statement, issued upon passage in the House, adding to President Obama’s false assertions, that “there is no access to this data without a court decision, and the standards for that decision are higher than they were,” is so disingenuous if not outright a lie. Boehner should know better as the leader of the alleged opposition party that has rightfully vilified Obama for his lies over “phony scandals” such as Obamacare, Benghazi, IRS discrimination toward conservatives and a host of other sleazy and illegal actions that harm the populace."

Why would elected officials and judges sell out this country unless they are worried about the NSA and what it knows about them? My firm belief as well as probably millions of other Americans is the reason the U.S. Congress did not stop Barry/Obama in 2008 is because his skin is black. But selling us out to give amnesty to tens of millions of liars, cheats and thieves, illegal aliens, going against their base conservative supporters and John Roberts making such an abomination of a decision regarding Obamacare - why would they do it? Why won't the Outlaw Congress open a real investigation into 9/11?

Just like 9/11, we the people have the absolute right to know who the NSA has been spying on. We the people have the absolute right to know which elected members of Congress, judges and even high ranking military personnel have been spied on because blackmail is a very real tool for tyrants. Perhaps we will finally get some answers: Greenwald to publish list of U.S. citizens NSA spied on: "Glenn Greenwald, one of the reporters who chronicled the document dump by National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden via the U.K. press, now said he's set to publish his most dramatic piece yet: The names of those in the United States targeted by the NSA." Snowden bagged 1.7 million documents; the list of who is being spied on will be published on his website, The Intercept. Today won't be soon enough.

And speaking of 9/11, I just want to add here that the majority of the American people have no idea what the term 'false flag' means. Simply put it is an event staged for political purposes to justify actions like invading Iraq. The lying and deceit is so pervasive in Washington, DC, with all the black ops programs, even someone like me has a hard time keeping track of them. While I don't like to quote from RT, I do so because the prostitute media in this country have their own agenda and truth isn't part of it: The Truthseeker: 9/11 and Operation Gladio. While I don't like to quote from RT, I do so because the prostitute media in this country have their own agenda and the truth isn't part of it:

"‘Bigger than Watergate’: US ‘regular’ meetings with Al-Qaeda’s leader; documented White House ‘false flag terrorism’ moving people ‘like sheep’; the father of Twin Towers victim tell us why he backs this month's 9/11 campaign on Times Square and around the world; & the protests calendar for September.

"Seek truth from facts with Bob McIlvane, whose son Bobby was killed in the lobby of the North Tower; NATO’s Secret Armies author Dr. Daniele Ganser; Elizabeth Woodworth of Consensus911; Journal of 9/11 Studies co-editor Dr. Graeme MacQueen; Dr. Kevin Barrett author of Questioning the War of Terror, civil engineer Jon Cole of Architects and Engineers for 9/11 Truth; and Rachel Maddow of The Rachel Maddow Show....

"Bob McIlvane, son died on 9/11: My son died, he died from an explosion. I can prove that beyond reasonable doubt. If I was in a courtroom a jury cannot not accept that as proof. So that's where we have our problem – when I say, “Well, this is an inside job, my son died from an inside job, from someone putting bombs detonations. I would make her sit in this room and go through what I just went with you, and then I would say “You as****e now you tell me I'm a conspiracy theorist.”

"It just shows you how awful our media is. I don't want to call her a w***e but she's a media w***e. She makes over a million dollars and they tell her what to say. One newspaper reporter from the Philadelphia area was very upfront with me. She said, “You know Bob, as a reporter I am the problem because we will lose our jobs. If I take that, just that little bit you just said, to the editor, he will crush it. So I'm telling you right now I can't put your story out there. "The media owners would not allow it. The press would not cover it, just that, because it will put a little doubt in people's minds.

"RT: Who do you blame for all this?

"McIlvane: The people of the Unites States are just as much to blame because they just want to believe that we are good people, we are an exceptional country, but this is what governments do, it's very Machiavellian. Now we have an endless War on Terror. I know what these people in Iraq, Syria, Libya, Afghanistan are going though, because they're all losing children. And that's what it's all about – everybody's losing family members. It's pure hell."

I bring this up because if we are ever going to force this issue to bring a real investigation as I outlined in my last column, it will take millions of Americans demanding it. Architects & Engineers for 9/11 Truth have some excellent hand outs. They're not full of accusations. They deal strictly with knowledge of building towers like the ones brought down on 9/11, science and physics in a way that's easy to understand. Make people question what they've been fed.



Subscribe to NewsWithViews Daily E-Mail Alerts!





Everyone wants to know what they can do? Order some of their cards or brochures and put them out at gun shows and political events like town hall meetings. Where ever folks meet as long as no law is broken. We need to also target veterans and active military since they are the ones who enlist to fight this endless 'war on terrorism' based on nothing but a mountain of lies. The truth continues to get to our fellow Americans because people have been handing out their professional, easy to understand cards. 5" x 7", in color, glossy and cheap by any standards:

• Did You Know a 3rd Tower Fell on 9/11?

• ReThink911-Themed Solving The Mystery of WTC 7 25-Pack - This one is excellent.

If you are a pilot or know someone who is, consider getting some of the evidence from Pilots for 9/11 Truth. It took 60 years to get the truth about Pearl Harbor. FDR and his coconspirators can never be held accountable except with real history written. We cannot and must not allow the same thing to happen regarding the truth about 9/11. It takes all of us; no one can be just a bystander.

Links:

1- 9/11: The Devil's in the Details (short - excellent)

2- Professor Daniele Ganser (Switzerland) 10 Years After 9/11