Sunday, March 13, 2016

I would like to address the issue of homelessness in the Tennessee Valley. I realize this topic has been covered by many people because it is something that many people care about. In February of 2015, TN bill HB 641- SB 1083 was introduced to create an Interagency Council on Homelessness (ICH), in which the governor would appoint six volunteer council members who have experience in locating resources for those who are displaced. This bill was taken off the calendar in March 2015.

On Jan. 11 it was announced that Commissioner E. Douglas Varney had received the authority by Governor Haslam to reinstate the Interagency Council on Homelessness, also known as the Statewide Council on Homelessness. Commissioner Varney stated: “Many homeless cost studies show that there is a savings to governments and communities that invest in providing the right blend of support and services to individuals who are experiencing homelessness and chronic homelessness.”

My opinion is that the state has an obligation to its residents to pass bills such as this in order to reduce the homeless population and improve the lives of Tennessee residents. Likewise, many individuals feel that this is the government’s “issue” and not their responsibility, but I believe that we, the people, can help as well.

There are many landlords with high-cost apartments and rental properties who could designate even a small portion of their vacancies for local social service agencies to place homeless individuals or families through an agreement with the agency. For an example of this agreement, a homeless individual could be allowed to live there rent-free for up to three months with the understanding that they are actively working with a case manager (willingly) to secure income and other resources.

In the above example, the tenant would begin paying rent on a sliding scale once income is secured, with payments subsequently increasing as their income allows. The state could also help in this endeavor by providing the landlord a base-pay amount of rent on behalf of the tenant, perhaps half of the original rent, rather than the landlord offering the unit totally free of charge.

Another option is that the state or local residents, who are wealthy enough, should make efforts to invest in properties that have been foreclosed on or otherwise unused, and transition these into affordable housing. There are many houses and buildings being unused, frankly, lowering the value of neighborhoods due to foliage growth and repair needs.

I believe that each homeless individual has worth and deserves the chance to live in a home that is safe and to receive assistance in locating resources. They can then contribute back to the community once they are able to. I believe there are residents here in Chattanooga that can help. Those of us who can, should.

Melissa Hand

SAU MSW Student