How Jump Technologies and Champion Medical will improve supply management

In an attempt to improve health systems as well as the tracking and control of supplies, innovative software company Jump Technologies has partnered with medical device management IT company Champion Medical Technologies.

Jump Technologies provides solutions that improve supply management. With supply chain costs being the second-largest expense for healthcare systems, and the Affordable Care Act creating financial incentives to improve the quality of care at provider organizations, improving supply and device management creates a significant savings opportunity.

RELATED TOPIC: Top 10 healthcare supply chain rankings

Working together, Champion Medical and JumpTech will help healthcare systems gain visibility to all supplies used throughout an organization, regardless of the type of product used or where the care is delivered.

End-to-end visibility across the entire spectrum of supplies and devices will continually improve inventory management and surrounding business processes, reducing costs, enhancing patient safety and helping ensure regulatory compliance.

RELATED TOPIC: How UMCSC's partnership with aptitude will improve supply chain operations

Solutions from both companies provide efficient tracking and management of all types of supplies — from disposable and consumable products to implantable devices and tissue — stored and consumed throughout a healthcare system.

"Champion is delivering new tools to help hospitals with automated tissue and implant management, empowering care givers with the information they need to drive down operating costs, improve regulatory compliance and increase patient safety and overall care," said Peter Casady, CEO of Champion Medical Technologies. "Our partnership with JumpTech will help deliver a more comprehensive solution for hospital executives who need better visibility to what's really being used, where and at what rate. Combined, we can deliver essential information for better supply planning and cost management."

RELATED TOPIC: Is supply chain to blame for the recent Ecoli outbreak?

"JumpTech is reducing supply management costs for provider organizations with proven cloud-based mobile technology," said John Freund, CEO of Jump Technologies, Inc. "At the same time, Champion tools are capturing, documenting and sharing medical implant data between EHR and ERP systems, uniquely empowering hospitals with information they need to drive down operating costs, improve regulatory compliance and increase patient safety. Together, we can help provider organizations gain greater visibility to supplies used throughout their system."

Source: Market Wired

Let's connect!

Click here to read the latest edition of Healthcare Global magazine!