Timothy Jost

April 24, 2015

April 30 update: On April 27, 2015, CMS extended by 15 days, to May 15, the date by which health insurers must submit EDGE server data for the reinsurance and risk adjustment programs. CMS assured insurers that this extension will not delay CMS getting reinsurance and risk adjustment results back to insurers by the current June 30 deadline.

April 28 update: Contraceptive coverage litigation. The Supreme Court on April 27, 2015 granted certiorari in Michigan Catholic Conference v. Burwell, vacated the judgment of the Sixth Circuit federal court of appeals, and remanded the case back to the Sixth Circuit for reconsideration in light of Hobby Lobby v. Burwell. The Sixth Circuit had concluded in June of 2014 that the contraceptive coverage accommodation then offered religious organizations did not substantially burden the religious freedom of the plaintiffs within the meaning of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. Arguably, the Supreme Court’s decision in Hobby Lobby imposes a more rigorous standard for evaluating the substantiality of burdens imposed on religious freedom by federal regulations. The Sixth Circuit will reconsider the case in light of this altered standard.

The Sixth Circuit decision was also issued, however, before the relevant agencies altered the contraceptive coverage accommodation offered religious organizations by rule in August, 2014, arguably diminishing the burden imposed on religious organizations. The Sixth Circuit will presumably also take into account this new accommodation when it reconsiders the case on remand.

May 27 update: CHIP buy-in programs. On April 24, 2015, the Internal Revenue Service released a Notice clarifying that individuals are not disqualified from receiving premium tax credits merely because they are eligible for a “CHIP buy-in” program unless they are actually enrolled.

The ACA provides that an individual is ineligible for premium tax credits if that individual is eligible for another form of minimum essential coverage other than coverage in the individual market. The Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) is recognized as minimum essential coverage; thus, individuals who are eligible for CHIP are not eligible for premium tax credits. Some states operate CHIP buy-in programs, under which individuals with incomes above the state’s CHIP eligibility level can purchase coverage that resembles CHIP, in some instances at a fairly high cost. These programs are not part of the federal CHIP program.

Original post: It seems like the 2015 open enrollment period has just ended, but CMS is beginning to gear up for 2016. On April 22, 2015, CMS released a Guidance on Eligibility Redetermination and Re-enrollments for Marketplace Coverage for 2016. Under CMS rules, marketplaces have three options for eligibility redeterminations.

One of these is a set of alternative procedures announced by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) annually for the following benefit year. The April 22 guidance describes the procedures that the federally facilitated marketplace, and any other marketplace that chooses to use it, will use for 2016. It is similar to the procedure used in 2015, but has been modified based on 2015 experience and to implement new eligibility requirements that are going into effect for 2016.

The process will begin with CMS requesting tax return information from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for all enroles on whose behalf advance premium tax credits (APTC) or income-based cost-sharing reduction (CSR) payments are being provided for in 2015 and who have authorized the marketplace to access their tax information. Beginning with benefit year 2016, the marketplace may not determine or redetermine an applicant eligible for APTC if the IRS indicates that APTC was previously provided for the individual but that the individual did not file an income tax return for the year in which APTC was provided and reconcile APTC. When this is the case, the marketplace will reenroll the individual without APTC or income-based CSR payments.

Changes To The Marketplace Open Enrollment Notice

As in 2015, the marketplace will send a Marketplace Open Enrollment Notice (MOEN) in advance of open enrollment. Unlike what happened in 2015, this notice will only be sent to current enrollees who have not indicated that they intend to terminate coverage, and not to all individuals who were determined eligible at an earlier time during the previous year.

As in 2015, the MOEN will contain:

A description of the redetermination and re-enrollment process;

Notice of the requirement to report information affecting eligibility and the timeframe and channels through which changes can be reported;

Notice of the last day for which plans may be selected for coverage on January 1, 2016 (December 15, 2015) and the last day of open enrollment (January 31, 2016);

A description of the default process through which eligibility for APTC and CSR payments will be determined for individuals who do not contact the marketplace.

In addition, special notices will be provided to the following groups:

Special Notice Group. Individuals whose tax return information indicates income in excess of 500 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL) will be told that their eligibility for APTC will be discontinued unless they contact the marketplace and reestablish eligibility;

Income-Based Outreach Group. Individuals will be particularly urged to come back to the marketplace and update eligibility information if they are enrolled in a qualified health plan, but: No updated tax return information is provided by the IRS, The most recent information reported to the marketplace for 2015 reflects income in excess of 350 percent of the FPL, IRS updated tax information shows: Household income in excess of 350 percent FPL, An increase or decrease in household income of greater than 50 percent, Household income under 100 percent of the FPL, or Household income that meets other marketplace criteria; Opt-Out Group. Individuals who did not authorize the marketplace to obtain their tax data for 2015 will be asked to contact the marketplace to reestablish eligibility and will be reenrolled in coverage without APTC and CSR payments if they do not; and Did Not Reconcile Group. Individuals who received APTC for 2014 and did not file a tax return and reconcile their APTC will be told they will be reenrolled in coverage for 2016 without APTC and income-based CSR payments.



Navigating Crosswalk Options

Insurers will also send separate notices to 2015 enrollees informing them whether the insurer will be offering a crosswalk option for 2016 similar to their 2015 plan; if so, the notice will include the premium for the option; and key changes in coverage and cost-sharing between 2015 and 2016. Insurers will also notify enrollees about the APTC that will be provided if the consumer is auto-enrolled. If this information is not available prior to open enrollment it will be provided during the open enrollment period.

If an enrollee contacts the marketplace during open enrollment for 2016 to update eligibility information, authorizes the marketplace to obtain updated tax return information, and selects a Qualified Health Plan (QHP), the marketplace will redetermine eligibility for APTC and income-based CSR using updated FPL tables, the applicable 2016 benchmark plan cost, and the 2016 applicable percentage of income contribution tables. Eligibility will also be determined for Medicaid and CHIP.

If an individual does not contact the marketplace to obtain an updated eligibility determination by the last day on which plan selection may be made for continuing coverage for 2016, the marketplace will determine eligibility according to the following rules:

If the individual is in the special notice group, opt-out group, or did not reconcile group, APTC eligibility will be terminated, although the individual will be reenrolled in coverage without APTC if permitted;

If an individual does not fall into one of these excluded groups, and provided income information for 2015 by creating or updating an application for 2015, and the projected household income used for determining eligibility for 2015 is within the APTC eligibility range (100 to 400 percent of FPL or under 100 percent for certain noncitizens), the marketplace will use the projected household income and family size from the most recent application, updating the household income upwards according to the rate in growth in the FPL from 2015 to 2016 and using 2016 benchmark plan premium information, to calculate APTC eligibility.

If an individual does not fall into one of the excluded groups and was automatically reenrolled for 2015 and did not update eligibility information for 2015, but income information from the IRS when evaluated with the family size from the most recent application shows that projected annual household income is above the lower income threshold for APTC eligibility, the marketplace will use the income data from the IRS adjusted upwards for the increase in the FPL from 2015 to 2016 and 2016 benchmark plan premium information to calculate APTC and income-based CSR eligibility. If an individual’s projected annual income using this method is greater than 400 percent of FPL, APTC, and income-based CSR are discontinued.

If an individual does not fall into one of the excluded groups and was automatically enrolled for 2015 and did not submit an updated application and has no income information available from the IRS, and has income under the APTC threshold, the marketplace will calculate eligibility using annual household income adjusted upwards for the increase in the FPF from 2015 to 2016 and 2016 benchmark plan premium information to calculate eligibility.

If an enrollee is reenrolled for both 2015 and 2016 and did not submit updated information for 2015 and does not submit updated information for 2016 and 2017, and has no tax information available from the IRS for 2014 and 2015, APTC and income-based CSR will be terminated for benefit year 2017.

Individuals who did not return to the marketplace and update their eligibility information for 2015 were simply awarded the same level of APTC that they had received for 2014. Updating income information for growth in the FPL and using 2016 benchmark plan premium and prior year tax return information to determine eligibility for those who do not return to the marketplace is new for 2016 and should result in more accurate eligibility determinations. Updating income information for increases in the FPL should also help keep enrollees from falling out of the bottom of APTC eligibility. This continues to be particularly important in states that have still not expanded Medicaid eligibility.

Any enrollee may submit updated eligibility information and obtain an updated eligibility determination until the end of 2016 open enrollment period—January 31, 2016—even if the enrollee does not submit the information in time to get an updated determination for January 1, 2016.

Consumers who do not pick a QHP will be automatically reenrolled consistent with current rules. To maximize the ability of QHP insurers to efficiently reenroll consumers, a marketplace may send preliminary reenrollment information to an insurer before the deadline for marketplace selection, but insurers should not communicate with consumers about reenrollment prior to the date when they would begin their regular billing cycle for January 2016. Enrollees who are reenrolled for 2016 by the marketplace will receive an enrollment confirmation message explaining the result of the annual eligibility redetermination and reenrollment process. All notices must be in plain language and accessible to individuals with limited English proficiency and those who are disabled.

The Federally Facilitated SHOP Exchange

CMS is also preparing the FF-SHOP for 2016. On April 21, 2015, CMS announced at its REGTAP website its FF-SHOP Development plan for 2016. For the first time in 2016, employee choice will be available in all FF-SHOPs. Issuer testing of the FF-SHOP will begin prior to November 1 and is expected to last about three weeks.

The Development plan for 2016 involves three phases or “sprints.” In the first phase, the FF-SHOP will update maximum dependent age and aging off rules. In the second phase, the FF-SHOP will update plan selection options to allow employees to choose dental or health coverage or both and to do so for each of their dependents. The FF-SHOP will also in this phase update the employee user interface and create a series of new FF-SHOP notices. In the third phase FF-SHOP functionality will be improved to allow multiple plan years of data to be stored and to allow employers to renew FF-SHOP coverage.

Origination Clause ACA Challenge Tossed

On April 24, 2015 yet another lawsuit challenging the Affordable Care Act was thrown out of court. A three judge Fifth Circuit panel unanimously concluded that Hotze v. Burwell should be remanded to the district court for the complaint to be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

Dr. Steven Hotze and Braidwood management had sued challenging, respectively, the ACA’s individual and employer mandate, claiming that Congress enacted the ACA in violation of the Origination Clause. The Origination Clause, a rarely litigated provision of the Constitution, requires that bills to raise revenue must originate in the House, although they can be amended in the Senate. A Texas district court had concluded in 2013 that the ACA did not violate the Origination Clause because it was not in fact a bill to raise revenue and because in fact the bill that became the ACA had originated in the House.

On appeal, the Fifth Circuit, in an opinion written by Judge E. Grady Jolly (a Reagan appointee) held that it could not reach the Origination Clause issue because the court had no jurisdiction. First, the court concluded that Dr. Hotze did not have standing to challenge the individual mandate because he had not been injured by it. The individual mandate does not impose a penalty on an individual who has minimum essential coverage. Dr. Hotze failed to allege that he did not have minimum essential coverage, and in fact the complaint suggested that he had employer coverage, which qualifies as minimum essential coverage. The court concluded that Dr.Hotze’s additional claims that his employer might provide less desirable coverage or that his premiums are higher because of the mandate were too speculative to establish standing to sue.

The court next concluded that it could not hear Braidwood’s challenge to the employer mandate because the claim was barred by the tax Anti-Injunction Act. The AIA prohibits courts from enjoining the assessment and collection of taxes. The Supreme Court in National Federation of Independent Business had rejected the argument that the AIA barred the plaintiff’s’challenge to the individual mandate, concluding that the individual mandate provision of the ACA is not identified as a tax. The Fifth Circuit concluded, however, that the AIA does prohibit an action to enjoin the employer mandate, which is explicitly identified as a tax. The court thus held that the challenge to the employer mandate must be dismissed as well.

Although the Fifth Circuit did not reach the Origination Clause issue, a panel of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals concluded earlier that Congress did not violate the Origination Clause in adopting the ACA because the ACA was not a bill to raise revenue. That case is still pending on a petition for a rehearing before the entire D.C. Circuit, but a grant of a rehearing is very unlikely. We have probably heard the last of this issue.

The Hotze case joins a string of recent cases cases in which Courts of Appeal have dismissed challenges to the ACA because the plaintiffs have not suffered an injury from the law and thus lack standing to challenge it. It appears that the courts are losing patience with a seemingly endless series of lawsuits challenging the ACA, believing that these challenges belong in Congress, not in the courts.