Other athletes haven't been so fortunate. A New York Times investigation in 2009 revealed a lack of established insurance coverage standards for schools that could and did leave some athletes footing the bill for their injuries.

For instance, a football player at Ohio University was left with $1,800 in medical bills after he was temporarily paralyzed during a workout, and a football player at the University of Wisconsin-Stout was left with $6,000 in medical bills after he broke his leg and his private insurance coverage reached its limit.

Wilson said she never really worried about her insurance, assuming like many others — sometimes falsely — that she would be covered.

"You hope that it won't be necessary," she said.

Granted, stories of athletes being left with hefty medical bills aren't common, but they were frequent enough that better medical coverage has been an emphasis in the recent reforms aimed at improving student-athlete welfare for collegiate student-athletes.

Last year, the Pac-12 announced its schools should offer four years worth of coverage to athletes once the eligibility has expired, beginning with the 2015-16 academic year. In addition, the Pac-12 and Big Ten are also guaranteeing four-year athletic scholarships, which means a scholarship won't be revoked if an athlete is suffers a career-ending injury.

Pac-12 commissioner Larry Scott said when reforms were announced, he understood insurance was a concern for student-athletes from his discussions with Pac-12 athletes.

"I believe these reforms will mean a great deal to student-athletes in the Pac-12," he said.

Utah athletic director Chris Hill said he supports the increased coverage, but acknowledges he's not going forward without some reservations.

"We are committed to doing it," he said. "But to be honest, the whole medical care discussion can get scary, especially with so many concussion cases coming out. How do you determine if an injury like that, or say a shoulder that starts bothering you years later, happened during your college career?"

Hill estimates his school spends about $1 million on health care annually.

The NCAA requires athletes to have catastrophic insurance, but it comes into play only when expenses reach $90,000. So athletes who don't have adequate coverage of their own or from their school could still be left with a hefty bill — an issue that Hill acknowledged is problematic.

"The bottom line is we are trying to do the best thing we can for people with injuries," he said. "We want to take care of them the best we can, but there is still a lot we don't know about how the medical care thing is going to affect schools."

Other local schools offer similar plans to the Utes, with Utah State covering medical costs for athletes for two years past eligibility, to the tune of an estimated $500,000 according to school officials.

Like many athletic directors, Hill's concern is increased costs with the coverage, but that argument holds no weight with advocates for college athletes, such as Ramogi Huma, the president of the College Athletes Players Association.

In his opinion, health care coverage has been subpar for athletes and is only now getting the attention it deserves.