NEW YORK —

Your stock-fund manager wishes you’d buy more fun things.

Most mutual funds are failing to keep up with broad market indexes again. It’s a trend that’s gone on for years, and the most recent struggles for portfolio managers may be due to their preference for companies that sell coffee, make travel reservations and otherwise focus on nonessentials for consumers. These stocks have had some of the year’s weakest performances.

Through the end of June, 60 percent of large-cap stock funds fell short of the Standard & Poor’s 500 index for one-year returns, according to S&P Dow Jones Indices. The numbers are starker for funds that focus on small-company stocks: Nearly three quarters of small-cap funds — 73 percent — failed to keep up with the S&P 600 index, while 58 percent of mid-cap funds underperformed the S&P 400.

It’s one of the risks of buying a fund where managers are trying to pick winning stocks in hopes of beating an index: They could pick wrong. And when they stumble, they still charge fees that are higher than for index funds.

So far this year, a mistake has been to focus on companies that sell nonessentials to consumers. They’re collectively known as the consumer-discretionary sector, and they have risen 2.3 percent. That’s well below the 8.1 percent gain for the S&P 500.

Strategists at Goldman Sachs looked at hundreds of large-cap mutual funds with $1.4 trillion in investments, measuring which stocks are most and least favored by managers. They found that most funds devote a bigger slice of their portfolios to the consumer-discretionary sector than the S&P 500 does.

Priceline Group makes up 0.8 percent of the average large-cap fund’s investments, for example. That may not sound like much, but it’s double the online travel company’s weight in the S&P 500. That means Priceline’s performance will have a bigger effect on the average fund than the index, and Priceline has been relatively weak this year, up 1.2 percent. Its stock has struggled since August, hurt by slowing growth.

Or consider Starbucks, another relative favorite of mutual-fund managers. Its stock is down 2.9 percent this year.

To be sure, mutual-fund managers are prepared to accept short-term drops. But many funds run by stock pickers have struggled to keep up with broad market indexes during the past five years, as well.

In the five years through June 30, 87 percent of large-cap stock funds have had lower returns than the S&P 500. The percentage of small- and mid-cap funds failing to beat their respective index is nearly identical, 88 percent.