Maybe it was the debate's structured ground rules.

But U.S. Rep. Scott Perry and former Harrisburg Mayor Linda Thompson kept their attacks to the issues Wednesday night during their second public debate.

Like the last debate, Perry, R-York County, and Thompson, the Democratic challenger in the 4th U.S. Congressional District differed widely on their responses to topics including the Affordable Care Act, immigration reform, ISIS, the government's role in job creation, increasing the minimum wage, Common Core, and gun control.

About 175 to 200 people attended the debate at Nicarry Meetinghouse at Cross Keys Village – The Brethren Home Community in Oxford Township, Adams County.

Here are three takeaways from the hourlong event.

Affordable Care Act

Thompson said the Affordable Care Act was "working," because "26 million Americans now have affordable health care" and children can stay on their parents' health care policy up until age 26.

"Many of you don't know or may know that the most high-risk patients and high-risk insurance claims are with kids who are 18 to 30 because of gun violence or motorcycle accidents, car accidents," Thompson said. "And a lot of our parents, in the middle class particularly, were having to file bankruptcy because of the hospital bills they were encountering because of their kid's accidents. But the Affordable Care Act certainly saves parents from that nightmare."

She said the act also prevents health care providers "from denying pre-existing conditions."

Thompson said, if she was elected to Congress, she would "fight against anyone who wants to repeal that act, which has been the case with Republicans, particularly House Republicans that stood on the House floor and voted 55 times to repeal a law that's not going anywhere."

Thompson said she found that "un-American."

Conversely, Perry said, while he's an advocate of some of the provisions of the Affordable Care Act, he opposes it.

"It seems to me we have taken a fairly good system, actually one of the best systems on the planet in healthcare, and really turned it's on its head for the sake of a few things ... that needed to be remedied," Perry said.

Perry talked about the rising expenses that he said have been reported with the act.

While originally creating the website was estimated to cost $840 million, Perry said, according to a report from Bloomberg, "the federal government's system has cost $2.1 billion."

"The act itself was going to cost short of $1 trillion for 10 years, and now it's estimated somewhere between $2 and $3 trillion," Perry said. "So it comes to the point of affordability."

Perry also said it's been reported that about 70 percent of the people who had left or been "forced off" their insurance had gone to Medicaid.

"The problem with that is you have an access to care issue which is emerging because many physicians aren't interested in treating people on Medicaid because the reimbursement rate from the federal government is low," Perry said.

Increasing minimum wage

Thompson believes in raising the minimum wage.

She said that's because "it also lessens dependency on public assistance. And it will allow these individuals who will get a raise to put money back into the economy."

"I don't support it for the sake of bankrupting businesses, particularly when businesses get corporate tax breaks to hire," Thompson said.

Perry, however, said to him, the "minimum wage is a starting wage."

"It's not meant to be a family-sustaining wage," Perry said. "You've got to plan for your future and be responsible with it."

As a Congressman, Perry said having one federal wage rate seemed "foolhardy," and he questioned whether the wage in New Oxford should be commensurate with that in a large city like Los Angeles or New York City.

"I don't see where a one-size-fits-all policy like a minimum wage is good for America," Perry said.

Immigration reform

Thompson and Perry said they were for immigration reform, but their comments otherwise were markedly different.

Perry said the immigration system is "broken," and while he was for immigration reform, he wanted reform that was "responsible" and which recognized "the rule of law."

When asked why the U.S. House of Representatives had been unable to enact immigration reform, Perry said while the U.S. Senate has approved a plan, he and many others believe the "Senate plan is ... tantamount to blanket amnesty for too many folks that came here knowing that they were breaking the law in doing so."

"Many of us, myself included, don't think that we should pass something that fixes those things that are broken, and in turn, for passing that, we must accept that everybody that broke the law knowingly then gets to become a citizen in this country," Perry said. "We reward people for breaking the law."

Concerning illegal immigration, Perry also said it's a "national security issue."

"We don't know who's coming; how long their staying; and what their intentions are," Perry said. "And that is not a recipe for the success of a sovereign nation, especially with concerns like ISIS and Ebola."

Thompson, however, pointed out that the millions of undocumented workers in America are "human beings" — mothers, fathers and children. They wanted to own businesses and homes.

She said she believed in "keeping families together and making them go through a legal process."

"America's motto has always been give me your tired and give me your poor," Thompson said. "We all are immigrants, quite frankly, in one way, form or fashion. We all have come from somewhere other than America."

Additionally, Thompson said having undocumented workers who get paid under the table also means that America doesn't reap "tax-roll dollars that she's supposed to get. ... "So, it's hurting the economy tremendously."