Accounting students at Husson University are donating their time to help their peers and members of the public complete their state and federal tax forms correctly. For our accounting students, this is a great opportunity to get some “hands-on” experience working with clients and filing taxes.

It seems as if there are tax code changes every year. This year, there are changes to the tax penalties associated with the Affordable Care Act, adjustments to tax brackets for inflation, increases in standard deductions and personal exemptions, and more. Students who are filing their taxes for the first time and experienced tax filers sometimes need a little guidance to complete this process in a timely and accurate manner.

In an effort to help anyone who needs assistance, aspiring accountants from Husson University’s College of Business are donating their time to help others file the appropriate state and federal tax forms by this year’s deadline. Individuals must have an income of less than $62,000 per year to quality for this free service.

The IRS Taxpayer Assistance Program is open to any local area resident or Husson University student who needs some help with their tax form preparation. Individuals interested in participating in this program are encouraged to bring any receipts, W-2s and other documents that might be needed for filing their returns to the Husson accounting students at the Richard E. Dyke Center for Family Business on the University’s Bangor campus. No appointment is necessary.

“This service benefits both our students and the individuals they assist,” said Dewey Martin, CPA, director of the School of Accounting at Husson University. “For our accounting students, this is a great opportunity to get some “hands-on” experience working with clients and filing taxes. In addition, members of the community and the first-time filers who may be concerned about the process, receive coaching from well-prepared students on filling out their tax forms correctly. Everyone wins.”

The IRS Taxpayer Assistance Program is open five days a week between now and April 15.



Monday: 9:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. and 2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.

Tuesday: 12:15 p.m. – 3:00 p.m.

Wednesday: 9:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m.

Thursday: 12:15 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.

Friday: 9:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m.

Students and members of the community interested in learning more about this service should contact Shannon Graves at gravess(at)husson(dot)edu.

For more than 100 years, Husson University has prepared future leaders to handle the challenges of tomorrow through innovative undergraduate and graduate degrees. With a commitment to delivering affordable classroom, online and experiential learning opportunities, Husson University has come to represent superior value in higher education. Our Bangor campus and off-campus satellite education centers in Southern Maine, Wells and Northern Maine provide advanced knowledge in business; health and education; pharmacy studies; science and humanities; as well as communication. In addition, Husson University has a robust adult learning program. For more information about educational opportunities that can lead to personal and professional success, visit Husson.edu.