Back in 2012, blogger “Helene In Between” posted a picture of herself looking distraught over a bad dye job. Yesterday, she woke up to piles of emails from strangers asking her if she was aware that her picture was being used in a bizarre anti-Obamacare meme, and spreading across the internet like wildfire.

In reality, Helene says she is very happy with her Obamacare situation and never thought it was going to be free, because she’s not an idiot.

Via Helene In Between:

Here’s what really gets me: I don’t talk politics on this blog, because, honestly, I’m not as informed as I’d like to be. But if anyone asked me I’d tell them that I voted for Obama, twice. Not only that, I actually HAVE Obamacare. Yep. I went to healthcare.gov and got insurance. Despite all the negative publicity, I have to say it was easy. I had no problems. And, unlike what the picture would have you believe, I never expected it to be free. So, not only did someone take my picture without my consent, they used it to profess the opposite of what I stand for. …. Well, I do. Several of the comments on the fake political poster using my face, criticized “young people who just think they have it so tough. God I hate them.” One told the girl in the picture to “Grow the fuck up.” Meaning me. Most of the comments were basically just anti-Obama for the sake of being anti-Obama. We see images like this everyday. We laugh, we share, we move on. But when it twists the truth just to confuse and misinform, it makes you realize that much of what is out there isn’t true. No matter what side you’re on. What’s more disturbing is when your face or name is associated with something you don’t believe in, and there’s really not a whole lot you can do about it.

The sad part about this is that it’s neither truthful nor funny. I mean, Obama never claimed that the AHA was Single Payer. As someone who is ardently for Single Payer, I can attest to that. Even if that were true, which it’s not, it still wouldn’t be funny. I’m more frightened by the fact that 15,000 people thought this was fabulously clever enough to share, and 20,000 people “liked” it. Not even noticing that the word “conspiracy” was spelled incorrectly. That actually scares me.

I looked at some of the other memes posted on the Right Wing News Facebook page, and they are all equally painfully devoid of humor. And yet, the people commenting on them seem to think they are just the wittiest thing they’ve ever seen. It’s truly, truly bizarre.

Personally, I really don’t like the idea of using real, non-famous people in memes to begin with. It gives me the creeps and I find it dehumanizing and mean-spirited. Even in the case of “positive” memes like “Good Guy Steve” and what have you. It just must really suck to have people using your face to make their own point or push their own agenda. I mean, yes, things we put on the internet are “public”–but that doesn’t mean that we have to be assholes and not exhibit basic human dignity.