The second half of the Yankees' season promises to be more entertaining than those first four months of Obamacare Girardicare, and it's not because free-agent disappointments Brian McCann and Carlos Beltran finally might start earning their millions, or because emotionally walled-off Derek Jeter is going to slip into a 65-game crying fit as he heads into retirement.

It's because of Amanda McCarthy, the smark-alecky tweeting wife of Brandon McCarthy -- the 6-foot, 7-inch roll of duct tape the Yankees have purchased to try to hold their season together. (Yankees fans: If you're not following her, click the blue button now.)

On Saturday, when her husband kept the Yankees unbeaten after the All-Star break, she let him (and the rest of the world) know she'd be late (and we all sympathized):

Hi @mlb Amanda here, can you postpone the Yankees game today? I am stuck on the Deegan again. Thanks! Xoxo — Amanda McCarthy (@Mrs_McCarthy32) July 19, 2014

When fans suggested a Metrocard Plan B, she reminded them that she's not a mass transit sort of gal:

Telling me to take the subway is like telling me there is a new stadium.. I know guys, I know.. — Amanda McCarthy (@Mrs_McCarthy32) July 19, 2014

Her husband, the guy she calls "Stretch," just shakes his head.

“If everybody isn’t apprised of what she’s doing every few minutes, God knows what would happen,” said McCarthy, himself a Twitter Hall of Famer, after the game. “That’s how I find out what goes on with my wife. I read it when everybody else does.”

Well, if he accessed Twitter in the dugout, he found out she beat the traffic in time to comment on the weather:

Loving the pinstripes.. Loving the cloudy weather, such a perfect day to sit outside and watch a game — Amanda McCarthy (@Mrs_McCarthy32) July 19, 2014

And boast about her hubby, who has been looking like an ambidextous Clayton Kershaw lately. In six innings of Saturday's 7-1 victory, he struck out nine, walked none and gave up six hits. His ERA is 1.42 in his two starts as a Yankee and 1.78 in his last four starts.

So proud of that guy... YNWA — Amanda McCarthy (@Mrs_McCarthy32) July 19, 2014

YNWA, by the way, stands for "You Never Walk Alone," the pitcher said, meaning Amanda has assured him she'll always be there -- tweeting like crazy.