Looking for connections based on more than looks

Tinder and Grindr and Bumble, oh my.

Just when you thought there couldn't possibly be another original concept for a dating app, a band of University of Colorado students has sought to prove you wrong.

Founded last year by CU senior Sean Chenoweth, the Qualify app seeks to bring compatibility and personality back into the dating game. Able to speak from bad app-dating experience, Chenoweth said he finally became fed up with the superficiality of Tinder and other dating apps that often led to awkward conversations and very few second dates.

"After more than two years of Tinder, two years of meeting random strangers solely off of appearance, two years of aimlessly and monotonously swiping our thumbs right or left, this campus is ready for something new," Chenoweth said. "Last year after my breakup, I went on a pretty horrible date. I felt even lower about dating afterwards — I was hoping for love, and got that horrible experience instead."

From a collection of bad experiences, Chenoweth and a group of like-minded friends were able to identify where dating apps, like Tinder, were going wrong and sought out a way to change it.

Advertisement

"We're trying to get away from the mass amount of right swiping based only on someone's looks. Tinder is pretty much known as a hook-up app, but we want to get more compatible matches so that you can go on a second date and hopefully it will lead to a great relationship," said Emilia Caliguiri, who runs Qualify's marketing and social media.

"We don't want it to be based on how hot you are and then have a horrible date with someone with nothing in common."

According to Caliguiri, the app seeks to "combine the compatibility of match.com with the instant gratification of Tinder and the entertainment aspect of trivia games." A user will log on, create an account, and upload a picture, just as with any other dating app. Qualify, however, requires an extra step: A customizable quiz.

The user creates a quiz for his or her profile which can consist of three to five questions with various multiple choice and true or false answers for each. The idea, as Chenoweth explains, is to try to define your perfect date through a series of your own questions, so that users become their own gatekeeper for who to invite into their lives.

"I can ask, for example, 'Who was the main wizard from Lord of the Rings?' and if the girl can't answer correctly, I know she doesn't have an interest in fantasy or the Lord of the Rings, and then that's not someone I want to match with," Chenoweth said.

"We're escaping the sleazy factor of Tinder, with all the mindless scrolling. That can get really boring after awhile, too. Just scrolling and judging, scrolling and judging."

On other apps, decisions to pursue or not pursue a person are largely based on a profile picture. But Qualify introduces a unique sense of anonymity to the game, which requires decision making to be primarily interest-based. To start, a user's profile picture will be completely blurred out.

"When you answer one of my quiz questions correctly, my picture will get less blurry. With every question you get right, you can start to see my face better," Chenoweth said. "By the end, you can see exactly who I am. It adds a layer of trivial entertainment while also (adding) a layer of protection from potential mismatches."

Another unique component: The app is exclusively available to CU students. When logging in, users are required to use a CU student email address, to ensure it's only being used by CU students.

Chenoweth explains that there are various reasons for deciding to isolate the target audience, among them being a sense of community in meeting fellow students, not just a random person. For Caliguiri, exclusively seeking out other CU students adds a larger sense of protection to the world of app-dating.

"Especially for girls, this gives us a little more of a sense of protection. Safety was a big part of conversations we had as a team," Caliguiri said. "I feel much more safe going to meet up with someone if I know that we both go to CU, that we're both on campus every day from noon to four. It's much more familiar."

Future plans include Qualify's official launch, which is set within the upcoming weeks. Long term, Chenoweth and the team hope to expand the app to other college campuses throughout the country after establishing a following here in Boulder.

"Hopefully by the end of this semester or next, we'll get to a minimum of 1,000 CU users. Once we get that, we'll raise a big round of funding and travel from campus to campus. We want to keep it only for college students," Chenoweth said.

"This is something I'll continue doing even after college. I'm in it for the long haul."