The former Florida governor says the race is far from over. | Getty Jeb Bush: Early polls 'really don't matter'

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who has persistently trailed Donald Trump and Ben Carson in the Republican presidential polls, is questioning the accuracy of them showing him way behind.

“These polls really don't matter,” Bush said in an interview on “Fox News Sunday.” “They don't filter out the people that aren't going to vote. It's just…an obsession, because it kind of frames the debate for people for that week.”

Story Continued Below

His comments aired Sunday, as a new NBC/Wall Street Journal poll of Republicans who say they’re likely to vote in next year’s GOP caucuses and primaries showed him lagging in a distant fifth behind Trump, the real estate developer and entertainer, and Carson, a retired neurosurgeon, who were tied for first –and trailing (but statistically tied with) Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina.

Bush told Fox host Chris Wallace that he’s taking a long view on the race and expects his poll numbers to rebound as he runs television ads. And, he said, he’s confident of his campaign’s ground game in New Hampshire.

“Look, it is a marathon, and we just started advertising. I'm confident we get good response,” Bush said. “We've got a great ground game in these early states. … I'm confident I can win New Hampshire for sure. I'm going to work really hard at it.”

Bush also sought to tamp down some backlash to controversial comments he made when he suggested last week that Republicans who hope to connect with African-American voters should emphasize their message isn’t about giving them “free stuff.”

“We need to make our case to…to African-American voters and all voters that an aspirational message, fixing a few big complex things, will allow people to rise up,” Bush said, blaming “the left” for taking his remarks out of context. “That's what people want. They don't want free stuff. That was my whole point.”

“We spend a trillion dollars a year on poverty programs,” he continued. “And the net result is the percentage of people in poverty has remained the same.”