Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz said Monday in Fort Wayne that today's Indiana primary election is a choice between "a campaign that is based on yelling and screaming and cursing and insults and anger and hatred" and "a positive, optimistic, forward-looking conservative campaign."

Cruz did not explicitly say – nor did he need to – which campaign was his and which was that of GOP front-runner Donald Trump. But by his own estimate, Hoosiers are evenly divided about whose approach they prefer.

"In Indiana we are neck and neck. This race is tied in Indiana. It is 100 percent about turnout," the Texas senator told 1,752 people at a rally at Grand Wayne Center, nearly 800 more than attended a rally for him at the same venue on Thursday.

National polls show Trump with a big lead in the Hoosier State, but an IPFW survey released last week gives Cruz a double-digit advantage. Ohio Gov. John Kasich, who has not campaigned in Indiana as part of a deal with Cruz, is a distant third in the polls.

It is believed that Cruz must win most if not all of Indiana's 57 delegates to have any chance of stopping Trump's march to the 1,237 delegates he needs to tie down the Republican presidential nomination ahead of the party's national convention in July. Trump is just shy of 1,000 delegates with 10 state primaries to go.

"This election our country is at the edge of the cliff. We are staring down into the abyss," Cruz said Monday. "In the entire country, millions of Americans are praying for this state right now. The entire country is dependent on the state of Indiana to pull us back from this cliff."

Much of his speech was a rehash, almost word for word, of his Thursday remarks, right down to his line about imagining Democratic presidential favorite Hillary Clinton "tossing and turning in her jail cell." Some in the Grand Wayne Center audience wore "Hillary for Prison" T-shirts.

Cruz's main themes, like last week, were that his presidency would boost American jobs, freedom and security through establishing a flat income tax, repealing the Affordable Care Act, reducing environmental and business regulations, toughening immigration policies, protecting gun rights, strengthening the military and defeating Islamic terrorists.

Earlier, conservative talk-show host and ardent Cruz supporter Glenn Beck told the Fort Wayne crowd: "The country is in your hands. I come to you as a dad. My children's future is in your hands, in your neighbors' hands."

Gov. Mike Pence, who endorsed Cruz last week, called him a "principled conservative" who as a first-term senator "has shown the courage of his convictions by fighting runaway federal spending in Washington, D.C., taking on the leadership of his own party with courage, and he led the fight to repeal Obamacare lock, stock and barrel."

During a brief news conference, Cruz referred to Pence as "a happy warrior" for conservative principles. Cruz said media coverage of Pence's endorsement – widely depicted as lukewarm at best – had "confused being Midwest nice for being less than enthusiastic."

Cruz's backers at the rally, many of them waving "Choose Cruz" signs, did not lack for zeal.

"I've been supporting Cruz since he got elected to the Senate," Fort Wayne resident Seth Owen, 33, said in an interview. "I like that he's a Christian, that he's very conservative, that he believes in the traditional principles."

Owen's mother, Elaine Seifert, 67, said Cruz "is a constitutional conservative. He's defended the Constitution before the Supreme Court successfully, defended U.S. sovereignty, defended our First and Second Amendment rights. That matters to me."

Fort Wayne resident Ralph Scantlin, 71, recited major planks of Cruz's platform as the reasons he had already voted for the Texan.

"I think he's a good man; I like the fact that he is a man of faith," said Scantlin, who wore an American flag cross pin on his jacket.

Technically, the Fort Wayne rally was not a Cruz campaign event; it was organized by Keep the Promise, an independent political action committee that supports his candidacy, and Cruz and Pence were considered "special guests." Cruz campaigned earlier Monday in Osceola and Marion – where he reportedly argued with a Trump backer protesting Cruz's appearance – and was scheduled to speak later in Bloomington and Indianapolis.

bfrancisco@jg.net