Denver police searched a man twice Wednesday before he was placed in the back of a patrol vehicle from where he later shot at officers, according to a statement of probable cause used to arrest the man.

The incident began Wednesday afternoon when narcotics detectives arrested 32-year-old Isaac Vigil in the McDonald’s parking lot in the 300 block of South Eliot Street.

According to the document, detectives called for a cover officer to help in the arrest, “due to the violent and aggressive behavior of the suspect who they observed smoking suspected methamphetamine.”

During the arrest, detectives searched Vigil but stated that he was “constantly moving, thrashing and jumping with both feet off the ground.”

When Cpl. Greg Juarez arrived to provide cover, he also searched Vigil and then transported him in a police cruiser to the District 4 substation at 2100 S. Clay St. in southwest Denver.

During the arrest and the ride, the document states that Vigil made several comments to detectives and officers that he was going to shoot them, saying, “I’ve got something for you guys.” He also admitted to police on the drive that he had been smoking meth for three days and was not going back to prison, saying he preferred to die.

The document also says Vigil was kicking the doors and windows of the police vehicle.

When they arrived at the station, Vigil refused to get out of the vehicle, so Juarez asked another officer for help.

As the other officer helped to get Vigil out, police saw a flash as Vigil fired a gun from behind his back.

Officers took cover behind the police car and heard a second shot fired.

Another officer, Cpl. John Sisneros, then fired one shot at Vigil, hitting him in the abdomen.

Police used a shield to approach the vehicle again and take the wounded suspect out of the car.

The document also reveals that police recovered a handgun with a scratched-off serial number from the back of the police car, and paramedics retrieved three bags of meth from inside Vigil’s body.

As of Friday afternoon, Vigil was still in a hospital being treated for the gunshot wound.

The probable cause document was first reported by CBS4.

Yesenia Robles: 303-954-1372, yrobles@denverpost.com or twitter.com/yeseniarobles