Buy Photo Historic photo of the old Church Street School. The 3rd floor with the gabled roof burned and was never replaced (Photo: FILE PHOTO )Buy Photo

The school district’s historic Church Street school was sold to the highest bidder at a public auction, officials have said.

The winning bid was made by Jemals Church Street, LLC.

“We had dozens and dozens of inquiries and at least six bidders at the auction,” said Bob Dann, chief of operations at Max Spann Real Estate & Auction Company, the auctioneer hired by the school district to sell the property.

MORE: District has plans for old high school

Dann said the bidding started at $200,000 and within five minutes was sold at $550,000.

According to the Board of Education, the school district has been trying to sell the old school property for about a decade, but buyers were hesitant because the building has an historic easement on it.

“That was an issue. There are things you can’t do it there. A developer can’t knock it down and build townhouses, for example,” said Lucille Perez, president of the city Board of Education.

The Church Street school was built in 1891 and is on the National Register of Historic Places.

Jemals Church Street, LLC signed the contract on Oct. 8, and has 45 days from that date to close on it, said Dann.

The school is 16,634 square feet and sits on about 1½ acres.

One of the owners of Jemals Church Street, LLC, Douglass Jemal of Long Branch, bought and restored two former Takanassee Beach Club buildings, the Captain's House and Port Huron House.

The buildings are located at his home at 900 Ocean Ave.

Perez said the school district could use the money for capital projects, but nothing formal has been brought before the school board yet. Superintendent Dr. Michael Salvatore said earlier this month if they sold the school they could use the money to help fun the renovation of the old Long Branch High School.

The total cost for that project is estimated to cost $11.5 million.

Dan Radel: 732-643-4072; dradel@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1wbqKgs