JPMorgan Chase & Co. (NYSE:JPM) reiterated its Overweight rating on Rite Aid Corporation (NYSE:RAD) stock earlier this week and maintained the target price at $6.50. UBS AG (NYSE:OUBS) also holds a bullish outlook on the drug retailer. Only two days before the company’s expected date for third-quarter earnings release, the financial firm upgraded the company’s rating from Neutral to Buy and increased the target price from $6.25 to $8.

JPMorgan and UBS are not the only optimistic sell-side firms on Rite Aid stock. Out of the 12 analysts who cover the stock, nine rate it a Buy and two have given it a Hold rating. The 12-month forward consensus target price on the stock is $6.78.

Rite Aid revised down its earnings estimate for fiscal year 2015 (FY15) twice this year, with the most recent guidance revision being $0.22-0.33. The midpoint of this range falls below the analysts’ estimate of $0.28.

Rite Aid has outperformed analysts’ revenue expectation consecutively for seven quarters. It has beaten analysts’ expectation for adjusted earnings by beating last quarter’s estimate last quarter by 109.68%.

JPMorgan and UBS believe that the overall industry will perform better in the upcoming years. While US population is increasing, dynamics are also changing with more people falling under the old-age bracket. This age group has a higher healthcare expenditure that drives higher sales for the company.

The recent Affordable Care Act regulation will lead to a higher number of people becoming eligible for government healthcare, hence, benefiting Rite Aid and other drug retailers.

JPMorgan and UBS believe that the deal between Rite Aid and McKesson Corporation (NYSE:MCK) is most likely to benefit the company. UBS believes that the deal will add roughly $50 million to Rite Aid’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization for FY16. Whereas, JPMorgan has stated that the deal will reduce disparity between Rite Aid’s margins with other firms in the industry.

Considering the price-to-earnings multiple, Rite Aid is currently underpriced. Investors have currently placed a value of $16.57 for each dollar of the company’s future earnings. Since last year, investors have placed a value of $17.10. Moreover, the stock is currently trading at a discount of 11.15% to the S&P 500 Drug retail Index, compared to a premium of 2.02% previously.

Rite Aid stock gained 0.83% yesterday during extended trading, indicating a 7.13% growth in five days.