Cop Saves Subway Jumper’s Life… Then Nearly Beats Him To Death

An investigation by local 5 news has proven that the police deliberately edited the video to highlight the actions of the officer which would make him look heroic. But they cut out the part of the video where the very same cop beat the man to a pulp.

Last year, Greater Boston’s Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority Transit Police released video of what seemed to be a “hero cop.” The officer saved the life of a man who almost fell (or apparently jumped), onto the tracks in front of a subway train.

But now, a full-length version of the previously-edited video, has revealed much more to the story.

An investigation by local 5 news has proven that the police deliberately edited the video to highlight the actions of the officer which would make him look heroic. But they cut out the part of the video where the very same cop beat the man to a pulp.



official MintPress sponsor official MintPress sponsor

The MBTA video clearly shows Detective Sean Conway grabbing a man who was about to go over the edge of the subway platform.

Chief Paul MacMillan praised Conway at the time, calling him a hero.

“He was alert, he saw what was going to happen and he took appropriate action, so we’re very proud of him,” MacMillan said last spring.

Watch the short, edited version and you will see an apparently drunk Anthony Ferrier being saved by the officer.

But after the video ends, you see Detective Conway punching Ferrier in the face repeatedly. Ferrier’s lawyer released a photo (above), that shows severe facial injuries the man sustained at the hands of the supposedly “heroic” cop.

“The MBTA misled the public and clearly intended to do so,” David Milton, Ferrier’s lawyer said. “If they truly believe the officer’s actions were appropriate beginning to end, they should have released the entire video and let the public decide.”

The MBTA didn’t release the video at first. It took eight months and a lawsuit to get them to finally hand it over.

The MBTA released a statement stating their belief that “Detective Conway’s use of force was justified and commensurate for the situation.”

They added that “Conway was in compliance with policy.”

“Properly trained police officers do not punch people in the face,” Ferrier’s lawyer said. “Properly trained police officers receive extensive training in subduing suspects.”

Watch the local WCVB 5 report below and help us SPREAD THE WORD!