Did President Obama consider how an increase would affect Colorado’s potential employees, current employees, business owners, our state’s economy, and our citizens — half of whom are restaurant patrons on any given day? Does he know Colorado has its own minimum wage law in our state constitution? Here are some things that should be taken into consideration by the president and by our members of Congress before they support a $10.10 minimum wage:

Colorado law: Colorado already has its minimum wage set in our state constitution, as do some other states. Currently, the Colorado minimum wage is $8 per hour for non-tipped employees and $4.98 per hour for tipped employees — much higher than the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour for non-tipped employees and $2.13 per hour for tipped employees. Colorado’s minimum wage is also indexed to the Denver-Boulder-Greeley Consumer Price Index, so it increases annually with inflation.

Colorado’s restaurants: Colorado’s 10,700 restaurants provide 250,500 jobs and collect nearly $700 million in state and local taxes. Those sales taxes build roads and schools and prisons. Restaurants gave almost 50 percent of all adults their first jobs. Restaurant owners contribute to countless charities. Over 75 percent of Colorado restaurants are locally owned and operated. Restaurants employ more minors, minorities, and disabled workers than any other industry.

The profit margin in a restaurant is less than 4 percent before income taxes, so a restaurant that grosses $1 million in sales makes $40,000 in pre-income-tax profit. The money to pay for an increased minimum wage will not come from those profits. It will come from an increase in menu prices, and it will come at the risk of depleting our customer base and threatening current jobs.

Starting wage versus living wage: The federal minimum wage was never intended to be a living wage, or to provide the sole source of income for a family. It was intended to be a starting wage for unskilled workers. Of the restaurant employees who earn the minimum wage, more than 75 percent are part-time employees, 70 percent are under the age of 25, and nearly 50 percent are teenagers. An increase in the minimum wage will limit opportunities for teens and for low-skilled and entry-level workers, where unemployment rates are the highest.

Ladder to success: The minimum wage provides individuals with a foot on the first step of the ladder to upward mobility. If that first rung is too high, many people will not be able to get onto the ladder. On average, restaurant workers receive a raise within their first six months of work. Ninety percent of salaried restaurant employees started as entry-level restaurant employees. Many of our minimum wage jobs are filled by young or first-time employees entering the workforce.

Do Coloradans want the starting wage to be so high that teenagers and unskilled workers can’t get a job? Do we want current employees to be laid off because employers can’t afford this mandated increase in payroll costs? Do we want to push the unemployed toward welfare, or do we want to push them toward jobs?

Our leaders should spend their time and energy on pro-growth proposals that will help create more jobs and put money back into our economy, where everyone will benefit.

Peter M. Meersman is president and CEO of the Colorado Restaurant Association.