A fledgling group pushing for “maximum transparency and openness” in government met Thursday to organize and hear from Freedom of Information Act experts.

About 20 potential members attended the Transparency in Government Group of Western Arkansas’ evening meeting at Homewood Suites by Hilton in Fort Smith. Organizer and Fort Smith attorney Joey McCutchen said the local group will be modeled after one established in Boone County in 2010.

“We’re just getting started,” McCutchen said. “It’s about how we as citizens can be informed and then take action.”

The group’s stated mission is “to ensure maximum transparency and openness in governmental affairs involving taxpayer monies and encourage full reporting of governmental activities by all available news media.”

At the heart of the Transparency in Government Group is the Arkansas Freedom of Information Act.

“It is the people’s law, and it’s a great equalizer,” McCutchen said. “The reason I’m so passionate about this is it’s just like a jury trial. The smallest among us can compete with the largest corporation when we are in that courtroom and we have 12 of our peers evaluating it.”

Speakers were Bill Ray Lewis and retired Lt. Col. Jim Parsons, both described by the group as experts in freedom of information laws.

A member of the Boone County Transparency in Government Group, Lewis is a retired school administrator from Harrison. He encouraged Thursday night’s attendees to get involved.

“All you need as a group is to learn the law and how to apply it,” he said. “All we want our governmental people to do is abide by the law. We’re just after the truth. Where are the tax dollars going? Who’s spending those tax dollars? What’s the school superintendent make every year?

“It’s our right to know that.”

Lewis spent much of his speaking time on the Arkansas FOIA, which he described as “one of the greatest laws, I think, ever written in the state.”

“We call the FOIA the Sunshine Law,” Lewis said, “because it kind of lets sunshine in. We’re looking through the telescope, which is sort of the FOIA law. It’s magnifying what’s going on in this city council meeting, this school board meeting or this quorum court meeting.”

McCutchen said Transparency in Government Group of Western Arkansas will likely meet monthly or quarterly. For information, call 783-0036.