$200 million tax hike possible after health co-op collapse Obamacare's co-op in NY, Health Republic was shut for failure to pay bills

Albany

Are New Yorkers looking at a health insurance tax to pay for the more than $200 million in unpaid doctor and hospital bills remaining after the collapse of the state's consumer-run nonprofit insurance co-op?

Or could that money come from the billions in bank settlements that have flowed to state coffers in recent years?

Those are among the questions that lawmakers and Gov. Andrew Cuomo will likely be debating in the upcoming legislative session. They were previewed Wednesday during a roundtable discussion put on by state Sens. Kemp Hannon and Jim Seward that was attended by members of the state's health insurance companies and health care providers.

Also unclear is the future status of the approximately 215,000 New Yorkers who had low-cost health insurance policies through the short-lived Health Republic co-op. While most have found new policies with other carriers, it isn't yet known if they'll all be able to pay the new higher premiums.

The collapse of Health Republic has been echoed in other states, adding to already abundant Republican criticism of the 2010 Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Among other initiatives, the landmark law set up a mechanism, supported by federal loans, for the creation of nonprofit consumer-governed co-ops to compete with more established health insurance players like the various Blue Cross/Blue Shield organizations as well as giant firms like United Healthcare.

The idea was that the co-ops could provide a lower-cost alternative for people needing insurance coverage.

It didn't work as planned.

Plagued by inadequate funds to cover their claims, Health Republic was shut down by state regulators in November. Similar scenarios have played out nationwide, with 12 of 23 co-ops closing this year.

Some have asserted that co-op rates might have been unrealistically low given the high cost of health care. Monthly costs under Health Republic were in some cases hundreds of dollars less than those of other plans.

"The company failed to propose premiums which covered the cost of claims," said Deborah Fasser, spokeswoman for the state conference of Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans, at the roundtable.

Overall, Health Republic was allowed by the state to offer rates about a third less than many competing firms.

In Albany, for example, a "Silver"-level policy at Health Republic in 2014 was $294 per month, compared to an average of $434 for other plans.

With such low rates, competing firms said Health Republic's collapse shouldn't have been a shock to the state regulators.

But Troy Oechsner, acting executive deputy superintendent for insurance at the state Department of Financial Services, noted that "the experience of Health Republic wasn't unique to New York." DFS oversees and approves rates for insurers.

Oechsner pointed out that Congress never came through with additional backstop funding that had earlier been promised for the co-ops.

The collapse has led to a split between stakeholders: Health care providers support a special fund that could be paid through a tax to repay doctors and hospitals; the insurance industry, meanwhile, says it is already taxed enough.

Seward, who chairs the Senate insurance committee, said the state already charges some $4.6 billion in fees and taxes on health care insurance. He believes the Cuomo administration should scour some of those revenues and perhaps tap bank settlement funds to pay off the providers.

Seward and Hannon seemed wary of the state's "prior approval" process, DFS's mechanism for approving insurance premiums.

That process was scrapped under the Pataki administration but restored by former Gov. David Paterson, and has remained in place.

The lawmakers described it as opaque. Seward said there have been efforts, which haven't moved in the Democratic-led Assembly, to set up a formal appeals process in which insurance firms could push for higher rates if they need them. Health insurance profits are limited by regulations to a percentage of their premiums, and insurers say they need higher premiums to cover ever-rising claims.

rkarlin@timesunion.com • 518-454-5758 • @RickKarlinTU