Crony Capitalism: ObamaCare has unleashed a wave of industry mergers that will increasingly restrict access and limit choices for consumers. Worse, it will make government control of the industry all the easier.

Does anyone remember President Obama promising that ObamaCare would create a few giant health care oligopolies? Well, it’s heading that way.

This week, IBD’s Ciaran McEvoy reported on Tuesday, health insurers are the latest to catch the health industry’s merger mania. Anthem is trying to take over Cigna. Humana is being pursued by Aetna, which in turn is a target of United Health Group.

“It could be just Anthem and UnitedHealth when the dust settles,” McEvoy notes.

Insurance companies are just following the lead of hospitals since ObamaCare passed. In fact, the number of hospital mergers in 2014 was 50% higher than it was the year before ObamaCare passed. And when not merging with each other, hospitals are busy snapping up doctor practices.

Those mergers prompted insurers, who are worried about too much power in two few provider groups’ hands, to join the merger game.

The theory goes that these big provider groups will be more efficient and can better manage costs by coordinating care and eliminating redundancies. And big insurance companies, with enhanced bargaining power, will be more effective at keeping a lid on prices.

In reality, it will end up more like a step toward a single-payer system. With Washington paying most of the bills, and consumers having nowhere else to go, the federal government can more easily impose its will.

In any case, the real-world impact of this consolidation isn’t going to be better health care at lower prices. Instead, it will leave consumers with fewer choices and less access, while they pay more for the privilege.

If you don’t think so, try to recall the days when government regulations had snuffed out all competition in the telephone industry. The result was sky-high (and government-approved) phone bills, few services, and so little innovation that call-waiting was heralded as a major advance in telecommunications.

The ObamaCare-induced merger mania also risks creating another too-big-to-fail problem, this time in health care.

In a competitive market, if one hospital fails, others can pick up the slack. But if there are only one or two companies running most of all the hospitals in the country as a result of ObamaCare, the government would have no choice but to bail them out should they face a financial crisis. Ditto giant-sized insurance companies.

In the end, ObamaCare is a case study in how supposedly consumer-driven reforms end up benefiting big established companies, while hampering competitors responsible for most of the quality-improving and cost-cutting innovations.

That’s not what Obama promised. But it’s what ObamaCare will inevitably produce.