Insurance mergers are all the rage

Posted: 6 am ET

As befitting Shark Week, insurance great whites have been gobbling up some equally substantial brand-name competitors lately in what industry sources say is the start of a feeding frenzy in the sector.

Word came down over the July 4th weekend that Humana health insurance is giving up its independence to Aetna in a $37 billion deal rumored weeks ago. If approved by shareholders and regulators, the cash and stock deal would combine two of the nation's largest health insurers into one company that's expected to see $115 billion in operating revenue this year, thanks to more than 33 million customers.

Mark Bertolini, the current Aetna CEO who will head the combined company, says the merger would position the nation's largest for-profit health insurers to better adapt to a health care environment where consumers increasingly choose coverage on Obamacare or private exchanges.

"The public exchange is an example of where the system is going overall," agreed Humana CEO Bruce Broussard.

Merger-and-acquisition fever

Over in the equally stormy property/casualty pool, CEO Evan Greenberg announced that ACE Ltd. has reached a $28 billion deal to acquire Chubb Corp. It's the biggest merger in the home insurance sector since the 2008 government bailout of AIG, the whale previously headed by Greenberg's father, Hank.

The deal prompted Nomura Holdings analyst Cliff Gallant to declare the start of merger and acquisition (M&A) fever amid the busiest quarter of insurance wheeling and dealing in a dozen years.

"M&A fever is upon the industry, and size is critical," Gallant says. "Major companies need to rethink their global ambitions and consider actions perhaps not previously considered. Small deals are likely irrelevant."

More to come

And it's not just insurers who are throwing in together. Gallant says reinsurers, the companies that back up insurers' risks, have been consolidating in droves, while insurance broker Willis Group Holdings recently shelled out $8 billion to acquire rival Towers Watson.

Chicago-based analyst Paul Newsome of Sandler O'Neill and Partners says M&A fever may be raising the bar for the industry.

"The management teams of virtually every large property/casualty company will be having a conversation today about whether they should be more active acquirers," he told Bloomberg. "(ACE and Chubb) are two well-run companies that probably could have done very well on their own, but they're trying to build something even bigger."

Analysts say AIG, Allstate and Travelers are the likeliest sharks combing the pools of small fry in this feeding frenzy.

"There is now literally no deal that cannot be contemplated in (property and casualty)," according to Citigroup analyst Todd Bault, writing in a report.

Follow me on Twitter: @omnisaurus

Get more news, money-saving tips and expert advice by signing up for a free Bankrate newsletter.

Veteran contributing editor Jay MacDonald is co-author of "Future Millionaires' Guidebook."