There are defining moments, and there are teachable moments. When we recount the history of Syrian refugees, will our actions have counted? Will our story be that of a fearless Pittsburgh community that stood with Mayor Bill Peduto to welcome Syrian refugees to our city? Will our faith and not our fear dictate our actions?

Last week the House passed the American Security Against Foreign Enemies Act (shrewdly named the SAFE Act). The legislation would require the director of the FBI to vouch for the completion of a background investigation on each refugee, as well as to certify to Congress that he or she is not a security risk. The secretary of homeland security and director of national intelligence would also be required to certify to Congress that individual refugees are not security threats. The SAFE Act essentially copies existing procedures except for requiring personal certifications by agency directors, which seems like political gamesmanship.

The dangerous rhetoric used by some Republican presidential candidates fans fear. Several have called for the registration of Muslim-Americans and others have promoted using a religious test for entry. Donald Trump even fabricated a claim of seeing thousands of Muslim-Americans celebrating the destruction of the World Trade Center on 9/​11. We must call for an end to this reckless behavior. If we remain silent, in this time of fear, have we given “never again” a narrow and perhaps dangerous meaning?

Adolf Hitler is reported to have taken the world’s silence regarding the killing of Armenians as a virtual green light for his diabolical plans. Martin Neimoller’s words emblazoned at the entrance to Yad Vashem, the Holocaust Memorial in Israel, tell the story: “First they came for the socialists and I did not speak out …Then they came for the Jews and I did not speak out … and then they came for me and there was no one left to speak for me.”

Will we learn from history? During World War II, 120,000 Japanese-Americans were wrongly incarcerated in relocation camps after Pearl Harbor. More than half were American citizens. Many lost their property forever and whole families were destroyed. Fear did that.

In 1939, 900 Jewish refugees, fleeing Nazi Germany, waited on board the MS St. Louis off the coast of Florida for permission to go ashore. It never was granted, and the ship was forced to return to Europe, where many of the passengers perished in the Holocaust. Fear did that, too.

Public opinion was overwhelmingly against the admission of fleeing Jews. They were called Bolsheviks and labeled as exploiters by certain members of Congress, and some spread rumors of Nazi agents hidden among them.

Last week, efforts led by the Anti-Defamation League resulted in 81 major religious and human rights organizations signing a joint letter to members of Congress urging them not to close the doors to Syrian refugees. Signers included the American Jewish Committee, the Jewish Council for Public Affairs and the Association of Jewish Family and Children’s Agencies (our local JF&CS is considered the model for refugee acceptance and absorption in Pittsburgh). The 81 signers represented a broad coalition.

The powerful letter authored by the ADL outlined the facts:

“The world is witnessing the largest refugee crisis since World War II. More than 4 million Syrians have fled their home country, fleeing conflict and violence, and 6.5 million are displaced internally. At a time when the world needs humanitarian leadership, some are now calling for the suspension of the U.S. refugee resettlement program or the imposition of restrictions on funding for Syrians and other groups of refugees.

“We oppose these proposals and believe they would jeopardize the United States' moral leadership in the world. Syrian refugees are fleeing exactly the kind of terror that unfolded on the streets of Paris. They have suffered violence just like this for almost five years.”

Refugees are the most thoroughly vetted group of people who come to the United States. Security screenings are rigorous and involve the Department of Homeland Security, the FBI the Department of Defense and multiple intelligence agencies.

The signers noted that, “to turn our back on refugees would be to betray our nation’s core values. It would send a demoralizing and dangerous message to the world that the United States makes judgments about people based on the country they come from and their religion. This feeds into extremist propaganda and makes us all less safe.

“The United States is a welcoming country with a diverse society, and our resettlement program must continue to reflect this. We can welcome refugees while ensuring our security. Refugees have enriched communities across our country and have been part of the American fabric for generations.”

In a recent blog posting, Rabbi David Hoffman of The Jewish Theological Seminary urged us to “pray for the strength not to act or speak from a place of terror.” Actions based only on fear are dangerous. We need to act bravely, firmly and rationally. The Reform Jewish prayer for repentance recited during Yom Kippur includes supplications for the sin of silence and the sin of closing our borders.

We call upon the citizens of Pittsburgh to bravely advocate for the acceptance of the thoroughly screened Syrian refugees to our country and community.

Ted Goldberg is a Pittsburgh attorney, a past president of the Pittsburgh Area Jewish Committee and a past president of Temple Emanuel of South Hills in Mt. Lebanon. Karen Hochberg is executive director of the PAJC.