Rendering of the new James Monroe Elementary School in Edison. The new school will replace the school destroyed by a March 22, 2014 six-alarm fire. (Photo: Courtesy of LAN Associates) Story Highlights Voters support is needed to borrow $18.6 million to build a new James Monroe School in Edison.

A new school is needed to replace the school destroyed by a six-alarm fire last March.

An informational meeting on the James Monroe referendum will be held 7 p.m. March 4 at Herbert Hoover Middle School, Edison.

The bond referendum will be held 12 p.m. to 9 p.m. March 10.

Township voters are being asked to go to the polls Tuesday to approve a $18.6 million bond to help finance construction of the new James Monroe Elementary School to replace the school destroyed in a six-alarm fire in March 2014.

Polls will be open 12 p.m. to 9 p.m.

"I urge you to please come out and vote. You have supported the school district's efforts through this entire process and now we need your help more than ever to help us rebuild,' Superintendent of Schools Richard O'Malley said in a letter posted on the district's website.

A James Monroe Referendum Informational Meeting is scheduled for 7 p.m. Wednesday in the cafeteria at Herbert Hoover Middle School, 174 Jackson Ave.

The cost to rebuild the school for 483 students is estimated at $28,127,796. The school district's insurance company has provided nearly $9.5 million, leaving the district to raise $18.6 million in order to seek construction bids for the project.

If the referendum is approved, the cost to the average local taxpayer is estimated at $21 a year for 30 years based on a home with an average assessed value of $176,700.

According to O'Malley's James Monroe referendum facts posted on the district website, voter approval is needed to maintain a two-year time line to rebuild the Sharp Road school.

RELATED: LETTER: Support James Monroe referendum in Edison

The district wants to avoid paying nearly $2 million in penalties to the Diocese of Metuchen, owners of the former St. Cecelia's School in the Iselin section of Woodbridge, where the James Monroe School has been located since the start of the 2014-2015 school year. The district's lease agreement with the diocese ends in September 2016. If the district exceeds the two-year lease, two six-month extensions would cost the district nearly $2 million.

In addition, the district is looking to obtain about $4 million in state debt aid for the school's construction.

"A referendum approved by the voters is the only means in which the district can obtain state debt aid. Therefore, by passing a referendum, Edison taxpayers would save close to $6 million in costs. If the referendum fails, these costs would be shared by all the taxpayers in Edison," O'Malley said in his letter.

The fact sheet indicates the district has a $350 million property insurance policy and $50 million in extra expense insurance with the New Jersey School Insurance Group, which is much higher than the fire claim.

The 40,000-square-foot James Monroe Elementary School was built in 1963, when fire sprinklers were not required. As a result the fire, believed to have started by a cigarette tossed in a trash can, spread throughout the one-story school in a neighborhood locally known as the Heights of Edison off Grandview Avenue.

The district has filed suit against the insurance company for failing to provide all the funding needed to rebuild the James Monroe School. The insurance company has disputed certain code upgrades and regulations. A Middlesex County Superior Court judge last month ruled current state Department of Education regulations must be met in rebuilding the new school.

RELATED: Ruling might bring more funds to rebuild Edison school

O'Malley said those regulations require the district to build a larger, two-story 67,700-square-foot school to conform with minimum 125-square-feet per-pupil classroom space requirements, and include fire sprinklers and a 5,600-square-foot gymnasium and stage. The insurance company would have to pay for those increased costs, he said.

Any additional funds received from the insurance company from the lawsuit will be used to reduce the bond. For every $1 million received toward the school's construction, the $21 annual cost to the average homeowner will be reduced by about $1.12 per year over 30 years, school officials said.

Furniture, supplies and technology from the St. Cecelia's location would be used at the new school. The district is looking to include air conditioning at the school for a price of $250,000.

If construction of the new school is delayed past a one-year extension of the lease with the diocese, the district would be forced to disperse the James Monroe students throughout the district's other, already overcrowded, elementary schools.

If the referendum fails the district may look to hold another vote in the fall, and if that vote fails to win support, the board can appeal to the state education commissioner.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1ADWgmt