JACKSONVILLE, Fla. - The nation's 20th largest school district begins its 2015-2016 school year Monday. Duval County serves 125,000 students in more than 180 schools.

Everyday in Duval County public schools



125,750 meals are served to students



1,100 food service workers prepare meals



850 school buses are on city roads



17,000 bus stops are made



1,200 bus drivers and attendants transport students



50,000 miles are traveled by buses



286 maintenance workers ensure schools are ready



920 custodial staff provide clean learning environments



8,260 educators lead classroom instruction



6,998 students will experience their first year of school (kindergartners)



7,763 students will experience their last year of school (seniors)

Teacher paperwork has been reduced from more than 47 require documents required to only 13 to maximize instructional time



Back-to-school street safety tips, reminders



Motorists



Do not block the crosswalk when stopped at a red light or waiting to make a turn.



Be extra vigilant in school zones and residential neighborhoods.



Always stop for a school patrol officer or crossing guard holding up a stop sign.



Never pass a vehicle stopped for pedestrians.



When passing a cyclist, proceed in the same direction slowly, and leave 3 feet between your car and the cyclist.



Watch for cyclists coming from driveways or behind parked cars.



Never pass a bus from behind – or from either direction if you are on an undivided road – if it is stopped to load or unload children.



The area 10 feet around a school bus is the most dangerous for children; stop far enough back to allow them space to safely enter and exit the bus.





Parents



If dropping your child off at school, be aware of school rules regarding student drop-off procedures.



To promote school safety, schools restrict students being dropped off on campuses excessively early.



Do not double park; it blocks visibility for other children and vehicles.



Do not load or unload children across the street from the school.



Check side mirrors before opening your door.



Call 904.381.RIDE (7433) to report any issues (through Sept. 4).





Students



Always walk on the sidewalk if one is available; if a child must walk on the street, he or she should face oncoming traffic.



Never walk or drive while texting, talking on the phone or wearing headphones.



Be aware of your surroundings.



Look left, right, then left again before crossing the street.



Cross only at crosswalks.



While at your bus stop, do not run into traffic.



Arrive to your bus stop early.



Never walk behind the bus.



Make sure the bus comes to a complete stop before trying to enter or exit the bus.



Resources for more information







Copyright 2015 by News4Jax.com. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.