On a typical day in her last job, Janet Roth left home at 4 a.m. each day and drove 40 miles to a tax preparation office in Glendale, Ariz. When she finally got back home, she had less than an hour before starting her 6 p.m. shift decorating cakes at Wal-Mart. She worked until midnight, giving her just a few hours to sleep before starting all over again.

Roth, 68, worked in many jobs over the years, but she never made quite enough to pay back the $33,000 she borrowed years earlier for an education degree she couldn’t afford to complete, and certainly not the $95,000 it ballooned to in default.

She filed for bankruptcy, wiping out five figures in medical debts. But erasing student loans requires initiating a separate legal process, in which borrowers must prove that paying the debt would cause an “undue hardship.”

To prepare her case, she copied down statutes at a local law library and watched episodes of Law & Order. Her efforts paid off: Roth’s loans were discharged in 2013.

That Roth, now living on Social Security, managed to succeed in what is known as a notoriously difficult process is not even the most remarkable aspect of her case. Instead, the ruling captured the attention of other judges and legal scholars because of a judge’s bluntly worded written opinion that rebuked the widely adopted hardship standard used to determine whether a debtor is worthy of a discharge.

The judge, Jim Pappas, in his concurring opinion for the bankruptcy appellate panel decision in the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, said the analysis used “to determine the existence of an undue hardship is too narrow, no longer reflects reality and should be revised.”

He added: “It would seem that in this new, different environment, in determining whether repayment of a student loan constitutes an undue hardship, a bankruptcy court should be afforded flexibility to consider all relevant facts about the debtor and the subject loans.” But the current standard, he wrote, “does not allow it.”

Pappas isn’t the only critic. Although plenty of cases still hew closely to a strict interpretation of the test, some judges and courts have signaled in recent years that they believe the rigid standard — known as the Brunner test — should be reconsidered, even if they are still bound to it now.

“The world has changed,” said Michael Kaplan, a federal bankruptcy judge for the District of New Jersey, who criticized the standard in an opinion article. “Certainly, the costs of education and the level of student loan indebtedness has exploded.”

Because the bankruptcy code never defined “undue hardship,” the courts needed to develop their own definition. Most courts adopted the Brunner test, which originated from a precedent-setting ruling in 1987, in which a woman named Marie Brunner filed for a discharge of her debt less than a year after she completed a master’s degree.

To stop debtors from trying to prematurely cancel their debts, the case laid out a three-pronged test: Individuals must prove they made a good-faith effort to pay the loan by finding work and minimizing their expenses. Debtors must also show they could not maintain a minimal standard of living based on their income and expenses if they had to repay the debt.

But then, in arguably the most challenging prong, the court must consider whether that situation is likely to persist for a significant part of the repayment period — which essentially requires the judge to predict the debtor’s future, ensuring what some courts have described as a “certainty of hopelessness.”

“How do you prove things won’t change for the better in the future?” said Daniel Austin, associate professor at Northeastern University School of Law.

Bankruptcy scholars and judges said the test made sense at the time it was adopted because even if debtors could not pass the test, their debts — which were far more modest then — would automatically be discharged in bankruptcy five years after their repayment period started.

But the legal landscape has changed substantially since then. Before 1977, student loans could be discharged in bankruptcy alongside other debts like credit card balances. Congress toughened the law in 1976, adding the five-year period, and again in 1990, when the waiting period was extended to seven years.

In 1998, the waiting period was eliminated. So now, all debtors must prove undue hardship to erase their student debts. (In 2005, Congress added private student loans to the mix of federal education debt that could not be discharged.)

This year, President Barack Obama instructed several government agencies to review, by Oct. 1, whether the treatment of student loans in bankruptcy should be altered. But the fate of the proposal may be similar to previous legislation calling for student loans to be dischargeable in bankruptcy. Those bills never went anywhere.

A large part of the problem is that only a tiny percentage of debtors attempt to discharge their student loans in bankruptcy, perhaps because of the perception that it isn’t possible or is too hard.

But debtors’ best chance at having their student loans wiped away may simply be to try.

Tara Siegel Bernard,

The New York Times