The House voted 228-199 Wednesday night to approve the $3.8 trillion budget (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Story Highlights McSally said her constituents have stressed the importance of protecting retirement programs and the military.

Schweikert said without substantial growth in the economy the amount of mandatory spending will soon eat up three-fourths of the federal budget.

WASHINGTON - Arizona Reps. Martha McSally and David Schweikert were among just 17 Republicans who voted against the GOP budget that passed the House.

The House voted 228-199 Wednesday night to approve the $3.8 trillion budget, with all 182 Democrats who were present voting against the resolution.

The proposal increases to $96 billion a special account — called Overseas Contingency Operations — to cover war spending, an effort to assuage concerns among military hawks in the House GOP caucus. But the spending is not offset, which angered some Republicans focused on reducing the debt and deficit.

The budget plan calls for reducing spending by $5.5 trillion over a decade, including cuts to Medicaid and food stamps. It also would repeal the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, and partially privatize Medicare.

McSally said her constituents have stressed the importance of protecting retirement programs and the military.

"I have concerns that this budget does not meet those priorities," she said.

ROBB: There is a middle ground on the federal budget

RELATED: Senate budget votes foreshadow 2016 campaigns

MORE: House passes $3.8 trillion budget

"The budget passed yesterday relies on Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) funding to make up for shortfalls in the traditional (Defense Department) account," McSally said Thursday. "Using OCO represents a Band-Aid approach that doesn't allow our military to plan and modernize as efficiently as possible."

She said she also was concerned that changes to the Medicare program in the budget could increase out-of-pocket costs for seniors.

"Instead of experimenting with Medicare, the best thing we can do to shore up Medicare is reduce the overall cost of health care by implementing patient-centered reforms," she said.

Also Thursday, McSally sent a letter signed by 17 other House members, including five members of the Arizona delegation, to the leaders of the House Appropriations Committee's defense appropriation subcommittee urging them to reject the Obama administration's plan to get rid of the fleet of A-10 Thunderbolt fighters.

Davis-Monthan Air Force Base in Tucson is the primary training facility for A-10 pilots.

During floor debate on the budget Wednesday, Schweikert used charts to illustrate how mandatory spending on entitlement programs, such as Medicare, was eating up more and more of the federal budget.

The breakdown is now about two-thirds mandatory spending and one-third discretionary, but Schweikert said without substantial growth in the economy the amount of mandatory spending will soon eat up three-fourths of the federal budget.

"If we do not have phenomenal economic growth, we are not going to be able to keep our promises," Schweikert said.

Final passage of a competing budget resolution in the Senate was expected early Friday, and then the two bodies will negotiate a compromise.

The budget resolution sets spending levels for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1, but the details of what each agency receives are hashed out in 12 annual spending bills.

Contact Bill Theobald at wtheobal@gannett.com or follow Twitter @BillTheobald.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1bySEh9