The Most Rev. Mitchell T. Rozanski will be installed as the ninth bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Springfield on Aug. 12 at 2 p.m. at St. Michael's Cathedral. Rozanski, of Polish heritage, has been auxiliary bishop of the Archdiocese of Baltimore, where his duties included ministry to Hispanics, as well as to clergy and religious. Appointed auxiliary by Pope John Paul II, his ordination on Aug. 24, 2004, at the age of 46, made him the youngest bishop in the United States at the time.

On the day before his 56th birthday on Aug. 6, Rozanski gave one of his first area interviews, fielding questions in the diocesan chancery about his favorite baseball team (the Orioles), his mother's advice to remember his working class roots, and his beliefs in Catholic education, a pastoral approach to Catholic doctrine and ongoing Church vigilance against any abuse of minors.

"The charter has been effective," said Rozanski, who is involved with minor revisions to the United States Catholic Conference of Bishops' seminal, Charter for the Protection of Children and Young People, first issued to Church workers, in 2005. All 195 U.S. dioceses now have staff to assist victims of abuse, bishops are required to report allegations of abuse to law enforcement authorities, and most dioceses undergo annual review of compliance with the document's 17 points. Billions of dollars in settlement money has been paid by the Church to victims of pedophile clergy, in the wake of victims coming forward and the release of court documents showing a pattern of suspected clergy being transferred to different assignments. "It has raised the consciousness of bishops, priests, deacons, religious, lay ecclesial ministers, catechists, anybody entrusted with youth that, when they feel something is wrong, that they step forward and say it."

Rozanski stressed that ongoing awareness and adherence to the charter's regulations is key, something Pope Francis underscored in his recent statement that "all bishops must carry out their pastoral ministry with the utmost care in order to help foster the protection of minors, and they will be held accountable." The pope's statement was seen as addressing criticisms that bishops transferred pedophile priests, rather than address allegations of abuse against them.

"We cannot let this pass as something that happened in the past and we took care of it, and not be aware of continual efforts for a safe environment for children in our care," Rozanski said. "I would not like to see a fatigue set in where we back off from our vigilance that we are so much aware of in the present time. I am speaking of vigilance at all levels -- the national, the diocesan, the local parish, our schools, our institutions."

Rozanski termed Catholic schools "crucial in transmitting the faith, and in supporting parents in their roles as teachers of the faith, and in helping to educate our children life long to be able to live in the faith."

"The challenge we face today is that the cost of education is prohibited for many families. In the past, we relied on the Sisters, who made very low wages or a stipend to get by on, but who did such a wonderful job in our schools. Of course, that has changed. The role of Catholic education is to have teachers who are imbued with Catholicism and who are clearly able to teach our Catholic faith to our children," said Rozanski, who was entirely educated in Catholic schools.

He said that there is a tradition in the Baltimore archdiocese of "partnering with the business community, who sponsors scholarships, particularly for underprivileged youth."

"We need to really work on the affordability of Catholic education for middle class parents and their children. We need to look at what it means to build up an endowment for tuition scholarships, something Bishop (Timothy) McDonnell has started here, particularly with Cathedral High. I would encourage building up endowments for both elementary and high schools," Rozanski added.

The youthful-looking prelate disclosed that, when it comes to cooking, "the microwave is my friend," and the use of the treadmill keeps him in shape. Reading Tom Clancy and Ken Follett thrillers help him relax, and his enjoyment of mysteries is enough to enable him to pronounce, with the right French accent, the first name of Agatha Christie's Hercule Poirot. The son of a father who retired from the private police force of Bethlehem Steel Corp., Rozanski also admitted to enjoying an occasional "CSI: Crime Scene Investigation" episode on TV.

He also shown himself as among the bishops' vocal in their belief that religious freedom is being infringed upon by government legislation, as well as among those Church leaders promoting an evangelization ushered in under Pope Francis.

When asked about the U.S. bishops' opposition to the Affordable Care Act provision on insurance coverage for a woman's contraception, Rozanski said the issue is much larger than who will pay for such coverage.

"What that mandate did was to tell churches that the government defines what a church is, and that is unprecedented in the history of our country. It really isn't the issue of contraception. It is a far wider issue of the government infringing upon our practicing of our faith as our faith is taught. It would be unfair to characterize it merely as an issue of contraception," Rozanski said.

Rozanski cited the importance of family life, marriage and a Church rooted in its own Gospel message. U.S. bishops continue to oppose same sex marriage, and to support legislation that would ban them. Twenty states and Washington, D.C. allow same sex marriage.

"Much of what we are experiencing today in terms of crime, drugs, general lack of respect for one another, is really based on in the disintegration of family life," Rozanski said. "What we offer as Catholics is to strength the family as the basis of society. When there is a solid family life, there is less likelihood of crime, there is less likelihood of drug use. The children grow up with a solid foundation. And that is a foundation they can take all through their lives. And, as a Church, what we are saying is that God made us male and female, and that the institution of marriage is so crucial. It is a sacrament of the Church, if the sacrament is well lived, then the children and future generations will benefit."

A measured speaker, with a dry sense of humor, Rozanski said he plans to attend the November meeting of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. One of the issues said to be on the agenda includes a new introduction to the "Forming Consciences for Faithful Citizenship," a document the Catholic bishops issue prior to presidential elections that applies Catholic moral teaching to a variety of election issues.

"The document gives us an ability to sort through the issues in light of the Gospel and teaching of the Church and, ultimately, in light of the common good," said Rozanski of the practice that some critics see as an endorsement of candidates. "It is a document that is based in Scripture, based in Church teaching and based in democratic principles. It seeks to bring the Gospel to our everyday life, particularly in the way we approach voting, which is such an important part of our everyday life because it is part of our government."

Rozanski also plans to attend the 8th World Meeting of Families, scheduled next year in Philadelphia. Initiated by the Vatican under the Pope John Paul II in 1994, the theme of the 2015 meeting is "Love is our mission: the family fully alive." The Catholic bishops have invited Pope Francis to attend the meeting, which Rozanski called a "crucial one" in its emphasis.

Rozanski will not attend "The Pastoral Challenges of the Family in the contest of Evangelization," an extraordinary assembly in October, at the Vatican, to review the results of a global survey that Rozanski also called "extraordinary." Distributed last year at the request of Pope Francis, the questionnaire garnered confidential feedback from Catholic parishioners, on such topics as contraception, same-sex marriage and co-habitation. The intent is not to change, but improve how Catholic doctrine is taught, received and understood. The assembly will make suggestions to a 2015 synod which will forward its proposals to Francis.

"The extraordinary part of the survey is that it was put out to the laity to receive input from the laity. That is Pope Francis' way of operating. He seems to do as much consultation as possible on many levels. For many people, it was a surprise even to be asked," Rozanski said. "The input that was given to the survey was given not to foster a change in any Catholic doctrine, but to see how Church teaching is accepted and how it is perceived. The synod will be a response to the reaction of that survey. But, in the spirit of Pope Francis, the synod will be based on pastoral bent."

This pastoral approach is important to Rozanski, who in Baltimore, would visit parishes, as part of that diocese's tribunal, to discuss such judicial process within the Church, as having a marriage annulled. He sees this process as vital to the Church renewing itself, and to the process of evangelization in clarifying "misconceptions" about Church doctrine.

"I found that going out and reaching out to divorce Catholics and letting them know what the annulment process is about, gave them some hope that they had recourse and had a process to address their situation in the Church," Rozanski said.

"We cannot be an evangelizing Church, unless we ourselves are evangelized and rooted fully in the Gospel. What has taken place over the last two generations is a catechesis (transmission of faith) that needs to be strengthen and brought up in a clear way. From that base, we can then reach out to others. It is amazing to me that when I talk to those undergoing the process of conversion, and they talk about what their perceptions were in the past, and what they have learned of the Catholic faith, how those perceptions have change. It shows to me that when our teaching is really pastorally and clearly presented, it does attract people to the faith."

Rozanski stressed in the hour-long interview his desire "to be a listener" in presiding over his first diocese, and incorporated into his daily schedule are visits with ailing Bishop Emeritus Joseph F. Maguire.

"One of the big influences in my life was Archbishop William Borders, who ordained me as priest in Baltimore, in 1984. His episcopal motto was: I will listen that I may serve. I truly believe that Archbishop Borders taught me the lesson that listening, in order to serve, is a really a good way of proceeding forward," Rozanski said.

"I have visited Bishop Maguire everyday since I have been here to bring him communion, and to chat with him a little bit, and he shares with me the history of the diocese and some very wise advice."

His appointment calendar is already dotted with parish events, including the arrival of the relic of St. Anthony of Padua, in September, at St. Anthony Maronite Catholic Church.

"After the installation, I plan on going out to meet with the priests, and the staff of the parishes and to celebrate Mass in the different parishes on the weekends. There have been a lot of gracious invitations extended already, and we are working on the schedule."

Rozanksi was ordained to the priesthood in his native Baltimore, after completing seminary at the Theological School of Catholic University of American in Washington, D.C. He served in parishes in the Baltimore area, and was made a monsignor in 2003. His mother, Jean Rozanski, used to make Polish sausage for the future bishop and his two younger brothers. In an interview with Catholic Review, the online publication of the Baltimore archdiocese, Alfred Rozanski, his dad, said of his son's departure for Springfield, "Everywhere he's been the people really like him. I think he'll do just fine in Springfield, too." His mother said, in the interview with George P. Matysek Jr: "I always tell him, 'Mitch, remember where your roots came from so you don't get a high head Just stay the way you are.'"

"My parents always instilled in myself and my two younger brothers the importance of both education and of work," Rozanski said of his upbringing. "As soon as we were old enough as teenagers, we had jobs mowing neighbors yards, shoveling snow for neighbors. It was important that we both appreciate our education and appreciate the importance of hard work. I am grateful to my parents for their sharing of their faith with me, and my brothers and I am grateful to them for the work ethic they gave to us. And, for the love that was in our family always and the welcome place God has in our home."

Since 2012, Rozanski has served under the Most Rev. William Edward Lori, former bishop of Bridgeport, Conn. Lori is former chair of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, where his committee memberships include those on Church doctrine, pro-life advancement, and defense of marriage as between a man and women.

Rozanski has served on the USCCB's committee on youth protection, since 2007, and his other national duties include serving as co-chair for the Polish National Church – Roman Catholic Dialogue, (the national church was founded in the late 19th century by Polish-American immigrants), and consultant to the National Association for the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities. He is on the USCCB's National Advisory Council, and chairs the USCCB committee on ecumenical and interreligious affairs.

Rozanski spoke out in support of Maryland's DREAM act, allowing some undocumented immigrants to receive in-state college tuition.

Rozanski was asked about being surrounded by key bishops, from Lori, to Archbishop Leonard P. Blair of Hartford, who chairs the USCCB's committee on Evangelization and Catechesis, to Boston Archbishop Sean O'Malley who regularly speaks out against abortion, and who is a close adviser to Pope Francis. He was specifically asked about the bishops' support for immigration reform, as well as refuge for Central American children.

"When we look at issues from a Gospel perspective, from the perspective of the Lord Jesus, then certainly we have to see these are children, they are victims of some horrendous situations in their own countries," said Rozanski, of the Central American children illegally crossing the country's southern border. "So, what the bishops are saying, including Cardinal O'Malley, is not only is there a need for immigration, but there is a much wider issue of looking at the causes of people sending their children far from their homes, and people who are willing to leave their homes to look for a better life. What Cardinal O'Malley is challenging all of us to do is to look at those wider issues."

When pressed on why Catholics need to apply Church morality in making life decisions, Rozanski said "if we truly know our faith and what it is all about, then the decisions that we make and the actions that we do make that faith visible."

"As Catholics, if we follow the way of Christ, Jesus taught us it is not what we do in church while we are at Mass, or in prayer or only within those four walls. Our faith permeates the whole of our life," Rozanski said. "Our participation in public life, our role in building up the common good and our witness to faith is what we do every waking moment. Catholics have contributed so much to the life of this country -- the hospitals that we have, the institutions of higher learning that we have, the Catholic charities that we have, the nursing homes, our work with immigrants, to name just a few, but all of those stem from our belief in the teachings of Jesus and our response to the call to follow him."