Map showing where a new roundabout is planned in Colts Neck. (Photo: Staff Graphic ) Story Highlights Approval of the roundabout allows Monmouth County to solicit bids for construction. Depending on the outcome of those bids, construction could start in late summer.

Some township residents say a traffic roundabout is the best solution for an intersection that has a history of car crashes.

But other neighbors contend they haven’t seen enough information about the proposal and believe it could be an excessive move.

Monmouth County officials have been considering how to improve the intersection at Crine Road, Dutch Lane and Heulitt Road for more than five years.

Last week, the county freeholders voted to approve the plans for the roundabout, which allows the county engineering staff to solicit bids for the estimated $1.03 million project.

“There were a couple of near fatal accidents that brought this all about,” said Freehold Director Lillian Burry, who also lives in Colts Neck.

The intersection had 11 crashes from 2005 to 2008, with seven causing serious injuries. Those crashes sparked concern from residents. More so, from 2010 through this year, there have been another 14 crashes, according to state Department of Transportation data. That caught the attention of county engineers.

But Brook Crossan, a resident and Colts Neck planning board member, said he and his neighbors were surprised to hear a roundabout was how county officials wanted to address the problem.

“I don’t think the roundabout has been all that well publicized,” he said.

Crossan said he had gathered a petition with 20 signatures in the hours before the Thursday night meeting asking the vote to be postponed. He said there were other ways to improve the intersection and the roundabout “seemed a little bit of overkill.”

But another resident, Michelle Warendorf, said it’s time to move ahead with the roundabout, which she said has been discussed for years. She got choked up as she talked about crash six years ago at the intersection, one that involved a school bus carrying her children.

“It’s not safe,” she said of the intersection. “This has to be done.”

Freeholder Serena DiMaso said she initially had concerns about the need for a roundabout, but ultimately decided it was the right choice after discussing with County Engineer Joseph Ettore all of the options his staff had considered to improve safety.

Freeholder John Curley cast the lone vote against the roundabout, saying he thought the freeholders should wait to vote until the county engineering department can meet with neighbors who still have questions.

Curley said his opposition has nothing to do with the roundabout itself.

“Quite frankly, I would support it,” he said. “People need to have more input into what’s transpiring and certainly more information into what’s transpiring.”

Susanne Cervenka: 732-643-4229; scervenka@app.com

WHAT’S NEXT:

Approval of the roundabout allows Monmouth County to solicit bids for construction. Depending on the outcome of those bids, construction could start in late summer.

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/western-monmouth-county/2014/05/23/colts-neck-traffic-monmouth-county/9512119/