The brother of the Border Patrol agent who died during a gunfight with smugglers armed with weapons that were part of the botched Fast and Furious “gun-walking” operation has written a scathing letter to Attorney General Eric Holder demanding to know when someone will answer for Brian Terry’s blood.

In the letter excerpted by Breitbart.com, Kent Terry is clearly frustrated that after more than four years Holder remains unable – or unwilling – to hold anyone in the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms responsible for his brother’s death.

“It is shocking to know that the Attorney General of the United States had no knowledge or was not made aware of Fast and Furious until after the death of my brother, Brian Terry,” Terry writes.

Fast and Furious is in danger of being the forgotten scandal of the Obama administration, eclipsed by the administration’s distortions – for political purposes – of the terrorist attack on Benghazi, the IRS targeting of conservative groups and, of course, the continuing meltdown of Obamacare.

But Kent Terry is trying to keep the operation, which allowed about 2,000 guns to be sold to straw purchasers suspected of ties to Mexican drug cartels, in the public eye. The ATF lost track of more than 1,000 of the weapons, including two that turned up at the scene of Brian Terry’s death in December 2010.

Another Fast and Furious weapon smuggled into Mexico was used to kill American Immigration Customs Enforcement officer Jaime Zapata in Mexico in February, 2011.

The Obama administration has stonewalled congressional investigators for years over Fast and Furious. In June 2012, Holder became the first attorney general in United States history to be held in contempt of Congress on a largely party-line vote.

In his letter, Terry brands Holder a “coward of an attorney general” and demands that he live up to his oath of office.

“Why hide behind executive privilege? … Somewhere deep inside you must have some conscience; do the honorable thing and have some integrity as an attorney general,” Terry wrote.

“So I ask you: stop misleading my family and the American people. Stop obstruction of justice.”