There are voices from history that cannot be forgotten. Among them is that of Alistair Cooke, a Brit who understood America like no other.

There are times when I really miss Alistair. He had a unique ability to explain to us the seemingly bizarre and sometimes incomprehensible machinations of American politics and government.

Of course, he spoke of much more than politics in his Letter from America broadcasts. His tale of Gershwin and Russian immigration still gives me goose bumps. His lament on the closure of Woolworths captured the aspirations of a generation. He even managed to make golf sound entertaining, even vaguely important.

Many of Cooke’s political pieces are also unsurpassed. I remember sitting in a squalid bedsit in Fulham in 1974, listening in thrall to his account of the events leading to Nixon’s resignation just hours after we had learnt of the news in the Evening Standard. Five words of that broadcast – “and the rest you know” – have gone down in radio history, not least because of Cooke’s own account of how they came about.

Obama is in a standoff with Congress. Much of the federal government has shutdown, with many workers on “furlough”. The battle began over the Affordable Care Act – Obamacare – which Republicans want delayed and changed. Now that is almost paling into insignificance over the debt ceiling. If that is not raised, then there is a possibility of the government defaulting on its payments.

The political manoeuvres seem arcane. The very thought that political disputes could lead to the government world’s biggest economy defaulting is plainly absurd. Yet, so many aspects of American politics seem absurd. That’s why we needed Alistair Cooke and why I still miss his analysis.

So what might he have said if he had lived to cover the crisis over Obamacare? My guess is that he would take a very wry, even whimsical look at the politics works on Capitol Hill. He’d argue that this drama will not lead to a crisis.

Here are just a few extracts from his November 1995 Letter from America, in which he explained the background to the shutdown during Clinton’s administration:

Here’s a howdy do! Here’s a state of things, US government shuts down. Last Wednesday morning, you could see that headline everywhere on every sort of paper from the trashiest tabloid to what we used to call, the good grey New York Times and in every language from English – still the main language in most parts of the country – to Lithuanian, Yiddish and I suppose Cherokee Indian – the Cherokee Oklahoman is printed in that dialect, “Why was the government shut down?”… Well only partially shutdown, what they call the ‘non essential’ services. If you’re going abroad and needed a passport you’d have to wait. Or the national parks, monuments and other tourist attractions, the Washington monument, Yosemite the Statue of Liberty was shut up or shutdown. The people doing all the paperwork in every department, except maybe the CIA, busy there in its huge secret building in Virginia, using its radar vision to spot spies or invent them… So why do they [the politicians], did they, go on being so boringly self righteous? Because neither side dared say ‘we surrender’. That would mean either the president or the Dole Gingrich team could crow and declare it a great sign for 1996 when there is, they never forget for an instant a presidential election… I said earlier that if you went behind or outside the television cameras and talked to only a few of the three quarter of a million federal workers who are workless at home… you’d have noticed an air of happy resignation before this national crisis. Something of the same mood was noticeable among the ordinary folk that you see and do business with everyday. It must be because most of them know and remember that this threat has happened nine times since the middle 1980s and four times the government has been shutdown, well partly, well for a day or two. A real shutdown… not really!

* Andy Boddington is a Lib Dem living in Shropshire, and a former editor for Lib Dem Voice