SHARE Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

Lyle Drier incurred more than $35,000 in co-pays after she was diagnosed with multiple myeloma for a reason that she felt was inherently unfair: A drug needed to treat her cancer was given as a pill rather than intravenously.

The drug, which Drier took for 10 months as part of her initial treatment, cost about $7,700 a month. Her health plan covered half of that amount.

"It just seems that if you are going to cover chemo, you should cover it equally, no matter what the delivery system," said Drier, a Waukesha resident who was diagnosed seven years ago.

For three years, she has been among those pushing for legislation that would require health insurance companies to cover oral cancer drugs the same way they cover other cancer drugs.

The legislation, authored by Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills) and Rep. Pat Strachota (R-West Bend), has more than 50 co-sponsors this year, and its supporters remain optimistic that it could become law.

The bill is backed by a coalition of advocacy groups and health systems, including Aurora Health Care and the Medical College of Wisconsin. But the bill has yet to be scheduled for a vote in either the Senate or the Assembly with roughly six weeks remaining in the session.

Twenty-six states, including Minnesota and Iowa, have passed legislation that requires similar coverage for cancer drugs administered as pills and those administered intravenously.

For some cancers, such as chronic myelogenous leukemia and multiple myeloma, crucial drugs are taken orally and are covered by a health plan's prescription drug benefit.

The drugs can cost as much as $10,000 a month, and in the past, some health plans covered only part of the cost, with no limits on out-of-pocket spending for prescription drugs.

In contrast, cancer drugs administered intravenously at hospitals or clinics are covered once a patient hits his or her deductible as part of health plans' medical coverage.

Insurers oppose bill

The risk of facing tens of thousands of dollars in costs no longer exists: The Affordable Care Act limits a patient's maximum out-of-pocket costs to $6,350 a year.

But many health plans will be allowed to have a separate $6,350 limit, and in some cases no limit, for prescription drugs this year. Supporters of the Wisconsin bill note that the cap still is high, and they contend that how a cancer drug is covered should not hinge on whether it is taken orally or intravenously.

"To me, this is a common sense thing," said Brad Kahl, a hematologist and an associate professor of medicine at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health. "It's a matter of simple fairness. It's doing the right thing."

Health insurance companies, through their two trade associations in the state, oppose the bill, contending that it would limit insurers' ability to design health plans. They note that the Affordable Care Act already limits patients' out-of-pocket costs.

Some health plans have had minimal cost-sharing for the drugs while others cap out-of-pocket spending, said Phil Dougherty, deputy director of the Wisconsin Association of Health Plans. And now all health plans have a cap on out-of-pocket spending.

The law would not apply to employers who self-insure, or pay most of the medical claims of employees and their families. That group includes most employers with 200 or more employees, and some with as few as 100 employees.

Limited coverage for oral drugs is more common in health plans sold to people who buy health insurance on their own.

The bill, Dougherty said, does not address the cost of the cancer drugs.

"The reason there is a problem is these drugs are very expensive," he said.

Proponents note that oral cancer drugs are no more costly than their intravenous counterparts.

Oral drugs also are expected to become more common in coming years.

"This issue is only going to get bigger," said Kahl, the UW professor.

Yet he, too, questions the drugs' cost.

He describes Gleevec, or imatinib, made by Novartis, as a "terrific drug" for a specific type of lymphoma, but he estimates the cost at $13,000 a month.

"Personally, I would like to see the companies engage in more responsible pricing," he said.

57 co-sponsors

Natalie Callander, a hematologist and an associate professor at the UW school of medicine, said she supports parity in how treatments are covered.

"But this is avoiding the bigger issue — which is how we set up a system that sets reasonable costs for drugs," Callander said, adding "I feel ambivalent about this legislation because the backers include the drug companies."

Pharmaceutical companies contribute to advocacy groups that support the bill. The companies would benefit because limited coverage for oral cancer drugs draws attention to their high prices.

Unlike the two previous sessions, the legislation has at least 57 co-sponsors in both houses of the Legislature.

"We've educated a lot of individuals about this bill," said Strachota, who is leading the effort in the Assembly. "That's made a difference."

She acknowledged that the Affordable Care Act now limits patients' out-of-pocket costs but said they still face a significant expense.

Strachota is confident the bill's supporters have the needed votes — if the bill can get to that point.

"It's the right thing to do," she said.