Cigna Corp. CEO David Cordani told a health care conference Monday that the company he leads is likely to have revenue growth in the high single digits in 2016, despite a shrinking Medicare prescription plan business and fewer customers on Obamacare exchanges.

Cordani spoke at a national health care conference for investors in California hosted by the investment bank JP Morgan Chase & Co.

Cigna has a relatively small presence in the exchanges under the Affordable Care Act. In December, Cordani told Kaiser Health News that the company has not made any profits on the exchange plans in either 2014 or 2015.

This year, Cordani said, he expects Cigna's profits to grow in the high single digits, but earnings per share may be constrained as it waits for the Anthem merger to receive regulatory approval. Cordani's speech was brief, and questions from analysts were not included on the webcast available on the Cigna website. He touched on many themes he has talked about for years — particularly the need to manage chronic conditions and the benefit of insurers and doctors working together to improve patients' health.

He said that even in the developing world, the aging population and growth in chronic diseases like diabetes and congestive heart failure are leading to unsustainable cost growth.

He said the system needs to "move from the financing of sick care to the evolution of enabling health and health care."

In a regulatory filing last month, the company said that by the end of 2018, it wants 90 percent of its payments to providers to be tied to value, not just volume, and 50 percent will be a payment model different than the traditional fee-for-service model.

Cordani gave a few examples of Cigna's collaborative care initiatives, which add more health coaching to doctors' practices with the hopes of reducing illness and therefore, utilization.

For women who had an earlier premature birth, 80 percent carried the current pregnancy to term when they were engaged in Cigna's coaching. When chronic disease patients have engaged in coaching to improve their weight, or at least stop gaining weight, health care spending dropped on average more than $1,000 for each patient.

Cordani said that across 80 percent of the collaborative care models, there have been medical cost reductions, and across 75 percent, there has been an improvement in health quality.

Cordani, who resisted four takeover advances by Anthem in June, briefly defended the wisdom of selling Cigna to the nation's second-largest insurer. He reiterated that the companies have little overlap — for instance, Anthem is stronger in Medicaid, and Cigna is strong in disability plans.

Both companies have been saying for months that they expect the deal to close in the second half of this year.

Cigna's stock is down 13.8 percent, to $134.73 Monday, compared to its price before the announced merger. Anthem has promised to buy Cigna shares at $188.

In a regulatory filing on Dec. 14, Cigna went into greater detail about the merger and its consequences, noting that when the two companies consolidate, "there clearly will be overlaps of certain functions/roles which we will handle in a professional manner no differently than we have in similar situations.''

'The ultimate value of this combination is not measured in headcount reduction, but rather enabling growth anchored in driving better affordability, more quality and increased choice — accelerating the evolution to a more sustainable health care system for public payers, employers and individuals.' "

Cigna employs about 4,200 people in Connecticut.