The Department of Health and Human Services quietly released the years-in-the-making National Pain Strategy, just a few days after the CDC issued a guideline urging doctors to reduce opioid prescribing.

Unlike the CDC's opioid recommendations, announced by HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell and CDC director Tom Frieden, MD, MPH, at a highly attended press briefing with national media, the agency only issued a press release with a quote from assistant secretary for health Karen DeSalvo, MD.

There's no budget attached to the 83-page strategy, and it does not make specific recommendations about treatment, particularly regarding opioids. Nor does it state a plan to definitively establish opioids' efficacy, or lack of it, for relieving chronic noncancer pain.

Rather, the HHS strategy is to increase access to interdisciplinary team-based pain care, said Sean Mackey, MD, PhD, of Stanford University and a co-chair of the working group that developed the strategy.

"There's not just one specialty that knows everything about pain. It's best done with an integrated approach," Mackey told MedPage Today.

The strategy also aims to improve payments structures to support this multimodal approach to pain management, which often runs into reimbursement barriers.

Another goal is to get "Americans [to] recognize chronic pain as a complex disease and a threat to public health," according to the document, and it calls for doctors to take "active measures to prevent the progression of acute to chronic pain."

And it seeks to increase education for patients in pain regarding effective approaches for self-management programs as well as better understand the risks and benefits of various treatments including opioids.

In the press release, HHS acknowledged that the CDC guidelines on opioid prescribing should be part of the strategy, and that the document does provide opportunity for reducing the need for and the over-reliance on prescription opioid medications, such as moving away from an opioid-centric treatment paradigm and putting an emphasis on interdisciplinary care.

It specifically states that "actions to improve pain care and patient access to and appropriate use of opioid analgesics for pain management would be coordinated and balanced with the need to curb inappropriate prescribing and use practices."

"A take-home message from the CDC guidelines is that we should be moving away from the ready and widespread use of opioids, and many believe that it is not simply enough to educate patients and practitioners in their safe and effective use," said Lewis Nelson, MD, of NYU Langone Medical Center, who has expressed concern about opioid use. "Making sure that patients, providers, and regulators have rational expectations for pain relief, function, and quality of life balance is critical to maximizing outcome while limiting risk."

"Our aggressive diagnosis and treatment of pain has proven to be problematic for patients on many levels, and it is time for a reassessment of our approach," Nelson said. "Hopefully these two documents will initiate this effort."

Others said the two documents could have a synergistic effect.

"The opioid crisis and the National Pain Strategy are both contributing to recognition of the deficiencies in options for helping patients manage pain," said Michael Von Korff, ScD, of Group Health Research Institute in Seattle, who helped write the strategy.

Mackey said HHS has no specific time-frame for implementing the National Pain Strategy, but that he and his co-authors will be working with the agency to determine their ideas about a plan of action.

The group will also develop the Federal Pain Research Strategy, which will identify gaps in the pain research agenda and recommend directions for new research.

A draft version of the National Pain Strategy was released a year ago. Mandated by the Affordable Care Act, the strategy was developed by officials from six federal healthcare agencies.