In 1775, founding father Patrick Henry uttered his famous line about the colonies’ need to shake off their British overlords: “Give me liberty or give me death.”

That same sentiment applies to daylight saving time, or DST, the Beltway’s latest abrogation of states’ rights for the alleged common good even though, in the age of the Affordable Care Act, what’s good for Washington isn’t necessarily good for America.

On Sunday night at 2 a.m., every continental citizen save brave holdouts in Arizona will set their clocks back by one hour to Obamatime. This unfortunate willingness to “spring ahead, fall back” to please Beltway insiders was first seen during World War I under President Woodrow Wilson, the Democratic tyrant who also brought us the Federal Reserve and the League of Nations.

The federal overreach was justified by the commerce clause, so often misconstrued to bless Eisenhower’s interstate highways, the Environmental Protection Agency and similar despotism.

Wall Street loves it, of course, since extra daylight hours means more shopping. But the farmers who ostensibly benefited from DST when it was first imposed hated it — they had to milk their cows earlier and wait for dew to dry on crops. These agrarians who objected to the policy under Wilson even had a name for our good, old-fashioned and unregulated clock: “God’s time.”

Meanwhile, DST has been undermining American values for a century.

Example: I am the father of a small child and the owner of a large dog. These creatures wake approximately eight hours after they retire, no matter how black the night. When, at 5:30 this morning, they entered my room to begin the day, I was forced to report that, because of government fiat, it was too dark to go outside.

Without the market distortions created by DST, the sun would have been blazing above our local playground. We might have strolled down our neighborhood’s Main Street or enjoyed a picnic in a park by the dawn’s early light. But, thanks to the government, I walked my dog and drove my child to school in the dark.

Has Obama explained to my daughter and my dog why our polity has auctioned off its sunlight to satisfy big bankers?

No.

Washington’s crime against life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness hasn’t gone entirely unremarked upon. In March, a New York Times editorial questioned the “feds’ confiscation of more than 300 million privately held American sleep hours, taken for eight months without interest payments or a penalty.” But the Gray Lady’s editorial board, holding its love of late-night soirees above the interests of the American people, concluded that the government’s overreach was justified by the benefit of “longer dusks.”

I don’t think so. Manhattan media elites can press for laws that match their nap schedules, but real America ran by its own watches from July 4, 1776, until Nov. 18, 1883, when standard time was established to please railroad robber-barons. Though states can still opt-out of DST — after a hard-fought battle, Indiana surrendered as recently as 2006 too many are seduced by the siren song of a central government that tells us what to do and when to do it.

Like all market interference, standard time upends our level playing field. Why should Gary, Ind., a city on the eastern edge of the Central Time Zone, see night fall an hour earlier than Kalamazoo, Mich., a city little more than100 miles away and on the Western edge of the Eastern Time Zone? Why should a hardworking farmer in Mountain Time have to wake up early to follow the lead of Manhattan commodities markets? Why should Californians have to watch “Saturday Night Live” taped?

They shouldn’t. We need to not just abolish DST, but allow states (and, eventually, citizens) to decide its own time. Call it Liberty Time: every member of our country’s right to live by his or her own clock.

Sure, such a system might create initial confusion. Web sites might not work. Income tax e-filers might receive letters from the Internal Revenue Service informing them that, because of time-stamp confusion, their taxes hadn’t been received. What would a pilot flying from Philadelphia to Seattle say when, upon final approach, a SEA-TAC air traffic controller explains that her plane isn’t due to land for three hours?

I’m not sure.

But I do know this: The citizens of a nation 3,000 miles wide can’t be expected to set their alarms by Washington diktat.

In the long run, the invisible hands of the clock will guide us.

Moyer is a musician and writer living in Washington, D.C., the home of oppressive time.