When Phamaly Theatre Company’s production of “Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat” opens Saturday at the Space Theatre, it will be the second time the company composed of people with disabilities has taken on Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber’s Bible-inspired musical.

A few things have stayed the same since that 2005 production. This one, too, is helmed by artistic director Steve Wilson. It will unfurl its colorful display at the Denver Performing Arts Complex’s Space Theatre with the blessing of the Denver Center. Actor Leonard Barrett will reprise his role as Narrator.

“It’s fun to revisit a show that marked a change and marks a change again,” said Bryce Alexander, Phamaly’s associate artistic director and production manager.

Indeed, quite a few things have changed. And a slew of recent successes speak to the professional maturing of one of the city’s — arguably nation’s — most unique artistic enterprises.

In spring the company received its second grant from the National Endowment for the Arts: $60,000 for “Joseph.” In 2013, a $10,000 grant allowed the company to bring its first guest artist in: San Francisco-based violinist Sophia Hummel.

The company’s touring initiatives, which have taken performers throughout Colorado, makes an international leap. In June, the company announced it will travel to Osaka, Japan, in 2015 to conduct workshops and perform “The Fantasticks.”

When Phamaly first performed “Joseph,” the acronym PHAMALy stood for Physically Handicapped Amateur Musical Actors League. The next year it would become “The Physically Handicapped Actors and Musical Artists League.”

In 2012 the outfit became simply, elegantly, strategically the Phamaly Theatre Company.

“This direction is very planned. We said our mission is to inspire people to re-envision disability through professional theater,” Alexander said, sitting outside the theater during the show’s first dress rehearsal.

“Before it was about providing opportunities, which is still part of our core values. But our mission really is to produce professional theater that has an impact.”

Last summer’s Henry Award nominated musical, “Fiddler on the Roof,” directed by Wilson, hit many a grace note. February’s too-brief mounting of Tennessee Williams’ “The Glass Menagerie” was ambitious, resonant and well performed. The company’s first holiday offering — “It’s a Wonderful Life” — had charms particular to the tale of dutiful son George Bailey as well as particular to the company’s tweaks (Old Man Potter isn’t in a wheel-chair).

Yes, recent successes have been impressive. Some things remain vitally the same.

A few days before opening, the dress rehearsal of “Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat” looked a bit frayed.

“How will they get there by Saturday?” was this observer’s thought bubble.

“That was a rare insight into the madness that is Phamaly,” Alexander said afterward with a smile. “The house foreman always says that he loves Phamaly because it’s ‘organized chaos.’ ”

Yes, it had the look of mild disarray. Then director Wilson stood staring at the theater-in-the-round stage. In good dry humor, he began blah-blah-ing his way through his opening night welcome and patron pitch. He said a few more words. The lights went down, quiet descended.

When the lights came up, the cast advanced in good voice, some in wheelchairs. Donna Debreceni’s tight band started up. Organized chaos gave way to theater’s magic, Phamaly-style.

“JOSEPH AND THE AMAZING TECHNICOLOR DREAMCOAT.” Lyrics by Tim Rice. Music by Andrew Lloyd Webber. Directed by Steve Wilson. Featuring: Leonard Barrett Jr., Daniel Traylor, Don Mauck, Amber Marsh and Jeremy Palmer. July 12 – Aug. 10. At the Space Theatre, Denver Performing Art Complex, 14th and Curtis. Tickets $30-$36 via phamaly.org or 303-893-4100.