TORONTO (AP) - Kevin Love had six points and four rebounds in his first game since a season-ending shoulder injury in the opening round of last season’s playoffs, but the Cleveland Cavaliers remained winless in the preseason with an 87-81 loss to the Toronto Raptors on Sunday night.

Jonas Valanciunas scored 12 points and Cory Joseph had 11 points and six assists for the Raptors.

Mo Williams had 13 points while Matthew Dellavedova and Anderson Varejao each scored 12 for Cleveland (0-6). Timofey Mozgov had 11 rebounds.

LeBron James and Richard Jefferson (rest) did not play for the Cavaliers.

Toronto’s Anthony Bennett had 11 points against the team that drafted him. Bismack Biyombo led Toronto with 10 rebounds.

With forward Tristan Thompson locked in a contract dispute and point guard Kyrie Irving still recovering from a left knee injury suffered in Game 1 of last year’s NBA Finals against Golden State, the Cavaliers are on counting on Love to be a healthy contributor.

Love had six points and two rebounds in a 6 ½-minute stint in the opening quarter, converting both free throws after he was fouled by Luis Scola, then connecting on two of three jump shots. His only miss was from 3-point range.

Love missed all four shots he took in six second-quarter minutes but had two assists, including one where he stole the ball from Valanciunas and fired a behind-the-back pass to Williams for an open 3. Love headed to the bench at the next stoppage and did not return.

Traded from Minnesota to Cleveland in a three-team deal in August 2014, Love reached the playoffs for the first time as a professional last spring, but his experience didn’t last long.

The three-time All-Star, who averaged 16.4 points and 9.7 rebounds in 75 regular-season starts, didn’t play again after injuring his shoulder on April 26 as the Cavaliers completed a first-round sweep over Boston.

Love dislocated his left shoulder midway through the first quarter after getting tangled up with Boston’s Kelly Olynyk as both players pursued a loose ball. During the play, Olynyk pulled on Love’s arm and yanked it from the socket, which Love later called “bush league.” Love grabbed his shoulder and ran immediately to his locker room. He had surgery three days later.

Olynyk was suspended for the first game this season.

Love opted out of the final year of his contract to become a free agent, but returned to Cleveland by signing a five-year, $113.2 million contract in July.

HEY JOE:

Former Blue Jays and Indians slugger Joe Carter attended the game. Fans chanted ‘Let’s go, Blue Jays!’ after Carter tossed signed mini-basketballs into the crowd during a second-half timeout.

UP NEXT:

Cavaliers: Cleveland wraps up its exhibition schedule when it hosts Dallas on Monday night. Toronto plays its final preseason game against Washington on Friday. That game will be played in Montreal. The Raptors also played preseason games in Vancouver and Ottawa.