Get the free Morning Ledger emailed to you each weekday morning by clicking: http://on.wsj.com/TheMorningLedgerSignup.

Good morning. The current boom in new home construction could be the basis for the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates next month. As The Wall Street Journal’s John Carney reports, U.S. housing starts in July rose 0.2% from a month earlier to a seasonally adjusted rate of 1.21 million, hitting their highest levels since October 2007. Starts on single-family homes, which exclude apartments, were up 12.8%.

New home construction acts as a bellwether to employment, as changes in housing starts tend to predict the direction of the unemployment rate some 12 to 18 months later. The strong link between the two may be one of the most powerful economic indicators. Even seemingly unrelated industries, such as legal services, tend to benefit from surges in construction. Strong demand for homes could also ameliorate some of the squeeze that rising interest rates could put on mortgage lending.

CFO JOURNAL TODAY

Most U.S. companies could pass new EU auditor-fees sniff test. The majority of U.S. companies would breeze through recent European rules limiting the amount of money a company’s auditor can collect on additional client services, were the policy to be imposed over here, writes CFO Journal’s Maxwell Murphy. Fewer than 200 companies in the Russell 3000 Index spent more than 70% of their average audit fee on additional services with those same firms, according to data and research provider Audit Analytics.

Internal auditors face technology skills gap. Companies are relying more on internal auditors for defense against cybersecurity breaches, but many who aspire to be internal auditors lack that skill set. Slightly more than 10% of internal auditors said they entered the profession with education in information systems or computer science, according to a recent survey of more than 14,000 internal audit executives. Six out of 10 internal auditors surveyed said they have a background in accounting.

Court decision could affect conflict minerals audits. A federal appeals court upheld an earlier decision Tuesday on part of a Dodd-Frank Act regulation requiring public companies to disclose whether their products contain conflict minerals. The court previously said requiring the labeling violates free speech under the First Amendment, writes CFO Journal’s Emily Chasan. The Securities and Exchange Commission is reviewing the decision, which could affect how companies prepare for audits of their conflict mineral reports next year. Companies are struggling to get results in their efforts to find “conflict minerals” – tin, tungsten, tantalum and gold– blamed for fueling violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in their supply chain.

Wachtell Lipton sees merits of ditching quarterly reports. Wall Street law firm Wachtell Lipton is voicing support for abandoning quarterly corporate earnings reports, CFO Journal’s Maxwell Murphy reports. The firm drew on work by European investing firm Legal & General Investment Management. The firm contacted the boards of the largest 350 companies on the London Stock Exchange supporting a move away from quarterly reports, according to Wachtell Lipton. Legal & General’s move follows similar calls from money managers and consultants, including Blackrock Inc. and McKinsey & Co., to end the reports.

Home Depot shoppers may like yuan devaluation. While Chinese yuan devaluations last week caught markets off guard, customers at Home Depot Inc. may benefit from the disruption, according to its finance chief. Carol Tomé, told CFO Journal that consumers will be the biggest beneficiary of any Chinese goods whose wholesale price falls as a result, because the home-improvement retailer will lower its retail selling prices accordingly to stay competitive.

Wal-Mart margins hurt by Affordable Care Act. Wal-Mart Stores Inc.’s took a hit from the Affordable Care Act during the second-quarter, CFO Journal’s Vipal Monga reports. The Bentonville, Ark.-based retailer said its pharmacy business had reduced margins, which hurt earnings at the U.S. business. Much of that was due to fewer customers paying for drugs with cash, which has higher margins, said Greg Foran, head of Wal-Mart’s sprawling U.S. operations.

THE DAY AHEAD

Lowe’s Cos, the home improvement retailer reports second quarter earnings. Analysts polled by FactSet project earnings per share of $1.23 for the latest quarter, compared with $1.04 in the same period a year earlier. Upbeat economic data on employment and construction are reasons for optimism about home improvement spending, Ahead of the Tape’s Spencer Jakab writes.

Target Corp. will report fiscal second-quarter earnings on Wednesday, before the market opens. According to MarketWatch, the results come “during a season in which vulnerabilities, from digital shortcomings to inventory miscalculations, have had an impact on just about every retailer.” The company is expected to report per share earnings of $1.11, according to analysts polled by FactSet, up from 78 cents in the same period last year.

At 7:00 a.m. the Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA) will release the results for the mortgage purchase applications index.

The Consumer Price Index for July comes out at 8:30 a.m.

CORPORATE NEWS

Delta planes line up at their gates while on the tarmac of Salt Lake City International Airport in Utah September 28, 2013. Lucas Jackson/Reuters

Dark clouds loom for airlines even as their profits take off. U.S. airlines are producing their biggest profits ever, but are simultaneously facing problems often compounded by their success. Employees at Southwest Airlines Co. and Delta Air Lines Inc. rejected labor contracts in recent weeks, arguing the compensation was insufficient given the industry’s financial performance. Federal regulators began two separate probes into whether the biggest airlines violated competition rules. And shareholders, predicting the airlines’ success will stall, have beaten down stock prices. U.S. airline earnings collectively topped $8 billion in the first half of this year.

Harris boosts stake in Glencore. U.S. investment fund Harris Associates LP has upped its stake in Glencore PLC to 4.5%, making it one of the mining and trading firm’s biggest investors. The move boosts Harris’s position in the Anglo-Swiss company – the world’s third largest publicly traded mining company by market value – from 1.53% at the end of June, and 0.77% at the end of last year, according to FactSet.

SS&C Buys alternative investor services unit.SS&C Technologies Holdings Inc. will buy Citigroup Inc.’s alternative investor services business for $425 million, as the New York bank drives its downsizing strategy. The operations include Citi’s hedge-fund services and private-equity fund services business, along with 1,500 employees. The deal is expected to close in the first quarter.

Comcast raises its bet on new media. Comcast Corp. agreed to invest $200 million in BuzzFeed Tuesday, in a deal valuing the new-media company at $1.5 billion. The pact comes a week after NBCUniversal said it would invest the same amount in BuzzFeed competitor Vox Media. The deals give NBCUniversal more exposure to websites that offer a combination of news, lists and advertiser-sponsored content, and specialize in reaching the young audiences increasingly fleeing traditional television.

Target, Visa in pact on repaying issuers. Target Corp. has agreed to reimburse thousands of financial institutions as much as $67 million for costs incurred from a massive 2013 data breach. The cyber attack damaged the retailer’s reputation with shoppers and cut into sales. The deal, struck with Visa Inc. on behalf of banks and other firms that issue credit and debit cards, comes as the card industry and merchants move toward more secure cards aimed at stopping such attacks.

Tencent invests $50 million in messaging app Kik. Kik Interactive Inc., the Canadian startup behind a popular messaging app, said it tapped Chinese Internet giant Tencent Holdings Ltd. for a $50 million investment. The deal values Kik at $1 billion, and gives it the financial backing to take on rivals Snapchat Inc. and Facebook Inc-owned WhatsApp.

AutoNation to acquire dealer groups. AutoNation Inc., the largest U.S auto dealership chain by revenue, agreed to purchase two dealer groups, Carl Gregory Enterprises and Valley Motors Auto Group, representing more than $600 million in annual revenue, the company said on Tuesday. Carl Gregory Enterprises operates 13 stores in the Southeast and generated $480 million in sales in 2014. The deals add to a string of recent acquisitions among car retailers as U.S. light-vehicle sales head toward their highest level in more than a decade.

Shipping growth slows at U.S. East Coast ports. The red-hot growth in shipping volumes at some East Coast ports appears to be slowing as the hampering effects of the labor strife that hit West Coast ports earlier this year recede. Growth in shipping container volumes at the Port of Savannah slowed to 10.3% year-over-year in July, compared with 23.2% in June, according the Georgia Ports Authority.

Intel, aiming beyond PCs, launches reality TV show. Intel Corp.’s future will include a producing a reality TV show, Chief Executive Brian Krzanich disclosed at a company event on Tuesday. In a bid to bring his company’s vision to a larger audience, Intel will develop a contest show with Mark Burnett—the producer who created “Survivor”—and Time Warner Inc.’s Turner Broadcasting unit. Called “America’s Greatest Makers,” the program will engage do-it-yourself types who turn chips and other components into gadgets.

REGULATION

J.P. Morgan expected to settle with SEC on investment-steering case. J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. is in advanced talks with the Securities and Exchange Commission to pay more than $150 million to resolve allegations it inappropriately steered private-banking clients to its own investment products without proper disclosures. The WSJ’s Emily Glazer and Jean Eaglesham report that the settlement could be announced within the next few weeks, according to people familiar with the matter.

Promontory to pay $15 million in settlement of Standard Chartered case. Promontory Financial Group settled its case with the Department of Financial Services, agreeing to pay $15 million and acknowledge that it didn’t follow the regulator’s requirements for consultants. Last week Promontory planned to challenge the regulator’s move earlier in August to block the firm from advising some New York-based banks on regulatory compliance matters, but in a sudden volte-face on Tuesday agreed to the deal.

Citigroup to return $4.5 million more in fee overcharges. Citigroup Global Markets Inc (CGMI), a unit of Citigroup Inc. struck an agreement with the New York attorney general to return $4.5 million in account management fees charged on some 15,000 frozen accounts, Reuters reports. More than $20 million will be refunded to Citi customers for overcharges in an investigation initiated by New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman. In October, CGMI agreed to return some $16 million to more than 31,000 customers who paid higher advisory fees than negotiated.

SUV’s air-bag rupture under investigation. Federal regulators ordered Volkswagen AG to provide additional details on a Takata Corp. air bag that ruptured in a sport-utility vehicle in June, widening a government probe that has led to the largest automotive recall in U.S. history. The German auto maker disclosed the incident to regulators on July 15, the auto-safety agency said.

Drug maker reaches settlement with states. Amgen Inc. reached a $71 million settlement with 48 states related to allegations that the biotechnology company made unsubstantiated marketing claims about blockbuster drugs Aranesp and Enbrel, according to several state attorneys general. In a statement on Tuesday, Amgen said the settlement with the states resolves some of the same issues addressed in Amgen’s December 2012 settlement with the federal government related to the company’s marketing practices.

Are Wall Street interns the latest regulatory target? Bank of New York Mellon Corp. on Tuesday agreed to pay $14.8 million to settle civil charges that it violated foreign-bribery laws by giving internships to relatives of officials from a Middle Eastern sovereign-wealth fund.The deal is one of the first enforcement actions brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission against a financial institution under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which bans U.S. companies from giving anything of value to a foreign official to gain an unfair advantage or business favors.

EARNINGS

A Wal-Mart Stores Inc. associate organizes school supplies at a Wal-Mart Stores Inc. location in the Porter Ranch neighborhood of Los Angeles, California, U.S., on Thursday, August 6, 2015. Patrick Fallon/Bloomberg News

Wal-Mart’s outlook cut shows struggle to grow sales. Wal-Mart Stores Inc. warned Tuesday its profits would suffer this year, acknowledgment that the world’s largest retailer needs to spend heavily to make its stores convenient places to shop, while maintaining bargain prices. Wal-Mart’s second-quarter net income fell 15% from a year ago, and the company lowered its profit targets for the current quarter and fiscal year. In the second quarter, Wal-Mart’s profit fell to $3.48 billion, or $1.08 share, from $4.09 billion, or $1.26 a share, a year earlier. Total revenue was $120.2 billion, little changed from a year earlier.

TJX Profit rises 6.1% on strong sales. TJX Cos. said its earnings rose 6.1% as the off-price retailer reported better-than-expected sales growth at established stores for the second quarter and raised its guidance for the year. For the period ended Aug. 1, TJX reported a profit of $549.3 million, or 80 cents a share, up from $517.6 million, or 73 cents a share, a year earlier. The company expected per-share profit of 72 cents to 74 cents. Revenue increased 6.5% to $7.36 billion, above expectations of analysts of $7.26 billion.

La-Z-Boy profit rises on higher sales, improved margins. La-Z-Boy Inc.’s first-quarter profit rose as the furniture retailer recorded higher sales and improved margins. Overall, for the period ended July 25, La-Z-Boy reported a profit of $13.7 million, or 27 cents a share, up from $13.1 million, or 25 cents a share, a year earlier. Revenue rose 4% to $341.4 million. Analysts expected 21 cents on $341.2 million in revenue.

Home Depot lifts guidance amid housing recovery. Home Depot Inc. raised its outlook for the second time this year as homeowners continue to spend on big-ticket upgrades such as new appliances, water heaters and windows. The home-improvement chain’s second-quarter earnings rose 9%, with sales up 4.2% at stores open more than a year, including 5.7% growth in the U.S.

Dick’s Sporting Goods seeking to expand casual sportswear offerings. Dick’s Sporting Goods Inc. on Tuesday reported $90.8 million in profit for its fiscal second quarter ended Aug. 1, a jump of 31%, on sales growth of 7.9% to $1.82 billion. Executives laid out plans to expand the chain’s casual-sportswear lines in a retail environment that has become more about sporty clothes than sporting gear.

ECONOMY

U.S. economy on track to grow 1.3 percent in third quarter: Atlanta Fed. The U.S. economy is on track to grow at an annualized rate of 1.3 percent in the third quarter following news of a stronger-than-expected 0.6 percent rise in industrial output in July, the Atlanta Federal Reserve’s GDPNow forecast model showed on Tuesday. Reuters reports that the model upgraded third-quarter GDP growth as the factory production report included a 15.3 percent increase in motor vehicle assemblies in July. This reduced the drag from an expected inventory decline in the quarter to 1.8 percentage points from 2.2 points, the Atlanta Fed said.

CFO MOVES

USMD Holdings Inc., an Irving, Texas-based company that manages hospitals and other healthcare units in the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area, named Jim Berend its new CFO. He succeeds Michael Dooley, who has served as interim finance chief since June 1, after former CFO Carolyn Jones retired, according to a regulatory filing. Mr. Berend most recently served as finance chief of “a company operating surgical hospitals in Texas,” according to a press release. The company did not immediately disclose Mr. Berend’s compensation information.

Era Group Inc., a helicopter transport operator based in Houston, said Andrew Puhala will serve as finance chief starting on September 14. Mr. Puhala succeeds Christopher Bradshaw, who was promoted to president and CEO in December 2014 and continued serving as CFO while the company searched for a replacement. Mr. Puhala has served as CFO of American Electric Technologies Inc. since January 2013 and will continue in the role until September. At Era, Mr. Puhala will receive an annual base salary of $275,000 and a bonus targeted at 75% of the base salary. In addition, the company grants Mr. Puhala 15,000 shares of common stock, according to a regulatory filing.

The Morning Ledger from CFO Journal cues up the most important news in corporate finance every weekday morning. Send us tips, suggestions and complaints: james.willhite@wsj.com. Get The Morning Ledger emailed to you each weekday morning by clicking here: http://on.wsj.com/TheMorningLedgerSignup. Follow us on Twitter @CFOJournal.