Buy Photo Sue Vogel walks her dog, Lady, along Rehl Rd in Tucker Station. (By Michael Clevenger, The Courier-Journal) June 29, 2010 (Photo: cj)Buy Photo

In a lawsuit that could affect past and future Planning Commission votes, a coalition of neighborhood groups says the commission is illegally constituted because seven of its eight members have "a direct financial interest in the land development and construction industry."

State law allows only four of the commission's eight members to have such ties.

"I think we've got them cold," said attorney Steve Porter, who filed the suit Friday in Jefferson Circuit Court on behalf of 21 eastern Jefferson County residents, as well as the Tucker Station Road Neighborhood Association, the Floyds Ford Environmental Association and other non-profit groups.

The city of Louisville and the attorney for the developer both disputed the suit's allegations.

The residents are seeking to reverse the Louisville Metro Planning Commission's March 6 votes recommending approval of a FedEx distribution center off Tucker Station and a proposed warehouse off Rehl Road that residents says will create an unbearable mix of noise and light as hundreds of tractor-trailers roll though 24 hours a day.

The FexEx facility was approved on a 6-1 vote and the warehouse 7-0.

"All actions taken by the Planning Commission on March 6 are null and void," says the 19-page complaint.

Chris Poynter, a spokesman for Mayor Greg Fischer, who appoints Planning Commission members, said the city reviewed the appointees Friday and believes only four have significant ties to construction and development.

"We think it is a stretch to call some of the appointees 'developers,'" he said.

He cited three members whom the suit alleges have direct financial interest in those industries:

• Chairman Donnie Blake, who owns Okolona Pest Control but is also part owner of of OPC Construction and Repair, which advertises that it does room additions, finishes basements and remodels kitchens and bathroom. Blake is a member of the Building Industry Association of Greater Louisville, formerly known as the Homebuilders Association of Greater Louisville, according to the suit.

• David Proffitt, a senior architect at University of Louisville, who manages and coordinates the construction and renovation of the university's construction and renovation projects.

• And Lloyd "Chip" White, a union representative and negotiator for the Indiana/Kentucky/Ohio Regional Council of Carpenters.

Poynter said Blake's main business is pest control and that White brings a labor, not development, perspective to the commission.

White said in a brief interview that he was absent for the votes on the projects and doesn't "put much stock" in the suit.

Blake and Proffitt, a salaried U of L employee, referred questions to the Jefferson County attorney's office, whose spokeswoman, Jessie Halladay, said it was reviewing the allegations and couldn't comment. She said it hasn't determined whether it will recommend that the commission abstain from voting until the suit is resolved.

Bill Bardenwerper, the attorney for for the developer, HOSTS Development LLC, said in an email that the if planning commissioners are disqualified, the remedy is to remove them — not invalidate commission votes.

He also said attorney general opinions say that the commissioner's financial interest must be "sufficiently direct and personal to cause his judgment to be subject to question" and not "remote, uncertain, contingent and speculative."

He also said the residents didn't object at the hearing and had waived their right to bring up the issue now.

But Porter, who, with his wife, owns a bed-and-breakfast on Tucker Station Road, said the challenge to the commission's makeup puts past and future votes in question.

"I think this puts all their business in jeopardy," he said.

Porter, who frequently represents neighborhood groups, said the suit is the first to challenge the makeup of the commission, although in 2000 Judge-Executive Rebecca Jackson withdrew the appointment of a real-estate agent after questions were raised about naming another person with development links to the panel.

David Kaelin, who raises hay on his 50-acre farm on Tucker Station Road and has followed the commission for years, said: "It doesn't seem like it is very balanced right now. It is just a biased body where regular taxpaying blue collar citizens don't stand on equal ground."

The commission's annual reports show that it recommended for approval 113 of 117, or 97 percent, of request for zoning changes from 2011 through 2013.

The suit seeks the reversal of rezonings won by HOSTS,which wants to build the projects in Blankenbaker Crossings II, an existing industrial park. Its principals include John Hollenbach, the brother of state Treasurer Todd Hollenbach IV and son of former county judge-executive and commonwealth's attorney Todd Hollenbach.

Kaelin and other neighbors say they have no problems with the industrial park, most of whose current tenants are offices that are closed at night. But they say that the proposed projects violate the county's comprehensive plan, which prohibits high-intensity use immediately adjacent to residential property, according to Porter.

He says if the residents prevail, Fischer could be forced to replace at least three new commission members and the panel could be required to take a new vote on the projects.

Porter says all eight commission members well qualified and "good guys" but that too many have development and construction ties.

The suit says only one of the eight has no known industry connections -- Vincent Jarboe, who owns an insurance agency.

It says four are clearly in the business. They are Tawana Hughes, who owns a company that does new home construction and remodeling; Robert Peterson Jr., who has been a homebuilder and remodeler for 39 years; David Tomes, whose real estate development company manages Norton Commons; and Clifford Turner, owner and president of Land Development Services Inc. and Turner Realty and Management Inc.

The suit also seeks to void the votes on the grounds that Turner allegedly lives in Oldham County and because there is only one woman on the commission, which is required by law to be representative of the community.

Kaelin, whose family has farmed on Tucker Station Road for 64 years, and the projects will destroy 23 acres of forest and cover 2,000 feet of a stream that flows into Floyds Fork.

The other plaintiffs are Wolf Pen Preservation Association; Open Louisville, Neighborhood Planning and Preservation Inc., and residents Eileen Kaelin, Pattie and Thomas Read, Janet and Wallace Wayne Backman, Rita and John Hayes, Sylvia and Gregg Rogers, Janice and Paul Smith, Doris and John Foster, Martha and Chesley Wheeler, Cynthia and Douglas Weaver, Frances Aprile, and Cathy and Mike Farmer.

Named as defendants are the Louisville Metro government; Fischer; the Metro Council; the Planning Commission; Hosts Development Inc.; and Hollenbach, Greg Oakley and Brett Setzer.

Reporter Andrew Wolfson can be reached at (502) 582-7189

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1ilnNBQ