WASHINGTON, D.C. - Ohio Gov. John Kasich has not officially entered the 2016 presidential race, but a new poll this morning strengthens his case for getting in: He'd beat Hillary Clinton in his home state, where national elections tend to be decided.

Unlike two other swing states, Florida and Pennsylvania, where Clinton leads or would be in a statistical tie against her potential Republican foes, Kasich, a Republican, would beat Clinton in Ohio by 7 percentage points, the new Quinnipiac University poll shows.

That doesn't mean Kasich is the only Republican with a chance against Clinton, the Democratic front-runner, in Ohio. He would merely have the best chance at this moment.

To understand, it helps to look at the exact poll question: If the election were held today and the candidates were (Republican X) or Hillary Clinton, for whom would you vote?

When the name of Kentucky U.S. Sen. Rand Paul was pitted against Clinton's, the result was a tie. When the name was former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, the same thing happened; Clinton, a former secretary of state and former first lady, had a 1 percent lead over Bush, which makes it a statistical tie.

And Clinton's 3-point current lead against U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida would be barely outside the poll's margin of error, so Rubio, too, can be considered to be in a tie.

In other words, the poll does not show that Kasich is the only candidate who could win all-important Ohio against Clinton. But it does show he's got a 7-point lead, and his opponents in a Republican primary would be tied, at best, against Clinton in the general election.

There's a big "if" factor: This would occur if the election were held today. It won't be.

The primary election is nine months away and the general election is in more than a year. In Florida and Pennsylvania, two other states surveyed in Quinnipiac's latest Swing State Poll, a handful of Republican candidates vying to win the GOP nomination could be stronger than Kasich against Clinton in November 2016. Led by Rubio, they also include Bush, Paul, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and Texas U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz.

The number stack up slightly differently in each state, and none of the Republicans would have a discernible lead over Clinton in either Pennsylvania or Florida at this point.

That's why the new Quinnipiac Poll -- reaching the same conclusion as a voter survey released last week by Public Policy Polling -- makes a statistical case that Kasich is likely to make rhetorically in the next few weeks: He could win Ohio. And no Republican president has occupied the White House without first winning Ohio.

The PPP poll showed Kasich with the same 7-point lead over Clinton as did Quinnipiac.

"Gov. John Kasich's 47-40 percent lead over Secretary Clinton is the largest of any GOP candidate in any of the three states," said Peter A. Brown, assistant director of the Quinnipiac Poll. "With Ohio being such a critically important state – no Republican has ever won the White House without carrying it – that gives Gov. Kasich a key talking point about why he should be the nominee."

Other key points:

Voters in all three swing states have trust issues with Clinton. She is not honest and trustworthy, they say.

Voters don't know a lot about the Republican candidates who aren't from their states. They'll know more in the coming months, starting with the first Republican debate on Aug. 6. It will be in Cleveland.

Barring a national emergency, this election will be about the economy and jobs. The second biggest issue will be health care (a subject that could grow or decline in priority with a pending U.S. Supreme Court decision on the Affordable Care Act), then terrorism.

Quinnipiac typically releases polling results over several days, and today's results showed the preferences in a fanciful general election, not a primary, with self-identified Democrats, Republicans and independents. Quinnipiac surveyed 1,191 Ohio voters by phone from June 14 to June 14. The margin of error in Ohio was 2.8 percentage points.

You can read all the numbers for Ohio, Pennsylvania and Ohio here