Topics: Andrew Sullivan, Democrats, Editor's Picks, Fox News, GOP, Pew poll, Politics, Republicans, Tea Party, the leftt, The Right, wingnuts, Media News, Politics News

A recent survey of 10,000 Americans from Pew Research Center for the People and the Press was ostensibly designed to provide proof of the increased polarization of our country. (Spoiler alert: “Republicans and Democrats are more divided along ideological lines – and partisan antipathy is deeper and more extensive – than at any point in the last two decades.”)

But the poll, due to its large sample size of both far left and far right respondents, provides quantitative data demonstrating something striking: an extreme right wing that not only hates those on the opposite side of the political spectrum, but also desires to be isolated ethnically, culturally and geographically from the rest of the country.

Observing the conservative movement from afar, the products of the intellectual segregation of the right-wing biosphere are obvious: the belief that climate change is a hoax, that racism only exists in the form of the knockout game, that polls in 2012 needed to be unskewed and Mitt Romney was going to win in an electoral landslide culminating in Karl Rove’s televised meltdown.

But, though further study is necessary to determine whether the chicken or egg came first, it’s clear from the Pew study that the right-wing echo chamber is also buttressed by a conservative movement desiring a siloed existence.

According to Pew, “two-thirds (66%) of consistently conservative Republicans see the Democratic Party as a threat to the nation’s well-being, compared with the half (50%) of consistently liberal Democrats who say the same about the Republican Party.”

This 16-point divide between the polarized ends of the ideological spectrum is fomented by the seething anger of the conservative media. It convinces the Republican base that Democrats are not the loyal opposition, but a domestic enemy. As conservative David Frum noted in his postscript to the passage of Obamacare, “How do you negotiate with somebody who wants to murder your grandmother? Or – more exactly – with somebody whom your voters have been persuaded to believe wants to murder their grandmother?”

In fact these trends have only gotten worse. Andrew Sullivan observed this week after a single night viewing Fox News, that network viewers were told, “the president is a lawless dictator, abetting America’s Islamist foes around the world, releasing Taliban prisoners to aid in his own jihad on America, fomenting a new caliphate in Iraq, and encouraging children to rush the Mexican border to up his vote-count, while effectively leaving those borders open to achieve his ‘fundamental transformation of America.’”

With this messaging being broadcast to conservatives not only on Fox, but also through talk radio and conservative websites, it’s surprising the 16-point hate gap is not larger.

Furthermore, according to Pew’s research, want to live on an ideological island, sequestering themselves away from diversity of any kind.

Those on the far right – or, as Pew describes them, “consistent conservatives” — are 15 points more likely than their progressive counterparts to want to live in communities where most people share their political point of view. This is only logical. Why would you want to live in an area where you think your neighbors are out to destroy America?