There’s a paragraph in his résumé that center Will Montgomery thinks might have caught the attention of coach John Fox and the rest of the Broncos offensive coaching staff when they revamped the offensive line and targeted an improved running game.

Before joining the Broncos this season as a free agent, Montgomery had been the starting center for the Washington Redskins the previous three years. Washington’s rushing offense ranked among the best in the league during that time.

“The last couple of years in Washington, all we did was run the ball,” Montgomery, who is in his ninth NFL season, said after Thursday’s practice. “I do come from a background of running the ball and one of my strong points is run blocking.”

Fox verified the Broncos had a paper on Montgomery before taking him out of the free-agent market.

“He was a player we were familiar with,” Fox said. “We knew he could get to the second level in the run game, and he’s a good communicator, which is important in the offensive line.”

Since the commitment to add a strong running game in support of quarterback Peyton Manning, the yards have piled up. In a 39-36 victory over the Miami Dolphins, the Broncos rushed for 201 yards, with running back C. J. Anderson accounting for 167.

The next week against the Kansas City Chiefs, the Broncos rushed for 214 yards, and Anderson galloped for 168 yards in a 29-16 victory.

Last week, the Broncos rushed for 133 yards, with rookie Juwan Thompson gaining 63 yards in a 24-17 win over the Buffalo Bills.

Montgomery was a central part of the changes in the offensive line. When he became the starter at center, Manny Ramirez moved from center to right guard and Louis Vasquez moved from right guard to right tackle.

“That whole group has done a good job since we made the change,” offensive coordinator Adam Gase said. “We’ve been solid in protection on the right side, and they’ve been really good in the run game.”

The offensive linemen have their thoughts.

“We do what’s asked of us, and we do it at a high level,” Ramirez said. “He (Montgomery) brings another aspect to the game because he plays the position different than I do. Playing experience makes the run game go easier. We work well together.”

Anderson said Montgomery makes tracks to the linebackers.

“When he gets his hands on them, he can move them and I can see where I can get running room,” Anderson said.

Montgomery, at 6-foot-3 and 304 pounds, is an imposing figure. He came to Denver for good reason.

“I thought there would be opportunity to win games here,” Montgomery said. “I thought there would be good opportunity to play at some point, and the opportunity is now.”

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or twitter.com/irvmoss