MT. PLEASANT — City officials reached a $350,000 settlement with two defendants in a multi-million dollar lawsuit involving the town’s failed lagoon wastewater treatment facility.

On Thursday, City Attorney Tom Hardin said the city reached an agreement between Enviroworks Inc., a general contractor involved in the lagoon project, and its bonding company, Ohio Farmers Insurance Company.

Ohio Insurance will pay the city $350,000, Hardin said.

“That helps clean up the lawsuit considerably,” Hardin said. “We all very much concur that this is certainly a reasonable settlement from the city’s perspective.”

Newly appointed City Commissioner Delores Blankenship made the motion that the city accept the offer during a special-called commission meeting. Blankenship was appointed and unanimously approved Thursday to fill an open seat left by her husband, Tom, who died in July.

The commission also unanimously approved to accept the $350,000 offer.

Mt. Pleasant filed a multi-million dollar lawsuit on April 6, 2011, naming the lagoon and spray field project engineer James C. Hailey &Co. as defendants.

The lagoon system was allegedly intended to treat the town’s wastewater by using its former phosphate mines as the infrastructure. The system has experienced many issues, including several compliance violations from Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation.

An amended complaint, filed June 18, 2012, added Enviroworks Inc. and Ohio Farmers Insurance as defendants.

The city owes the state about $6 million of an $8 million loan that it withdrew to fund the lagoon project.

Mt. Pleasant reached an agreement with the two defendants in which the city netted about a $500,000 return. The city held on to about $135,000 of retainer money that was not paid to Enviroworks and about $19,000 that the company requested in additional payments, Hardin said.

The city also avoided a $1.3 million counter suit from Enviroworks that alleged it did work which the city never paid for. Enviroworks agreed to forgo any claim to the retainer money, additional payment and the counter suit.

“The net benefit to the city is a little more than $500,000, plus we get rid of their $1.3 million claim against us, and get rid of them,” Hardin said.

“Cleaning up the lawsuit is a good thing,” Commissioner Chris Frierson added.

The city is now setting its sights on Hailey &Co. to finish out more than three years of litigation. Hardin said mediation is scheduled with Hailey in early October.

“We can now focus our attention on the engineering firm,” Hardin said. “We have made some progress with (Hailey), but none worthy of really discussing … .”