New health system CEO and GRU President Brooks Keel said some of those talks have been with each other. In coming years, there could be only a handful of very large health systems left in Georgia, University CEO Jim Davis said.

After his first health system board meeting, Keel said he met with Davis about a week ago.

“We hit it off very well,” he said. “We started it off that at the very least we are going to be good neighbors to at the very most we are going to have all of the partnership opportunities you can imagine.”

The health system is working with the University System of Georgia Board of Regents on what the next steps should be but “we’ll start opening up those communication lines between University Hospital and Georgia Regents University,” Keel said. There had been some preliminary, “high-level discussions” between the two and some assessments of other opportunities that might be out there but the regents wanted to wait until Keel was on board before pursuing anything in more detail with anyone, said Chief Business Officer Tony Wagner.

“We are not actively at this point engaged in a discussion of a merger or any other major affiliation,” he said. “But we’re hopeful, based on the work that we’ve done to date, that we’re ready to enter into those kinds of much more detailed discussions in the very near future.”

The health system has turned around its financial fortunes from some previous years and “that gives us room to be very deliberate about moving forward,” Wagner said.

While University is doing very well this year, looming financial pressures and the need to spread fixed costs over a much larger organization point the way toward greater hospital consolidation in Georgia, Davis said, a trend he predicted in October 2013 just as enrollment in the Affordable Care Act started. Some of that is already happening in the Atlanta area now, where WellStar Health System is in talks to acquire five hospitals and hospitals in Athens and Savannah have announced they are seeking partners, Davis said.

He once predicted that in order to be a standalone health system in the future it would take at least $3 billion a year in revenues and has since revised that to $5 billion and it may be as high as $20 billion. Ultimately, the U.S. might end up with 150 or less large health systems, which would likely leave Georgia with three to five big providers, Davis said.

Scale “is becoming very important,” he said. For now, University is watching what happens, Davis said.

But ultimately, “we’re probably going to have to get bigger,” he said. “That’s what we are looking for.”

There is a lot of enthusiasm on both sides to make something happen between the two health systems, who sit “literally a stone’s throw away” from each other, Keel said.

“We are all committed to making this a better community,” he said.