As first lady Michelle Obama embarks on her good-will tour across China, she and her aides have been using photo-sharing platform Instagram to document her travels. She even has her own hashtag for the trip: #FLOTUSinChina.

Check out a filtered view of her trip abroad below:

After a long journey, the First Lady, along with her mother and daughters, have arrived in Beijing. Follow along as the First Lady highlights the #PowerOfEducation. A photo posted by First Lady Michelle Obama (@michelleobama) on Mar 20, 2014 at 8:55am PDT

First lady Michelle Obama lands in Beijing.

The First Lady and Madam Peng stopped by a robotics class at a high school in Beijing to highlight how students in China are collaborating with students around the world. #PowerOfEducation A photo posted by First Lady Michelle Obama (@michelleobama) on Mar 21, 2014 at 7:45am PDT

The first lady, along with Peng Liyuan, the wife of China’s President, Xi Jinping, stopped by a robotics class at the Beijing Normal School, one of China’s elite high schools.

"While we loved our visit to the Forbidden City, we only wish we had more time to see everything. But then again, I'm not sure there could ever be enough time to fully appreciate all of the art and history within this extraordinary place." —The First Lady #FLOTUSinChina A photo posted by First Lady Michelle Obama (@michelleobama) on Mar 21, 2014 at 11:40am PDT

“While we loved our visit to the Forbidden City, we only wish we had more time to see everything. But then again, I’m not sure there could ever be enough time to fully appreciate all of the art and history within this extraordinary place,” said Obama on Instagram.

"When it comes to expressing yourself freely and worshiping as you choose and having open access to information, we believe those universal rights — they are universal rights that are the birthright of every person on this planet." —The First Lady to Chinese and American students at Peking University in Beijing A photo posted by First Lady Michelle Obama (@michelleobama) on Mar 22, 2014 at 12:24pm PDT

“When it comes to expressing yourself freely and worshiping as you choose and having open access to information, we believe those universal rights — they are universal rights that are the birthright of every person on this planet,” said Obama to Chinese and American students at Peking University.

Touring the extraordinary Summer Palace in Beijing. A photo posted by First Lady Michelle Obama (@michelleobama) on Mar 22, 2014 at 1:56pm PDT

Obama also visited the Summer Palace in Beijing.

"Simply breathtaking" —The First Lady on her visit to the Great Wall today: #FLOTUSinChina A photo posted by First Lady Michelle Obama (@michelleobama) on Mar 23, 2014 at 6:37am PDT

In response to her first visit to the Great Wall, the first lady said, “Simply breathtaking.”