Topics: 1960s, Action movies, Archaeology, Brazil, Breathless, France, French film, imperialism, Indiana Jones, Jean-Paul Belmondo, Movies, Race, Racism, Rio de Janeiro, That Man From Rio, Entertainment News

“That Man From Rio” is a half-forgotten artifact of 1960s European exoticism, and there’s a whole lot of good and bad that comes along with that. First of all, let me set your mind at ease, O Entertainment Consumer: Yes, this is a 50-year-old French film with subtitles, but I promise you it isn’t some talky, black-and-white odyssey into the soul. The cultural fatwa against all-that-is-not-fun is not violated here. This globetrotting farce-thriller from 1964 is driven by an escalating series of delightful stunts, most of them personally performed by Gallic superstar Jean-Paul Belmondo. In fact, this movie and the entire career of director Philippe de Broca belong to an entirely different trajectory of French cinema from the New Wave legacy of Godard, Truffaut, Jean-Pierre Melville and so on. If Belmondo is best known to the film-studies crowd on this side of the Atlantic for his classic bad-guy roles in “Breathless,” “Le Doulos” and “Pierrot le Fou,” he was almost certainly more famous in France for playing swashbuckling heroes in movies like this one.

There are moments in “That Man From Rio,” including an almost surrealistic chase scene shot against the nightmare-modernist construction site of Brasilia, Brazil’s newly invented capital city, where de Broca seems to channel the spirit of modernist anomie found in, say, the contemporaneous films of Michelangelo Antonioni. I think that’s pure accident, a case of inhaling the Zeitgeist without meaning to, but it’s also true that there’s so much bizarre social subtext in “That Man From Rio” that you can’t tell where intention ends and coincidence begins. I suppose this is a spoiler – can I spoil a movie made 50 years ago? – but at the very end of the story an apparent intervention by supernatural forces turns out to be something else entirely: Bulldozers felling the rain forest, to make way for a superhighway. (This was at least two decades before Amazonian deforestation became an important environmental cause.)

This is a high-spirited action-adventure – at times oppressively high-spirited, if you want the truth – that begins in Paris, where ne’er-do-well French soldier Adrien Dufourquet (Belmondo) is taking a week’s leave to see his girlfriend. Adrien represents the other side of the Belmondo persona from his tough-guy roles, a French stereotype that would soon disappear into cultural irrelevance: He’s an unsophisticated country boy, masculine and cheerful, who may not be all that bright but is an unstoppable force once he gets going. Somewhat implausibly, his girlfriend is an upper-crust Parisian beauty named Agnès (Françoise Dorléac), whose archaeologist father has been killed as part of some complicated mystery that is never entirely explained (because it doesn’t make sense).

Next a band of mysterious burglars steals a priceless statue from the museum run by her dad’s old colleague, Prof. Catalan (the terrific character actor Jean Servais), who is then himself kidnapped. After that the thugs drug Agnès and spirit her away as well, apparently because she knows where Dad buried another, identical statue on the grounds of the Rio estate where they once lived. That’s quite enough for Adrien, who pursues her through Paris on a stolen motorbike and then buffaloes his way onto a Rio-bound flight at Orly Airport without a ticket or a passport. (It isn’t all that plausible anyway, but yes, those were more innocent days in air travel.) If you haven’t heard of Françoise Dorléac, by the way, she’s another one of the odd historical ingredients in this movie. Not too many people have – Dorléac was a rising star in French film who died three years later in a car accident, at age 25. You’ve heard of her younger sister, though, who went on to some success under the adopted name Catherine Deneuve.