ATLANTA | The differences between Republican Attorney General Sam Olens and Democratic challenger Greg Hecht go beyond political parties. They also disagree on the role of the office.

Olens, whose legal career focused on businesses before his election as Cobb County Commission chairman, has made his contributions to economic development a cornerstone of his campaign to a second term. Among the accomplishments he lists are fights against environmentalists over the deepening of the Savannah River shipping channel, against the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, against neighboring states over water, and against the Affordable Care Act in which he won a Supreme Court decision allowing states to opt out of Medicaid expansion. He’s also proud of legislation he pushed against gambling, prescription-drug abuse and sex trafficking.

He’s won the endorsement of gun-owner-rights groups and the majority of district attorneys of both parties.

Hecht has the backing of organized labor, and he announced Friday that 37 sheriffs had switched allegiance from Olens to him.

Hecht, a onetime legislator and former assistant prosecutor, has attacked Olens on several fronts. First, he said the attorney general shouldn’t have offered a court defense of the state’s law banning same-sex marriage. He notes that 25 courts in other parts of the country have ruled similar laws unconstitutional.

Second, Hecht accuses Olens of not being aggressive enough about prosecuting child abuse and neglect, noting the number of children who died within five years of their families’ contact with state social workers.

“What we should be doing is fundamentally protecting citizens in need, such as the 400 children who passed away between 2011 and 2013 when that man was wasting time on unconstitutional laws,” Hecht said of Olens during a debate organized by the Atlanta Press Club.

Olens responded that none of the courts with jurisdiction over Georgia have ruled on the issue, requiring him to continue backing the law.

“It’s not my job to state my personal opinion on same-sex (marriage),” he said. “I think it’s actually contrary when you are the attorney general to do so because, once again, my primary job is not to replace the courts but to defend Georgia law.”

Hecht also attacks the incumbent’s integrity because a county judge has ruled the state should have turned over to plaintiff’s attorneys a memo written by the then-head of the state ethics commission. Her predecessor was suing the commission — eventually winning — alleging the staff of Republican Gov. Nathan Deal interfered in an investigation, and the memo alleged similar interference.

The judge sanctioned Olens’ office $10,000 for withholding a relevant document.

“How can you actually tell officials that you can actually check and balance on corruption?” Hecht asked.

Olens contends an appeal will show the memo wasn’t required to be turned over, and he said the problems within the ethics commission are not his doing.

“Once again, we don’t operate the agency; we represent the agency,” Olens said. “And I’m not going to defend Georgia’s ethics law, because I, too, believe they need to be much stronger.”

If he is elected, Hecht would most likely be up against a majority GOP legislature with most state posts held by Republicans. He has signaled he would use the attorney general’s office to root out wrongdoing by the rest of state government.

Olens, on the other hand, has shown that he’ll fight for Republican goals, like thwarting Obamacare. That put him in sync with most Georgia voters four years ago, and it may again, depending on who shows up to vote Nov. 4.

Follow Walter Jones on Twitter @MorrisNews and Facebook or contact him at walter.jones@morris.com.