Topics: American Exceptionalism, innovation, Jingoism, Science, Scientific American, Innovation News

This article was originally published by Scientific American

Throughout the history of the U.S. human spaceflight program, a peculiarly American rhetoric of manifest destiny, frontier conquest and exploitation has dominated official and public discourse. Take, for example, the credo of the Space Frontier Foundation, an American nonprofit advocacy group “dedicated to opening the Space Frontier to human settlement as rapidly as possible … creating a freer and more prosperous life for each generation by using the unlimited energy and material resources of space.” Such rhetoric reveals an ideology of human spaceflight—a set of beliefs about the nation’s right to expand its boundaries, colonize other lands and exploit their resources.

This ideology rests on a number of assumptions about the role of the U.S. in the global community and American national character. According to this ideology, the U.S. is and must remain “number one” in the world community, playing the role of political, economic, scientific, technological and moral leader, spreading democratic capitalism. The metaphor of the frontier, with its associated images of pioneering, homesteading, claim staking and taming, looms large in this belief system.

The rhetoric of human spaceflight advances a conception of outer space as a place of wide-open spaces and limitless resources—a space frontier. From John F. Kennedy to Barack Obama, U.S. presidents have embraced this rhetoric of frontier conquest and exploitation. So have nasa administrators, members of Congress and decades of expert panels.

I have heard a White House official tout a concept for large-scale industrialization of the moon as “a phenomenally inspiring long-term vision” for the U.S. space program. The invitation-only Pioneering Space National Summit, held in February in Washington, D.C., yielded a declaration that “the long-term goal of the human spaceflight and exploration program of the United States is to expand permanent human presence beyond low-Earth orbit and to do so in a way that will enable human settlement and a thriving space economy.” One of the groups that participated in this summit, the Tea Party in Space, advocates “applying the core principles of fiscal responsibility, limited government, and free markets to the rapid and permanent expansion of American civilization into the space frontier.”