Firefighter shackled to the back of a truck in disturbing, brutal ritual

Disturbing images of a bastardisation ceremony have emerged for the first time, providing damning evidence of institutionalised workplace humiliation within the NSW fire brigade.

Pictures show a firefighter shackled to the back of a firetruck at Fire & Rescue NSW’s headquarters in the Sydney CBD before being sprayed with highly corrosive oven cleaner as part of a “send off” ceremony.

The photos obtained by The Sunday Telegraph show the firefighter tied between two trucks with a chain and cable ties before his colleagues sprayed him with a fire hose, doused him with a fire extinguisher and then being sprayed with caustic oven cleaner over his head and neck.

The man who took the photos, a former firefighter who did not take part in the ceremony, said the victim was left bent over in agony before he collapsed to the ground, gasping for air.

“It was panic stations then,” the former firefighter, who asked not to be named, said.

“The poor guy couldn’t breathe and they threw soda ash all over him to try and stop the oven cleaner burning his skin.

“He had to be given oxygen.”

An ambulance was called, but the firefighter did not want to go to hospital and had a shower at the station to wash off the spray and powder.

The victim, who Fire & Rescue NSW management said did not make an official complaint, is now stationed in regional NSW.

It was the victim’s last day before he was transferred out of the station in Castlereagh Street.

After the incident, a high-ranking officer ordered the man who took the pictures to destroy them.

“I handed the senior officer a photo card from my camera, but it wasn’t the one with the photos on it,” the former firefighter said.

“I kept them because I believed it was an unreasonable order.

“This wasn’t the only incident. They happened all the time.

“Sometimes you would be called out to a fire in the early morning and you’d find a naked firefighter chained to the truck. You’d have to cut him free before you could get on the road.

“The mob mentality in there was just out of control. And the senior offices did nothing about it.”

The mob mentality in there was just out of control. And the senior offices did nothing about it

The former firefighter revealed the photographs after reading a report in last week’s Sunday Telegraph into the case of another firefighter, Ron Moor, who was bullied, harassed and humiliated while working at the same fire station.

Mr Moor is suing Fire & Rescue NSW in the Supreme Court for more than $1 million in lost earnings. Mr Moor, who suffered a humiliating initiation ceremony in the late 1980s and ongoing physical and mental bullying from his workmates at Castlereagh Street, had a mental breakdown in 2007.

Since Mr Moor’s story appeared, another seven firefighters have contacted his legal firm, Turner Freeman Lawyers, seeking legal help for allegations of workplace abuse.

“This behaviour was clearly systemic, leaving most of these victims scarred for life,” solicitor Sally Gleeson said.

In 2010, a Sunday Telegraph investigation revealed a hidden culture of bizarre sexualised initiation ceremonies within the Fire Brigades including firefighters being sexually assaulted and branded with red-hot coat hangars.

Fire & Rescue Nsw Commissioner Greg Mullins said in a statement that if the organisation been made aware of the August 2002 incident, it would have been investigated and appropriate action taken.

He said Fire & Rescue NSW has spoken with the firefighter who advised that he did not suffer ongoing physical or psychological issues.

“Bullying and harassment of any kind will not be tolerated in Fire & Rescue NSW.

“The revelations of bullying and harassment made in 2010 helped us, as an organisation, face up to aspects of the past that we are not proud of and to eliminate bullying and harassment from the workplace.

Since 2010, we have made significant progress in implementing measures to prevent workplace bullying and harassment.”