NEW HAVEN, Conn. (AP) - Thelma Ladeira knew after her first dance class in Brazil at 5 years old that this was what she “was going to do for the rest of my life.”

That was more than 30 years ago and Ladeira, now a New Haven resident, hasn’t missed a beat since. By age 16 after a decade of ballet training, she became a professional, performing modern dance, belly dancing, Brazilian dance on cruise ships and tours in Japan and Europe.

Moving to the United States was never part of the plan, but love brought her here five years ago - and now New Haven is in love with Ladeira’s popular Brazilian dance classes, featuring samba, the fast tempo dance of Brazil, Maculelê and samba Reggae. Samba was popularized in Brazil, but has a heavy African influence.

Ladeira also brings Brazilian dance and culture in New Haven schools and performs around the nation with Ginga Brasileira Dance Co., based in New Haven.

Students say she brings more than the dance of Brazil - as she casually blends in stories of Brazil’s history and culture.

“Thelma is an amazing teacher. She takes something seemingly difficult and she can really break it down,” said student Kelley Traister, who tried samba previously with another teacher, but without success. “It’s a fun way to get really good exercise. It’s a good way to burn what stress you have in your day with a really fun group of people.”

Lina Klaus said she loves that the class brings together people of all ages and backgrounds.

“Her classes are energetic and she brings everyone together,” Klaus said. “She gives us all a chance to perform.”

Ladeira, a warm, energetic woman with extraordinary zest, said there’s much to be learned from Brazilian culture and she especially loves to share that in New Haven public schools and others in Connecticut.

She said there are heavy Portuguese and African influences in Brazil and no stereotypical face - as the people are a mix of all cultures.

“I think America is a mix of cultures as well,” but Brazilians are always happy, she said.

That’s where she takes the opening to teach young people, “To bring joy to people and remind them that we come from mixed cultures.”

“When I went outside of my country, I could appreciate the culture much more . I want to spread it further,” she said. She also uses cultural lessons to teach kids to be more open.

Of America, Ladeira says, “I love it.”

Ladeira has wonderful memories beginning in childhood of dancing samba in Brazil’s Carnival, a days long celebration considered the Mardi Gras of the southern hemisphere. She grew up in the large city of San Paulo.

“Every year, it’s the most exciting thing. People come together to celebrate life,” she said.

Samba is the main dance and music of Brazil, she said.

“It’s a kind of lifestyle - everyone grew up hearing samba,” a blend of African and European music, she said. “It’s music you can feel. The music is in your heart,” she said.

The connection between Ladeira and her dance students is apparent. No matter what she’s done all day - often she has performed out-of-state before class - Ladeira has a huge smile, energy and enthusiasm, or as she puts it, “The beat comes from the inside to the outside.”

“When I connect with my students I feel alive,” she said. “I just breathe and see everyone and we feel this energy.” The dance has lots of foot, hip and shoulder action.

She also teaches students to perform and brings them to venues to show their talents. While practiced in casual, comfy clothes, samba is typically performed with a colorful head piece, often with feathers, high heels and a Brazilian bikini.

“They become better and better,” Ladeira said of her students. In many ways, they are learning more than dance, she said, adding that by “putting themselves out there,” students gain confidence they carry into parts of life.

“Maybe you didn’t realize you have so much inside,” she said.

Ladeira came to America in 2009 to visit friends and fell in love, moving to America a year later. Her boyfriend - they are still together - introduced her to Mestre Efraim Silva, founder of the Connecticut Capoeira and Dance Center and they formed Ginga Brasileira Dance Co.

Theresa Biagiarelli, who started with samba and now takes Ladeira’s belly-dancing class, said Ladeira is a gifted teacher who introduces moves during warm-up, then blends them naturally.

“She can make everything fun. You could start a party with three people if you had Thelma,” Biagiarelli said. “I saw Thelma perform and she did things that were amazing.”

___

Information from: New Haven Register, http://www.nhregister.com