Wisconsin quarterback Joel Stave fumbles the ball during the first quarter. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

The conclusion of Saturday's game between Wisconsin and Northwestern was one that both teams will talk about for a long time. It was the kind of thing you needed to see to believe and even then there were incomprehensible elements. It was controversial. It was nerve-wracking. Maybe the referees botched it.

Say what you want, but one thing was clear among many on the Wisconsin side — with five turnovers the Badgers would have been lucky even to have a remote chance in the final moments let alone multiple legitimate shots at the win.

"I thought our defense played tremendous and individual efforts, group efforts, gave us a chance to be in that game and to win," head coach Paul Chryst said after the 13-7 loss. "And that's not common. You turn the ball over five times, four on offense, one on special teams, and even to have a chance to win the game, that's a credit to that group."

Wisconsin's offense put its defense in bad situations for most of the afternoon at Camp Randall Stadium, with the miscues starting early.

On the Badgers' second possession, quarterback Joel Stave dropped back on third down and was hit as he threw. The ball got deflected at the line and Wildcats cornerback Nick VanHoose intercepted it at the UW 19-yard line. Northwestern scored a touchdown three plays later.

Four minutes after that interception, Wisconsin worked its way into Northwestern territory when Tanner McEvoy caught a pass and was stripped by Wildcats safety Matthew Harris.

The Badgers defense bent but didn't break on the ensuing drive, forcing a 27-yard field goal attempt that went wide right. While the offense continued to sputter toward a 10-0 halftime deficit, the defense kept hope alive.

After Wisconsin's offense showed its first sign of life with a five-play, 64-yard touchdown drive on its first possession of the second half, it looked like turnovers might derail whatever momentum it had built.

Later in the third quarter, minutes after he had a punt return called back due to an invalid fair catch, Alex Erickson muffed a punt and Northwestern recovered at the Wisconsin 30-yard line.

"I was going to fair catch it and I saw that guy and I was just indecisive and second-guessed myself," Erickson said. "Any time you do that, you hesitate, usually it doesn't work out well for you."

But the defense held again, forcing a 40-yard field goal attempt that Northwestern's Jack Mitchell sent wide right.

The Badgers still very much had life early in the fourth quarter as they trailed by three. Then came back-to-back turnovers. Stave tried to fight off a sack on a first down from his own 44-yard line and was stripped, giving Northwestern the ball at the Wisconsin 34. When Stave got back on the field, he didn't see Anthony Walker on a third down throw, and the middle linebacker easily picked off the pass and returned it to the Wisconsin 20.

"We just made it hard on ourselves," Chryst said.

Yet those critical errors didn't bury the Badgers. The defense forced a punt after the fumble then allowed zero yards following the interception to hold the Wildcats to a one-score lead at 13-7.

"They rose up," Northwestern head coach Pat Fitzgerald said. "The bell rings as a defense, go put the fire out. They did a great job of that today."

On the day, the Badgers defense allowed 72 yards on 25 plays following the five turnovers. Over Northwestern's final seven possessions, excluding a kneeldown at the end, the Wildcats didn't gain more than seven yards on a drive.

"I think every single guy on our defense — first string, second string — came in there and executed at a high level, made plays when we needed to," said linebacker Vince Biegel, who had a career-high 14 tackles.

Safety Michael Caputo described his unit's play as phenomenal, but still lamented that they couldn't create a turnover. Even without one, the defense set the stage for an improbable comeback attempt.

"We said, 'Give us one more chance,' and they gave us another chance," Erickson said. "'One more chance,' and they gave us another chance. Lo and behold at the end we had a chance to win it."