Australian snowboarder Belle Brockhoff is standing up for her beliefs at the Winter Olympics in Sochi. Photo: Getty Images

''After I compete,'' promised Australian snowboarder Belle Brockhoff last month, ''I'm willing to rip on his ass. I'm not happy and there's a bunch of other Olympians who are not happy either.''

She might have to. She might be the only one.

Big air: Belle Brockhoff. Photo: Getty Images

As it stands, the blowback for Russian president Vladimir Putin and his draconian anti-gay propaganda laws has not materialised, and certainly not on the grand scale the western media had widely salivated over.

Advertisement

When Dutch speedskater Ireen Wust became the first of seven openly gay athletes at Sochi to win a medal, taking gold in the 3000m, she didn't mention Putin or his legislation. Her fingernails were painted in the colours of her country, not of the rainbow - a tactic that was previously mooted as a silent protest on the podium.

On the same day, Austria's veteran ski jumper, Daniela Iraschko-Stolz, said she would remain mute on the subject. ''I don't think it's a good idea to make protests here, no one cares,'' said the 30-year-old, who added her partner's name - Stolz - to hers when they were married. ''To jump pretty good is also a statement.''

And that's where Brockhoff - the 20-year-old snowboarder from Victoria who came out on Lateline on the ABC last August - comes into it. On Sunday night (AEDT), she will line up in the boardercross event and attempt to ''rip on the ass'' of Putin in the best manner possible: by finishing on the podium.

It is this philosophy of making a statement through sporting achievement rather than words that has sparked memories for elder statesmen in the Australian team in Sochi.

Specfically, president John Coates, who had vehemently and passionately taken on Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser in 1979, when vice-like political pressure was applied to prevent a team participating in the Moscow summer games in 1980.

Fraser was supporting US president Jimmy Carter, who had withdrawn Team USA because of Russia's invasion of Afghanistan.

What transpired was the most dramatic chapter in the AOC's history. Former IOC vice-president Kevan Gosper supported a boycott, but has publicly admitted since he regretted his stance. ''It proved nothing back then,'' Coates tells Fairfax Media. ''We had a situation when Malcolm Fraser just fell into line with Jimmy Carter, and pressured us to boycott. At the same time, he was selling wool from his sheep station to the Russians. The athletes are easy targets. I know at that time the Australian government splashed a bit of money around to athletes to encourage them not to go. If you talk to those athletes these days, they very much regret not going.''

Australia sent a team, but some sports - such as hockey - banned their players from attending. ''Some very vocal people like [former men's national team player] Ric Charlesworth are very bitter about missing those Games,'' says Coates, who is also an IOC vice-president.

''In the case of Belle Brockhoff, this isn't an issue like the invasion of Afghanistan but it's an issue that she feels strongly about and entitled to feel strongly about. The IOC opposes all forms of discrimination. This anti-gay law that they have here is a form of discrimination and we're opposed to it.

''I'm pleased that she's here and she'll have her opportunity, at some press conference, to voice her concerns. I'm much more pleased that she's come here, and already voiced her concerns and opposition to the law, and got good media. That's better than staying away and not participating. Had she decided not to come, she would've regretted it.''

Coates met Brockhoff for the first time at the Australian team reception at a hotel in Rosa Khutor on the night before the opening ceremony. They shook hands, chatted briefly, but did not mention the issue of making a public stand against Putin's anti-gay legislation. The AOC boss has encouraged Australian athletes to be critical of Russia's anti-gay laws as they see fit, but insisted they do so while respecting the Olympic charter that forbids political protests during competition or on medal podiums. ''We recognise that our athletes have the right to express an opinion,'' Coates says. ''We give them that opportunity. We don't want them getting into any trouble on the podium, because they might prejudice any medals they might win.''

So far, the world's opposition to Putin's discriminatory laws has barely created a ripple as the pursuit of medals, talk of faulty snowboard halfpipes, dodgy judging at the figure skating and the apparent slaughter of cute stray dogs infatuates the western media.

Indeed, the pointy story of so-called Russian homophobia has centred on its best-known gay nightclub, Cabaret Mayak. The bar's owner, Andrei Tanichev, is already wearied by the attention.

''We called last week to schedule an interview,'' a Danish reporter told Deadspin.com. ''And we got 15 minutes between the Finns and the Swiss.''

Sochi is considered a tolerant city, by Russian standards. It was once considered the unofficial gay capital of Russia, and has a gay beach. Tanichev told The Guardian: ''It's a complex question, whether or not all the noise in the west about the issue has been good or bad. On the one hand, it is very good that it has forced people in Russia to think about gay rights properly. On the other hand, I think the level of noise has been greater than the size of the problem.''

WHETHER sport and politics should entwine has been a burning debate for the Olympic movement for decades. US president Barack Obama has snubbed Sochi, announcing before the Games he would instead send a delegation that included two openly gay athletes - tennis great Billie Jean King and Caitlin Cahow, a hockey player. King did not travel to Russia because of her ill mother.

IOC president Thomas Bach slammed world leaders, such as Obama, for such a boycott. Go back to Moscow for the reason.

Bach was a West German athlete who was desperate to compete in Moscow. He'd claimed gold in fencing at Montreal in 1976, and wanted to defend his Olympic title.

He was furious athletes were dragged into the dispute, and eventually forced to boycott the 1980 Olympics. Doubtless, he was angered when he sniffed the same politicisation of the Olympics.

''Have the courage to address your disagreements in a peaceful, direct political dialogue and not on the backs of the athletes,'' he said at a ceremony attended by Putin just before the opening ceremony.

When Bach said this, it cast Coates' mind back more than three decades.

''That comment reminded me about what happened in Moscow,'' he said. ''If you've got problems, sort them out between governments, don't do it off the back of athletes. The IOC is not some super-government. Far from it. We run sport and we try to encourage athletes from around the world to get to know each other. It's just not our role. I just hope that people understand that.''

Since Brockhoff came out on the ABC, journalists have been on the hunt for other gay athletes in the Australian winter team. There is scuttlebutt about some team members, as there invariably is in all sports, but none have emerged to make the brave stand that Brockhoff has.

She has been criticised for grandstanding, while others know she has saved lives young lives by encouraging teenagers to be who they are, without fear.

As she said of Russia's laws, which were introduced early last year, on Lateline: ''I honestly find it a little bit disrespectful and a little bit sad, not only to me, but to other athletes and, you know, it's my dream and I want to be able to be who I am, be proud of who I am and be proud of all the work that has gotten me to the Olympics and not have to deal with this kind of a law.''

Having made the public stance already, merely competing in Sochi means she has underlined her point. Will it change anything in Russia?

When black athlete Jesse Owens competed at the 1936 Olympics in Berlin and won four gold medals right beneath the eyes of Adolf Hitler, it was the ultimate rejoinder to Germany's claim of ''Aryan racial superiority''.

Legend has it Hitler refused to shake his hand, although reports have surfaced since that he did. Owens' response is worth contemplation, given Russia has anti-gay propaganda laws but Australia still won't allow same-sex marriage. ''Although I wasn't invited to shake hands with Hitler,'' he said, ''I wasn't invited to the White House to shake hands with the President either.''

Twitter - @awebstar1