NEW YORK, Sept. 24 (UPI) -- Kanye West is in deep with his fashion collection and other ventures, so the rapper says he's taking his time with his next musical project.

In an interview with Vanity Fair, the entertainment mogul and husband to Kim Kardashian revealed the name of his current album-in-the-making, Swish, and warned the name could change at any moment.

The rapper premiered a new song, "Fade" alongside the live streaming event of his Yeezy Season 2 fashion show at New York Fashion Week, but West says it's not finished yet either. "For the kids that all went to see it in theaters, I thought they'd be happy to hear some new music," he told the magazine.

"I've been doing that [working on an album] too. That's like a sonic landscape, a two-year painting. That song I played has been a year and a half in the making and it may be still a year from being complete," West continued. "But it was to let people get a glimpse of the painting."

YEEZY SEASON2 #NUDES A photo posted by Kim Kardashian West (@kimkardashian) on Sep 16, 2015 at 5:23pm PDT

Swish isn't on a fast-track for release, the artist said. In fact, it's not precisely clear when the project will be completed at all. "I'm not sure. I'm not worried about the years," Yeezy said. "I'm worried about the life and the body of the work that I can put out while I'm breathing."

West also didn't dismiss the announcement of his decision to run for the 2020 presidential election which he made during this year's Video Music Awards. Instead, he told the magazine he's taking it very seriously.

"I sit in clubs and I'm like, 'Wow, I've got five years before I go and run for office and I've got a lot of research to do, I've got a lot of growing up to do,'" West said. "My dad has two masters degrees. My mom has a PhD, she used to work at Operation PUSH. Somehow the more and more creative I get, the closer and closer I get to who I was as a child...I think it's time."

The musician explained he would have to stay creative as he ran for the highest position in the land. "The whole point is to have someone [in office] that's creative, that's around amazing creatives. This is my theory," he added. "I think the world can be helped through design, so it's very important that I stay around creative forward thinkers."

"I'm not a politician at all," West said, referencing his VMA speech. "I care about the truth and I just care about human beings. I just want everyone to win, that's all I can say, and I think we can.