Vacant visit

The "what" of President Obama's visit to Naypyitaw, Myanmar, is simple enough: two regional summits complete with flags, big conference rooms and speeches. CBS News chief White House correspondent Major Garrett reports the "why" of visiting the largely vacant capital city is more elusive; it is 200 miles north of Myanmar's former capital of Yangon.

Young voters

Young voters in the 2014 midterm elections did not turn out in the numbers they did in 2012, but a CBS News poll shows signs of a shift in the youth vote that may mean changes for both political parties.

Port slowdown

There are growing concerns that a worker slowdown at one of the country's busiest ports, in Long Beach, Calif., could hit holiday shipments. CBS News correspondent Ben Tracy reports business could come to a halt on the West Coast, as a battle threatens to stop crucial imports affecting the nation.

Healthcare.gov working?

Will Healthcare.gov work when Obamacare open enrollment begins again on Saturday? That's the question on the minds of Americans who will be logging on to buy health insurance on the government's website. The CEO in charge of the health insurance marketplaces tells CBS News national correspondent Wyatt Andrews what's being done to ensure it will work.

Obamacare a tax?

A new controversy is stirring over the Affordable Care Act, and this time it has nothing to do with the website. CBS News correspondent Jan Crawford reports, one of the architects of the health care law was caught on camera saying the bill was specifically written in a way that it wouldn't be viewed as including a tax. He then went on to call American voters stupid.

Out of network costs

Doctors saved a Wisconsin woman after what could have been a deadly heart attack, but the lifesaving work came at a steep cost. CBS News correspondent Dean Reynolds reports the patient went to a hospital outside her insurance network, and now faces medical bills that could force her into bankruptcy.

Drug prices

Some spectacular jumps in generic drug prices have been exposed in an article in the New England Journal of Medicine. CBS News chief medical correspondent Dr. Jonathan LaPook reports Doxycycline, an antibiotic, went from $.06 a pill to$3.36, an increase of more than 5,000 percent. A recent analysis found nearly 10 percent of generics more than doubled in price in the past year.

Printing skin

Scientist are developing a method of 3D printing of human skin on demand. They say the innovative technique will revolutionize burn treatment. Here is a look at how it they do it.

Bob Seger

Legendary rock star Bob Seger is back. He's out with his first studio album in eight years. His songs sound like they were written for every working man and woman in America but, as "CBS This Morning" co-host Charlie Rose reports, there was a time when it seemed his music might not reach the masses.

Top News

World

First image from comet's surface

U.S. - China carbon pledge short on specifics

Indian doc arrested in mass-sterilizations scandal

Big scare for Bono on his private plane

Politics

100th female member of Congress sworn in

Senate Democrats plan vote on Keystone XL pipeline

Rand Paul, advisers meet to strategize on a 2016 presidential bid

Mike Huckabee is looking a lot like a 2016 presidential candidate

U.S.

Supreme Court decision allows same-sex marriage in Kansas

Tobacco sales ban proposal draws fire in Mass. town

First snow, now cold - eight cities break cold records

Virgin Galactic pilot unaware of key step before crash

Murdered vet was never deployed

Cardinals' outfielder was drunk in fatal car crash

MoneyWatch

Millions of part-timers long for full-time work

Personal, financial data of 70,000 posted online

Bankers pay fines, but show little sign of reform

How renting may pave a faster road to riches

Retirees beware: A key tax deadline is looming

In what states are college students carrying the most debt?

Health

U.N. Ebola death toll has now topped 5,000

Inside story of the first two U.S. Ebola patients

Jennifer Hudson fights the "lady killer"