IPA Family Our technology enables advisors to efficiently add on supplemental sales when there is a product need- such as major medical gap plans, which is only available through IPA advisors- can be added to an ACA plan with just a few keystrokes.

IPA-Family, LLC, a division of The IHC Group (NYSE: IHC), today released its sales results for the first two weeks of Obamacare open enrollment period, which started on Nov. 1st and runs through Jan. 31, 2016.

“Our sales are up over 400% from this period last year, driven primarily by a growth in sales to consumers who are shopping for health plans both on and off the exchange,” said David Keeler, President and Chief Operating Officer of IPA Family.

In addition to record sales of Affordable Care Act (ACA) policies, IPA’s advisors are a leading marketer of short term medical for IHC. Short term medical plans are designed to provide medical coverage for consumers who find themselves temporarily without health insurance. IPA advisors enroll major medical coverage, short term medical and supplemental plans through a proprietary enrollment platform available at http://www.HealtheDeals.com.

According to Brad Frazier, an advisor with IPA, "The vast product line that the IPA Family offers, alongside the state-of-the-art technology to utilize and process clients’ specific insurance solutions is in my view, second to none in the industry hands down."

“Significant enhancement and ready access to Health eDeals has been a game-changer this year,” said David Kettig, Chief Operating Officer of The IHC Group. “It has allowed our advisors to efficiently add on supplemental sales when there is a product need. For instance, our VIP series of major medical gap plans, which is only available through IPA advisors, can be added to a major medical plan enrolled on Health eDeals with just a few keystrokes, saving both the producer and the consumer valuable time.”

IHC recently committed to spending $1.5 million dollars on technology enhancements that will make it even easier and faster for advisors to enroll Obamacare and supplemental health plans. Mr. Kettig added, “IHC’s investment in innovation is on-going. While other carriers are considering pulling away entirely from health insurance, we are investing in becoming a market leader in providing much-needed, affordable ancillary coverages.”

“At IPA Family, we know that our success hinges on our ability to hire top producers and experienced sales leaders,” added Mr. Keeler. “To that end, we have launched an enhancement to our new advisor program that provides recent hires a new service called Telephonic Concierge, which gives them sales support via phone, email or text message. We think that this new service will accelerate the career growth of our new hires and help us reach even more consumers during this open enrollment.”

For more information on becoming an advisor with IPA-Family or to learn about health insurance products, please visit http://www.IPAFamily.com, and connect on @IPAFamily on Facebook, LinkedIn and follow @IPA_Family on Twitter for latest updates.

#

About The IHC Group

The IHC Group is an organization of insurance carriers and marketing and administrative affiliates that has been providing life, health, disability, medical stop-loss and specialty insurance solutions to groups and individuals for over 30 years. Members of The IHC Group include Independence Holding Company (NYSE:IHC), American Independence Corp. (NASDAQ: AMIC), Standard Security Life Insurance Company of New York, Madison National Life Insurance Company, Inc. and Independence American Insurance Company. Each insurance carrier in The IHC Group has a financial strength rating of A- (Excellent) from A.M. Best Company, Inc., a widely recognized rating agency that rates insurance companies on their relative financial strength and ability to meet policyholder obligations. (An A++ rating from A.M. Best is its highest rating.) Collectively, the companies in The IHC Group provide insurance coverage to more than one million individuals and groups.

For more information about The IHC Group, visit http://www.ihcgroup.com.

About IPA-Family:

IPA Family, LLC (IPA) is a national marketing organization and established consumer direct sales agency with approximately 250 agents that distributes family and individual major medical insurance plans and ancillary products (including short-term medical, vision, dental, supplemental products (including fixed indemnity limited benefit, critical illness, and hospital indemnity) and small group stop-loss) for The IHC Group, an organization of insurance carriers and marketing and administrative affiliates and the majority owner of IPA. In addition, it has begun to write major medical through well-known national insurance companies. IPA’s trained professional sales associates provide information and a product portfolio that can meet the needs of many small business owners and self-employed individuals and families. Headquartered in Tampa, Fl., IPA is accredited and has an excellent reputation with the Better Business Bureau (bbb.org).