The Eye

Ellie Goulding And Taylor Swift Set To Perform At London Festival, Could The Duo Tour Together One Day?

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Karl Walter, Jason Merritt) Ellie Goulding And Taylor Swift Will Perform At Hyde Park in 2015

Singer Ellie Goulding announced that she will be supporting Taylor Swift for a performance at Hyde Park on June 27 next year. She posted the announcement on Instagram with a caption expressing her hopes that she and Swift could actually do a tour together one day.

Joining the ultimate babe human @taylorswift for Hyde Park next year. Only wish we could tour together. Now there's an idea... Una foto publicada por elliegoulding (@elliegoulding) el Nov 11, 2014 at 10:34 PST

This won't be the first time the two have performed at the same event. Swift brought Goulding onstage for a show during her "Red" tour in 2013, and the duo performed Goulding's hit "Anything Could Happen."

Recently, Goulding was pictured with Swift and Selena Gomez at a concert by indie group "The 1975." Goulding and Swift were also pictured celebrating actress Sarah Hyland's 24th birthday.

Since the two are friends and seem to have great onstage chemistry, a tour together wouldn't be too far-fetched.

Swift's "1989" tour starts next year. Vance Joy, famous for his single "Riptide," will serve as the opening act for the North American tour dates. Shawn Mendes will also join the tour for certain dates.

Even though it's last minute, they could possibly sneak Goulding into the tour somehow. At the very least, we could expect Goulding to pop up for a surprise performance like she did on the "Red" tour.

Swift's tour kicks off next May in Bossier City, L.A. and ends in Tampa, Fla., on Halloween. In June, Swift will travel to five locations in Europe and return to North America for an Ottawa performance.

Goulding recently posted another concert announcement benefitting the Streets of London charity. She will be performing at the Dec.16 concert, which will raise money to help the homeless.

The tickets for this year's concert sold out in minutes, meaning that the charity will be able to fund projects in time for Christmas. Goulding sent out a message to fans on Twitter, thanking them for their support.

Thanks for selling out the show in a few minutes. This means that we will fund @streetsofL projects in time for Christmas. I am so happy. X — Ellie Goulding (@elliegoulding) November 28, 2014

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.