President Barack Obama delivers remarks about Obamacare and the ongoing tensions in Ukraine in the Brady Press Briefing Room at the White House on April 17, 2014 in Washington, D.C. (Photo: Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images)

Obamacare exchanges open for (hopefully error-free) enrollment

Federal and state health insurance exchanges open for business on Saturday after an error-filled opening earlier this summer. Those behind it are cautiously optimistic after a seemingly successful window-shopping period on HealthCare.gov earlier this week. Officials from states that run their own health care exchanges said they also are broadening their reach and methods to get as many people enrolled and re-enrolled as possible.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Here's advice on how to prepare and sign up for health insurance under Obamacare. (News, USA TODAY)

Weed by the ton? This Washington farmer's got you covered

A Washington state farmer wants people to be seeing green on Saturday, as he prepares to sell off a ton of marijuana — seriously, 2,000 pounds worth — in one of the first large-scale legal pot auctions in modern American history. Randy Williams of Fireweed Farm in Prosser, Wash., will sell the marijuana he's been growing all summer. At retail prices, Williams' crop could be worth $6 million.

Marijuana farmer Randy Williams, left, stands with Cesar Munoz in front of his marijuana plants on Fireweed Farm in Prosser, Wash., in this undated photo. Williams is auctioning off his plants on Saturday. (Photo: Courtesy of Andre Dayani)

G-20 economic summit begins in Australia

President Obama wraps up his week-long overseas trip this weekend at the Group of 20 economic summit of world leaders meeting in Australia. The G-20 is a gathering of the world's 20 largest economies, where a main topic will be the Brisbane Action Plan, aimed to boost world GDP by 2% above current projections over the next five years. The two-day conference starts Saturday.

A Brisbane sign is displayed along the bank of the Brisbane River. (Photo: Saeed Khan, AFP/Getty Images)

R&B singer Aaliyah remembered in controversial Lifetime biopic

Thirteen years have passed since a tragic plane crash claimed Aaliyah's life at 22, and Lifetime will remember the icon in Aaliyah: The Princess of R&B, airing Saturday. The star has inspired many artists with her whispers and coos (her signature sounds), including Rihanna, Drake and up-and-comers Tinashe and Jhené Aiko.

Singer/actress Aaliyah in New York in 2001. (Photo: Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY)

The barking begins at the National Dog Show

Whose bark is best? Find out this weekend at the National Dog Show in Pennsylvania. Over 2,000 furry friends are expected at the show, representing over 150 breeds that are vying for the Best in Show title. The competition will be aired on NBC Thanksgiving Day.

Pamplona Harry Potter, a Bichon Frise owned by Michael Coad, is exhibited after winning the Best Utility category at the annual Crufts dog show at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham, England, in 2011. (Photo: Paul Ellis, AFP/Getty Images)

In case you missed it:

Is Obamacare killing rural hospitals? USA TODAY's Jayne O'Donnell and Laura Ungar investigate.

Major League Baseball awarded top prizes this week. Here are the winners:

Thanksgiving is officially better than Black Friday when it comes to getting holiday deals.

Don't want to leave your house? Check out these holiday shopping apps:

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Shoppers take your mark! Before you set out on your holiday shopping spree, there are a few apps that can help you shop smart and save. Krystin Goodwin (@krystingoodwin) has a few of the best apps to help grab holiday shopping deals! Newslook

Kim Kardashian revealed a whole lot of skin in Paper.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Reaction to Kim Kardashian's butt photo in PAPER Magazine leads to tons of cheeky memes. USA TODAY's Desair Brown rounds up the best ones. (LIFE, USA TODAY

All you need is a glass of sweet tea for these scenic Southern strolls.

And, the weekend essentials:

The week in pictures:

Missed the top videos of the week? We've got you covered:

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share A tightrope walk, cheerleaders and GoPros, and polar bears faces off in this week's threepeat.

USA TODAY has your ticket to the best new films to watch in theaters this weekend.





Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1uwDfUr