Photo

“Don’t wait for a crisis,” I told a friend whose elderly parents were struggling to care for themselves and a big Connecticut home.

“Don’t wait for a crisis,” I told another friend, his mother recently widowed, lonely and overwhelmed, rattling around in a family house that was now her solo responsibility.

“Don’t wait for a crisis,” I told a third friend, whose widowed father-in-law dropped his daily insulin regimen after his live-in girlfriend left him.

“Don’t wait for a crisis,” I’ve told readers of “The New Old Age,” no doubt ad nauseam.

As just about everyone who has cared for an aging parent knows, getting old is both an inexorable and maddeningly unpredictable forward march. Everything is OK. Then it’s not. Then it is again. What felt early on like a roller coaster becomes the new normal. In between swerves and plummets, it is almost possible to doze off.

And planning for all possible eventualities is useless — after the essential documents are in place, the family has talked openly and often about end-of-life wishes, they understand the difference between Medicare and Medicaid, they know how much money is available and that it is probably not going to be enough.

Caregivers and their elderly charges both know, in a spoken or unspoken way, that on the horizon is The Crisis. That’s the one that demarcates “before” and “after.” Your parents are at home, say, when they really shouldn’t be, and don’t want to leave. The Crisis, when it appears, will be an awful milestone for them and probably so for you, the adult child.

Then one day the roles shift and the crisis on the horizon could be yours. Maybe your parents are dead or maybe not, but you’re now an old person. It happens even if you’re diligent about antioxidants and fish oil, exercise both body and mind, have a cheery attitude, good genes and a wide social network. If you’re not there yet, you’ll have to take my word for it.

So today, on my 66th birthday, I can call myself middle-aged but it isn’t true. The Census Bureau offers one kind of proof. The various body parts that don’t work like they used to offer another kind. It obviously didn’t happen overnight, but sometimes it seems that way. Young yesterday. Old today.

So this is put-up-or-shut-up time. I either take my own hard-won advice or I’d better stop dishing it out.

“Don’t wait for a crisis.”

I am weary of shoveling snow and bailing a flooded basement. Unsure about the risk versus benefits of trying to change those high-hat lightbulbs in the ceiling by myself. Plain lucky to wind up with only carpet burns after falling down the stairs. And another hurricane season looms. None of these, in isolation, is The Crisis. But there’s certainly a trend developing around here.

So I’m moving.

For a long time, I’ve known I wanted to quit the suburbs, even if it meant trading the chirp of crickets for the screech of car alarms and depriving my dog the woods outside our back door. I want ambient street life, endless opportunities to eavesdrop, takeout menus shoved under my door, grocery stores that stay open past 10 p.m., a MetroCard instead of parking tickets, movie theaters within walking distance. My friends.

Maybe I don’t need Access-a-Ride and a MedicAlert pendant yet. Until I do, the city will be fun. After I do, it’ll be necessary.

After 17 years in the most wonderful place I’ve ever lived, I’ve sold my house. My feelings are mixed, to put it mildly. I’ve loved the proud stewardship of a small piece of local history, the only property remaining from when this tract of land was the LeBoutillier Estate, with its own drawer at the Hastings Historical Society.

But this is a bad place to be a spinster lady (I’m allowed to put it that way because I’m talking about myself and have always liked the word). The deal was sealed after a year of eye surgeries that made driving impossible and a night cowering in the basement with the dog while Hurricane Sandy sent gigantic spruce trees within inches of the house.

This is a place for someone younger than I am — or someone with a strong man who’s good with power tools. I’d rather move while I can make these decisions semi-voluntarily, not after I’ve amputated a hand using a rented chainsaw.

Writing to my neighbors on the local e-mail list, telling them the news and describing the buyers, I said, “Especially after so many years writing about elderly parents and their grown children, and giving others advise about not waiting for The Crisis, how foolish I’d feel if I waited for The Crisis myself.”

Moving is hard enough without it also being a signifier of old age. Scribbling anxiously on Post-its helps me.

“Have the painter find a peachy color, but a little deeper than here.” “Get the rugs cleaned in town because it’s probably cheaper.”

“Hire my friends’ children to help run a tag sale: furniture in mint condition, and rusty egg beaters.”

“At what point do I sell the car, and where’s the title?” “Dog groomer? Veterinarian?”

When I lose one of the Post-its, my first reaction is to freak. Is my mind going already, or have I just overloaded the circuit board? Then I remember why I’m doing this at 66, not 86.