Photo

Saturday was a watershed moment for the American suicide-prevention effort. In response to decades of public advocacy, San Francisco transit authorities unanimously approved a $76 million plan to construct suicide barriers on the Golden Gate Bridge — where 46 people jumped to their death last year alone. “The time of healing can only begin when the drip-drip-drip of bodies into the raging waters has stopped,” a mother of one jumper told Michael Cabanatuan of The San Francisco Chronicle.

“Suicide barriers on other bridges have proved to be successful in deterring jumpers,” Mr. Cabanatuan wrote. “At the Ellington Street Bridge in Washington, D.C., suicides dropped from 25 in seven years to one in the five years after a barrier was erected. A span in Switzerland with a net saw suicides drop from 2.5 per year to none.”

“It’s a very emotional day, but it’s very historic,” said David Campos, a San Francisco transportation official, to Jennifer Chaussee of Reuters. “It’s a unanimous vote for life today.”

In Britain, lawmakers are considering the other side of the coin: If the government is obligated to protect the physically healthy from self-harm, does it have an obligation to assist the terminally ill to die with dignity? Is the right to life counterweighted by a right to die? According to Paul Lamb and Jane Nicklinson, the answer is a resolute yes.

Mr. Lamb, 57, “has spent the past 23 years receiving round-the-clock care following a car crash which left him with only a tiny degree of movement in his right arm,” reports Jonathan Brown for The Independent. Mrs. Nicklinson’s husband, Tony, suffered from locked-in syndrome, entailing complete paralysis from the neck down following a stroke in 2005.

The pair originally went to Britain’s Supreme Court in 2012. The goal: to secure the right to die with medical assistance for the severely disabled and “to decide how to end this constant tortuous situation,” which had become daily life, as described by Mr. Nicklinson in a 2012 statement from his attorneys. Current laws forbidding assisted death are “barbaric and inhumane,” says Mr. Lamb.

The court rejected the plea, claiming that “the questions they raised were too significant to be decided upon in a court, and could only be answered by parliament,” according to The Guardian’s Alexandra Topping.

Mr. Nicklinson passed away six days after the ruling was handed down.

Mrs. Nicklinson and Mr. Lamb, however, were undeterred. They appealed the decision, and on June 24, nearly two years after the initial ruling, the court reaffirmed its stance 7 to 2 — though the verdict was accompanied by judicial comments that should prove heartening to those engaged in the effort to legalize and de-stigmatize assisted death.

Brenda Hale, deputy president of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and one of the dissenting justices, said “the problem was ensuring that ‘vulnerable’ people were not put under ‘undue pressures’ to end their lives,” according to The Irish Times. She added that “that problem was not sufficient to justify a ‘universal ban’ on assisting suicide.”



It now comes down to legislators to decide whether ailing Britons beyond the possibility of recovery do indeed have a right to die on their own terms. “The justices of the Supreme Court have given parliament what looks like a final warning,” writes The Guardian’s editorial board. “If they do not amend the 1961 Suicide Act, which makes it illegal to help someone to kill themselves, then by declaring the existing law incompatible with the Human Rights Act, the courts will force them to do so.”

If members of Parliament vote with the general direction of public opinion in mind, it seems likely the efforts of Mrs. Nicklinson and Mr. Lamb will succeed. According to a poll by the Swiss Medical Lawyers Association, which surveyed Europeans in 12 countries on the permissibility of medically assisted suicide, an overwhelming 82 percent of Britons believe it should be decriminalized.

The objecting 18 percent is nevertheless vociferous. “Disability isn’t a punishment, and to consider it as such is an insult to every quadriplegic who has made something of his life,” writes Kate Maltby for The Telegraph. “Just because able-bodied people can and do commit suicide — always a terrible thing, always cataclysmic to the people around them — doesn’t mean disabled people should.”

“Because at the heart of this lies our chronic addiction to the language of rights,” Ms. Maltby claims. “When it comes to the fundamentals of birth, death, love, sex, the world has never been able to provide satisfactorily for us. How can we claim the right to a life without pain if none of us have ever known one? Is the government in breach of contract when it fails to stop my heart breaking?”

It is a question popping up on legislative and judicial dockets around the world. Euthanasia (in which a doctor administers the lethal drug) is legal only in a handful of countries like the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg. Assisted suicide (in which the patient self-administers) is legal in Switzerland, Germany, Albania, Colombia, Japan and several American states (including Vermont, Montana, New Mexico, Oregon and Washington).

Canada’s Supreme Court is considering federal decriminalization of assisted suicide for the second time — though the province of Quebec has already implemented “comprehensive end-of-life legislation,” according to The Globe and Mail. Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s Conservative government, however, supports current laws, which categorically ban assisted death in any form. “It is our government’s position that the Criminal Code provisions prohibiting assisted suicide and euthanasia are in place to protect all persons,” said Justice Minister Peter MacKay.

In a column published in The Globe and Mail on Friday, the Canadian journalist Gary Mason reflected on his own struggle to understand, and ultimately embrace, the concept of assisted death. The last few years of his father’s life were “dreadful” and “without an ounce of joy” for the family to endure, he recalls, but “at the same time, I wasn’t sure I could ever say ‘yes’ in a sibling vote to end his life, regardless of how humane it might be. Now, I realize how incredibly selfish that point of view was.”

Mr. Mason lost his younger brother as well, to cancer, years later. As the younger Mason wasted away on a hospital bed, he “implored me to steal a needle somewhere and do the job myself,” Mr. Mason jarringly recounts. “This was certainly not how I wanted to remember my brother. It was nothing close to the dignified end most of us hope for. In fact, his were precisely the circumstances that would qualify for physician-assisted death consideration in more enlightened jurisdictions around the world.”

“As Canada’s baby boomers begin their grand exit,” he writes, “the demand for a debate on this subject is only going to intensify.” A demand that will undoubtedly reverberate around the world.