When you have performed on the "American Idol" stage with the fabulous Jennifer Lopez who just nabbed the People's Choice Triple Threat Award, appeared on the hugely popular FOX hit TV show "Glee" and sang for The President of the United States, dreamboat George Clooney and the legendary Barbara Streisand, what can you possibly do next to top that?

You can release a new single for your loyal fans as a Christmas gift to them, according to "American Idol" finalist Jennifer Sanchez, who spoke to Latin Post in an exclusive interview.

Sanchez, who took second place in the 2012 "American Idol" competition, just released her new single, "This Love," which she considers to fall under the "urban pop" genre. She is also currently in the studio working on her sophomore album.

For Christmas, the talented singer also returned to her hometown of Chula Vista, California to surprise her neighbors with Christmas carols while celebrating the re-launch of M&M'S Crispys, which is returning to store shelves this month after a 10-year hiatus thanks to its vocal fans that rallied for its return.

"I have been performing for a really, really long time and I have just been working really, really hard and now I am back in my hometown with M& M'S Crispys, and they are bringing them back after 10 years due to the demand of their fans. It's nice to be back where it all started," Sanchez told Latin Post.

Sanchez reflected on her "American Idol" experience, which changed the direction of her career, putting her on the music industry map.

"It was amazing. They were so much fun," Sanchez said of the "American Idol" judges, Jennifer Lopez, Steven Tyler and Randy Jackson.

Sanchez also had the once in a lifetime opportunity to perform Lopez's hit song, "I Luh Ya Papi," on the "American Idol" stage. Along with Sanchez was longtime fan favorite Allison Iraheta, and season 10 standout Pia Toscano for the performance.

"It was so much fun," she said. "We got to go to her house, it was amazing. She is amazing."

With the FOX hit TV show "Glee" coming to an end with its final sixth season, Sanchez can look back and be proud to have that on her resume as well.

What was it like appearing on an episode of "Glee?"

"It was very fast-paced. We learned the choreography like the day before. It was insane. I don't know how those people do it. ... "We did two numbers. It was fun. I got to meet Naya Rivera and the rest of the cast. They were all amazing."

Sanchez, who lists Mariah Carey, Etta James, and Ray Charles among her musical influences, started singing at the young age of 2 years old.

Although a shy kid growing up, Sanchez eventually overcame her shyness at age 10 and braved a huge audience by performing Aretha Franklin's "Respect" on an episode of "Showtime at the Apollo." A year later, she gained further exposure, this time to millions of people, by competing on the premiere season of "America's Got Talent," reaching the wild-card round before getting cut.

Since becoming a fan favorite and finalist on "American Idol," Sanchez has had the fortune to travel the world to places such as Macau, China and to sing at both the Filipino and US National anthems at the Manny Pacquiao fight, which was her third time singing the anthem for the celebrated boxer.

Last year, at the young age of 18, Sanchez--who is of Filipino descent--received a star on the Filipino Walk of Fame in Manila. She has also been heavily involved in philanthropic work with the Starkey Hearing Foundation, which included a two-week mission to the Philippines with Pacquiao giving out over 10,000 free hearing aids to those in need.

"Every time I go to the Philippines, it has been amazing. I feel so welcomed," she said, adding that although they are strangers, their warmth makes them feel like family.

As mentioned, Sanchez also sang for President Obama and the First Family, former President Jimmy Carter, former President and Secretary of State Bill and Hillary Clinton and major celebrities including Academy Award winners George Clooney and Barbara Streisand.

What's it like singing to the President of the United States and Hollywood royalty George Clooney and vocal powerhouse Barbara Streisand?

"It's ridiculous and crazy. I have done so much and I am only 19 years old and I plan on doing so much more," Sanchez said. "I have had so many opportunities such as singing at the White House and singing for George Clooney and being on 'Glee.' I am just taking everything day by day and just taking it in. The schedule is crazy and to be such a young age. It's insane, but I just love it."

Check out M&M'S Crispy caroling with Jessica Sanchez.