Executive Session with Jack Abernethy, Part I

In Part I of this two-part interview, Fox Television Stations CEO Jack Abernethy talks business. He says he is looking ahead to double-digit growth in 2014, even if it is just barely double digits, thanks to the return of heavy political spending with a boost from Obamacare advertising. He also discusses the coming of TV Everywhere, his continued faith in Dyle, Fox's station acquisition ambitions, the usefulness of Twitter and his personal mission to engender a more robust syndication market. Tomorrow, in Part II, Abernethy talks about his determination to change the look and substance of local TV news.

TVNewsCheck , October 7, 2013 7:19 AM EDT

Despite the Sinclair Broadcast Group's feverish buying of stations, Fox Television Stations is still the nation's largest TV station group, at least according to the annual TVNewsCheck-BIA/Kelsey ranking of groups by 2012 revenue. With $1.8 billion on the top line, Fox comprises 28 full-power stations in 18 markets, including duopolies in New York, Los Angeles and Chicago.

Charged with running the No. 1 group as CEO for the past nine years has been Jack Abernethy, whose long TV career includes turns at the NBC O&Os and CNBC in financial management and later at Fox News where his management role broadened to include human resources, legal affairs, affiliates sales, marketing and business development.

Story continues after the ad

In his current post, Abernethy also oversees Twentieth Television's first-run syndication arm and the quasi-network My Network Television. As he did at Fox news, he reports directly to Roger Ailes, chairman and CEO of Fox News and chairman of the Fox Television Stations.

In Part I of this two-part interview with TVNewsCheck Editor Harry A. Jessell, Abernethy talks business. He says he is looking ahead to double-digit growth in 2014, even if it is just barely double digits, thanks to the return of heavy political spending with a boost from Obamacare advertising.

He also discusses the coming of TV Everywhere, his continued faith in Dyle, Fox's station acquisition ambitions, the usefulness of Twitter and his personal mission to engender a more robust syndication market.

Tomorrow, in Part II, Abernethy talks about his determination to change the look and substance of local TV news.

Brand Connections

An edited transcript:

The question I often like to start out with is a simple one: How's business?

Business is good. Our ratings through the summer have held up pretty well year-to-year and we've had a pretty good start to the network season with Sleepy Hollow doing well and the other shows doing OK.

What about 2014 when the political money comes back? Are you well positioned for all those gubernatorial and senate races?

I think so. We have never been lined up particularly well for the electoral college being that our big city stations tend to be in states for which the presidential race is not contended, but when it comes to the congressional then we’re okay.

What about this Obamacare money? TVB is talking about some big numbers — $1 billion over the next two years. Do you think that’s really feasible?

Our best guess — this is a guess based on the money we have on the books for Obamacare and how big we are and what share we usually get — is that about $150 million has already been placed. Now the sense is that the spending will take a break. People have till March to sign up. As we get near the deadline, there will be a much bigger surge of advertising.

Is that $150 million from insurance companies, exchanges, advocacy groups or what?

They’re all in.

I would say that that bodes well for the $1 billion over two years.

It sure as hell does and what I like is that surge is going to be right around the time we have got the Super Bowl, a good time of the year.

We surveyed the industry in August and we came up with spot revenue projections for next year — 11% total, 2.6% core. Are those numbers in the ballpark based on what you know?

Yeah, the low double digits.

But core seems stuck at 2% or 3%. Is there any upside in the core business?

This year we have gotten better. We’re up a little bit. The car business is healthy.

But core bumps along at 2% or 3% a year. That doesn’t sound like a very exciting business to me.

It may not be exciting, but it's sustainable. Remember: We’ve got two revenue sources now. The other one is growing more than 2%.

That's retrans you’re talking about.

Yeah. That’s it.

Fox has the Super Bowl and it's being played in New York. How will WNYW capitalize on that? CBS was touting the $1 million local spot in the Super Bowl last year. Are you going to be able to do that?

I would be shocked if we can’t one up CBS.

How important is it for the Fox stations to stream their linear signals so that they can be received on smartphones and tablets? Is that front and center for you?

Yes, it actually is, especially in breaking news. People have come to expect more and more. It’s as much a business issue as a safety issue and we are on it.

But what about the entire day, sign on to sign off?

Well that’s what TV Everywhere is trying to accomplish in the pay TV world. It’s taking more time probably than we expected. There are rights issues and there are some technological issues, but we are not going to have our signal retransmitted for free. We’re going to need to be compensated for it.