Home Hospice of West Texas will close Hospice House in Odessa, the only in-patient hospice serving the region, in response to a decline in patients that company representatives Thursday attributed to increasingly stringent Medicare reimbursement rules.

The six patients currently staying at Hospice House in Odessa will be allowed to stay as long as they need to, so there is not a firm closure date yet, said Karen Carter, the community relations manager and volunteer coordinator for Home Hospice.

But they have stopped admitting new patients and will soon begin letting go or transferring the 40 staff members, Carter said. Plans also call for the house to be sold as Home Hospice focuses entirely outpatient care at homes, nursing homes and hospitals.

“The loss is not just for the patients,” Carter said. “It’s a loss for the families.”

Hospice House provided specialized end-of-life in-patient care. Often the goal was improving patients’ condition enough to move them to their homes but Hospice House also worked to comfort people who would die there.

Staff reeled, including the Rev. Jimmy Braswell, a chaplain at Hospice House, who said he was “shocked.” Families of loved ones cared for at the facility also grieved.

“That’s just going to be such a loss to our community,” said Merry Worley, whose parents John and Mary Imagene Worley both died at Hospice House and who was finishing up her volunteer application as news came that the facility would shutter. “If you have your loved one in your home, and he’s in the active dying stage, you are pretty much alone. You can call them and they will come, but it’s not like they have a shift that’s going on all the time, so all you have to do is walk down the hall. There’s a sense of peace there.”

Home Hospice is a for-profit company that staffs and operates Hospice House. But the home itself is owned by the Hospice House Foundation, which raises money to pay for costs of maintaining the home, such as electric bills.

Hospice House is separate from the nonprofit foundation, which cannot cover the for-profit company’s operating expenses such as paying employees. Even still, Carter said a large donation would not solve the problem.

In recent years, Home Hospice absorbed about $200,000 a year in losses from operating the Hospice House and projected those losses to triple this year.

Hospice House also accepted patients who could not pay, and Carter said the company lost about $1 million operating Hospice House, which essentially gave away millions more in care.

The reason, Carter said, is fewer patients and Medicare reimbursements.

“It is not a financial problem, it is really truly regulations, because the rules are preventing access for in-patient care,” Carter said, adding that continuing to operate Hospice House would threaten the company’s other home-care hospice services.

Hospice House patients will likely get hospice care at their homes, nursing homes and hospitals, Home Hospice officials said. Carter said Home Hospice might need to adapt its at-home treatments. And none of the home-care offices will close in Odessa, Midland, Andrews and Big Spring.

“The majority of hospice care can be done in home environments,” Carter said. “The difference is when there are those who need medical intervention. We no longer have the Hospice House as a place we can take them.”

In order to comply with Medicare reimbursements, at least 80 percent of the company’s patients already received care at home. And Hospice House, with more expensive round-the-clock care, had been operating at a loss for years.

In a statement, founder and owner Hilton Chancellor said they accepted that loss because “medically and spiritually we knew it would be a winner for patients and families in our community.” Since 2000, Hospice House served about 6,000 West Texans and their families.

To meet expenses, an average of five of the facility’s nine beds must be filled daily. Last year the average was closer to two patients daily.

“The Medicare benefit is really the bread and butter of a hospice house,” said Braswell, who will keep his job, performing out-patient services. “What insurance pays and donations are really a small part of it – they are needed – but a small part of it.”

The company’s initial statement that they would close Hospice House because of “stricter government healthcare rules” left many decrying the Affordable Care Act as to blame on social media. Company officials on Thursday sought to correct that impression.

“This is not what some call ‘Obamacare’ causing us to close the Hospice House,” Chancellor said in a Thursday statement. “These are Medicare rules being implemented under the Obama administration that have restricted access to care and caused many impatient facilities to close around the county.”

Company representatives explained four general categories of ways someone could be admitted to in-patient care at the Hospice House:

First, if there was a need for medical intervention to treat a malady overwhelming the ability of the at-home care in place — for example, an Alzheimer’s patient who suffered a stroke. A patient would be stabilized at home. Second, if someone needed care in the last stages of their life. Third, if a family needed “respite care” for a loved one for a short-period of time while they tended to an emergency like a death in the family. And finally, if the patients were children.

But federal government’s interpretation of the requirements a patient must meet in order for Medicare to reimburse hospice care narrowed as part of an effort to reduce Medicare spending, according to Home Hospice representatives. They described that as a decade-long trend intensifying in recent years.

Braswell said that in recent years, Hospice House suffered limitations in people who qualified for “respite care” and that people could no longer choose to die there unless they suffered an additional, treatable medical problem.

Worley said she was unsure whether her father would have qualified had he died now instead of 2010. She said she knew of Hospice House through friends who took their loved ones there, and she first took her mother, who suffered a massive stroke in 2006 and died within 24-hours.

“It was such a warm place for such a hard time,” Worley said.

Worley’s father’s death was not as sudden, she said, and she took him three separate times, beginning in 2008. He suffered maladies that included serious heart disease and the Hospice House helped her handle downturns such as dementia, which prompted one of his stays.

“They make the patient as comfortable and as possible and make the family also as comfortable as possible and provide you with information that helps you understand what’s happening to the person there and help you deal with your feelings about that,” Worley said, describing the home she described as beautiful.

The foundation owns the Hospice House property, which is the former Mellie Van Horn boarding house and later a bed and breakfast.

Carter said she did not know how much the home was worth including assets. But the appraised value of the property, at 903 N. Sam Houston Ave, is $435,799, according to the Ector County Appraisal District. The home was built in 1938. Carter said the money would go to the foundation if the home is sold as planned.

The foundation will also have to find a new focus, Carter said.

John O’Hearn, the executive director of planning and development for Medical Center Hospital, where doctors refer patients to Hospice House, called it a sad day. His grandmother died at Hospice House in 2008, he said.

“That’s where we could facilitate those short term transfers and put [patients] in a comfortable environment,” O’Hearn said, because of the hospital’s proximity of the house. “And we don’t have that anymore.”