...her husband could be on the block for impeachment...

Advertisement - story continues below

In an email sent out by the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee (DSCC) Thursday, First Lady Michelle Obama cautions that if the Republicans wrest control of the upper chamber next month, her husband could be on the block for impeachment during the last two years of his final term.

As first reported by The Washington Examiner, Obama warned if the GOP wins control of the Senate in November, “more lawsuits and talk about impeachment, and more votes to repeal the Affordable Care Act or even shut down the government.”

Several respected election forecasters, as of Thursday, give an edge to Republicans to win the Senate next month, including FiveThirtyEight, The Washington Post, and The Huffington Post.

Advertisement – story continues below

Here is the body of the email sent on behalf of Michelle Obama:

Friend — You can’t hold your breath and wait to see who wins the Senate. It’s too close for that. We need your help immediately. Advertisement – story continues below I’ll put it frankly: If we lose these midterm elections, we’ll just see more obstruction, more lawsuits and talk about impeachment, and more votes to repeal the Affordable Care Act or even shut down the government. That’s why I really need you to get off the sidelines and join me. If we go after every single vote, I know we’ll win. Raising $100,000 by midnight is absolutely critical to our voter mobilization efforts. Will you pitch in to keep the Senate blue? We’ll triple-match gifts for a single day only. It all comes down to this: Advertisement – story continues below Trending Stories Mark Cuban Says Clinton’s People Want To Talk

Glenn Beck Warns About What Comes Next on The Slippery Slope

Watch: ‘Shocking’ Response When Mom Confronts Son’s Accused Killer In Court If you think folks who work 40-50 hours a week shouldn’t have to live in poverty in the wealthiest nation on Earth and if you don’t want women’s bosses making decisions about their birth control, then you need to step up right now. These races are going to be unbelievably tight. They could be won and lost by a few thousand — or even a few hundred — votes. But here’s the good news: We have enough supporters to win these races — but only if we get folks registered and to the polls in November. It all comes down to whether or not we have the resources we need to get this done. That’s why I’m asking for your help right now. Will you pitch in before midnight to keep the Senate in Democratic hands so we can keep moving this country forward? Remember: All gifts will be triple-matched and put to work on the ground immediately. Thank you, Michelle Obama

Photo Credit: shutterstock