A new small hospital is headed to south Jefferson County at the northwest corner of Wadsworth Boulevard and Coal Mine Avenue.

The Foothills Park and Recreation District owned the land since 1972 and is under contract with Emerus Development Company, which will build the hospital on what is now an open lot. The sale was dependent on rezoning the land to allow for what will be a boutique hospital — a hospital that specializes in personalized care and high-volume surgeries.

Foothills Park and Recreation executive director Ron Hopp said he wasn’t sure of the specifics of the hospital but had heard it would be a boutique hospital.

Emerus is partnered with SCL Health System, which will build four of these smaller hospitals throughout the Denver metro area, according to a SCL news release. The boutique hospitals will offer emergency medical care, inpatient care, surgical procedures and other services. It will be staffed by board-certified physicians, experienced nurses and other specialists.

Hopp said the land will be sold for $1.165 million. The Jefferson County Commissioners approved the rezoning at their April 29 meeting and the developer will have to go through a site development plan process, according to Jeffco planner Analiese Hock.

“It’s good to see vacant land that is being utilized to the highest and best use,” District 3 Commissioner Don Rosier said.

Rosier noted that there wasn’t any public comment against the hospital when the rezoning was approved. There will not be a public hearing along with the site development plan, but Hock said there would be public notification.

The parcel is one of six that Foothills Park and Recreation put up for sale as a result of two failed mill levies in 2006 and 2008. Hopp said this was land Foothills could spare.

“These weren’t parks, weren’t ever going to be parks and didn’t make sense to be parks,” Hopp said. “There are also spaces available close by that are open space, so it’s not a great loss for opportunities.”

Hopp said this parcel and the two near South Simms Street and South Ward Street are sold or under contract. The two spots near Simms and Ward are under construction to become a housing development.

Two parcels at Wadsworth and Columbine Drive are still for sale and Foothills is in negotiations for the sixth parcel at the northeast corner of Wadsworth and Coal Mine. Hopp hopes the sales will generate approximately $4 million for the district.

Joe Vaccarelli: 303-954-2396, jvaccarelli@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joe_vacc