Elise Stefanik - A 30-year-old New Yorker, with an ambition of being a standard-bearer for 'women in politics', has gotten a good start after being the youngest woman ever elected into the U.S. Congress.

Like Us on Facebook

Rep. Elise Stefanik was sworn into Congress on Tuesday among 434 other new members. The young and vibrant lawmaker from the 21st district of New York has made national headlines since her election.

"I decided to run for office because my generation can't just complain about these problems. We have to help solve them as well," Stefanik said. "I think that's where being young is a strength, because I bring, I hope, a sunny side of optimism to Congress, and a willingness to work with people. I hope I'm not frustrated after the next two years."

Congresswoman Elise Stefanik is a Republican and Harvard graduate. She worked with the George W. Bush administration in the White House days after her graduation. In 2012, she also supervised Rep. Paul Ryan's vice presidential debate prep.

In her campaign Stefanik hopes to "work to repeal and replace ObamaCare with commonsense proposals that lower cost, improve healthcare quality, and increase accessibility."

Stefanik has already been confronted by security personnel at Congress. She stands out due to her youth especially since the average age of a member of congress is 58, with the majority traditionally being male.

"The first time they brought the freshman onto the floor for orientation they said 'Staff?' I shook my head no. They said,' Spouse?' I shook my head no. They said, ' Member?' "Yes," Stafanik said.

Elise Stafanik broke a four-decade record held by fellow New Yorker and Republican Elizabeth Holtzman, who was sworn into Congress at 31 in 1973 after beating Democrat Aaron Woolf in a district that spans from Saratoga County to the Canadian border.

The position was previously held by Democrat Bill Owens, who surprising pulled out of the race shortly after the then 29-year-old Stafanik announced her decision to run.

Stafanik's first official move in Capitol Hill was pledging support for John Boehner as speaker of the House.

"Luck favors the brave.....Many people would say, 'She got lucky.' ' But I believe that it was [my] early courage to enter the race that was the key factor in winning," Stafanik said.