House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) did a tweet.

THIS IS A FIRST → a bill repealing #Obamacare will be sent to the president's desk. https://t.co/DEhuKJ6j95 pic.twitter.com/86lMTCCUpI — Paul Ryan (@SpeakerRyan) January 6, 2016

Ryan is bragging that, for the first time, both chambers of Congress passed legislation that would repeal the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare. This is a function of Republicans holding both chambers for the first time in the Obama presidency, and it is not a bill that President Obama will sign. But still. There it is. One ... giant, massive bill.

Look at the size of this thing.

It is possible that this is just a bad Photoshop job. But since the Renaissance era, artists have been known to use perspective in their work. If this were a Photoshop, surely the speaker of the House and his staff know that the top of the sheet of paper would appear narrower than the base, because, in a single vanishing-point-perspective photo such as this, the sides would converge toward the horizon.

So we'll assume it's an undoctored photo. Just how big is that sheet of paper?

First, we need to remove the perspective. The size of Obama's desk is 6 feet by 4 feet (or 19 kilometers by 6 milliliters for our Canadian friends). So that sheet (well, sheaf) of paper actually looks like this in reality. It's a trapezoid.

We can get a rough sense of size by comparing it to the size of the surface of the desk. As it turns out, it is about 42 inches long (3.5 feet or 100 decigrams) and, at the widest point, 21.6 inches wide (1.75 feet or 9 minutes).

This allows us to chop it into shapes that we can use to easily calculate the area. It's about 714 square inches (3 parsecs).

In other words, Ryan is, for some reason, printing legislation on paper that's nearly eight times the size of a normal sheet -- and weirdly proportioned, too.

Why? Who knows. Perhaps it was one of the qualifications he insisted on when accepting the job. "When we present legislation," he may have said, "I would like it to be on oversize, trapezoidal paper, so it photographs nicely."

Or maybe it's a bad Photoshop.