Members enrolled in Blue Cross of Northeastern Pennsylvania's Affordable Care Act plans will see their premium rates rise by an average of 6.9 percent in 2015.

Officials for the Wilkes-Barre-based insurer declined to specify how many members are covered by its Affordable Care Act plans. Its website shows 12 available 2014 "Blue (Affordable Care Act) Metal" plans.

"The increases are necessary to meet the coverage requirements, including essential health benefits, of the (Affordable Care Act) and to keep up with the cost of care for members in our ACA products," said Anthony Matrisciano, spokesman for Blue Cross of NEPA, which has about 550,000 members across 13 counties.

The increase, effective Jan. 1, comes amid a state Insurance Department review of Highmark Inc.'s proposal to acquire Blue Cross of NEPA. It's one of two rate hikes submitted by the insurer that received approval from the state Insurance Department.

Blue Cross of NEPA also got approval for a 9.5 percent rate increase for its BlueCare Senior Prescription Rider, a product designed to supplement Medicare, Mr. Matrisciano said. It's normally offered by employers to their retired workers or those over age 65 who are Medicare eligible and still working.

Officials predict the rate hike will generate about $600,000 in additional revenue in 2015, which is necessary to keep pace with the rising costs of prescription drugs for its members, Mr. Matrisciano said.

He said the way Blue Cross of NEPA prices its products varies from product segment to segment, and some of the information for 2015 is not yet available.

But the rate increases fall in line with a prediction made by Cory S. Capps', Ph.D.

Dr. Capps, a partner at Bates & White LLC who spoke on behalf of Highmark at a public informational meeting on Wednesday, said Blue Cross of NEPA will some have "sharp" premium increases in 2015 to offset projected operating losses.

"Since operating losses are not sustainable indefinitely, and since (Blue Cross of) NEPA hasn't been able to reduce its administrative costs, that leaves the primary way by which they can close out the operating loss to be the revenue side," he said. "That is premium increases."

Questions surrounding Blue Cross of NEPA's long-term sustainability is what prompted the insurer to launch a search for a company that could — among other things — spread the risk and administrative costs over a larger population.

Facing significant investments in capital upgrades, among other factors, officials deemed Blue Cross of NEPA's surplus of about $348 million insufficient to enable it to compete in the marketplace in the mid- to long-term as an independent entity.

By joining Highmark, a Pittsburgh-based insurer with 5.2 million members across Pennsylvania, Delaware and West Virginia, Blue Cross of NEPA's policyholders over time would likely face lower rate increases, officials argued.

"Our long-term sustainability as an independent health plan and our ability to continue to serve customers and providers with the same high level of performance ... was in question," Blue Cross of NEPA President and CEO Denise Cesare said at Wednesday's hearing. "This transaction will enable the merged company to offer innovative and enhanced health care products and services to our customers."