The IHC Group Many are surprised to find out the start date for their Obamacare policy can be as much as 45 days from the day they apply. Short Term Medical is a great option for financial protection during that period in case the unexpected happens.

The IHC Group announces Connect Net, a new Short Term Medical (STM) plan underwritten by Independence American Insurance Company (IAIC). Combining IHC’s 20-year experience in administering and underwriting STM, Connect Net plans are designed for consumers who want protection from the financial impact of an unexpected claim while they are waiting for a permanent major medical plan to become effective.

Benefits of Connect Net include affordability and broader network access versus the standard STM plans thanks to IHC’s partnership with a national carrier. It also features an office visit copayment, copayments for prescription drugs and a $2,000,000 coverage limit per policy period.

“One of the most common questions we are asked on our website, http://www.healthedeals.com, is what are the enrollment deadlines for an Obamacare plan,” said Dave Keller, Chief Marketing Officer of IHC Specialty Benefits. “Many people are procrastinators, and they are surprised to find out when they are ready to enroll for a permanent plan that the start date for their Obamacare policy can be as much as 45 days from the day they apply. Short Term Medical is a great way to provide financial protection during that period in case the unexpected happens.”

Consumers can choose a monthly pay option for their short term medical needs, or a pre-payment option for up to 185 days. These plans are not designed to replace Obamacare coverage, but to bridge the gap between open enrollment periods.

Enrollment for Connect Net can be done entirely on-line with the help of a licensed insurance agent, or by calling 888-452-6522. For more information on Connect Net, please visit http://www.healthedeals.com/articles/short-term-medical-insurance-012115.

About IHC Specialty Benefits, Inc.

IHC Specialty Benefits, doing business as HealtheDeals.com, is a full-service marketing and distribution company that focuses on small employer, individual and consumer products. Products are marketed through general agents online, telebrokerage, advisor centers, private label and directly to consumers. For more information about IHC Specialty Benefits, visit http://www.ihcgroup.com.

About The IHC Group

The IHC Group is an organization of insurance carriers and marketing and administrative affiliates that has been providing life, health, disability, medical stop-loss and specialty insurance solutions to groups and individuals for over 30 years. Members of The IHC Group include Independence Holding Company (NYSE:IHC), American Independence Corp. (NASDAQ: AMIC), Standard Security Life Insurance Company of New York, Madison National Life Insurance Company, Inc. and Independence American Insurance Company. Each insurance carrier in The IHC Group has a financial strength rating of A- (Excellent) from A.M. Best Company, Inc., a widely recognized rating agency that rates insurance companies on their relative financial strength and ability to meet policyholder obligations. (An A++ rating from A.M. Best is its highest rating.) Collectively, the companies in The IHC Group provide insurance coverage to more than one million individuals and groups. For more information about The IHC Group, visit http://www.ihcgroup.com