Number, rate of those without health insurance in Pa. increases

State bucks national trend as more people go without coverage.

The report, commissioned by the Hospital & Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania, a trade group representing the state's hospitals, said 156,000 more Pennsylvanians were without health insurance last year compared to 2011. In addition, less than 60 percent of employers provided coverage to their workers — a record low.

The number and rate of uninsured Pennsylvanians increased from 2011 to 2012, defying a nationwide trend of declining rolls of uninsured people, a study shows.

In all, nearly 1.3 million Pennsylvania adults between the ages of 18 to 64 were uninsured, the study said.

"The idea that every Pennsylvanian must have access to health care — through insurance coverage and sufficient provider capacity — has driven the public policy agenda for Pennsylvania's hospitals for a generation," said Andy Carter, HAP's president and CEO. "The insurance data we are releasing today highlight the urgency of finding and implementing effective measures to reverse Pennsylvania's uninsured trends."

The findings come at a time when Gov. Tom Corbett's administration is planning to ask the federal government to relax rules allowing for an expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act to cover more of the state's working poor. Corbett announced his intentions last month, opening a small window for a formal plan to be proposed and approved by the new year, when Medicaid expansion will begin in neighboring states such as New Jersey, New York, Maryland and West Virginia.

Antoinette Kraus, director of Pennsylvania Health Access Network, an advocacy agency supporting expanded insurance programs, said the provision of new health coverage to the uninsured through Obamacare could not come soon enough. Obamacare coverage will begin at the soonest on Jan. 1, 2014.

"We need to work diligently in Pennsylvania to make sure that all Pennsylvanians have access to health care," she said. "This is why Gov. Corbett needs to move forward swiftly with Medicaid expansion in Pennsylvania, so we do not continue to leave nearly a half a million Pennsylvanians without coverage. If we fail to act, Pennsylvania will fall behind in decreasing its uninsured population and leave millions of dollars on the table to offer working families health insurance coverage."

The actual number of Pennsylvanians who would fall into the "coverage gap" if Medicaid is not expanded varies. According to a separate report by the Kaiser Family Foundation released Wednesday, 281,290 people in Pennsylvania will not qualify for the state's existing Medicaid program, nor will they qualify for subsidized Obamacare coverage.

According to the study, which cited data from the U.S. Census Bureau, the number of uninsured people across the U.S. declined by 1.4 percent from 48.6 million people to 47.9 million. Over the same one-year period, however, the number of uninsured working-age Pennsylvanians increased from 1.15 million in 2011 to 1.28 million.

The rate of uninsured people, or the percentage of working age adults without insurance, ticked down nationally, to 17.7 percent. But in Pennsylvania, the rate rose by 1.1 percentage points to 13.8 percent.

Employers are continuing to abandon health insurance as a benefit to their workers. The HAP report showed that two-thirds of businesses provided coverage to employees in 2003. By 2012, that rate had dropped by about 10 percent to 59.8 percent of employers.