Another dreadful week for global markets drags on, as concerns over China’s lagging economy and its sinking currency continue to loom.

Chinese stocks slid further and further into the red over the first two weeks of the year, with the Shanghai Composite closing out the week down another 3.6 percent. The index has tumbled 18 percent so far this year and more than 20 percent since its recent high in late December, putting it in bear market territory.

This is the third time it’s surpassed the 20 percent threshold in just six months—first at the beginning of July and later in mid-August. It’s no shock that three bear markets erasing trillions of dollars in half a year in the world’s second-largest economy would send shocks through global markets on the whole. Europe’s Stoxx 600 benchmark is inching dangerously close to bear territory. The S&P 500 and Dow had both wiped out about 8 percent so far this year as of Friday morning .

Everyday Americans may not yet be feeling the pinch. But those gunning for a 2016 presidential win should be, as this would be the sort of unstable, teetering world economy they could inherit the second the moving trucks pull up to the White House next January.

So it was a good thing, then, that China came up in Thursday night’s G.O.P. debate. Only, no one brought up the bear market. No one brought up markets at all.

Billionaire businessman Donald Trump kicked off the display of absolute lack of concern for current market conditions, answering moderators’ questions about his plan to impose a tariff on China with a winding response that gave no indication that he’s looked at the top business headline since the start of the year.

“China is ripping us on trade. They’re devaluing their currency and they’re killing our companies,” he said, without mention of what’s been going on in markets. “I’m totally open to a tariff. If they don’t treat us fairly, hey, their whole trade is tariffed.”

Now, in fairness to Trump, he was asked a specific question about tariffs and trade, so if he chose not to dive into markets, it could be chalked up to him sticking closely to the subject at hand. But this left the door wide open for a candidate—any candidate, every candidate—to jump in with a salient point about the crush in Chinese markets, a nation on the brink of a devastating slowdown that could boomerang to the U.S. economy and economies all around the world. They were all getting the chance to slam Trump, the front-runner, their main opponent, for focusing on an issue that maybe would have been important nine months ago, but its significance had dropped dramatically, just as Chinese indexes have at the start of the year.

Yet, that’s not what happened, not nearly. Instead, nearly every single candidate weighed in with canned gobbledygook—a collection of rehearsed responses that used the word China, but only as a way to pivot back to talking points they were more comfortable with, like blue-collar workers and Obamacare and tractor drivers.

John Kasich interrupted Trump to give his take on “China,” which was actually sort of about free trade and fair trade and not making China an enemy. But how does Kasich know “this”? (Mind you: it’s unclear what the “this” meant, but that’s irrelevant. He had a pre-planned point to get to, and he wasn’t going to let the current conversation on China get in the way.) “Because so many people in my family worked in steel mills, and they didn’t work with a white collar, they worked in a blue collar. And the fact is those jobs are critical, they’re hard working members of the middle class and they need to be paid attention to because they’re Americans and they carry the load. So let’s demand open trade but fair trade in this country.” Got it?

Rubio piped up next. Hopes were high that he’d circle back to what’s been going on the last few weeks in the world’s second-largest economy, when he began by saying, “We are all frustrated with what China is doing.” It devolved from there. His “better approach”: tax reform, regulatory reform, repealing the “certified job killer” that is Obamacare. “That is the way to deal with China at the end of the day.”

Jeb Bush’s main point about China? Soybeans. “Apart from the higher prices on consumers and people are living paycheck to paycheck, apart from that, there will be retaliation. So the soybean sales from Iowa, entire soybean production goes—the equivalent of it goes to China,” he said. “This would be devastating for the economy. We need someone with a steady hand being president of the United States.”

Ted Cruz went a different route. “China is running over President Obama like he is a child,” that’s the problem. He then turned to an anecdote about a meeting he had with senior leadership at John Deere who told him how hard it is to sell tractors in China. Maybe that would have been a way to talk about how China is getting hammered, and maybe no one is buying tractors because the economy is in the brink. No dice. The rest of his response mostly focused on his plan for a flat tax in the U.S. and abolishing the I.R.S.

Trump, incidentally, may have made the truest, most apt statement on the issue without once mentioning current conditions.

In referring to powerful businessmen he deals with, he said, “These are the kind of people that we should use to negotiate and not the China people that we have who are political hacks who don’t know what they’re doing and we have problems like this.” Hopefully, all of the candidates onstage were listening.