To be featured on KUVO's Collegiate and High School Jazz Series

Rhythmaires saxophonists sophomore Jack Merrill, senior Levi Trout, and junior Dylan Larsen tune up at the start of rehearsal at Longmont High School Thursday morning. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

The Rhythmaires, Longmont High School's Advanced Jazz Ensemble, play through Duke Ellington's "Caravan" on Thursday morning inside a large room littered with musical instruments.

A quotation from T.S. Eliot dons a wall near the room. It says "You are the music while the music lasts."

"Caravan" might make the band's setlist for it's appearance next Tuesday on KUVO's Collegiate and High School Jazz Series. So far, nothing is set in stone and the band will keep rehearsing up until the day before.

"I think that's where it needs to be," LHS Associate Director of Bands Darryl Abrahamson tells the group, referring to the tempo they are playing at. "If it goes too fast, it starts to feel frantic and not all that musical. We have to find that balance."

If you go What: Longmont High School's Rhythmaires radio performance When: Tuesday, 7 p.m. Where: KUVO FM 89.3 Cost: Free (It's the radio)

During the last year, the band has played all of its normal concerts but also the Skyline Jazz Festival, during which two members won soloist awards.

"They did an improvisation," he said. "It's cool, because that is the hardest part about this jazz thing — making it up off the top of your head."

Next week's performance marks the second time the band has been invited to play. This year, it's one of only two high schools to receive the honor, the other being the Denver School for the Performing Arts.

Advertisement

"I'm floored we get to do this," he said.

Senior Trevor Bonner, who plays the trumpet, played on the radio show last year. He said he felt nervous the first time around, but is excited and looking forward to playing next week.

"There is some pressure, because we will be playing for a larger audience," Bonner said.

Abrahamson said the group is still working on the final set list, a precarious balance of styles, tempos and keys and difficulty levels. If the group plays too many songs in the same style, tempo or key, it can get repetitive.

"The repertoire is representative of where we are at," he said. "You don't do a tune just because it's difficult. We want them to be successful. It's always a battlefield."

Abrahamson said he wants his students to have fun playing but also appreciate the rich heritage of jazz, a purely American art form. He joked that he would like to see a required jazz history class but added, "That'll be the day."

"As we get further along, the younger kids might not know about it," he said. "It blows my mind, because it's such a rich part of their heritage."

Sophomore Jack Merrill plays the alto saxophone, and Tuesday's performance will be his first time playing with the ensemble on the radio.

Merrill and Bonner said they like playing with the group because of the improvisation that jazz affords them, but also the cohesion among the players that is required for the music to work.

"We are going to show off what we have," Merrill said. "I'm not nervous. I'm just going to play good music and have a good time."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/jonbearwithme