President Barack Obama toured a solar array April 3, 2014, at Hill Air Force Base in Utah. Slowing climate change, such as by investing in renewable energy, offers economic opportunity, not penalty, his administration has said. Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images

Four days after Pope Francis called on “all humanity” to act on global warming, and three days after a new study found 75 percent of the earth’s species will be wiped out within just three human lifetimes in part because of climate change, the Obama administration released the first-ever White House report Monday touting both the deep costs of global warming and the economic benefits of stopping it.

The peer-reviewed analysis, “Benefits of Global Action,” amounts to an international call to action and a 96-page rebuttal of conservative lawmakers and fossil fuels trade groups, which have long argued federal environmental regulation will threaten jobs, raise energy prices and undercut the reliability of the electrical grid.

Analyzing 20 “sectoral impacts” across the U.S. economy, from health to infrastructure, agriculture and electricity, the report asserts that restraining global warming to 2 degrees Celsius – widely seen by scientists and policymakers as the threshold before catastrophe – will save close to a trillion dollars by 2100 in power costs, infrastructure repairs, health spending, damaged crops, disaster recovery and lost productivity.

Temperatures across the U.S. will change profoundly if nations fail to keep global temperatures from rising more than 2 degrees Celsius. Courtesy EPA

“We not only have a moral obligation to act, we also have an economic opportunity,” White House senior adviser Brian Deese said during a briefing with reporters Monday.

It’s a point long emphasized by Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Gina McCarthy. This summer, her agency is expected to finalize the Clean Power Plan, the first federal limits on carbon dioxide emissions from existing power plants and the keystone of President Barack Obama’s pledge to slash U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by roughly a quarter from 2005 levels by 2025.

“It is not an understatement to say there are huge costs to bear if we don’t take action now,” McCarthy said at Monday’s briefing. “The story is, ‘What are the impacts of doing nothing versus the impacts of global action?’”

[READ: 75 Percent of Animal Species to be Wiped Out in "Sixth Mass Extinction"]

The report, published in conjunction with MIT, the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, highlights potential impacts on the U.S.: Summer temperatures in Illinois and Maryland, for example, will mirror those in Louisiana and northern Florida, respectively, without decisive action on climate change. Its target audience, however, spans the planet. The report comes five months ahead of a landmark U.N. climate summit of nearly 200 nations in Paris, where Obama reportedly hopes to achieve an ambitious but non-binding international accord to rein-in greenhouse gas emissions.

Its release is also the first in a series of events at the White House and State Department this week highlighting the president’s efforts on climate change, both building perhaps on the momentum from Pope Francis’s encyclical on climate change last week, and overlapping with the two-year anniversary June 25 of Obama’s announced Climate Action Plan – a speech signaling he would make global warming a major priority of his second term.

“We are going to try to help push other countries to the action this report urges,” Deese said. With this latest analysis, “You’re continuing to see a clear commitment to taking the kinds of long-term actions that will be necessary.”

[ALSO: EPA Moves to Slash Truck Emissions]

Congressional Republicans will prove a tough sell. Following the release of Francis’ encyclical Thursday, Oklahoma Sen. Jim Inhofe, chairman of the Environment and Public Works Committee – and author of a book labeling human-caused climate change a “hoax” – warned of “global warming alarmists.”

“We have been innovative with our energy supply, and for generations the United States has lifted people out of poverty through the development of our God-given natural resources, most prominently from fossil fuels,” Inhofe said in a statement. “To unravel this fabric of economic opportunity would create more poverty, not less.”

[MORE: Pope Francis Encyclical Calls on "All Humanity" to Halt Global Warming]

Democrats, by contrast, urged fellow lawmakers and global leaders to heed the EPA’s call for climate action.