Back in 2010, the New Jersey Devils wanted to sign their star forward Ilya Kovalchuk. They knew he’d command a cap-straining figure, so they did what every team in a similar situation had done: They exploited loopholes to get Kovalchuk paid while not killing their salary cap. In 2009, Marian Hossa, Roberto Luongo and Henrik Zetterberg all signed lucrative, front-loaded deals for absurd lengths. Everyone knew what they were doing, but there was nothing the NHL could do about it. It was legal, so the contracts held up.

The Devils followed precedent and signed the 27-year-old Kovalchuk to a 17-year (hahahaha) deal for $102 million. But the NHL was tired of looking dumb, and it didn’t let the contract go through. The deal was eventually signed at 15 years, $100 million, which was totally OK for some reason.

But that wasn’t the issue. The issue was that the league fined the Devils $3 million and took away two draft picks — a third-round pick they already lost in 2011, and a first-rounder they were poised to lose this year. They lost a first rounder, a major asset, for doing something that smart teams had done multiple times, going unpenalized. It’s like how the retaliator always gets the penalty… except in this case, the “infraction” wasn’t actually against the rules, and the penalty was massive.

But out of nowhere, the NHL decided to make amends today. Gary Bettman and all non-Adam-Silver-commissioners (so far), take a lot of crap, because they’re mostly awful. They’re greedy and power-hungry. This goes against everything we know and hate, and it’s incredible and strange.

Hearing the NHL has reversed part of its penalty against the Devils for cap circumvention (Kovalchuk contract)…. — Darren Dreger (@DarrenDreger) March 6, 2014

NHL will award Devils with the 30th pick in the Draft instead of the 1st round pick as usually determined. Also forgiving $1.5 mil of fine. — Darren Dreger (@DarrenDreger) March 6, 2014

They still got screwed out of a third-rounder, $1.5 million and probably quite a few spots in this year’s draft, but I’m seriously astonished that they amended the mistake at all. There is hope for sports and greedy rich people. Now if Bettman could just rescind Obamacare, amirite?*

*That was a joke. This post is about hockey. Do not take this as a pro-or-anti-Obamacare stance. I like sports.