Dear editor:

As we learn more about Paterson’s health care budget problems the story of Humpty Dumpty comes to mind. In spite of “all the king’s horses” (insurance brokers, insurance carrier experts, pharmacy benefit management professionals and even the State’s oversight committee) and “all of the king’s men” (city and labor management) this mastermind team couldn’t put Humpty together again.

But wait – Humpty doesn’t have to fall off the metaphorical healthcare wall! What if Paterson could do it all over again? What if the King’s horses actually applied best practice methods to its ways of managing a health plan? What if the taxpayer’s actually had a say in the matter? Perhaps Humpty would never have fallen off the healthcare wall!

In spite of working with Horizon, a “leading” health insurance carrier; USI, a top-10 nationally-ranked health insurance broker; Citizen’s Rx (a national pharmacy benefit manager), and the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, this “best thinking” approach produced a very unexpected $7.4M bill – a very bitter pill to swallow!

Ironically, this news coincides with Horizon’s newest advertising campaign emphasizing how Horizon better understands the solution (to reduce costly insurance). In the spirit of Clara Peller (Wendy’s commercial circa 1995), “Where’s the cost savings beef?” Well, wake up Paterson taxpayers – there is no beef! Beefy savings can only be realized when stakeholders do any combination of the following:

1) Make the medical and pharmacy plans less generous by raising member out-of-pocket costs, eliminating the highest cost providers, encouraging members to use center-of excellence facilities, removing high-cost biotech drugs and emphasizing the usage of pricing transparency to name a few.

2) Audit the medical and prescription drug claims to recapture overpayments

3) Identify data-driven cost savings through claims-based analytics, and

4) Verify the eligibility of each spouse, domestic partner and dependent child to eliminate the cost of erroneously paying for their claims.

If management truly wanted to plug the financial leak it could easily reduce costs by three to eight percent. In the case of Paterson’s plan, this translates to $1.5 million to $4 million in annual savings. How is this possible? A few examples follow:

Savings Example 1 – Simply by verifying the eligibility of all enrolled spouses, domestic partners and dependent children, this would likely remove about eight percent of the dependent population. Assuming 2,200 dependents, this translates to annual, recurring savings exceeding $800,000 (176 ineligible dependents times $5,000 per capita).

Savings Example 2 – Simply by removing all working spouses that have other insurance available to them, the plan could enjoy annual recurring savings of $2.5 million. Not only does Obamacare permit this, but this is quickly becoming an industry accepted best practice.

Savings Example 3 – Simply by identifying employee-based eligibility leaks, the plan could save an additional $500,000 or more. It is important to note most plans have leaks of at least one to two percent. This is often caused by untimely termination notifications or allowing employees to get benefits after their COBRA has expired.

Paterson stakeholders have a genuine opportunity to re-write its story. Humpty Dumpty doesn’t have to fall and give the tax payers a $7.4 million (and growing) bill. Not only can the Paterson health plan stay on the wall, but it has the opportunity to realize the $2 million in savings management originally hoped to realize after it implements some of these best practice health care cost management programs.

Howard Gerver

Wayne, NJ

Gerver is the President of HR Best Practices, a NJ-based healthcare cost management firm formed in 2001.