Kay Takes is aware that her job title is not the only thing changing at the local Mercy Medical Centers these days.

The Cascade, Iowa, resident on Oct. 2 became president of Mercy Medical Center-Dubuque and Mercy Medical Center-Dyersville after the retirement of Rusty Knight, the hospital's longtime leader.

Takes has worked at Mercy since 1998 and served as the hospital's vice president of patient services and chief nursing officer since 2000. Working as president will present plenty of new challenges, she said.

"In my new role, I have accountability for the organization as a whole, working across all departments and beyond the hospital itself," she said. "It is a broader scope."

Takes assumes the helm as Mercy deals with multiple changes, including a multifaceted remodeling effort at its Dubuque facility and navigating the evolving landscape of the medical industry in the wake of the Affordable Care Act.

Takes believes the federal act is guiding the health care industry in a new -- and mostly positive -- direction.

"It is really about 'How do you improve health?'" she said. "(The act) is based on the idea of trying to keep people healthy so utilization of health care resources are reduced."

This new mentality is leading to a new emphasis on "value-based" health care, which includes educating patients on items such as diet and exercise, as well as providing information on managing chronic diseases.

Still, the act has presented new challenges, according to Takes.

She said payment systems have been slow to incentivize this new focus on "value-based" health care. Understanding and following new regulatory requirements poses another significant challenge, she said.

Gary Guetzko, Mercy's vice president of business development, said Takes is ready to tackle Mercy's "triple aim": Achieving better patient outcomes, better care experience for the patient and reduced cost.

"The whole historical health care model is changing and changing rapidly," he said "We have to keep our focus on those three goals while being flexible and creative. I think (Takes) has the drive and the expertise to get that done."

Utilizing new technologies also will be a priority under Takes' leadership.

"It is changing on a daily basis," she said. "Technology is exploding, and there is more and more opportunity to use technology in health care."

Takes said Mercy plans to implement technology that will allow hospital workers to use televisions to interact with patients, providing patients with on-demand access to educational videos and information about medications and their side effects.

New technologies also are being used to update systems for staff scheduling and payroll, Takes said.

The most visible change at Mercy is the in-progress renovation of the front entrance area.

Takes said the first portion of the two-phase remodeling project will wrap up in December. The upgrades will lead to both aesthetic and logistical improvements, including better traffic flow near the entrance.

Takes said Mercy officials are taking short-term steps to limit disruptions caused by this construction, including offering a valet service for visitors.

Other ongoing facility projects include improvements in operating rooms and aesthetic improvements in maternal and child services areas.

The work at Mercy comes at a time when UnityPoint Health-Finley Hospital in Dubuque is undergoing at $42 million expansion project.

Keeping pace with competitors has not been the motivating factor behind the work at Mercy, Takes said.

"From our perspective, we are always looking at how we can provide the best quality and the best service and ensuring we have the facilities and equipment that allow us to do that," she said.