Wallet Hub released a study showing the impact of the Affordable Care Act in all 50 states and the District of Columbia.

Its conclusion? Blue states are getting a better deal than red states, seeing significant gains in certain areas of health care. But if red states were to all opt into the Medicaid expansion (currently 26 states have not expanded Medicaid), Wallet Hub says that rankings would change drastically.

Other findings in the study say that for the most part expanding Medicaid gives states more positives than negatives, with states that opt to expand their programs looking at "significant return on investment."

But the expansion of Medicaid didn't exactly match up with reductions in uninsured. "While one might assume that all of the states opting for ACA-advised Medicaid expansion would see larger reductions in their uninsured population than states opting out, that isn’t necessarily the case. Rather, the change in a state’s uninsured population depends on its Medicaid requirements prior to the ACA’s expansion as well as its decision to opt in or out of federally advised expansion. That is why states like Rhode Island, Nevada, California, New Mexico and Arkansas will see their per capita uninsured populations decline the most, while Pennsylvania, Maine, Iowa, Wisconsin and Massachusetts will still see declines, but they will be less significant."

Small-business owners were found to benefit across all states. "The ACA provides tax credits to small businesses with fewer than 25 employees who make less than $50,000 per year on average. Based on analysis of Census payroll records, the average company of that size in every state would qualify for the tax credit."

The 11 aspects the study looked at are: Preexisting conditions per capita, savings per capita on out-of-pocket medical expenses, average change in premium, tax credit-eligible small businesses per capita, changes in per capita uninsured population, emergency room visits per capita, average savings on uncompensated care spending per capita, cost benefit of Medicaid expansion, state spending required for federal funding, access to care and preliminary applications.

Utah ranks among the lowest when it comes to benefits. In fact, Utah is ranked 50th out of 51, with only Georgia performing worse than Utah. However if Utah were to opt into the Medicaid expansion, then it would rank 42nd.

This list ranks each state from those that benefit the most (1 being greatest) to the lowest benefiting state (51). For the full analysis of the ACA's impact on the states, you can view the study on Wallet Hub.