Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

If the presumptive nominee wants to be great at being president rather than just to be the president, she's going to need to shake things up.

Hillary Clinton seems poised to win the Democratic nomination, and polls suggest she has an excellent chance of securing the White House in November. For Clinton, it may be less a question of whether she’ll win in November, than of how—and what she’ll do next. I’ve been talking to a diverse set of political insiders, including many who are close to Hillary Clinton, to understand what form a genuinely transformative presidency might take. I’ve distilled those conversations into a faux memo, as I did in 2013 and 2015, to sketch the difference between merely winning, and actually succeeding. To: Hillary Subject: Winning Right Congratulations! You are now the presumptive Democratic nominee. Considering the demographic obstacles piled against Donald J. Trump, you’re this close to the presidency. The nation’s first woman president. Heir to President Obama’s legacy. Latest from Politics The Humbling of Paul Ryan It’s not enough. Is your goal to win the presidency or to win and transform the presidency? Are you a caretaker or a change agent? Do you seize power for the love of power or for higher purposes: to modernize the institutions of politics and governance; to restore the public’s faith in Washington; to break the cycle of polarization and solve big problems; to galvanize the youth vote (like Obama) and translate millennials’ passion and power into governmental reforms (unlike Obama)? Back in 2013, the first memo in this sequence predicted: “The next president of the United States (Democrat or Republican) will be a populist.” It urged you to run a campaign that was radically accessible, honest and authentic, small and nimble, and populist. You didn’t. Trump did. So did Bernie Sanders.

Then in 2015, the second memo chastised you for the email scandal and advised you how to come clean. You didn’t. “The country needs better,” that second memo said. “Stop being the problem. Be the Hillary we once knew.” You’ve got one last chance. The general election is an opportunity to surprise people by putting forward an agenda that goes beyond liberal checklists and tackles the structural impediments to reform. Listen to Senator Chris Murphy of Connecticut, who told the New York Times on Wednesday that you must focus on how best to connect to a broader electorate that is in what he called a “revolutionary mood.” He was referring to how Sanders has energized supporters. “You are not going to win this general election by proposing incremental changes,” Murphy said, adding that he hoped you won’t “shy away from proposing some big ideas to try to reorder the country, to the benefit of those that are hurting.” For what it’s worth, here are 10 such ideas: Redistricting Reform The president can’t single-handedy change how House districts are drawn, but presumably you will digitize and modernize Teddy Roosevelt’s bully pulpit—and could influence a grassroots movement forcing state legislatures to draw competitive districts that that incentivize compromise. Election Reform Start by making the Democratic nominating process more democratic (goodbye, superdelegates) and then recognize the fact that a majority of Americans are dissatisfied with the red-blue duopoly. Make it easier to run for office without pledging allegiance to the Democratic and Republican parties. Political Money The Citizens United ruling allowing corporations and unions to spend unlimited sums on politics has created a new Gilded Age of politics. The Washington Post found that nearly half the money raised by Super PACs came from just 50 mega-donors and their relatives. Reversing the ruling is improbable and would not fix the corrosive system that existed before Citizens United. You could opt for sunlight: Propose the immediate and full disclosure of all fund-raising and spending.