The state Senate voted last week to direct Tennessee Attorney General Herbert Slatery III to sue the federal government over its refugee resettlement program.

The resolution, which passed on a 27-5 vote, would give Slatery the option of filing a new lawsuit or joining states that have already filed suits. The House of Representatives now will take up the measure.

Gov. Bill Haslam is right to express misgivings about jumping into a lawsuit. Attorneys typically are consulted prior to making a decision whether to seek a legal remedy, but the Senate has plowed ahead anyway. The House would be wise to seek Slatery's official opinion about the state's legal prospects before its vote.

The resolution stems from concerns over the possibility that terrorists could enter the country masquerading as refugees, particularly those coming from war-torn Syria and Iraq. Last year Slatery advised lawmakers they could not refuse the resettlement of refugees in Tennessee because the federal government has exclusive authority to regulate immigration, including people with refugee status.

House members might want to consider the extralegal implications of the resolution. As a nation of immigrants, the United States always has welcomed refugees from oppression. This lawsuit would have ramifications affecting all refugees living in Tennessee, no matter what their nation of origin.

As a basis for the lawsuit, the resolution claims the federal government has not consulted regularly with the state as required by the Refugee Act of 1980 and cannot compel the state to provide funding for services to refugees.

Under the Refugee Act, states must operate programs to help refugees settle in their jurisdictions by providing social services and promoting employment and self-sufficiency. If a state opts out, as a dozen have done, the federal government contracts with a nonprofit organization to run the program. Tennessee opted out in 2007 and Catholic Charities took over, establishing the Tennessee Office for Refugees. The office is funded by the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement.

The legal question would be whether the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement satisfies the law's consultation requirement by working with the state's surrogate, Catholic Charities.

Even states that opt out must provide some services to refugees. Those who qualify for Medicaid, for example, receive health insurance through TennCare. Under federal law, states can lose Medicaid funding if they deny services to qualified populations such as refugees. The resolution cites the U.S. Supreme Court decision on the Affordable Care Act that made Medicaid expansion optional to argue that the federal government cannot "coerce" the state in such a manner.

The 2012 opinion provided that states could decide not to expand their Medicaid programs without putting existing Medicaid funding at risk. The ruling, however, also clearly states that states must comply with federal regulations — which would include qualifications — to receive money for Medicaid. Since refugees can qualify for Medicaid, Tennessee has to include them under TennCare or forego all the program's funding.

The resolution also states the federal government cannot force Tennessee to spend money on programs absent legislative action, implying that the Legislature has not voted on funding programs that benefit refugees. That is a curious argument to put forward since the Legislature approves state appropriations, including TennCare.

Despite the wisdom of seeking legal counsel first, the Senate wants to move ahead — to the point that the resolution gives pre-authorization to hiring outside counsel if Slatery deems the quest Quixotic.

The House should consider the effort based not on political calculation but on legal and humanitarian grounds. At the very least, legislators should get Slatery's advice before, not after, authorizing a lawsuit.