Topics: Barack Obama, Benjamin Netanyahu, Editor's Picks, Israel, Palestine, Palestinians, Violence, Life News, News

Nine years ago, I spent my time 10 years in the future.

In 2006, after a year of commuting to work through a 30-foot-high unfinished segment of a concrete wall that was being constructed around Bethlehem, I began to imagine what resistance to Israel’s military occupation might look like 10 years on when the structure Palestinians refer to as the “apartheid wall” was complete. I knew it would have to look very different than the nationally led mass movement of the late 1980s during which I came of age, when there was no permit system or terminal-style checkpoints between the occupied territories, Israel and the major Palestinian urban centers.

In my forthcoming novel, I took this question about the nature of resistance within the fragmented landscape that is Palestine and set it against the backdrop of the end of the era of the Oslo Accords. In my novel, “Die Standing Like Trees,” it is the young and disillusioned who engage in lone wolf attacks against the occupation, knowing as they do that their death is certain. The hope of the fictionalized young people in my novel is that through their singular desperate acts, international consciousness will be awakened.

As a human rights activist as well as an attorney, my view of a durable resolution to the Palestine-Israel conflict is predicated on law and justice. But law and justice can only take you so far. I decided to write “Die Standing Like Trees” because until those observing events unfolding in Palestine/Israel can imagine the humanity in the very real stories of Palestinians and the context of their struggle for freedom and self-determination, the violence will continue and a diplomatic resolution will remain illusive. The technical pen of a lawyer, limited as it is to legal precepts and sterile facts, can’t tell the story that is Palestine. Days after Barack Obama met with Benjamin Netanyahu to smooth over U.S.-Israel relations, I am writing this article for the same reason.

The remarks of President Obama while sitting in the Oval Office with Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu were emblematic of so much of what is wrong with the way those outside of Palestine/Israel view the conflict. While recognizing the deaths of Israelis and referring to Palestinian violence as if it occurred in a vacuum, the president spoke of the unwavering U.S.-Israel relationship. Left unsaid was that Palestinians had also suffered greatly in the last month under Israel’s almost 50-year-old military occupation — more than 70 Palestinians have been killed and more than 2,000 injured — the vast majority unarmed civilians participating in protests against the occupation. Palestinian suffering and losses ought to have been recognized too. And why they so frequently aren’t ought to trouble everyone interested in peace between Palestine and Israel.

Those things that I feared when I picked up the novelist’s pen — that fragmented randomness of collective hopelessness that I could see overtaking the youth of Palestine — is being borne out today.

Following President Mahmoud Abbas’ speech at the opening of the 70th Session of the U.N. General Assembly in September, in which he announced the end of the Oslo peace process, reports of Palestinian lone wolf attacks have dominated each news cycle. Many of the attackers have been young people, unaffiliated with any political organization. Last month, a 13-year-old was alleged to have engaged in one of the first strings of stabbing attacks. When Ahmad purportedly tried to flee the scene, an Israeli settler ran him over with his car to stop him. While Ahmad, legs unnaturally contorted behind him flailed for help, Israeli settlers, police and emergency technicians stood by and watched. Precious minutes go by and no one moves to administer aid. In fact, when the boy tries to get up, he is kicked back down by one of the bystanders while at least one among them yells out again and again in Arabic so the boy would understand: “Die, Arab. Die, you son of a whore.” We know all this because it was captured on videotape by one of the bystanders who failed to help Ahmad.

What made the news in the U.S. was not the depravity of those standing around watching the injured boy cry for help. What made the news was whether Ahmad was guilty of the knife attack, whether the Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas knew Ahmad was still alive when he announced his death on Palestinian TV, and how well Ahmad was treated once taken to an Israeli hospital for treatment.

Of course, stabbing innocent civilians is never justified. But neither is running over a child who is not posing an immediate threat or failing to administer aid when you are the police or an EMT. American mainstream media tends to focus its lens on violence perpetrated against, not by, Israelis and, even more infrequently, on the institutionalized violence that is Israel’s military occupation.