Abbe Gluck, associate professor at the Yale Law School specializing in health law, speaks during the “Ready To Launch” conference discussing the Affordable Care Act and U.S. Health Policy. Peter Casolino — New Haven Register

new haven >> Contrary to worker fears, employers are not dropping insurance coverage in droves as the marketplace exchanges under the Affordable Care Act get ready to open Tuesday.

“They are continuing to want to cover voluntary benefits to their employees for the same reasons they did before. They want healthy workforces, they want strong employee retention,” said Heather Meade, one of several panelists who spoke at Yale University on the impact the ACA, also known as Obamacare, will make.

Meade is a member of Ernst & Young’s Washington Council, where she provides advice about healthcare regulations and legislation to employers.

She said employers with fewer than 50 full-time equivalent workers, who are on the job an average of 30 hours a week or at least 130 a month, are not obligated to provide health insurance for their workers.

Advertisement

“The number of employers that are right at that 50 line is not a huge portion of our employer workforce,” said Meade, as 19 percent of the population works part time.

She said Obamacare, however, is driving changes in benefits for small employers, who have to stretch health care dollars further, with 58 percent of them featuring plans with deductibles of $1,000 or more.

Diane Rowland, an authority on Medicaid, Medicare and health care policy at Kaiser Family Foundation, told the audience at Koon Hall at Yale that normally when large programs are rolled out, they are tweaked in early years to get out the glitches. That didn’t happen here; rather, the House of Representatives voted more than 40 times to repeal the law.

Abbe R. Gluck, an associate professor of law at Yale Law School, where she specializes in health law, said the irony on objections to the Affordable Care Act is that its origins are bipartisan.

Gluck said health care continues to be the third rail of politics and the issue of individual mandates, despite already being tested and accepted in Massachusetts and upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court, sparked the huge backlash that continues to reverberate.

She said the patchwork healthcare system that remains in place with Medicare, Medicaid and private insurance doesn’t make much sense in terms of delivery and cost controls, but greater efficiencies weren’t politically viable.

Despite a continuing fight in Washington over the ACA, no one sees it being repealed and larger employers are looking ahead to fix problems, rather than trying to dismantle it, Meade said.

Amanda Kowalski, assistant professor of economics at Yale, said healthcare reform in Massachusetts, which in many ways is a model for the ACA, with its emphasis on preventive care, resulted in decreased hospital stays and emergency care admissions; more employers offering insurance, an increase in coverage and a decrease in premiums.

Since 2006, Massachusetts has reduced its uninsured adult population from 10 percent to 2 percent and now covers 99.8 percent of children. A total of 77 percent of residents approve of its health care exchange, according to surveys.

In Massachusetts and across the country, the big problem is healthcare costs, which Kevin Counihan, chief executive officer of Access Health Ct, which is the state’s healthcare exchange, said is the next big issue that must be addressed.

Access Health CT starts taking applications Tuesday with insurance offered as of Jan. 1 through three companies: Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, HealthyCt and ConnectiCare. Its website is www.accesshealthct.com to calculate possible savings through government subsidies or call 855-805-4325.