Buy Photo Gov. John Bel Edwards greets Marcus Bruno, assistant to Mayor-President Joel Robideaux, after Edwards addressed his roll out of Medicaid expansion at the Southwest Louisiana Health Services Center in Lafayette May 11, 2016. (Photo: LEE CELANO/THE ADVERTISER)Buy Photo

As promised, Gov. John Bel Edwards is moving on his plan to expand Medicaid to 375,000 state residents.

Edwards was in Lafayette on Wednesday to address the roll-out of the expansion alongside Dr. Rebekah Gee, Secretary of the Department of Health and local officials.

“This is what is going to happen for the start of Louisiana; we have about 375,000 people today who are caught," Edwards said inside the Southwest Louisiana Health Services Center. “They don’t have access to Medicaid currently, nor do they have access to health insurance through any other means. We are going to make this Medicaid expansion available to them and provide them heath care coverage that we are already paying for here in Louisiana.”

During his second term, former Gov. Bobby Jindal opposed Louisiana’s participation in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which provides for Medicaid expansion for states. Many critics called it a political move against President Barack Obama.

READ MORE: Medicaid expansion could lessen, not stop cuts, health dept. says

It’s a service Louisiana residents have been paying into but to which they have been denied access, Edwards said. The expansion will save the state $184 million that will be returned to the general fund, he said.

“I want you to understand the population of the people we are talking about. Seventy percent of the targeted population of this 375,000 are full-time workers,” he said. “They work in construction; they work in retail; they work in food service — you name it. But they are without health insurance.”

Those eligible must have an individual household income of $16,395 per year or an annual household income for a family of four at $33,534.

Enrollment for Medicaid begins June 1. Coverage will be available by July, said T. Bradley Keith, of assisting consulting firm Gulf South Strategies and Solutions. Applicants can enroll online or visit the 22 facilities in eight Acadiana parishes assisting with Medicaid applications.

OUR VIEW: For now, Medicaid expansion sensible

"Before Thursday’s press conference, the governor and other officials met with a handful of local residents in need of Medicaid assistance. One mother said her 33-year-old incarcerated son requires health care services currently not provided by insurance. Edwards noted that the federal health care expansion would also provide behavioral health services that would reach into the state's criminal justice system.

“Ill people are not criminals,” Edwards said.

For the next few weeks, Edwards and his administration will be traveling the state to inform residents about the application process, he said.

“What we’ve had in this state prior to this time are patches of care,” Gee said. “We are now going to have a quilt of care that covers the entire state. Just in Lafayette alone, you have over 20,000 people who have no insurance.”

The learn more about Medicaid assistance and apply online, visit www.healthy.la.gov. A full list of participating applicant assistant sites can also be found by calling 1-888-342-6207.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/2016/05/11/edwards-medicaid-expansion-we-going-right-ship/84243784/