Is Oakwood looking to sell, merge? CEO denies rumors about talks

Talk is circulating that four-hospital Oakwood Healthcare Inc. is up for sale and in talks with other health systems about a possible sale or merger.



Sources close to the talks say the Dearborn-based nonprofit system is being courted by Dallas-based Tenet Healthcare Corp., owner of the Detroit Medical Center, and Beaumont Health System.



"I have had continual discussions with every health care system leader throughout the state of Michigan," said CEO Brian Connolly, adding that the discussions did not include merger or acquisition. "There are no talks with Tenet or DMC."



Over the past several weeks, Crain's has spoken with multiple sources — including physicians on Oakwood's medical staff and competing hospital executives — about merger talks in Southeast Michigan. Navigating the changes wrought by health care reform is among the drivers for these conversations, they said. And four sources who asked to remain unnamed in this story said they have inside knowledge about Oakwood and a sale or merger.



Beaumont CEO Gene Michalski acknowledged his Royal Oak-based three-hospital system has begun discussions with several hospital systems about a closer relationship. He would not confirm names or the type of business arrangement.



"Because of changes in implementation of the Affordable Care Act, we continue to update our strategic plan," said Michalski in a statement to Crain's.



"As part this planning, we have been talking with other health care organizations that are also preparing (for) and adapting to health reform. These are confidential discussions, so we can't provide names. If and when we decide to align with another organization, we'll certainly let you know."



Last May, Beaumont and Detroit-based Henry Ford Health System ended seven months of merger talks that would have created Southeast Michigan's largest health system with 10 hospitals and $6.4 billion in revenue.



High on the list of problems the two systems faced were physician culture incompatibility. The majority of Beaumont's doctors are fiercely independent while most Henry Ford physicians have practiced medicine in an employed group corporate model for many years.



In a possible Oakwood deal, physician morale could be a factor, among several others, one source said.



Physician concerns



Physician relationships at Oakwood could be improved through a merger, one source said; a merger with Tenet, for example, could bring in management expertise to address some lingering problems.



Case in point: Some surgeons are upset with some of Oakwood's personnel changes for medical support services, the source said. Some physicians are also concerned about staffing levels on medical floors, the emergency department and intensive care units, the source said.





Related Links