KALAMAZOO, MI -- Starting out as a hauling business during the Great Depression, Kalamazoo's DeVisser Landscaping Services looks different today than it did 70 years ago.

Having evolved to meet customers' changing needs over decades, the business has grown into a third-generational multi-purpose landscaping company with its own rapidly growing Weed Man franchise, added 10 years ago.

“The business evolved from the depression," office manager Jan Post said. “People would say, ‘Could you bring in soil?’ and then they would ask, ‘Could you spread it?’ Then they would say, ‘Do you do lawns?”

Established by brothers Henry and Adrian DeVisser in 1939, the business has served the greater Kalamazoo area for over 70 years. The company is located on 4014 S. 9th street in Kalamazoo, and serves customers in Kalamazoo and Van Buren County.

The landscape company offers lawn maintenance and landscape design services for residential and commercial purposes, in addition to the separate lawn care services the Weed Man franchise offers.

“Through the work of my grandfather, my dad, my brother and me, we have built the company on good reputation, quality work and good customer service,” said Nate DeVisser, division manager of Weed Man Kalamazoo.

Nate DeVisser started to manage Weed Man Kalamazoo in 2003 after his dad, Dave DeVisser, bought the franchise as a part of the family business. The lawn care franchise offers fertilizers and weed control, mostly for residential customers.

After almost a decade in Kalamazoo, the local Weed Man division joined the franchise's Million Dollar Club in June, as it earned more than one million dollars in its net annual sales.

“We are the second largest Weed Man franchise in Michigan,” said Nate DeVisser, who added that the largest Michigan Weed Man franchise is located in Novi. “There are only 20 to 30 Weed Man franchises in the U.S. who are above that million dollar mark.”

DeVisser said there are around 10 Weed Man franchises in the state, and the closest division outside of Kalamazoo can be found in Grand Rapids.

“As a business we have grown a lot, and we are able to keep 10 to 11 full time employees year round,” said DeVisser, who added that most landscaping companies find it hard to keep a high number of employees throughout the winter season.



Several members of the DeVisser family are currently employed with DeVisser Landscape Services, such as brothers Nate and Joel DeVisser, their dad Dave DeVisser, and his sister, Jan Post.

“I was raised in this business,” said Post, who has worked for the company since 1983.

Joel DeVisser, the vice president of DeVisser Landscape Services, said the Weed Man franchise is a "nice addition" to the company’s preexisting services.

"Weed Man Kalamazoo complements our (landscaping) services," he said. "Despite the economic down times a couple of years ago, (Weed Man Kalamazoo) continued to grow because it's a low-cost service."

Weed Man Kalamazoo's rapid growth allowed for the local franchise to expand in size and employment, and is currently looking to hire two additional employees for the franchise.

"We started out with one Weed Man truck 10 years ago, and today we have seven trucks," Nate DeVisser said.



DeVisser added that the Weed Man department of DeVisser Landscape Services is also expanding the office space for their sales team.

"I'm proud of (the growth)," Nate DeVisser said. "Our family works well together, and we've come a long way."

Christina Cantero is a reporter for MLive/the Kalamazoo Gazette. You can reach her at ccantero@mlive.com. Follow her on Twitter.