What Kentucky’s Democratic governor has done to implement Obamacare may soon be undone by the Republican governor-elect.

Matt Bevin, who defeated Kentucky Attorney General Jack Conway 53 percent to 44 percent Nov. 3, campaigned on uprooting Gov. Steve Beshear’s Obamacare exchange and Medicaid expansion.

Without support from a divided Kentucky Legislature, Beshear created a state-run Obamacare exchange and opted in to Obamacare’s expansion of Medicaid to working-age adults with no kids and no disabilities.

Praising Beshear during his 2014 State of the Union speech, President Obama said the governor was “like a man possessed” when it came to implementing Obamacare — regardless of opposition from state legislators.

Unfortunately for Obama and fans of his unpopular health insurance law, Beshear’s unilateral actions leave the state’s two biggest pro-Obamacare decisions open to reversal from Bevin.

Bevin won the Republican primary after promising to roll back Obamacare expansion. He aims to shut down Kynect — the state’s Obamacare exchange — and direct Kentuckians to the federal exchange by the end of 2016.

If Bevin governs “like a man possessed” by opposition to Obamacare, Kentucky’s Obamacare exchange and Medicaid expansion will both prove short-lived.

Coverage in The Washington Post and elsewhere is indicative of the legacy-media beating Bevin would take if he doesn’t back down, but Beshear’s Obamacare expansion is already spiraling out of control.

“The first enrollment period added more than 310,000 Kentuckians to the Medicaid program, nearly double the expected number,” the Beshear administration said in a February report about the benefits of the deluge of new federal spending.

Kentucky’s Obamacare expansion had enrolled 375,000 by the end of 2014; when implementing the expansion 1 1/2 years earlier, Beshear estimated 188,000 would enroll by 2021.

Nic Horton, a senior research fellow for the free-market Foundation for Government Accountability, told Watchdog Bevin’s nine-point margin of victory reflects Kentuckians’ support for his platform.

“I think Governor-elect Bevin is exactly right when he says Kentucky’s Obamacare expansion needs to be repealed,” Horton said. “The program has been a complete disaster.”

“In fact, the state has already signed up more than double the number of able-bodied adults they expected to ever enroll, at any point in the future,” Horton said. “If the program were to continue, taxpayers would be forced to put up twice as much money as they were originally told.”

Since the Supreme Court gave states the ability to opt out of Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion, FGA has advised lawmakers to consider the long-term effects of expanding their welfare rolls for new federal money.

Because Obamacare promises 100 percent federal funding for Medicaid expansion benefits through 2016 and then tapers the federal funding to 90 percent, Beshear insists “the Bluegrass State couldn’t afford not to expand Medicaid.”

But if Kentucky’s Obamacare expansion remains in place, the state share of the welfare program’s benefit costs will soon threaten “things Kentuckians really care about, like roads, schools, law enforcement, or the truly needy,” Horton explained.

Prior to Obamacare, Medicaid was a program for pregnant women, children, the elderly, the disabled and impoverished families. Obamacare expansion comes with built-in incentives to cut benefits for traditional Medicaid recipients.

The feds pay for slightly more than 70 percent of Kentucky’s traditional Medicaid benefits, which means it would be easier for the state to balance its budget with cuts to traditional Medicaid than with cuts to Obamacare expansion.

Horton said Kentucky shouldn’t follow the lead of Arkansas or Indiana by trying to request federal waivers to make Obamacare expansion more palatable to state taxpayers.

The Obama administration, he warned, “is not interested in any reforms that help taxpayers, the truly needy, or the enrollees themselves. And ultimately, there’s really no way to improve a welfare program for able-bodied adults.”

FGA recommends Kentucky wind down Obamacare expansion by refusing to take new applicants. Anyone already enrolled would remain covered until they gained enough income to move off of Medicaid.

“Arizona took this approach in 2011 and nearly half of the enrollees left the program within a year,” Horton told Watchdog. In Tennessee, he said, more people found employment and gained private insurance when working-age adults were removed from Medicaid in 2005.

“These folks need jobs, not welfare, and any welfare program is going to penalize them for trying to climb the economic ladder. Window dressing can’t change the fundamentals of how welfare punishes work,” Horton concluded.

Bevin’s campaign did not respond to questions about how he will tackle Kentucky’s Obamacare exchange and Medicaid expansion upon taking office in December.