Duluth, MN (NNCNOW.COM) - In an exclusive interview with KBJR'S Nick Minock, Republican Stewart Mills said that he will launch his campaign for Congress in mid-October.

Mills ran against U.S. Rep. Rick Nolan (MN-08) in 2014, losing by only one percentage point.

If Mills jumps in, voters will see a rematch of epic proportions.

"(I am) almost certainly running for the Eighth Congressional District," Mills said on Wednesday. "We are going to pick up right where we left off."

In the one on one interview, Mills criticized Rep. Nolan's "F" rating by the National Rifle Association and Rep. Nolan's vote on the Affordable Care Act.

"He (Nolan) still supports Obamacare as a good first step to government run single payer," Mills added. "Obamacare has been a disaster for the people of Minnesota."

The Nolan vs. Mills showdown was one of the most expensive races in the country in 2014.

Around $14 million was spent for and against each candidate in the 2014 election cycle.

House Majority PAC and the DCCC aired ads that thrashed Mills for his personal wealth, and at the time, his long hair.

"If you take a look at the attacks that they leveled against me, the one thing they never wanted to engage in was the issues," Mills said on Wednesday. "They wanted to talk about my hair. They wanted to talk about my family's success and the people we employed. They did not want to talk about the issues."

Mills cut his iconic long hair this summer after a barbecue accident.

Once Mills declares his candidacy, National Democrats and Republicans say that the race will be one of the most watched races in the country next year.

The NRCC started running ads in the Minneapolis and Duluth television markets this summer. It was part of six-figure ad buy in three congressional districts in the country.

The Republican ads paint Rep. Nolan soft on terrorism.

"Are you prepared to go into this targeted race next year?" Minock asked.

"Oh yes. Very prepared for it. I wouldn't be here talking to you if I wasn't," Mills answered.

"Has Speaker Boehner or Congressman Greg Walden contacted you, asking you to run for this seat?" Minock asked.

"The national Republicans have been very supportive of me running," Mills answered. "They have engaged in recruitment and certainly having the support of the National Republicans is very important because the DCCC and Nancy's Pelosi's House Majority PAC will be putting millions of dollars in to support Congressman Rick Nolan. Last time they outspent us by over a million dollars."

Minock also asked Mills if he think he can win in 2016 against Rep. Nolan.

"Yes. I would not be doing it if I did not think we could win," Mills said.