They then made history again Thursday, when The Interview became the

December was a rough month for Sony, as the movie studio was forced to sit back and watch as hackers released private emails from top executives, the personal information of thousands of company employees, and then threatened a terrorist attack on American movie theaters, all in an attempt to get the studio to cancel the long planned Christmas release of their Kim Jong-un assassination comedy The Interview.

Things finally turned around on Wednesday however, when Christmas came exactly one day early for Sony and the studio was able to declare victory over their hackers by releasing The Interview online.

Making the release even sweeter for Sony was the massive outpouring of public support for the film, with thousands turning out for Christmas Eve midnight screenings across the country and tens of thousands of Americans streaming the film online.

Guests at the Cinefamily theater's midnight showing in Los Angeles even got their own little holiday surprise when the film's writers and directors, Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, showed up to introduce the film and answer questions.

Scroll down for videos

Surprise: Evan Goldberg and Seth Rogen (above) surprised some fans in Los Angeles at the midnight showing of the film in the early morning hours of Thursday

Big business: This just hours after the film was officially released - online

Meanwhile, the film has taken over social media, with viewers eager to share their near uniform praise of the comedy, a development that no doubt restored a little holiday cheer in everyone involved in the production after critics found little to love about the movie.

'Hey North Korea... I just watched the Interview and I laughed my butt off!!! Thanks YouTube!!' said one happy customer, while another said paying $5.99 to watch the film was 'totally worth it.'

This in contrast to Variety critic Scott Foundas who said in his review of the film that 'North Korea is right to object,' before then going on to warn readers eager to see the film that 'an evening of cinematic waterboarding awaits.'

Also expressing their excitement over the comedy's release on social media were stars Seth Rogen and James Franco, who have frequently taken to Twitter, Instagram and Facebook over the past two days to remind everyone how happy they are to see the film released, and, in Rogen's case, suggest that fans check it out on the big screen.

'I need to say that a comedy is best viewed in a theater full of people, so if you can, I'd watch it like that. Or call some friends over,' he said just hours before his surprise appearance Wednesday night.

Franco decided to take a much different approach, as the actor continued his current social media strategy of really utilizing his keyboard's caps lock and punctuation keys, writing on Instagram; 'Merry X-mas MERICA!!!!!!THE INTERVIEW IS LIVE!!!!!! !!!Watch it here!!!Thank you SONY!!!!!!!!'

There were also a few American flag emojis to really make the post pop.

And as an added bonus for Sony, the studio will now go down in the history books for becoming the first studio to release a major motion picture online, as well as being the first studio to simultaneously allow for the viewing of a film across three different platforms - theaters, online and video on demand.

'It has always been Sony's intention to have a national platform on which to release this film,' Sony Pictures chair and CEO Michael Lynton said in a statement.

'We chose the path of digital distribution first so as to reach as many people as possible on opening day, and we continue to seek other partners and platforms to further expand the release.'

Even more impressive however is how quickly the studio managed to pull this all together after initially deciding to hold off on distributing the film last week.

Sony only announced on Tuesday that the film would play in selected theaters and be released to video on demand on Thursday.

As for the big online announcement, that was confirmed less than an hour before the movie appeared on Google Play, YouTube, Microsoft Xbox Video and a Sony website created for the film, with the option of renting the film for $5.99 or downloading it for $16.99.

Laughing and laughing: James Franco and Rogen (above in a still from the film) have also be using their social media accounts to share how happy they are to see the film be released

And while many are not doubt eager to learn how many views, and how much dough, Sony will make off of online streaming, the studio has said at this time there is no plan to release the numbers, a move very similar to that practiced by Netflix.