The Republican party has been hammered repeatedly over their war on women, and one of the biggest places where they have shown weakness is in their disregard for a woman’s right to control when she wants to get pregnant or give birth. Birth control access has become a huge liability in that battle for many GOP candidates. Endorsing birth control access through no copay insurance plans makes them Obamacare sympathizers, believing that family planning clinics should provide heavily subsidized contraception gets you accused of being a Planned Parenthood supporter. On the other hand, siding with businesses, non-profits and religious groups trying to block access all together gets the candidates cited as hating women, or sex, or both.

In an attempt to navigate this tight rope, a number of GOP candidates have sought an alternative solution: make contraception over the counter. Then they can both remove it from the realm of bosses who would have to allow coverage, and at the same time hopefully weaken family planning providers, which would make their own socially conservative base happy, too.

It may work to assuage voters, but as a real policy, it’s doomed to fail. If there was any doubt that over the counter birth control would actually harm, not help, access issues, we only need to look at emergency contraception.

Emergency contraception should have been a major game-changer when it came to preventing unintended pregnancies. Taken within 72 hours of unprotected sex, the medication stops a person from ovulating until sperm should have had long enough to die, stopping fertilization from occurring. Despite complaints from anti-abortion activists, the medication was deemed appropriate for anyone of child-bearing age, and was supposed to be available in store aisles and without prescription.

That never happened. Advocates who opposed abortion and many forms of birth control fought to have age guidelines on the medication to ensure younger teens and preteens couldn’t access it, allegedly concerned that the hormones could be more dangerous for someone so early in puberty (the massive hormones of pregnancy and subsequent delivering of a baby apparently was not considered nearly as dangerous). In Mississippi, laws were passed to make it illegal to obtain without a permission if you are a minor. Pharmacists kept EC behind the counter in other states, too, requiring ID to prove age even though it was no longer necessary, or refusing to sell the pills to men who may have wanted to pick it up for someone else.

Access to EC continued to be at the discretion of the pharmacist or pharmacy, despite the drug being officially over the counter. Stores could decide whether or not to stock. Pharmacists could decide whether or not to sell it, even from customer to customer, citing religious liberty and conscience protections. Rural residents would find themselves with just one store that would even carry it, and need to leave town in order to find another place that might have it on the shelves.

Then there is the price. Over the counter means full payments, often $40 a dose. That’s an out of pocket expense that can be a massive portion of a month’s income to many.

While the GOP argues that birth control should move over the counter to allow everyone more access and stop employers from being involved in the process, all we have to do is look at what has happened with EC to see how contraception would become harder to get. What would have been paid for by a person’s insurance plan payment would now again be an out of pocket expense. Like Plan B, it would be locked behind the pharmacist counter, not on the actual shelves, adding another gatekeeper into the mix. It would allow protesters to picket and pressure stores to get the stores to not stock the product, and it especially would limit birth control options to be primarily pill based, since long acting reversible contraception like IUDs wouldn’t be available in this venue, and without a no-copay policy will remain financially out of reach for a vast number of people.

There are currently excellent solutions out there for improving birth control access, which reduces unintended pregnancy and abortion rates. Unfortunately, the Republican party feels unable to support any of them because of the rigid beliefs of their donors and base. Going OTC is the current solution of choice, but it simply isn’t a real option. The only person who benefits from moving birth control over the counter is the GOP candidate trying to avoid the issue.

Photo credit: Thinkstock