Former U.S. House Rep. Allyson Schwartz is donning a new hat on Capitol Hill. The Pennsylvania Democrat will head the Better Medicare Alliance, a young lobbying organization funded by health insurers, providers and business groups.The Washington-based Better Medicare Alliance named Schwartz president and CEO on Tuesday. The group was founded in December and advocates for the Medicare Advantage program. Medicare Advantage, run by private health insurers, covers more than 17.3 million seniors, or about one-third of all Medicare beneficiaries.“While I worked on many issues in Congress, nothing was more important to me than ensuring quality, affordable, accessible healthcare to all Americans, particularly our seniors,” Schwartz said in a video statement . “It is clear that there is work to do to protect and sustain Medicare for seniors today and for the future.”Schwartz's tenure in Congress ended this past January. She made a run to become Pennsylvania's governor in 2014, but she lost in the Democratic primary to Tom Wolf, who assumed office in January after beating incumbent Republican Gov. Tom Corbett.Schwartz supported the Affordable Care Act and advocated for the provision that said health insurance companies could not deny coverage to people who have pre-existing conditions. She also opposed several parts of the law, voting previously to repeal the medical-device tax and Medicare's Independent Payment Advisory Board.Medicare was a prominent part of her congressional agenda. Schwartz introduced legislation in 2012 and 2013 to repeal Medicare's much-maligned sustainable growth-rate formula for physician payment that was finally repealed last week . She advocated moving physicians away from fee-for-service and toward a payment system that rewards better quality and lower costs. Schwartz also railed against Medicare's controversial two-midnight rule for auditing the appropriateness of hospital admissions."I think Allyson Schwartz is a great addition," said Ipsita Smolinski, managing director of Washington-based consulting firm Capitol Street. "Her knowledge and expertise will likely make the group more visible."The Better Medicare Alliance bills itself as a not-for-profit, nonpartisan group. It has the financial backing of some of the largest healthcare companies that directly profit from Medicare Advantage. UnitedHealth Group, Humana and Aetna—three of the biggest Medicare Advantage insurers in the country—are all founders of the lobbying group. The American Medical Group Association, which represents physician groups and health systems, and conservative pro-business groups such as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce are also Better Medicare Alliance members.The Better Medicare Alliance was one of the most outspoken groups during this year's Medicare Advantage rate-setting process. The CMS proposed decreasing 2016 baseline Medicare Advantage rates to insurers by 0.95% in February. After six weeks of lobbying—which included vocal bipartisan support for higher rates and bus ads —the CMS decided to raise baseline rates by 1.25% on average.“The more cuts there are, the more reduction there is in value,” Krista Drobac, former interim executive director of the Better Medicare Alliance, told Modern Healthcare in February.Schwartz received more than $2.1 million in campaign contributions from the healthcare sector during her congressional career, according to OpenSecrets.org . Health insurance companies and HMOs represented more than $215,000 of that total.