The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) has long drawn the ire of the pro-life community for its promotion of abortion. Remember when it infamously opposed the ban on partial-birth abortions?

Now, at its latest conference in San Francisco, ACOG is promoting abortion. Here’s a sample of information one pro-life researcher uncovered about the how-to abortion classes happening at the conference:

It is no surprise that ACOG endorses abortion. While I am not at the conference, a series of tweets under the #ACOG2015 and #ACOG15 hashtags and also on the group’s twitter page, show support for Planned Parenthood’s founder Margaret Sanger as well as abortion. In addition, conference speakers appear to show support for the forced abortion/birth control mandate under ObamaCare. Abortion will be a topic according to the ACOG’s itinerary: Spontaneous, complete, incomplete abortion (1st and 2nd trimester) (27)Congenital anomalies (reproductive tract) The Society of Family Planning will be hosting a three hour session that will highlight new research and clinical practice issues related to contraception, abortion, STIs, sexuality, and how to translate the best evidence into clinical practice. Sarah W. Prager, MD from the University of Washington, Seattle, Washington will lead the ACOG class on Medical Management of Spontaneous and Elective Abortion. According to the group, “This course will review medical management of early pregnancy loss and abortion protocols, pain management, and complications.” According to ACOG’s final program guide Prager’s abortion class : This course will review medical management of early pregnancy loss and abortion protocols, pain management, and complications. At the end of this course, the participant should be able to: • Review epidemiology of medical abortion • Review 5 Ws of providing medical abortion: how? Who? What? When? Where? • Review appropriate patient selection • Address appropriate post-abortion follow-up • Discuss complications and how to prevent/manage them Also in their final program guide is this class on late term abortion: A Pilot Survey of Abortion Providers’ Knowledge Regarding Third-Trimester Procedures, will be presented Sunday by Jessica Maria Atrio, MD, Montefiore Hospital Einstein School of Medicine, Bronx, NY Mengyang Sun, MD.

So the next time you see ACOG discuss abortion or abortion advocates reference ACOG in a debate, keep in mind that this is primarily an organization that promotes abortion and teaches how to do abortions. No wonder so many pro-life physicians and doctors who don’t want to be involved in abortion are no longer members or not active members in ACOG.