Imagine 4 balked at the command, moving backward instead of forward.

Ibrahim Jaber was nervous as he used a video game console to guide the Frisbee-shooting robot. The goal was to maneuver the robot into position, then fire Frisbees through a target, competing against three other machines.

“Something was wrong with the programming,’ said Jaber, a 14-year-old freshman at Forest High School in Ocala. “We will have to work on recalibrating it.”

The robot, designed, built and tested in six weeks, was taking part in Robocon Tampa Bay 2013, an event held at the Martinez Center at the University of Tampa which showcases talents of students interested in engineering and programming.

Part of an organization called FIRST Robotics — For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology — Robocon was held in the University of Tampa’s gymnasium, which was filled with dozens of students working on their robots or competing in different age groups, ranging from children age 6 to 9 using Legos, to the high school students who made robots that can move, shoot Frisbees and climb.

Jaber was one of 85 students at Forest High to work on the project, said Peggy Brookens, director of the school’s engineering magnet program.

“They had to understand electronics and computer programming and use 3-D cad/cam systems,” said Brookens. “They had to build, model, draft, make a prototype, test it and redesign it. It is a pretty impressive endeavor.”

To Ben Weiss, a 16-year-old junior at Dwyer High School in Palm Beach, building his team’s robot, called Vertigo, was all-encompassing.

“We worked all day, every day,” said Weiss, who led mechanical aspects of the effort.

For the high school students, Robocon, which continues Sunday, takes place in the international robotics championship “off season.”

Weiss said his team, made up of students from Dwyer High School and Jupiter High School, have competed around the state and even at the world championship which took place in St. Louis in April.

“I want to be some type of engineer when I grow up,” he said.

Terri Willingham, regional director for FIRST Robotics in Central Florida, said in addition to offering the students a chance to build robots and compete, Robocon is a way to show business leaders there is a lot of talent in the area.

Talent, she said, that educators hope business leaders will want to keep here.

“There are a lot of bright kids here,” said Willingham. “There are $17 million worth of scholarships available to students who take part in this program.”

haltman@tamaptrib.com

(813) 259-7629