Sue Larson stands in front of the home her great-grandfather built, holding a saw and brick used in building the home in Erie on Tuesdsay. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

Sue Larson's impression of Erie's earliest days looks like this: her paternal great grandfather, James L. Wilson, holding court in the family's living room with a gavel near his left hand and a revolver near his right.

Back then, in the late 19th century, the town's estimated 50-plus charter residents upon incorporation on Nov. 16, 1874 — two years before Colorado became a state — rotated civic roles.

So, though a carpenter and brick mason, Wilson served as judge, justice of the peace, first fire protection booster with his hose company, and mayor more than once.

But his lasting claim to fame entails building the town's Methodist church in 1888 at 604 Holbrook St.

He built many more structures. Some still stand — including his brick home built in 1887 at 724 Holbrook St.

Others are gone for good.

Nevertheless, Boulder resident Larson, 57, calls the old town her great grandfather helped build the "real" Erie because until the late 1990s — more than a century after its incorporation — the population never grew much beyond 1,000 residents.

Today, it is a modern boom town.

The headcount in 2014 hit 21,500 residents; town hall employed 258 people; and the operating budget exceeded $49.5 million, according to Erie's website.

Yet, new residents may not realize this place went without paved roads until 1999 and started as a coal mining and farming community, said Jim Stull, Erie resident and author of "Images of America: Erie" (Arcadia Publishing).

He plans on presenting vintage photographs and stories from Erie's earliest days at the town's 140th anniversary celebration sponsored by the Erie Historical Society and Erie Historic Preservation Board Wednesday evening at the Erie Community Center.

The town's last major celebration in 1974 came with a king and queen and commemorative coins, Erie town clerk Nancy Parker, said.

"This celebration isn't as big, but it is about community awareness. And Erie is growing so fast that the fear is we'll lose some of that small town feel without this kind of thing," she said.

In this undated photo, Jean (Wilson Larson) Slater — Sue Larson's paternal grandmother — stands with her brother, Fred Wilson, in the Wilson-Larson general store on Briggs Street in Erie. She took over as her brother's business partner when her first husband, Harry Larson, died in 1927. She retired in 1951. (Erie Historical Society / Courtesy photo)

A town time forgot

Small town, indeed.

Until the 1960s, the telephone company billed calls placed in Erie to the outside world — even to Boulder just 14 miles away — as long distance calls, Larson said.

Until the 1950s, the town never bothered to mark streets with signs, Stull added. Letters nevertheless arrived at the correct house with no more address than "Erie, Colorado."

Even with street signs to guide them, visitors still puzzle over Main Street's location, which runs west of and parallel to the true main drag — Briggs Street, named after Cordelia Briggs, wife of a Civil War Union Army chaplain from Erie, Pa.

When that circuit minister, the Rev. Richard J. Van Valkenberg, settled with his family in Erie in 1867 and organized the Methodist Church out of their living room, he also named the settlement after his hometown.

Ira Austin discovered coal in the area a year earlier, which fueled the need to formalize the settlement growing up along the west bank of Coal Creek.

The freshly minted Town of Erie quickly became home then to miners representing more than a dozen nationalities, according to an oral history report written in 1974 by Erie High School students in sociology and history classes.

However, when the students interviewed Larson's grandmother, the then-retired woman explained that miners toiled under dangerous conditions.

She recalled one of her uncles leaving for work on horseback before sunrise, returning every night after dark, and mining a coal vein so shallow that he could not stand up to work.

National history in the making

John Garcia, an Erie resident and former longtime Erie Historic Preservation Board member, said that the miners' plight made him passionate about keeping Erie's hardscrabble history alive.

"It was those coal miners that brought out all the things I thought about (researching)," he said. "... How many people lived off these mines and faced the danger of going to work every day and not knowing what was going to happen to them?"

Apart from typing captions on unmarked photos hanging in Erie's town hall — he knew one depicting a row of horses and a row of men documented their weekend penchant for horseracing and betting — Garcia said his understanding of local history reminds him to be more neighborly.

"These people needed to help one another, and they did," he said.

Stull's research shows how by 1927 Josephine Roche — a single woman who owned several area coal mines — rallied for workers' rights after the Columbine Mine Massacre in November that year.

That standoff between striking miners and Colorado militiamen with machine guns left six miners dead and between 60 and 80 others injured, according to Stull's account.

The tragedy prompted Roche, who eventually owned the Rocky Mountain Fuel Co. that operated the Columbine Mine in Erie, to permit miners to unionize.

Her historic move set a precedent for improved conditions and workers' rights for miners nationwide.

"With my business background, it was enlightening to see all of the little struggles in the past that have led to so many companies today that are great places to work," said Stull, who earned his doctorate in organizational communication from Purdue University in Indiana and retired as a professor from San Jose State University in California before moving to Erie in 2006.

On a smaller scale, Larson remembered hearing of how her relatives weathered the Great Depression in Erie shortly after the mining crisis.

During those years, her grandmother — whose first husband, Harry Larson, died in 1927 — operated the Wilson-Larson general store on Briggs Street established by her brother and late husband.

That woman, Jean (Wilson Larson) Slater, ran the store upon Harry Larson's death as the single parent of Sue Larson's father, Melvin Larson, until 1951.

"And everyone knew my grandmother in that town because she fed half of them during the Depression, which says something about her and them," Sue Larson said.

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or at 303-746-0942.