Wellmark’s downtown Des Moines headquarters. (Photo: Special to the Register)

Iowa's largest health insurer is teaming with hospital systems to offer new health coverage that organizers hope will provide efficient, effective care.

Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield leaders say the new plans' customers should include people with moderate incomes who are seeking federal subsidies from the Affordable Care Act.

Those Iowans will finally be able to choose Wellmark plans next year — but their policies generally will only cover care at hospitals and clinics aligned with Mercy Health System, based in Des Moines, or the University of Iowa Health System in eastern Iowa.

Wellmark, the state’s biggest health insurer, previously declined to sell policies on Iowa’s version of the federal health insurance marketplace. The online system, which launched in 2013, is the only place to buy policies that qualify for subsidies. Wellmark leaders correctly predicted the marketplace would be plagued by bugs and hassles. But they say it’s better now, and they’re going to offer 2017 policies in 47 counties.

The new policies will be HMO plans that Wellmark will co-own with the Des Moines-based Mercy system and with the University of Iowa Health Alliance, which includes the Genesis system in the Quad Cities, Mercy Medical Center in Cedar Rapids and the Great River system in Burlington.

The new plans will be offered to people buying individual plans on or off the Obamacare marketplace and to small businesses. Organizers expect demand to build over several years, as the plans show results in holding down costs and providing good care.

“It’s really focused on keeping people well, instead of waiting for patients to show up in the emergency room,” said Jennifer Vermeer, chief operating officer of the University of Iowa Health Alliance. Vermeer, the former chief of Iowa’s Medicaid program, said the new arrangement will include innovative approaches. For example, she said, members of the UI plan will be able to use video-chat software on their phones or computers to talk with doctors about simple health matters for free.

The new plans will pay for some specialized care outside of the network, such as transplants or treatments of rare diseases not available at Mercy or the UI. Emergency care also will be covered at outside hospitals. But most care will only be covered if it's provided within one of the two networks.

Wellmark said the new plans will be up to 15 percent less expensive than its traditional open-network policies. They hope to expand the new plans to more counties as other clinics and hospitals agree to join. They also expect some large employers to show interest in offering the plans as options to their workers.

Steven Kukla, a vice president for the Mercy system, said the new plans will be more customer-friendly than HMOs offered in the past. Mercy owned one of those plans for a few years in the early 1990s, but folded it. The new versions of HMOs are less restrictive, he said. For example, patients wanting to see medical specialists won’t need referrals from primary care doctors if the specialists are within the network.

Kukla said the ownership arrangement means the hospital systems will have a direct stake in how well patients fare. The plans will make money if participants remain relatively well. Health coaches will help make that happen, he said. The HMOs will lose money if the patients receive unnecessary treatments and tests.

Janis Van Ahn, an independent Johnston insurance agent who specialize in health policies, said Wellmark’s approach makes sense. Wellmark is being careful in how much exposure it has to risk in the Obamacare marketplace, in which some other carriers have lost money, she said. “They’re dipping their toe in the water,” she said.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1X4Eyrr