In 2014, AL.com and Alabama Public Radio are examining how the Affordable Care Act is affecting the cost, availability and quality of health care in Alabama. We asked what it means to you, and you’ve responded.

Hundreds of Alabamians have shared specific personal experiences that explain why they're in favor of the law or against it. These stories are helping to guide and inform our reporting.

Here’s a closer look at one experience:

Name: Ty Burden

Age: 40

City: Mobile

Her situation: Count Burden among the multitude of Americans who previously could not buy health insurance because of a pre-existing condition. More than that, though, the Mobile woman racked up crushing debt because of an uninsured hospital stay.

“Last year, I was very, very sick,” said Burden, who has suffered from asthma since she was 6. “Prior to this, I could never get insurance.”

Burden said her illness almost cost her her life last year. “I went for my inhaler and found that it was empty,” she said.

Burden said she spent three days in a coma. She recovered but woke up with thousands of dollars’ worth of debt from the hospital bills. She said she slowly is paying it off.

Her view: Burden strongly supports the Affordable Care Act, which requires insurance companies to enroll the sick and prohibits them from charging higher premiums.

Burden said she used to shell out $75 to buy an inhaler over the counter. When she needed to see a doctor, she said, she would pay $200 out of pocket for the visit.

“I’m able to make sure I had an inhaler and EpiPen (an auto-injector) and everything I need,” she said. “I can go to a regular doctor. I was never able to do that before.”

As the executive director of an event planning company she co-founded, Burden said she did not make enough money to afford insurance. She said she qualified for a $225 monthly subsidy, which allowed her to buy a “silver” Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama policy on the federal health care exchange. Her monthly cost for the premium is $25.

“This is really just saving my life,” she said, adding that her co-workers also have signed up for insurance in the government marketplace.

The bigger picture: One of the key features of Obamacare – and one of its most popular, according to surveys – is the ban on using pre-existing health problems to deny or charge more for coverage.

Previously, insurance companies sometimes refused to sell policies to people who already had a severe medical condition. Other times, insurers would allow people with chronic conditions to purchase policies but would charge prices well above rates quoted for healthy customers.

Critics contend that younger and healthier customers are paying inflated prices to subsidize older and sicker consumers whose health problems make them more expensive to cover.



CLICK HERE TO SHARE YOUR AFFORDABLE CARE ACT STORY