Please enable Javascript to watch this video

(KPLR) – With the renewed focus on preventative healthcare as a part of the Affordable Care Act; Dr. Sonny Saggar, was on the KPLR News 11 noon show with Shannon Woodcock from Delta Dental Health Theater to discuss how looking after your teeth can affect our overall health.

Dr. Sonny Saggar is an internist, an urgent care physician and emergency physician, on staff at hospitals all over town. Shannon Woodcock is the Executive Director of Delta Dental Health Theater, and you can find out more about this on the KPLR website, as well as DDHTSTL.ORG

1. Is it really true that good teeth help prevent heart disease?

Sonny: Yes, it`s totally true. It`s been shown time and again that dental and gum disease can double one`s risk of vascular problems like blocked coronaries, like stroke and who knows what else? A number of recent studies suggest that you may already have a cheap and powerful weapon against heart attacks, strokes, and other heart disease conditions. It costs less than $2 and is sitting on your bathroom counter. It is none other than the humble toothbrush. I`ve brought in a friend today, Shannon Woodcock, of the Delta Dental Health Theater, that does an amazing job educating kids (and adults) about the importance of dental health.

2. Tell me about the Delta Dental Health Theatre.

Shannon: The Delta Dental Health Theatre has been educating children in the St. Louis community for 37 years. We offer a unique blend of fun, entertainment and education to promote healthy life-choices. Our guests enjoy an interactive 45 minute program, that includes an educational video, and interactive games and discussions that educate and inspire children and families to take care of their smiles and to adopt a healthy lifestyle.

3. So, you address topics beyond oral health care? How is oral health tied to your overall health?

Shannon: By practicing a few simple oral health habits, you will go a long way toward keeping your healthy smile. Think of good oral health habits as part of an overall healthy lifestyle. It`s not enough to teach a child to brush and floss their teeth if they are going to go home sit on the couch, eat cheetos and drink soda all day. It is equally important to educate the parents. We are working on bringing a new program of interactive shows to St. Louis, called Healthworks, with a view to educate as many kids as possible about not just good oral health, but also overall health. But more importantly to put the 'WOW' back into health education and make healthy living fun.

4. What is HealthWorks?

Shannon: Healthworks is an evidence based interactive experience for people of all ages, with the mission to help people understand how their bodies work and how they sometimes don`t work. Missouri is the 40th healthiest state in the nation. This is alarming. We really are hungry for some way to communicate what is the right way to look after the entire body.

5. What components of overall health do you include in your programming? What topics will be at addressed in the new show?

Shannon: Currently the Theatre covers oral health, nutrition, and exercise. By expanding our programs and introduicing HealthWorks to St. Louis we will be able to add shows such as Anatomy Academy a look at the heart and lungs, Bozo`s Big Bowel Movement which covers digestion. They are very interactive educational programs that make kids say 'ewww' and 'ahhh'. We are currently seeking funding to make this possible for us to bring these valuable programs to St. Louis community. Please consider making a donation at ddhtstl.org or calling me at the Theatre 314-241-7391 for sponsorship opportunities.

St. Louis Urgent Cares has 4 locations in St. Louis:

Downtown Urgent Care

Eureka Urgent Care

Creve Coeur Urgent Care

North City Urgent Care

You can also connect with Dr. Saggar, the Medical Director at St. Louis Urgent Cares, and ask him any questions you like via:

Sonny Saggar MD

You can also connect with Dr. Saggar, the Medical Director at St. Louis Urgent Cares, and ask him any questions you like.