The Bronx man who police say was at the center of a three-state rampage on Friday is facing a raft of charges, including sexual assault and abduction of a Pennsylvania woman, carjacking, and aggravated assault on Port Authority police officers.

A crashed SUV and a police car are seen on the upper level ramp of the George Washington Bridge on Friday, June 6.

Authorities have linked Luis Figueroa, 33, to four violent incidents that occurred between central Pennsylvania and Manhattan on Friday morning – including a fire at a Paterson car dealership and a brief police chase across the George Washington Bridge. It started with Figueroa violently abducting his girlfriend in Pennsylvania and driving east, according to Pennsylvania authorities.

Related story: Bronx man linked to Pennsylvania abductions is arrested after GWB car chase

Late Friday night, New Jersey State Police said they had charged Figueroa in connection with an encounter at an I-80 rest stop just inside New Jersey. There, state police said, Figueroa sexually assaulted his girlfriend, whom he had beaten with the barrel and butt of a shotgun. He also assaulted a park maintenance worker near the Delaware Water Gap and stole the keys to the worker’s minivan, police said.

Figueroa was also charged on Saturday in connection with the George Washington Bridge pursuit that ended with his capture. He faces two second-degree police evasion offenses and third-degree assault on a police officer, a spokesman for the Port Authority said Saturday. Those charges will be prosecuted in Superior Court in New Jersey, the spokesman said.

Port Authority police said they found a machete in the SUV that Figueroa drove across the bridge. He collided with two police vehicles.

Figueroa had severe burns on his body when police captured him. He was moved on Saturday to the intensive-care unit at the Burn Center at Cornell University Medical Center in Manhattan, Port Authority police spokesman Joe Pentangelo said. The two Port Authority police officers who suffered minor injuries when Figueroa’s car collided with theirs near the bridge were released from Holy Name Hospital in Teaneck, he said.

Pentangelo said Figueroa was a “career criminal,” citing 39 arrests dating back to 1997.

The police chief in Hazelton, Penn., where the alleged abduction took place, said Friday that other law-enforcement officials told him Figueroa had set fire to a Paterson car dealership and assaulted a car salesman there, but Passaic County officials still would not comment on the fire investigation or say if charges were pending.

The Passaic County Prosecutor’s Office is involved in the investigation, but an assistant prosecutor declined to comment on its status Saturday.

On Friday, a salesman at Hosanna Motors on Totowa Avenue told The Record that Figueroa doused a shed on the property with gasoline and ignited it with a match. And the owner of the dealership — also a relative of Figueroa — said she believed Figueroa was exacting revenge. The owner, Frances Martinez, said she and her husband had evicted Figueroa on Wednesday from another car dealership in Paterson that he leased from them.

The conditions of the other people injured during the Friday morning incidents was still unclear.

New Jersey State Police Sgt. Gregory Williams said Figueroa’s girlfriend escaped at the Route 80 rest stop by taking control of the car when Figueroa got out. She drove to the post office in Columbia, where she was found bleeding profusely from the head and fading in and out of consciousness. She was taken to a nearby hospital.

Back at the rest area, Williams said, Figueroa hid the shotgun in brush by the Delaware River before assaulting the park maintenance worker and stealing the keys to his minivan.

Staff Writer Shawn Boburg contributed to this story.

Email: morrison@northjersey.com