Buy Photo Nalazja Howard (right) , 8, of Asbury Park wins a potato sack race at Saturday’s event. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

How are you going to spend your summer vacation?

That's the question Mayor Myra Campbell posed to children, teens, young adults and parents who came out to the Super Safe Summer Event at Springwood Park on the West Side Saturday.

"We are here to let you know we care about each and every one of you and if you need a job, we can help you find one," she said to families waiting in line for hot dogs and hamburgers being cooked on a grill by volunteers with Interfaith Neighbors, Inc.

"If you need help keeping your kids active and out of trouble, we have programs for that, too," said the mayor, emphasizing that parents need to be firm when giving their child a choice of a fun summer program and then follow through to make sure they sign up for it and attend.

The event was hosted by the Asbury Park Community Development Initiative and the Asbury Park Community Action Network as a way to let the community know about available programs that can help them find jobs, summer camps and educational programs for children, and resources that can help families thrive.

Super Safe Summer also will be used to launch a "WE CAN" media campaign in the city that will include a billboard campaign displaying inspirational and anti-drug messages.

Thomas C. Huth, director of the Monmouth County Prosecutor's Office Major Crimes Bureau, said that this is the first joint event between the city, community groups, church groups, nonprofits, municipal alliance groups and law enforcement.

"We are trying to promote awareness of the good things that are happening on the west side of town and its cultural richness where families have lived for many generations," Huth said. "One component of the law enforcement aspect is crime prevention, and we're hoping by being visible in the community it will serve as a way to prevent crime.

The Asbury Park Press, Mercy Center, Community Affairs and Resource Center, the Covenant House, Faith Based Initiative Group, Bethel Christian Center, and Monmouth County Division of Workforce Development were among the groups represented who handed out information, books, toys, water, art supplies, and candy. All who wanted received a free T-shirt.

The vacant grassy lot where the event was held is within view of the vacant and boarded up Boston Way public housing complex, which is scheduled for demolition.

But there is also a view of the Springwood building, and the facilities in it, such as the Kula Café, a community café and job-training program owned and operated by Interfaith Neighbors.

"The Springwood building is the first building that's been built in this area in 44 years," said George Korman, who is involved with the Asbury Park Community Action Network.

The Rev. Lyddale Akins, pastor at Triumphant Life Church, which provided music for the event, said he hoped to promote a city program that gives residents grants of up to $15,000 to make repairs to their homes.

"Poor living conditions can contribute to violence in a community," he said, adding that homeowners living in Section 8 housing may even be able to qualify to purchase their own home through government programs.

For every 1,000 residents here, 21 were the victims of violence in 2010, according to the latest State Police statistics. The city holds the distinction of having the highest crime rate in Monmouth County.

Six people have been shot in Asbury Park so far this year, one of them fatally, according to the Asbury Park Police Department. One of those shot was a toddler, caught in crossfire on the 700 block of Comstock Avenue. By the end of April last year, seven people had been shot, police said.

Last year, just over half of the 68 high school seniors graduated. That left 33 students without a diploma.

Friday night, 60 law enforcement officers swept through the city to serve 200 outstanding warrants and make arrests for crimes ranging from failure to pay child support to more serious indictable offenses.

Deputy Police Chief Anthony Salerno, who was at the Super Safe Summer event, said the goal of the sweep was to send a message that violence and crime won't be tolerated in the city.

As Asbury Park Police mingled with families and children, McGruff, the crime prevention mascot, shook hands with people, and Monmouth County detectives handed out water and fliers promoting Monmouth County Crime Stoppers, a program that pays up to $5,000 to anonymous tipsters for information that leads to the identification, arrest and prosecution of any suspect in unsolved murders. Fliers were handed out highlighting several city murders, including the March 2006 murder of Jakeema Kelly and the May 2011 murder of Edric Gordon.

Catherine Nickens, outreach minister for Faith Baptist Tabernacle Church, here, said more programs to keep youth active could help keep crime down.

"We need more programs in Asbury Park and in Neptune, too," said Nickens, who lives in Neptune.

Mayor Campbell said the city has a summer camp and recreation programs ranging from basketball and soccer to swimming and track. The Boys and Girls Clubs of Monmouth County also offers a Summer by the Sea Day Camp, which offers educational activities, performing arts, sports and field trips plus breakfast, lunch and a snack. And, the Asbury Park Library has a summer reading program.

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/eatontown-asbury-park/2014/06/14/super-safe-summer-event-asbury-park/10528039/