The Supreme Court debated God and beards Tuesday, and the result did not seem promising for Arkansas prison officials who refuse to let prisoners grow facial hair in accordance with their faith.

The justices pelted a deputy attorney general from the state with so many tonsorial inquiries he had trouble keeping up. In the end, they seemed to indicate that they found it hard to believe the state’s contention that a half-inch beard poses more of a security threat than the hair on top of an inmate’s head, which is unregulated.

“You have no comparable rule about hair on one’s head, where it seems more could be hidden than in the beard . . . hide something in a beard, and it might drop out,” Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said.

Replied the attorney, David A. Curran, “Your point speaks to contraband, and I agree as a matter of common sense and logic there is a length and gravity component to a head that’s different than a beard, for sure.

“But the risk is still there none the same.”

Gregory Houston Holt, an Arkansas prison inmate, is challenging prison rules that ban beards grown for religious reasons. (Arkansas Department of Corrections)

It went on like that for quite some time. Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr., who coincidentally as a lower-court judge once wrote an opinion that said Muslim police officers have a right to grow beards, seemed particularly intent on picking holes in the state’s argument.

On the contraband point, where the state worried about razors or SIM cards for cellphones, he proposed another solution.

“Why can’t the prison just give the inmate a comb . . . and if there’s anything in there, if there’s a SIM card in there or a revolver — or anything else you think can be hidden in a 1/2-inch beard, a tiny revolver — it’ll fall out,” Alito said.

A second argument, that the ban was necessary for identification purposes inside the prison or if an inmate escaped, was no more successful with Alito.

The challenge was brought by Gregory Houston Holt, who is serving a life sentence for slitting the throat of a former girlfriend and stabbing her in the chest. He is also known as Abdul Maalik Muhammad, and according to his brief to the court, he feels his Muslim faith requires him to follow this dictate: “Allah’s Messenger said, ‘Cut the moustaches short and leave the beard (as it is).’ ”

Holt said he is willing to compromise with prison officials and keep his beard trimmed to one-half inch. But Arkansas corrections officials allow beards only for dermatological conditions — not religious beliefs — and even then they must be trimmed to one-quarter inch.

Holt is pressing his claim under the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000, which was passed expressly to protect religious practices from the whims of state and local officials.

It says that a substantial limit on a prisoner’s exercise of religion can be justified only if it is the least restrictive means to further a compelling government interest. The court ruled last year that the contraceptive coverage mandate in the Affordable Care Act failed essentially the same test under a related law, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

Lower courts had ruled that deference to prison officials required them to uphold Arkansas’s restrictions, even though a magistrate said it was “preposterous” to believe that contraband could be hidden in a short beard.

The Obama administration and a coalition of religious groups are supporting Holt, and Justice Stephen G. Breyer wondered how much deference was due when more than 40 states and the Federal Bureau of Prisons make such accommodations.

“Would you say it’s an exaggerated fear that people would hide something in their beards when, in a country of a very high prison population, not one example has ever been found of anybody hiding anything in his beard?” Breyer asked.

The problem for the court, several justices said, was how far to go. What about a Sikh inmate who is forbidden to cut his hair and wears it in a turban? Would a full beard be more of a contraband threat than a short one?

Douglas Laycock, a University of Virginia law professor representing Holt, tried his best not to get caught up in hypotheticals more complicated than the half-inch whiskers his client requested.

“Sooner or later, you will have to decide one of those cases. But this case . . . is only about half an inch,” Laycock said, adding that the law makes it the state’s burden to prove why a policy affecting his client’s religious beliefs is necessary.

Justice Antonin Scalia questioned just how deep those beliefs were. Holt is supposed to have a full beard, so why does he compromise? Scalia asked.

Laycock said Holt was trying to meet prison officials halfway and shouldn’t be penalized for trying to be “reasonable.”

“Well, religious beliefs aren’t reasonable,” Scalia said. “I mean, religious beliefs are categorical. You know, it’s ‘God tells you.’ It’s not a matter of being reasonable. God be reasonable? He’s supposed to have a full beard.”

The case is Holt v. Hobbs.