When the rate started to fall, it was months into the slowest recovery since World War II. It was also mostly because people gave up on looking for a job, and many of those lucky enough to have a job were still underemployed. Economic growth has been weak, at 0.5 percent in the last quarter and 1.4 percent before that. That's why 70 percent of Americans feel we are on the wrong track.

Then there's the utter failure of the launch of the Affordable Care Act. After months of promising people that if they liked their insurance plans and their doctors, they could keep both, the American people awoke to a very different reality. Their insurance plans were canceled, and they faced serious premium hikes to replace those plans.

It was made worse by the confession of one of the architects of the health-care law, Jonathan Gruber, that Obamacare was written in a "tortured way to make sure [the Congressional Budget Office] did not score the mandate as taxes." The point was to mislead people about the law so that it could be pushed down their throats.

Then came the Veterans Affairs scandal, exposing the department as plagued by massive inefficiencies and mismanagement, leading to the unforgivable deaths of veterans waiting for care.

Every administration has had its share of scandals, deceptions, or epic failures. Just since 2001, we've had: an intelligence breakdown that failed to prevent 9/11; a botched response to Hurricane Katrina; misleading claims about Iraqi weapons of mass destruction; flu vaccine and cancer treatment shortages triggered by mismanagement at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, along with the Food and Drug Administration; and so much more.

These are just some of the failures that come on top of the multitude of government programs that promise to: end poverty but don't; support small businesses or exports but simply amount to picking winners and losers; and fix the underlying causes of the last financial crisis but just end up building a wall of protection around traditional Wall Street interest groups at the expense of small banks and consumers.

No matter who is in office, government will usually fail you. That's because government is inherently incapable of performing certain tasks well.

An unseen army of bureaucrats and agencies is just as self-interested as the worst of the politicians we elect but considerably less accountable. Honorable politicians who truly want to do the right thing find themselves battling with bureaucratic structures that supposedly serve the public but in reality only serve themselves. This means that most government expansions are bound to fail from the start regardless of who is in charge.

Economist F.A. Hayek once warned his profession against the dangers of "the pretense of knowledge." He might as well have been addressing the lawmakers and bureaucrats who want to intervene in our lives on a daily basis through new regulations and programs. He urged economists and social scientists to maintain humility about the limits of their knowledge and reject the impulse to bind themselves with the heady authority of "expertise" by experimenting with and controlling the populations that they believe need their guidance.

That pretense of knowledge applies to government, and it explains why it fails and why we shouldn't trust it.

Veronique de Rugy is a senior research fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. She wrote this for InsideSources.com.