When Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe came to power in late 2012, he hoped a weaker yen would give exporters a much-needed boost as well as spur the inflation needed to revive the world's third biggest economy.

Eighteen months on and after an almost 30 percent decline in the yen's value driven by massive monetary stimulus from the Bank of Japan, the currency has failed to lead to the export boom the government had hoped for.

Japan's annual exports declined in May for the first time in 15 months, latest data show. More disturbingly, say economists, is that the yen's decline has failed to boost export volumes, which peaked in 2007 and fell for a third year running in 2013.

Read MoreJapan machinery orders fall 19.5% on month in May

Frederic Neumann, co-head of Asian economic research at HSBC, says the impact of a weaker currency will be felt; it will just take longer than anticipated.

"The Japanese export boost has yet to come. Once Japanese firms have taken the decision that they want to gain foreign export share and start to factor in a weaker yen and build up domestic capacity for expanding production, we will see an impact," he said.

"We think this will happen gradually and exports will start to pick up in the second half. The real kick is only likely to come in 2015/16," Neumann added.

Cautious

Economists cite a number of reasons for why exports, the engine of Japan's economic growth since the country industrialized in the late 19th century, have failed to see a significant boost from the yen's hefty decline against other major currencies.

Read MoreJapan current account improves in May, outlook grim

One is that Japanese firms have not used the opportunity to aggressively cut their prices and gain market share in overseas markets as they have done during previous episodes of yen weakness.

A study from the Japanese business journal the Nikkei earlier this year showed that in the past, a 20 percent decline in the yen's value may have led to a 17 percent reduction in overseas prices. But this time, the cut has only been about 6 percent.

Japan Inc, in short, has been trying to maximize profits by not cutting prices, analysts say.

Read MoreFund managers set their sights on unloved Japan

"Companies last year didn't cut their dollar prices, they didn't try to get market share," Neumann explains. "They could have been more aggressive, the reason they weren't is that nobody in Japan believed the yen would stay weak so companies were very slow in adapting."

Global backdrop

Tim Condon, the head of research for Asia at ING Financial Markets, adds that Japan's exporters would struggle even with the weak yen because global demand is weak.

Read MoreCan Sweden avert 'Nordic Japan' fate?

Exports to the U.S., Japan's biggest export market, fell 2.8 percent in May on-year – the first fall in 17 months.

"We're seeing the slowest world trade growth since 2011, so it would be unrealistic to expect Japan's exports to do well," Condon said.