Who is the enigmatic Mona Lisa of healthcare? Hunt is on to find model who is face of shambolic Obamacare website



Website launched on October 1 but has been inundated with problems

One feature has always been there - the smiling photo of a mystery woman



Conservative blogger David Burge tweeted she is now the 'most despised face on planet'



She has been floating across TV screens and smiling out from computer screens across the U.S. but who is the girl in the stock photo on the shambolic Obamacare website?

Since it first launched on October 1, the website has been inundated with teething problems .

But at least one feature on the homepage has always been there - the smiling stock photo of a

mystery woman.



Despite the number of technical glitches the Obamacare website has been experiencing, stock photo girl keeps on smiling

The satirical website The Onion published a story on Tuesday called 'People In Healthcare.gov Stock Photos Now Visibly Panicking'.

Even 'stock photo girl' looks alarmed by the glitches on the website judging by her eyebrows.



And then Conservative blogger David Burge tweeted: 'Congrats, vapidly smiling Healthcare.gov splash page stock photo girl! You're now the most despised face on planet Earth.'



So the question on everyone's lips is - who is this woman? And does she mind being dubbed the most hated woman in the U.S.?

But in this satirical version of the website on The Onion, even stock photo girl looks like she is beginning to worry

Jeanne Moos, from CNN, said: 'A small company that originally worked on the homepage told CNN she was originally part of the mock-up from the design folks.

'We checked stock photo files but couldn't find her.'

Even President Barack Obama's supporters have been critical of the website's performance which has been plagued with problems from the start.



Obama said this week there 'is no excuse' for the glitches.



Conservative blogger David Burge didn't hold back when he tweeted that stock-photo girl is the most despised face 'on the planet'

He said despite the problems, the insurance enrolment websites were enabling people to sign up for affordable coverage.

But those attempting to sign up for health insurance have reported persistent issues since the October 1 roll-out.

In Monday's Rose Garden event, Mr Obama conceded that healthcare.gov 'hasn't worked as smoothly as it was supposed to work'.