People Moves of the Week: Evercore, Fried Frank, Barnes & Thornberg

Evercore hires new head of capital markets; Fried Frank hires three partners; Barnes & Thornberg taps entertainment adviser Carolyn Hunt

Barnes & Thornburg LLP — The Los Angeles law firm has tapped entertainment attorney Carolyn Hunt to be a part of its ranks. Hunt, whose expertise includes film and television finance and distribution, joins Barnes & Thornburg as a partner. Previously, she was at Loeb & Loeb LLP.

Midcap Financial — The Bethesda, Maryland-based lender has named John Rosin managing director. Rosin comes to MidCap with over 25 years of asset based lending experience at various firms including AloStar Bank where he was a managing director, and GE Capital, as senior vice president.

Evercore (NYSE: EVR) — Jeffrey Rosichan has joined the New York investment bank’s Menlo Park, California office as a senior managing director. Rosichan was most recently managing director and vice chairman at Deutsche Bank. Prior to that, he led the U.S. equity capital markets group at Banc of America Securities. Rosichan also held a similar role at Merrill Lynch, as head of investment banking in Hong Kong.

Everstone Group — The Mumbai-based private equity firm hired Bhavna Thakur as head of capital markets and exits. Previously, she was with UWant, a CSR Index with Clinton Global Foundation, connecting Internet startups with angel investors and venture capital funds. From October 2009 to April 2014, Thakur was at Citigroup Global Markets Inc., also in Mumbai. Prior to that, she held leadership positions at several firms, including Morgan Stanley, Paul Weiss Rifkind Wharton & Garrison LLP and Davis Polk and Wardwell LLP.

Fried Frank Harris Shriver & Jacobson LLP — Mark Mifsud, Kate Downey and Alexandra Conroy will join the New York law firm as partners in the asset management practice. They will be based in Fried Frank's London branch. They counsel fund sponsors and financial institutions across asset classes including private equity, venture and growth, infrastructure, credit and real estate. Previously, they were private funds partners at Kirkland & Ellis International LLP, also in London.

Oppenheimer & Co. — The New York investment bank brought in Harry Wool as a managing director in New York. He previously worked at Sterne Agee Group Inc. and Gleacher & Co. His experience includes establishing and then managing the emerging markets fixed income business at New York-based Miller Tabak Roberts LLC.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: