Photo

EDISON, N.J. — Fathers and sons go together in golf like tee boxes and drivers. Where you find one, the other typically follows. For many of the top players, their fathers were the ones who breathed life into their golf dreams. That was certainly the case for Ryan Palmer, a Texan who was 9 when his father, Butch, introduced him to the game.

Golf helped cement the bond between Palmer and his father, who once played to a 6 handicap. It was the tool by which Palmer’s father instilled in his son lasting lessons about sportsmanship and self-respect.

In an instant, a parent-child tie almost 39 years in the knotting unraveled horribly on a highway outside Palmer’s hometown, Amarillo. On Aug. 19, Palmer’s father was killed in a sport-utility-vehicle rollover. He was 71.

Ten days later, Palmer shot his third consecutive sub-70 score, a five-under-par 65, for a 54-hole total of nine under at the Barclays, the first event in the FedEx Cup playoffs. He was tied for fourth with Zach Johnson, the reigning British Open champion, and Henrik Stenson, two strokes behind the leaders, Sang-Moon Bae and Jason Day, who carded 63s.

Palmer’s serenity in the face of all the resistance that Plainfield Country Club has presented suggests that the father-son connection survived the crash on Loop 335, near the State Highway 136 exit.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“When I get inside the ropes, I get those four hours to not think a whole lot about it and really try to play golf with some peace and comfort,” he said.

The difference this week, compared with the others in this season in which Palmer has recorded four top-10 finishes, is his concentration. He said he had never been so keenly focused on each shot and so quick to refocus on the next.

“I’m always hard on myself, but I’ve not made one comment on one shot all week,” Palmer said, “and I’m able to move on to the next hole and start the next hole with a good shot, and I think that’s been key for this week.”

A perfect example was the 16th hole. Palmer’s second shot on the par 5 found a greenside bunker, leaving him with a difficult stance for his next shot. With his left foot in the sand and his right leg bent as if he were a jogger limbering up in the goatee of grass above the bunker lip, Palmer swiped at the ball, but it rolled back into the sand. He hit his next shot fat and two-putted for a bogey 6.

“I’m telling myself, ‘O.K., it’s O.K., got a little bad break there,’ but I’m not letting those breaks or shots affect me,” said Palmer, who rebounded with two solid pars to keep himself in contention for a fourth PGA Tour title and his first since the 2010 Sony Open.

Sports Newsletter Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.

The fingerprints of fathers were all over Plainfield Country Club. Bubba Watson, who ended the round in third, one stroke off the pace, talked Friday about how his father, Gerry, had showed him how to grip a golf club and then let him play, never to bestow or suggest another lesson.

Day, who won the P.G.A. Championship in his last start, said his golf career was made possible by his father’s death. After his father died of cancer, Day said, golf became the vehicle that steered him clear of the trouble he was finding around every corner in his native Australia.

Two volunteers whose fathers imbued them with a love for golf walked with Palmer’s group. Ron Vincek, the scorekeeper, said his father, who is 90, played once a week and called him every weekend from Florida to go over his round.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“What he shot and the whole deal,” Vincek said. His father’s goal, Vincek added, is to have four generations of Vincek men, including Vincek’s 9-year-old grandson, play a round together. Vincek and the standard-bearer, Nick Rogus, could not help putting themselves in Palmer’s position and imagining trying to battle both their grief and the course.

“We were marveling the whole time at what a great round it was,” Vincek said.

The fans in the gallery were supportive, yelling, “Go, Aggies,” as Palmer, who went to Texas A&M, made his way around the course. On the 18th hole, Rogus said, somebody yelled, “God bless your father.” Palmer responded with a thumbs-up sign.

“He was very, very appreciative to everybody,” Rogus said. “Just a great guy.”

Palmer’s caddie, James Edmondson, has spent the last few nights eating dinner with Palmer and coaxing him to talk about his father.

“It’s the elephant in the room; I’m not going to ignore it,” Edmondson said. He added, “It’s pretty cool what he’s doing right now under the circumstances.”

Edmondson said he worried that the time between Saturday’s finish and Sunday’s start, roughly 20 hours, “was going to be the hardest part.”

On Saturday night, Palmer’s wife, Jennifer, was scheduled to join them from Texas. After she watches her husband’s final round, she is dragging Palmer to the first two days of tennis’s United States Open so she can see Roger Federer play.

That drive to Queens will be scarier than any blind tee shot this week. Every time Palmer gets behind the wheel, he thinks of his father.

“It’s crept into my mind, for sure,” Palmer said. “There’s no doubt about it. I mean, it can happen fast. But unfortunate that it happened, and obviously we’re dealing with the pain as best we can.”