When it comes to getting screened for cancer, Americans aren’t doing so well. Screening rates are below target rates that the government would like to meet by 2020, and not getting any better.

For breast and colorectal cancers, screening rates have stayed relatively the same since 2000 and 2010, according to a recent report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) published in MMWR in 2015. Meanwhile, screening rates for cervical cancer (think Pap smears) have plummeted since 2010.

That information may mean more when you consider this: “Screening and early detection are the most important steps you can take to combat cancer,” says Jame Abraham, MD, director of the breast oncology program at Cleveland Clinic in Ohio. While he admits that many of the screening tests are far from perfect, they’re still better than nothing.

If you can catch cancer at in early stage, after all, that's when it's most treatable. “Once you move into advanced stages, it’s extremely difficult to cure and will be more about symptom management,” he says.

Of the people who aren’t getting proper cancer screening on time, certain populations are more affected, according to the new CDC report. They include Hispanics, African-Americans, Asians, and people with low-income.

Top Obstacles to Getting Cancer Screening

What’s holding people back from checking for cancer? The reasons vary, but while finances might be the most obvious, it may not be the most common barrier.

“In the data we’ve been collecting to understand this problem, financial issues are becoming less of a reason, largely because more people are carrying health insurance under the Affordable Care Act,” says Jacquelyne Bailey, PhD, director of community outreach and patient navigation at Cleveland Clinic in Ohio. But even with health insurance, some people who get screened then often can’t afford additional tests or treatment.

When it comes to non-financial reasons, both consumers and the healthcare industry are to blame. Dr. Bailey says her data, for instance, indicates that lack of time to get a screening is holding many back, especially if they can’t take time off from work.

Motivation is another issue, she finds, because even if finances aren’t an issue, people need to want to get screened in the first place.

Many people also don’t have a primary care provider who can advise them on what screenings they might need. “As a result, they may not understand their risk of developing cancer,” says Deborah M. Axelrod, MD, breast cancer surgeon at New York University Langone Medical Center in New York City. Some people may also take a fatalistic view and just decide to risk it.

RELATED: 10 Cancer Screening Tests Women Need to Know About

The burden of educating the public falls on the healthcare industry, but that’s not always a sure thing, thanks to confusing cancer screening guidelines. “Primary care physicians are confronted by so many guidelines that there are no standards,” Dr. Axelrod says. “Because they’re not specialists, it can be confusing to know what guidelines to follow.”

Getting the Cancer Screening You Need

Even with all of these barriers to cancer screening, you can take steps to overcome them. How? Follow these strategies:

1) Learn about your cancer risk. Does your family have a history of cancer or do you have other risk factors that could make you more vulnerable to developing cancer? Knowing this information will give you a better idea of whether or not you should be screened, Axelrod says.

2) Find a primary care physician. Even though cancer screening guidelines can be confusing, a physician who knows your health history, including your inherited risk for cancer, can help advise the screening you may – or may not – need, Bailey says. If you can’t get a primary care physician, find a health care professional like a nurse practitioner whom you can trust to ask questions, Axelrod says.

3) Ask about low- or no-cost options for screening. The government often gives you cost breaks for screening, Axelrod says, so ask around to see if you’re eligible.

In the end, you need to become an empowered patient and take action for your own health, learning what cancer screening tests could benefit you, and then getting them if necessary.

As Abraham says, when it comes to cancer, “Early detection could save your life.”