Reid Scott had a choice to make at the last White House Correspondents’ Association Dinner: go gaga over a supermodel or chat up the House minority leader. He ultimately opted for both.

“I had a particularly unusual experience sitting at my table between [Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.)] and Linda Evangelista. I was like, this is the weirdest pairing I’ve ever been sandwiched in between,” the “Veep” star tells ITK.

ADVERTISEMENT

“At first, the seventh-grade boy inside me was just sort of like checking out Linda Evangelista. And then, as the night wore on, I was like, man, I have the opportunity to corner Nancy Pelosi here. And she was really funny. Like, she and I really got along.”

Not to mention that “Veep” fan Pelosi — who was recently named one of ITK’s “Best Dressed” on Capitol Hill — was wearing some head-turning duds, according to Scott.

“She was just sort of like an upbeat gal. She was very relaxed, very cool. She was a snappy dresser. She had this like really skintight, white lace pantsuit on. I was like, ‘Damn, girl.’ ”

“I don’t know. The whole evening was just kind of surreal,” Scott, 37, says with a laugh.

Scott, who plays the deputy director of communications, Dan Egan, to Julia Louis-Dreyfus’s fictional president on the hit HBO show, has a pretty good reason he’s unlikely to make this year’s correspondents festivities.

“We’re expecting our little guy very soon,” explains the entertainer, whose wife, Elspeth Keller, is pregnant with the couple’s first child.

The due date of Scott’s son could potentially coincide with the return of the comedy series, which premieres its fourth season on April 12. This season, Louis-Dreyfus’s character, Selina Meyer, will be the one in power in the Oval Office.

“With her new status as president, the world almost had to expand, because there are just so many more people swirling through that office,” Scott says. “I know one of the things that people tend to like about it is how dense the show is. It’s gotten even denser, but people somehow still feel included,” he says of the upcoming episodes.

For those who contend the political satire — the third season of “Veep” was released on DVD and Blu-ray this week — may be progressing too quickly with the sometimes-bumbling Meyer’s rise from vice president to POTUS, Scott says there hasn’t been a shortage of material for creator Armando Iannucci. “He seems to have no problem coming up with a list of endless problems for politicians to have,” Scott says. “I guess as long as [they] keep doing what they’re doing, we’ll still have ways to make fun of it.”