I’ve been having far too much fun with a new (?) service JibJab has, whereby you can insert anyone’s face into a ready-to-watch music video.

WAY too much fun.

So here are a few I made, below, regarding getting out the vote in November.

As you know, the congressional elections are coming up on November 4. And while the Democrats may not always be all that, they’re far better than these jokers, any day.

A Republican Senate will destroy Obamacare, which, again, wasn’t exactly what we wanted, but it was a heck of a lot better than what the GOP Congress is going to give us.

As for gay rights, in fact the Democrats have been all that and more. It took some work on all of our part, but we got sexual orientation added to the Hate Crimes law, we got “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” repealed, and we got the administration to stop defending the Defense of Marriage Act. At the same time, Obama judges on the Supreme Court gave us the margin for victory that we needed to strike down DOMA, which has led to a flood of pro-gay-marriage decisions in courts nationwide. If you’re gay, or care about gay rights, the Democrats in Congress and President Obama came through for us. And now it’s time for us to come through for them.

So, yeah, I’m going to vote Democratic on November 4. Our country paid a dear price the last time we gave Republicans control of the Congress (George Bush’s rubber-stamp lemmings come to mind). Let’s not do the Time Warp again.

Here are the videos, if you like them, please share them. Thanks, JOHN

House Version:

Personalize funny videos and birthday eCards at JibJab!

In case it wasn’t obvious, the players in the House video are Paul Ryan, John Boehner, Michele Bachmann (soon to be gone, but never forgotten), Aaron Schock, and directing the happy lemmings, David H. Koch (of the Koch Brothers). You can share the House version with friends via this page.

Senate Version:

Personalize funny videos and birthday eCards at JibJab!

As for the Senate, in order of appearance: John McCain, Mitch McConnell, Marco Rubio, Lindsey Graham, and their ringmaster, Ted Cruz. You can share the Senate version with friends via this page.

And here’s a fun third version, apropos of nothing:

Personalize funny videos and birthday eCards at JibJab!

And finally, appearing in this video are Aaron Schock, Larry Craig, Rick Perry, Lindsey Graham, and Marcus Bachmman (beloved husband of Michele). You can share the apropos-of-nothing version with friends here.

Here’s one more that I liked. It might even be my favorite. (You can share it here.)

Personalize funny videos and birthday eCards at JibJab!

Because I can’t help myself, here’s another focusing on the overall GOP Congress: