Companies: Don't forget to mail notices on exchange options





Photo: Courtesy Photo Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Jesse Gelsomini, an employment lawyer who specializes in employee benefits at Haynes and Boone in Houston. Jesse Gelsomini, an employment lawyer who specializes in employee benefits at Haynes and Boone in Houston. Photo: Courtesy Photo Image 2 of 2 Michael Abbott, an employment lawyer who specializes in employee benefits at Gardere in Houston. Michael Abbott, an employment lawyer who specializes in employee benefits at Gardere in Houston. Photo: Courtesy Photo Companies: Don't forget to mail notices on exchange options 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

Do you need health insurance coverage? If you're working, watch your mailbox or your email for details on how to buy it through the new health care marketplace.

Under the new Affordable Care Act, companies must notify their employees by Oct. 1 that they can buy health insurance through health care exchanges or, as they're now known, the health insurance "marketplace."

Even though companies have until 2015 to provide health care or pay penalties, they still have to provide the notices to employees, said Michael Abbott, an employment lawyer who specializes in employee benefits at Gardere in Houston.

Abbott said his clients are surprised to hear about the notification requirement.

They figure that with the year delay in providing coverage that they didn't have to do that, he said.

The U.S. Department of Labor has a sample letter that companies can use that spells out the marketplace's "one-stop shopping" to compare health insurance plans.

The notice also explains that participants in the exchanges may be eligible for a tax credit that would lower their monthly premiums. However, the tax credit is available only to those whose employers do not offer health insurance that meets "minimum value" standards or costs more than 9.5 percent of the employee's household income.

And those who buy from the marketplace face another hurdle: a big tax bill. Participants have to use after-tax dollars to buy coverage, according to the notice.

Currently, both the employer and employee contributions to health care plans are typically excluded from federal income taxes.

The disclosure rule applies to companies with just one employee, according to the U.S. Department of Labor. As long as they're covered under the federal law that governs minimum wage and overtime rules - the Fair Labor Standards Act -companies have to send their employees the notice.

Jesse Gelsomini, an employment lawyer who specializes in employee benefits at Haynes and Boone in Houston, has been fielding questions from clients.

One frequent question: Do companies have to distribute the notice in Spanish?

Gelsomini said there is no formal requirement, but if Spanish-speaking employees have any questions, the notice should include the name of a Spanish-speaking human resources representative who can help.