'You want to go out and pursue your dreams'

Galen Knowles, left, Phil Hessler and Brolin Mawejje answer questions from students after a screening of the documentary film "Far From Home: From Uganda To The Tetons" as part of the Boulder International Film Festival's Educational Outreach Program on Thursday, at Boulder High School. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

Boulder High film students recently watched a screening of the documentary "Far From Home: From Uganda to the Tetons," then talked to the subject and the filmmakers.

The film tells the story of Brolin Mawejje and his bid to be the first Olympic snowboarder from Uganda. Mawejje moved to Boston as a young teen to join his mother, then moved with the family of his best friend to Jackson Hole. He's now a pre-med college student with a goal of competing in the 2018 Olympics.

Mawejje told the Boulder High students that the film only "touches" on his story and struggles, including fitting in and learning a new language as the only student from Africa at his school. The only thing he doesn't like, he said, is all the footage of him falling as he learned to snowboard.

"You have to show people falling to show hope and inspiration," he said. "But I wish there were more killer shots of me snowboarding and less of me falling."

The Boulder International Film Festival organized screenings of three films at Boulder High and six other Boulder Valley schools on Thursday and Friday.

Along with "Far From Home," the films included "Lion Ark," which documents the efforts of Animal Defense International to rescue lions from now-illegal animal circuses in Bolivia, and "Havana Curveball," which documents a U.S. teenager's efforts to bring baseball equipment to Cuba.

Filmmakers answered questions after "Lion Ark," while the Boulder Cuba Sister City Organization answered questions after ""Havana Curveball."

Advertisement

"We're bringing good stories to students," said Ruth Wight, the festival's educational outreach director.

The festival also hosted a teen short film competition, and provided workshops and film screenings for youth at the Boulder Public Library this weekend.

At the Boulder High "Far From Home" screening, the filmmakers said they started out filming snowboarding, then expanded their scope to tell Mawejje's story.

Producer Phil Hessler, Mawejje's adopted brother, said the goal of the documentary is to inspire.

"I really hope people can take something positive and apply it to their own lives," he said.

His advice for young filmmakers is to "just get out there and go after it."

"There's no substitute for experience," he said.

Director — and college student — Galen Knowles said they condensed 300 hours of footage into 90 minutes. The advantage of a documentary, he said, is there's room to experiment because you shoot so much.

"You're constantly in the position to try new things," he said.

Boulder High senior Bradridge Saimon told Mawejje that the documentary made him want to do more with his life.

"It was really inspirational," he said. "You want to go out and pursue your dreams no matter what."

Senior Simone Mann said she loved the film.

"It was really nice how they showed all the adversity," she said. "You don't start out being amazing, you have to work at it. I like the reality of it."

Gabriel Nascimento, who's from Brazil, said the film was motivating, adding he encountered some of the same difficulties as Mawejje when he first came to the United States.

"It showed me to just keep living," he said.

For more information on the film festival's programming for teens and children, go to biff1.com/biff-2015/youth/. The festival ends today.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa