Getty Images Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age on Sept. 1 at the Budweiser Made In America Festival in Philadelphia.

For the last few days, Canada’s biggest city took its annual turn in the limelight hosting the Toronto International Film Festival. It was only fair that a rock concert got to join in the fun with Queens of the Stone Age landing in town this week.

The desert rockers played their biggest stage in Toronto yet, headlining the Air Canada Centre for the first time along with support act The Guards.

Illuminated by a 20-foot screen that showcased the dystopian work of recent collaborator U.K. artist Boneface, QOTSA played a full 20-track set with minimal filler and a workman-like attitude.

Touring behind …Like Clockwork, the band’s sixth album and first No.1 on the Billboard 200 chart, frontman Josh Homme kicked things off with the LP’s lead single “My God Is The Sun.” “No One Knows,” perhaps QOTSA’s biggest hit track, was played shortly thereafter, getting the night off to a good start.

Homme kept his stage banter to a minimum, a slight departure from his normal talkative self. “On tequila, I’m Josh,” Homme said during a brief moment after he introduced his fellow bandmates.

A triumvirate of slower tracks in the middle of the set appeared to dampen much of the band’s momentum with the crowd, although a reworked version of the rarely played Rated R’s “In The Fade” stood out from the pack.

The crowd picked up some steam during “Lullabies To Paralyze’s” “Little Sister” and “Smooth Sailing,” a boogie-driven track from the band’s new album. The song “Make It Wit Chu” was introduced by Homme calling for some romantic candlelight, ad asking the crowd for some help with the song’s chorus.

“I’m so glad that you’re here,” Homme stated. “It feels like it’s just us alone here now.”

And while Homme and Co. moved things along gingerly with several grinding, pulsating tunes, such as “Sick Sick Sick” and “Go With The Flow,” the high point of the show focused on the band’s guitar-heavy repertoire.

“Better Living Through Chemistry,” another track from the band’s critically acclaimed “Rated R” album, also got the reworked treatment, complete with a five-minute-long jam session sandwiched between a solemn, choral-like vocal interlude.

Edgier tracks that were staples at prior QOTSA shows were omitted from the setlist, such as “Feel Good Hit of the Summer” and “Regular John” —a slight nod to the band’s newer fanbase.

But Homme wasn’t afraid to leave things on a dark note. The band’s three-song encore ended the night with the explosive “Song For The Dead,” another metal-heavy number that had the crowd’s ears ringing for as they headed out into the humid September night.

Queens of the Stone Age Set List: September 10, 2013, Air Canada Centre, Toronto, Ontario:

My God Is The Sun

Millionaire

No One Knows

Burn The Witch

First It Giveth

Keep Your Eyes Peeled

Kalopsia

In The Fade

…Like Clockwork

If I Had A Tail

Little Sister

Smooth Sailing

Make It Wit Chu

I Sat By The Ocean

Better Living Through Chemistry

Sick Sick Sick

Go With The Flow

Encore:

The Vampyre of Time And Memory

I Appear Missing

Song For The Dead