Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky expects to vote to defund Planned Parenthood and repeal parts of Obamacare after Thanksgiving. (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster, File)

SENATE STILL PLANS A VOTE TO DEFUND PLANNED PARENTHOOD. Senate leaders may have considered dropping language defunding Planned Parenthood from an upcoming Obamacare repeal package, but Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) told reporters Tuesday that he expects both measures will be in an upcoming budget reconciliation bill. Power Post has more:

“It will contain a defund of Planned Parenthood in the Obamacare repeal bill,” McConnell said at a weekly press conference. “We’ll be moving to that after Thanksgiving.” Reconciliation bills cannot be filibustered and need just 51 votes for passage. But with some Senate conservatives threatening to vote against the legislation because it would not fully repeal the Affordable Care Act, GOP leaders reportedly considered dropping the Planned Parenthood language in order to attract the votes of moderates who are uneasy with cutting off all funds to the women’s health group.

DEMOCRATS WARN AGAIN ABOUT POISON PILL RIDERS. Democrats have been warning since the day the budget deal was announced that they will not accept any “poison pill” policies to be attached to the upcoming omnibus spending bill. That trend hasn’t changed as the Dec. 11 deadline for funding the government draws closer. The Hill has a rundown of the top Democrats reiterating that message.

“We’re going to stand firm on the riders and the president’s going to stand firm with us,” Rep. Nita Lowey (N.Y.), senior Democrat on the House Appropriations Committee, said Tuesday. Rep. Steny Hoyer (Md.), the chamber’s Democratic whip, sounded a similar warning. “We are unified as Democrats in opposing any riders which would be rightfully referred to as ‘poison pills,’ ” Hoyer told reporters in the Capitol. The comments raise the stakes in what’s certain to be a fierce — and fiercely partisan — debate over a sweeping spending package less than a month before government funding is scheduled to expire.

GOP BUDGET VET PICKS WINNERS AND LOSERS IN UPCOMING OMNIBUS. Democrats are warning against poison pills, Republicans are looking for policy wins, and former GOP staff director at the House Appropriations an Committee Jim Dyer told Politico he has some predictions on who will come out ahead.