Most men don’t see a physician unless they are extremely sick or hurt and often skip their annual examinations and preventative care appointment. So what’s the obstacle? Men, themselves don’t make their health a priority.

Why? If a man feels good, he doesn’t feel the need to be checked out. Many men are unaware that simple screenings or lifestyle changes that noticeably improve their quality of life. High cholesterol or blood pressures are not always obvious symptoms, but the fact is that many health issues are not detectable until it’s too late.

According the American Heart Association, there are 10 reasons men commonly avoid visiting their health care provider.

Don’t have a doctor. Find a doctor you trust by checking your insurance company listings and asking around to friends and family for recommendations. No insurance. With the Affordable Care Act everyone should have insurance. Nothing is wrong, you feel good. You may be right but … many health issues or conditions are not detectable until it’s too late. Lack of time. You are busy, but with about 8,766 hours in a year, spend two hours of those hours to visit a health care provider. You don’t want to spend the money. It is better to spend a little now and save a lot later than saving a little now and spend a lot in the future. Doctors don’t do anything. When you get a checkup, the doctor just gives you tests and it may seem like you don’t get anything, but you do. You receive knowledge and news that brings better health, if you take action. Don’t want to hear the truth. Your doctor’s there to help you become healthier and to avoid future disorders. You can deny your reality, but you can’t deny the consequences. Uncomfortable being examined. Don’t let one test stop you from receiving all the benefits of an annual physical. You tough it out. You don’t like to complain about your health, but there are plenty of instances where your symptoms will only get worse if you don’t receive proper treatment. Your significant other encouraging you to get a checkup. A little nudging from your wife, mom or partner nagging you influences your decision to go see the doctor, so go.

June is Men’s Health month, a time to increase awareness of preventable health problems and encourage detection and treatment of disease among men and boys.

If you or your men need a health checkup schedule an appointment for breakfast and ESPN during a one-stop medical visit at the Men’s Health Clinic on June 21 at South Jordan Health Center. Get a physical exam and tests, meet with a physical therapist and dietitian; all at one visit mensclinic.uofuhealth.org or call (801) 213-9299 to register.

About the author:

Lori Bonham is a marketing manager at University of Utah Health Care. Follow her on Twitter: @bonhaml

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus