Since moving to Brentwood in 1990, Steve Gawrys has stayed busy in the community.

He has four children with his wife Kim, he's run a number of small businesses and is running for the 61st District House seat for the second time against longtime incumbent Charles Sargent.

Gawrys, who received his MBA from Christian Brothers University in Memphis, owns several of the local Sonics in the area, employing over 600 people in the county, with about 250 of them being in District 61. He and Kim, a Brentwood High School graduate, have had all four of their children attend Williamson County Schools.

Gawrys has been a businessman for most of his life, taking a keener interest in politics in 2011 when the Obamacare health insurance reform happened and he saw it affect his employees.

"When the Obamacare changes happened, I had to tell my employees, who make between $10 and $12 an hour, that their option was to pay $160 per month for insurance with a $7,000 deductible," he said. "I found that it was hurting more than it was helping for them, and that's what prompted me to run for office."

He ran as a Republican in 2012 against Sargent and came within 256 votes of defeating him.

Federal programs like Obamacare, immigration policies and unnecessary taxes are a few of Gawrys' main focal points for this election.

"There is a threat from illegal immigration," he said. "It's a question of safety. I want to work to make sure that immigration happens legally. I like immigration. I just don't like illegal immigration."

Gawrys also said he will not play nice with organizations he thinks support illegal immigration, and if elected, immigration is one of his top priorities.

On the issue of taxes, he said there are too many that are simply unnecessary, including the Hall tax, the only tax on personal income in Tennessee, a six-percent application to all taxable interest and dividend income from investments.

"The Hall tax is one that I am for completely repealing," he said. "I'm against taking unnecessary money out of voters' pockets. The Hall tax targets the older generation by putting a tax on retirement accounts. It's not something I support at all."

With traffic being a huge issue all over Middle Tennessee presently, Gawrys said the district needs leaders who are committed to the community to make things happen that will help solve congestion issues.

"My family and I are vested in this community," he said. "An issue like traffic is vital for our children's future and for our future. Voters need to make sure someone is in office that actually spends time in the district and can speak for what's happening on our roads."

Gawrys said the underlying issue in government has to do with accountability and communication.

"The umbrella of all of this is transparency," he said. "I'm running because too many politicians run as conservatives and then get in office and vote the opposite. I believe in the Constitution and am really passionate about it, and I think the community is ready for a change."

In addition to business and politics, Gawrys said he enjoys spending time with his wife and children. He serves on the board of the Brentwood lacrosse program, has been involved with the Boy Scouts of America program for several years, has been a foster parent, is a five-time Ironman competitor and is enrolled part-time at the Nashville School of Law.

A debate is in the process of being scheduled between Gawrys and Sargent for April. Running on the Democratic ticket for District 61 is 22-year-old Steven Culbertson.

Samantha Hearn reports for Home Page Media Group. She can be reached via email at samantha@brentwoodhomepage.com or on Twitter @samanthahearn.