Buy Photo Zumba Gold instructor Susan Hinderer leads a class at the Humana Guidance Center on Hikes Lane recently. (Photo: Photos by Maggie Huber/Special to The C-J)Buy Photo

Arlene McClure's doctor has urged her to keep up her healthy habits — regular exercise, avoiding pies and pound cake and drinking lots of water.

With a family history of heart disease and diabetes, "I need to keep my cholesterol and weight down," McClure said.

Most mornings, the 68-year-old retired teaching assistant from Okolona drives to Humana's Guidance Center on Hikes Lane for Zumba, yoga, chair dancing and walking club. If there's time, she'll watch a healthy cooking demonstration.

McClure is participating in an initiative by Humana and other health care companies called lifestyle medicine — a rapidly expanding trend in health care driven by research aimed at reducing soaring rates of obesity, heart disease, diabetes and other preventable chronic conditions tied to inactivity and unhealthy eating.

Critics long have hammered physicians and the conventional health care establishment for failing to marshal a systematic, comprehensive effort to prevent chronic health conditions and break down the barriers to wellness.

Now there's a financial incentive. Hospitals and health care providers are rewarded under the federal Affordable Care Act and new Medicare rules for keeping people out of doctor's offices and avoiding costly readmissions.

"Everything pretty much goes back to policy and payment reforms. It's all about keeping your population healthy," said Pam Kirchem, director of member services for the Kentucky Hospital Association, a trade group representing the state's hospitals.

Humana's guidance center is one of 29 nationwide. Two centers will open soon in Louisiana and North Carolina — with more on the horizon, said Marisa Rowell, Humana director of consumer engagement.

KentuckyOne Health is investing $3 million from a foundation grant to debut three healthy lifestyle centers by the end of this year. They offer a menu of medically supervised exercise for the general public and for KentuckyOne Health patients completing cardiac and pulmonary rehabilitation.

Massage therapy, acupuncture, tai chi and nutrition counseling also are available for a range of fees.

Humana launched its first guidance center in Kansas City six years ago and locates them where there are large concentrations of Humana members. There are 15 centers in Texas and Florida.

Buy Photo MIchelle Kramer, center, stretches at the end of the Zumba Gold class at the Humana Guidance Center on Hikes Lane. (Photo: Maggie Huber/ Special to The C-J)

In addition to exercise classes, cooking demonstrations and other activities, Humana members can meet with a customer-service representative to get answers to questions about coverage or billing.

On a recent Thursday morning, instructor Susan Hinderer led nearly two dozen women and one man in a Zumba class, as they moved to upbeat Caribbean music.

Afterward, as McClure and others filtered into a lounge beside the activity room, the room buzzed with laughter and jokes. Several lined up to get their pedometers checked by Hinderer, who also leads the center's walking club.

"It's just an enjoyable place to come," McClure said. "You get drawn in" because the staff and regulars are friendly.

Humana officials declined to disclose the company's investment in the center, which has been open about 18 months. But the company has noticed a "lower disenrollment rate" from participants.

KentuckyOne opened its first lifestyle center at Medical Center Jewish Northeast near the Snyder Freeway in May. It served 85 people last month, and a second center at Sts. Mary and Elizabeth Hospital near Iroquois Park that opened late last month has 67 participants.

Another 29 people are scheduled for required assessments before they start, spokeswoman Barbara Mackovic said.

A third center at 250 E. Liberty St. downtown is under construction and scheduled to open late this year.

The company receives insurance reimbursement for patients at cardiac rehab sessions. Non-patients who want medical supervision and other services while they work out can join, get an assessment and pay $75 monthly.

The center at Sts. Mary and Elizabeth features a classroom for educational seminars and cooking demonstrations, an exercise area populated with treadmills, elliptical and leg press machines and trays of free weights and separate spa-like services.

Patrons weigh in, have their blood pressure checked, and if it's part of their regimen, their blood sugar tested. Cardiac rehab patients hook up electrodes from a cellphone-sized EKG monitor. While they work out, an exercise physiologist monitors their progress on a computer.

MORE: Tobacco growers urge farmers not to employ kids

There's a massage room and area nearby where integrative medicine — meditation, tai chi, therapeutic yoga, coping skill classes and acupuncture — are offered for $10 and up.

The idea is to help people reduce stress and complement the conventional treatments, said Jo Carol Stephens, a registered nurse and director of the lifestyle centers.

The center looks and feels like an upscale fitness center. "We've tried to create a very healing, spa-like atmosphere," said Alice Bridges, KentuckyOne's vice president of healthy communities.

KentuckyOne recognizes that despite an upbeat response to the centers, she said, it has an uphill battle moving the needle on a population with high rates of cardiovascular disease and obesity.

"We just have a lot of people who need help," Bridges said, but they aren't comfortable going to a gym on their own to work out.

"This is a very hard behavior change," she said. "It's hard to get people to start. We're trying to get past those barriers."

Reporter Grace Schneider can be reached at 502-582-4082. Follow her on Twitter @gesinfk.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1oiomyJ