There’s a consensus among leading scientists that global warming is caused by human activity. What–if anything–should we do about it?

JOHN HOFMEISTER: Based on what we know in the 21st century, it is time to come to grips with waste management. We know now better than ever before that there are too many wasting too much everywhere all the time. The man-made burdens on the earth’s land, water and air are diminishing the natural ability of the earth to restore itself. It’s not socially acceptable to impose the burden of our own waste on another person. We pay to properly dispose of such waste. The same principle needs to be applied to all forms of waste, including physical, liquid and gaseous waste from all sources.

The days of emitting waste for free need to end. Such a freebie is irresponsible to one another and on a global scale simply unacceptable. China’s waste washing up on our Pacific coast, poisoning fish in the ocean we share and impacting the quality of the air we breathe is wrong. Likewise we impact our near neighbors in like manner, unless we don’t because it’s forbidden and enforced. The only way to take waste seriously and therefore to do something about it is to price it, where the money goes to disposal and remediation. We’re already part way there, paying to protect land, water and air. So why don’t we go the rest of the way and price waste to reduce and ultimately eliminate it as part of a competitive marketplace?

Public policy makers tend not to talk about waste management. It’s insufficiently grandiose, when compared to climate change. But they should because waste management is the fundamental issue. We’ll never deal with climate change from a public policy perspective. It’s too big, too controversial, too ambiguous and too long term to deal with in any meaningful public policy methodology. But we know how to deal with waste. We’ve been doing it successfully for years. I’m suggesting now to go the distance. Set the waste management policy in motion to do more, to clean up after ourselves completely, using technology, growing an industry, creating jobs to do just that. It’s not grand but it works. Our progeny will be forever grateful.

John Hofmeister (@cfaenergy) is former president of Shell Oil Co. and founder and head of Citizens for Affordable Energy. He is also a member of the U.S. Energy Security Council.

Read the related article.

Read the latest Energy Report.