Now is a good time to revive the debate around tax breaks for Cleveland's biggest non-profit hospitals.

Here are a few of the reasons. The healthcare industry is the city's economic engine that continues to consume property. Cleveland taxpayers are tapped out. The new national healthcare law promises to change how hospitals are paid. And Cleveland leaders can't stand up to a far less important non-profit: the National Football League, whose teams continue to play in publicly subsidized stadiums.

University Hospitals and the Cleveland Clinic don't have to pay property taxes on many of their facilities because, as non-profit institutions, they provide charity care and other benefits to the community. That's the law and it applies to all non-profit hospitals regardless of size.

The Cleveland Teachers Union (CTU) said Monday that these tax breaks are costing the Cleveland Metropolitan School District $20.5 million a year, according to a new review of the hospitals' property values by the left-leaning study group Policy Matters Ohio. The estimate, based on the two hospitals' $1.6 billion worth of property in the city, is billed as a conservative one that accounts for many property-evaluation factors. The non-profit social justice organization, Common Good Ohio, is also pushing the study.



The teachers' union and others believe these hospital giants earn such sizable incomes – and have such sizeable footprints in the city -- that they should strike voluntary agreements with the schools to pay something toward the taxes they currently sidestep. Such deals, which have been reached in some other cities, are referred to as payment in-lieu of taxes, or PILOT agreements. The hospitals can completely ignore such requests.

It's not a new complaint here. In 2004, former County Cuyahoga Treasurer Jim Rokakis, armed with an earlier property study by Policy Matters, called for PILOT agreements with hospitals and other large non-profits in Cleveland. He and others are worried about the shrinking tax base and noted at the time, "The losers are always the schools."

In 2002, Beachwood's school district challenged the Cleveland Clinic's request for property exemption, arguing that the Clinic-owned Beachwood Family Health Center on Cedar Road provided little or no charity care. The state tax commissioner agreed with the Beachwood school district, which set up a legal battle that continues today. Last spring, this case was tried before Ohio's Tax Appeals Board, which is expected to issue a decision in early 2014, says David Seed, the lawyer representing the Beachwood school district. The case will undoubtedly influence this debate, and could be appealed to the Ohio Supreme Court.

Cleveland teachers are picking up the fight again because Cleveland residents in 2012 passed a large school tax increase on property owners.

"Citizens stepped up, and now it's their turn," CTU President David Quolke said, referring to the large hospitals.

Quolke and others also believe that the Affordable Care Act (ACA) could reduce what hospitals pay toward charity care, lessening their community burden.

Theoretically, under the ACA, hospitals will no longer have to give away care. Poor people will be ensured through mandated coverage plans and through an expansion of Medicaid.

Non-profit hospitals, of course, don't see it that way. The Cleveland Clinic believes its charity care and bad debt will actually increase next year, says Clinic spokeswoman Eileen Sheil. It covered $154 million in charity care in 2012, she says.

Sheil attributes the projected rise in charity costs to the high deductibles of some new healthcare plans that some patients will never pay, and to the lower Medicaid reimbursement rates, among other factors.

She also defended the Clinic's economic benefit to Cleveland, noting its employees paid $31 million of income taxes last year. (University Hospitals also paid millions in taxes and provided $53 million in free or reduced-cost care and $90 million in care to Medicaid patients that was not reimbursed.)

Quolke plans to press Cleveland City Council in the new year to hold hearings on the issue. But not much will matter if Cleveland Mayor Frank Jackson doesn't pick up the phone and call the hospitals' executives to join the discussion.

At the moment, Jackson isn't saying much.

"This topic has been an ongoing conversation in the community and the mayor will continue to be a part of the conversation," his spokeswoman offered.

Quolke has not talked to the mayor about the latest study or the union's renewed campaign. He faces some friction with the mayor, who was unhappy that the CTU remained neutral in his November re-election bid against businessman Ken Lanci.

I don't see Council getting too fired up over this, either. Without making much of a fuss, it signed off on a deal that gives the Cleveland Browns an additional $30 million in tax money for stadium upgrades.

The Clinic and University Hospitals, which have been known to push their weight around, are certainly more important than the Browns. But plenty of for-profit companies in town make sizable charitable contributions and pay all their taxes. So, Cleveland officials should not be afraid to push back to ensure residents are getting the best deal.