Prakash Singh/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images The Durbar Hall venue at the Jaipur Literature Festival.

The notable and quotable from around the festival on its second day of literary cogitation.

“In 2008, I was something called an advisor on the Obama campaign, I did give advice but no one actually took it.”

Barnett R. Rubin, director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University.

“The CIA began to see killing as a far cleaner method than capture,” after 9/11.

Mark Mazzeti, author of “The Way of the Knife” and national security correspondent for The New York Times.

“The ISI is like a ball of wool, it’s not coherent or easy to define. The ambiguity is built into the organization. It’s difficult to know where the state ends and the Jihadi groups begin.”

Adrian Levy, author of “The Seige” about the 2008 Mumbai attacks.

“What rules the world is capitalism and European culture.”

Lord Meghnad Desai, British-Indian peer and author.

“If humanity died, I don’t think it would be a disaster. The planet might recover from the enormous degree of harm we’ve done to it.”

Xiaolu Guo, Chinese author and director.

“Capitalism doesn’t prosper and grow because of capitalists. It prospers and grows because of entrepreneurs.”

Dipankar Gupta, a director at the Reserve Bank of India and professor at Jawaharlal Nehru University.

“Supposing we know everything we know about China, and then we add that to genuine liberalization and democracy. Globally, that would be the biggest challenge to U.S. hegemony and the only people that are preventing that at the moment are in Beijing.”

Rana Mitter, director of the China Centre and professor of the history and politics of China at the University of Oxford.

“The Lok Sabha election is the largest humanly organized event in the world.”

Mukulika Banerjee, author of “Why India Votes” on elections to India’s lower house of Parliament.

“Eighty per cent of my WhatsApp messages come from villages. It’s something that’s been denied to them because of connectivity, but now its available people are at it all the time.”

Manvendra Singh, Bharatiya Janata Party politician and member of the Rajasthani Assembly.

“I don’t want Narendra Modi to win the next elections, I think it would be bad for India.”

Nilanjan Mukhopadhyay, author of “Narendra Modi: The Man. The Times.”

“I don’t believe that a novel is important and a short story is nothing at all. Short stories are beautiful in their economy, much more of a pure form than a novel.”

Jhumpa Lahiri, author of “The Lowland” and Pulitzer Prize-winning short story writer.

Wall Street Journal reporters will be live tweeting from sessions at Jaipur Literature Festival.

Follow them @WSJIndia, @jhsugden, @A4iti and@zhonggg for the notable and quotable.