The Longmont City Council will officially begin overhauling the city's rulebook on development Tuesday night.

City staff set out in 2012 to condense the 120-page Longmont Land Development Code to an easier-to-understand 84 pages. That led to some changes to the code, which were brought before council for preliminary review during a Sept. 23, 2014, meeting.

"One of the primary goals was removing the legalese," said Don Burchett, a planner for the city.

In that September meeting, Mayor Pro Tem Brian Bagley proposed an additional change to the code — who can appeal a planning and zoning decision on major development applications.

Once the Planning and Zoning commission has made a decision about major development application like an annexation or a rezoning, that decision can be appealed to either municipal court or the city council. Under the current code, every Longmont resident has the right to appeal one of those decisions.

Bagley, referencing organizations that got involved on both sides of Longmont's since-settled lawsuit over its oil and gas regulations, said he would like the "any resident may appeal" part of the development code removed.

"I don't think people on the north end of town have any right appealing a decision involving people on the south side of town," Bagley said at the September meeting.

A subsequent motion to remove the "any resident of Longmont" part from the proposed code passed 5-2, with Council Members Sarah Levison and Jeff Moore dissenting.

The measure sparked emails from constituents and comments from residents during council meetings. Longmont property owner Duane Leise disagreed with the change, saying that for example, the apartment building in the works at Main Street and First Avenue would affect all Longmont residents and not just those in the immediate area.

"That affects downtown in a large, general fashion," Leise said. "The number of people that would be communicated to would be very, very small because nobody lives in that area ... but it's large in the impact that it has on the entire community."

Ahead of Tuesday's first reading, an amendment was added to the proposed changes, reinstating "any resident" to the group of people who can appeal.

Bagley said if that's what people want, that's fine by him.

"It happened to be this one little instance of tweaking the appeals process and it seems to have rubbed people the wrong way," Bagley said Friday. "I'm not above changing my mind."

Council Member Bonnie Finley said she didn't mind reverting the appeals groups to "any resident," but still has her reservations.

"The unintended consequence of that might be that local builders and developers are less likely to build here because they can't afford to put all that money into design to have somebody come out of the blue and potentially ruin what they want to do," Finley said.

Another amendment was added to expand the notice area for certain development applications from 750 feet to 1,000 feet. Additionally, city staff can expand that even further and require a developer to notify people if staff thinks it would affect more people, Burchett said.

Mayor Dennis Coombs said with the two amendments addressing some of residents' major concerns, he would see fit to vote for the proposed changes on first reading.

One part of the changes that is not addressed in an amendment but drew considerable ire from some public commenters is a measure that requires City Attorney Eugene Mei to review appeals before they are brought to council. Under the proposed changes, Mei would give feedback on appeals, allowing them through to council if the appeal is supported by language in the code and sending them back to the appellant if it doesn't. Currently an appellant has a week to appeal a decision, but the proposed changes tack on a week for Mei's staff to review it and an additional two weeks to resubmit.

Residents speaking at public meetings have disagreed with this measure, saying that although Mei has not been elected, the council wants to appoint him as a gatekeeper of the appeals process.

Both Coombs and Burchett said the change has been misinterpreted.

Mei "is giving it a legal review and saying either 'This isn't valid and will be shot down' or he will say 'Oooh. Good job. This is a valid appeal,'" Burchett said.

Both Bagley and Finley said the part about the city attorney had also drawn so much ire from constituents, they didn't think they could support it on Tuesday.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci