Dr. Gregory Jaramillo stretches as he works out with Physical Therapist Rashmita Patel at the Summit in the LifeCare Center of Longmont on Friday. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Related Dr. Gregory Jaramillo

Parkinson's leads Dr. Gregory Jaramillo to face his own mortality -- and to live well

The folks who gathered in mid-March at the Longmont Senior Center acknowledged how small things can get smaller as their Parkinson's disease progresses.

Terms like "micrographia" came up — writing reduced to itty-bitty characters — and how that makes just filling out a check challenging.

They discussed the Parkinson's "mask," how the disease can shrink a smile and other facial expressions.

Dr. Gregory Jaramillo, a longtime physician at Salud Family Health Center in Longmont, sat at the table — himself now a Parkinson's patient and member of the Longmont Parkinson's Support Group gathered there.

He knows better than most that Parkinson's disease is incurable.

Dr. Gregory Jaramillo carries artwork while riding in an elevator to the first floor at Salud Family Health Center in Longmont on Wednesday. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

He knows that it worsens over time as more of the dopamine-producing brain cells that regulate movement and other functions die — although for mysterious reasons the disease messes differently with each person.

It is a spectrum disorder.

No one can predict how fast it will move, or what physical and possible non-motor damage it may cause in terms of fatigue, sleep disturbances, dementia, and more.

But he and others with the same diagnosis make a big bid to live well when Parkinson's symptoms push them toward a closet out of embarrassment.

One already short guy, the 5-foot, 4-inch tall Michael J. Fox who starred in movies such as "Back to the Future" in 1985 and NBC's "Family Ties" show between 1982 and 1989, could feel shorter due to the disease.

The Parkinson's diagnosis he got in 1991 at age 30 makes him now, in the disease's late stages, look "peculiar," Fox, 53, said in a 2009 interview.

"(Parkinson's) makes me squirm, and it makes my pants ride up so my socks are showing and my shoes fall off, and I can't get the food up to my mouth when I want to," he continued.

But Fox has proven that big things can come from someone who could feel smaller by the day.

The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's established in 2000 by the actor has put $450 million toward research and is the largest nonprofit Parkinson's organization worldwide.

Jaramillo is no celebrity.

He is a doctor dedicated to serving the medically underserved.

However, in April, Parkinson's Awareness Month, he shares his diagnosis publicly for the first time as a doctor committed to being a good patient — to living well, to living large, to seizing the day and stepping into it with courage and confidence come what may.