Win the Super Bowl, go to Disneyland. Or so the cliché goes. Broncos safety Mike Adams has a bigger dream, a dream so real it hurts.

Win the Super Bowl and Adams is going for a long walk, straight to the dead-end street where he was raised, a place folks warned he would never escape.

“If we win the Super Bowl, I’m going to keep my helmet and pads on and I’m walking home,” Adams insists.

Home is Paterson, N.J.

“It can be almost like a cancer,” said Adams, describing his hometown. “And I say that because the negativity in that place can be like a snowball rolling downhill.”

Paterson is 12 miles up the Garden State Parkway from this year’s Super Bowl and a world away. I asked Adams: Think motorists will notice a grown man in a Broncos helmet as he strolls down the highway?

“After I get to the IHOP on Route 3, I’ll start hitchhiking,” said Adams, laughing. “But they’d probably think I’m just some crazy person.”

There are 101 sweet success stories at the Super Bowl. Maybe we can lend an ear to the story of Adams.

Adams is among the Jersey Boys returning home to wear orange at Super Bowl XLVIII. Defensive end Robert Ayers was born in Jersey City, not far from the team’s championship-game headquarters. Oddsmakers have made it 4-to-1 that Knowshon Moreno will cry as “The Star-Spangled Banner” is played at Metlife Stadium, less than an hour from the field where he carried the rock for Middletown High School.

The city of Paterson, according to native son and New York Giants receiver Victor Cruz, is a place where too many friends got a casket instead of a high school diploma. Adams never knew his father. His mother died of ovarian cancer during Adams’ rookie year with the San Francisco 49ers. So who gets the credit for Adams making it to the Super Bowl?

“Selfishly,” Adams said, “it’s hard to give someone else credit for what you’ve gone through and how you’ve shaped your life.”

Adams made the NFL as an undrafted free agent out of Delaware. Ten seasons later, he endured a demotion from the starting lineup in Denver, only to be one of the next men up for the Broncos when Rahim Moore got hurt. Adams’ interception turned a close game against Houston into a rout.

Winning the Super Bowl would be the happy ending to the movie of Adams’ football life. In fact, he’s already got a working title for the flick.

“I Earned My Spot,” Adams said.