CHESTERTOWN — Shore Medical Center at Chestertown “will be a viable organization for the foreseeable future.” So Ken Kozel, president and CEO of Shore Regional Health, told the Chestertown council and the Kent County Commissioners at their respective meetings July 20 and 21.

Mayor Chris Cerino said he invited Kozel to the council meeting to address rumors that the hospital is about to close or to reduce services drastically. He said council members could ask questions, but there would be no public questions or comments.

Kozel began both presentations with an overview of the health care industry, from the national level down to the local. The Affordable Care Act, giving access to services for those previously uninsured, has put a burden on healthcare providers to meet standards of quality and cost. Hospitals are now being judged by the quality of outcomes, rather than the volume of service they provide, he said.

Also, Kozel said, there is a nationwide shortage of doctors, especially primary care providers. The problem is especially acute in Maryland, he said, and it is expected to continue. At the same time, private providers such as Walmart and CVS pharmacies are competing directly with hospitals and local physicians.

Because of these factors, Kozel said, “the industry has turned on a dime in the last few years.” Shore Regional Health sees the changes as an opportunity to improve, he said. “We now have clear guidelines, and we know what our responsibility is,” he said. The five-county system has 175,000 potential patients, and its task is to define the services it will provide throughout the region.

Kozel said a strategic service council will be looking at the system’s offerings, planning for the next five years. The study will include pre-acute services, such as preventive care, education and screening; acute services such as emergency care and surgery; and post-acute services such as rehabilitation and home health care.

There is a role for local government in the provision of care, with such services as emergency medical services and the health department. Also, Kozel said, the study will look at transportation issues over the five-county area.

The 24 members on the study commission include administrators, doctors and board members, mostly from the local areas. Only two are from the parent company University of Maryland medical system, Kozel said. There are five members representing the Chestertown hospital: Dr. Deborah Davis, medical director of the emergency department, and board members Dan Saunders, Bob Swam, Bill Noll and Myra Butler.

The commission will begin meeting in August, and it is expected to present its conclusions by the end of the year, after which it will go to the board for a vote. No decisions on services will be made before then, he said.

Cerino asked if there would be an opportunity for public input when the group presents its conclusions.

Kozel said there might be focus groups in the local communities. Also, the plan might be brought to the community before the board votes. That might be in January or February, he said.

Cerino said when the hospital was community-owned, it would go out of its way to raise the funds needed to keep up services. He said people are saying UMMS is operating more like a for-profit corporation.

“We need to make a profit to stay in business in the current atmosphere,” Kozel said. He said it was almost impossible to operate on a community fundraising model. He said the hospital’s foundation is committed to fundraising, but it can’t do the whole job.

Councilwoman Liz Gross asked what happens to the hospital’s allocation of licensed patient beds — a number determined by the Maryland Health Care Commission — if it reduces or eliminates inpatient services.

Kozel said if services are shifted to another location within the system, the allocations could be transferred there. “It can go either way,” he said. He said there is a cap on the system’s revenue, no matter where the services are located. “If we lose patients, we lose beds,” he said.

Councilwoman Linda Kuiper asked about property donated to the local hospital being put on the market and sold. Does the income from those donations stay in the local area?

Kozel said the memorandum of understanding by which UMMS acquired the hospital specified that locally raised funds stay in the community.

Kuiper also asked how Anne Arundel Medical Center’s presence on the Shore affects Shore Regional Health.

Kozel said Shore Regional Health can work to rival AAMC and give patients a choice. “We can’t be all things to all people, but we can be the best at what we do,” he said.

Cerino said the system will need to make it clear where people need to go for services. “If you have a heart attack, do you need to go to Cambridge?” he said.

“That’s why we’re defining that,” Kozel said.

Gross said, “If my husband’s having a stroke, my first stop is the emergency room here.”

Kozel said the expansion of the local emergency department was a big commitment. He said there would be community involvement in the process.

Councilman Sam Shoge said, as a young person starting a family, he was concerned about where to go to have a child delivered, where to go if a child is ill. He said the vision offered the community at the time of the merger was an expansion of services, but now that vision appears to be abandoned.

Kozel said the recent changes in the system have forced a change in that vision. He said the hospital is now forced to use its funding more prudently. There will be a greater focus on outpatient services, he said.

The audience for Kozel’s presentation to Chestertown was larger than usual for a council meeting. Among those present was state Sen. Stephen S. Hershey Jr., R-36-Upper Shore.

At the county commissioners’ meeting, Commission President William Pickrum asked if the regulations addressed the rising costs of medications.

“Not yet,” Kozel said. He said the focus is still on hospitals. The next phase, hw said, will address doctors’ compensation, which is still on a fee-for-service basis. Pharmaceutical costs may come under scrutiny at that point, he said.

The commissioners also asked about competition from hospitals in Delaware.

Kozel said Shore Regional Health “can’t compete under the current system.” He said the only remedy, as with competitors within the state, is to provide better care and service to keep patients loyal to the local hospitals.