David McShane puts finishing touches on Pope Francis in his mural of famous Franks at Dirty Frank's bar on Pine Street.

David McShane puts finishing touches on Pope Francis in his mural of famous Franks at Dirty Frank's bar on Pine Street.

I heard a song on the radio a few weeks ago that made me pull the car over out of heavy traffic at Fifth and Market Streets to listen. The windows were down and I felt as if I had been blasted in the eyes by a sudden wind carrying road grit and bus exhaust.

I had come into it mid-song and couldn't make out a lot of the words, but there was something about the singer's voice and recurring refrain that ended with the words Philadelphia boy.

It was one of those eclectic indie-artist tunes you hear on WXPN-FM (88.5), and I was hoping the DJ would identify the song and artist when it ended. But the next song came on without introduction, and I arrived at my destination before it ended. I made a mental note to call the station later, but you know how those mental Post-it notes tend to fall off the brain pan once the workday routine begins.

If it weren't for the Pope-a-palooza countdown, that mental Post-it note probably would have remained where it fell on the kitchen floor behind the cat's food dish. But there is something about Pope Francis that reminds me of a street-smart Philadelphia boy. "Yo, Holiness, what up?"

I mean, how many popes get to be beatified Philly-style by inclusion in the wall mural of famous Franks outside Dirty Frank's bar? Last weekend, when I saw Mural Arts artist David McShane putting some finishing touches on the pope's nose outside the gritty dive, I remembered the song that made me pull over.

It was easy to find on the Internet. And wouldn't you know it was an Englishman who captured some essential truth about our city and the elusive-to-define quality of its people that we depend on and take for granted.

I've been a wanderer and it's been some time

Since I've found somewhere I could belong

'Til the cold wind on Walnut Street whistled in the trees

And it sounded to me like a song

David Ford, a singer-songwriter and multi-instrument musician from the southern English coastal town of Eastbourne, has been a favorite in the Philadelphia club scene since his first solo American tour in 2008. The 37-year-old performer connected immediately with Philadelphia audiences. His performances at WXPN's World Cafe Live sold out even in snowstorms.

I took a walk through the city

I bumped shoulders with strangers

The sinners, the saints, and the thieves

I looked in the faces befitting a cynical age

But we so desperately want to believe

On one of the worst nights of his life, March 28, 2010, Ford had a mental and emotional breakdown on stage at the World Cafe. He had just learned that his grandmother was days or hours away from dying, he was filled with doubts about his career, and, while he was soldiering on, there was an equipment failure. It was the last straw.

First came the anger, then came the tears. He fled the stage unable to continue. And nobody left the room.

One of his earliest Philadelphia fans, Lauren Roccia, who works as a production assistant at WXPN, was there. Unsure what had happened, but concerned about Ford, audience members, one by one, wrote notes of support and quietly walked up to the stage and left them atop his piano.

Lauren and her girlfriend knew where Ford had parked his car. They left a note on his windshield. When Ford recovered enough to retrieve his instruments on stage, he found the outpouring of genuine and unexpected expressions of affection and concern. And so was born a song:

When I needed a doctor and a brother and a friend

Turned out I wasn't so far from my home

'Cause sweet Philadelphia opened her arms

Took me in like I was one of her own

Here's the refrain:

When you're down and you're out

And don't remember the feeling of joy

You can lean on me, brother

I won't let you fall

Not while I'm a Philadelphia boy

Oh Lord, not while I'm a Philadelphia boy

Darn that road grit and bus exhaust. No wonder I could barely see.

Clark DeLeon writes regularly for Currents. deleonc88@aol.com