The sky isn’t falling! The sky isn’t falling! Or, to put it another way, the premiums aren’t reaching up to the sky. That would be the Obamacare premiums, which critics of the Affordable Care Act were absolutely sure would see crippling increases – as in double, if not triple digits – in 2015.

But actual data is starting to accumulate from states and the prophesied rate-shock horror stories are not materializing. PricewaterhouseCoopers’ Health Research Institute has collected available data from 29 states and the District of Columbia and concluded that the average premium increase for those getting their insurance through Obamacare exchanges is currently around 8.2 percent. There are of course caveats, starting with the fact that that’s a national average – some states have higher increases than others, and there can even be wide variations within states. The range in Colorado, for example, is from a 22 percent decline to a 35 percent increase, and it averages out to a 3.6 percent increase. For comparison’s sake, understand that the Commonwealth Fund, a pro-Obamacare foundation, released a study in June which found that increases in the individual market in the three years before the Affordable Care Act was enacted averaged 10 percent or more. That’s a higher number than 8.2 percent.

And it’s also a far cry from the standard right-wing talking points on the matter. House Energy and Commerce Committee Republicans issued a report in May of last year grimly warning of the forthcoming Obamacare price crisis: “Consumers purchasing health insurance on the individual market may face premium increases of nearly 100 percent on average, with potential highs eclipsing 400 percent,” the GOP members warned, speciously as it turned out. And, during last fall’s government shutdown, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz said that “virtually every person across this country has seen … premiums going up and up and up.” In April of this year, FactCheck.org surveyed a series of conservative attack ads, noting that “‘skyrocketing’ is the word of choice in these attack ads. That’s misleading.” And so on.

[MORE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

(It’s worth noting here also that while most of the discussion of the effects of Obamacare on health care costs focuses on those purchasing insurance on the individual market, it’s a distinction rarely explicitly stated in the political debate. Thus, headlines like “O-Care premiums to skyrocket,” from The Hill in March can easily seem to be a prediction for all insured, not the roughly 5 percent who purchase on the individual market.)

Given the right’s track record for Obamacare prognostication, the deflation of the sticker-shock talking point shouldn’t come as a great surprise. Vox’s Sarah Kliff did yeoman’s work on this last month, publishing a list of “predicted Obamacare disasters that never happened.” The gloomdoggling tends to exhibit a yes-but pattern: Yes, the last prediction didn’t bear out, but here’s another reason it is about to collapse. Yes, people signed up, but not enough. Yes, enough people signed up, but they’re not new. Sure, some are new but more have lost insurance. Yes, lots of people signed up, and a ton of them are new, but really, they’re not paying their premiums. Or, those who signed up will find their premiums are about to skyrocket, causing a death spiral. Obamacare is eternally on the verge of spectacular collapse according to the right (excepting those who, sometimes simultaneously, warned the opposite: that the law is a seductive new entitlement that will only bind otherwise freedom-loving Americans more closely to the big government teet).

But the fact of the matter is that the Obamacare news has been net positive in recent months, in some cases, as with the moderate premium hikes, simply because it didn’t approach the absurd predictions of its most rabid critics. Multiple surveys, for example, have shown the nation’s uninsured rate dropping since the law took effect. The Congressional Budget Office in the spring reduced its estimate for how much the law will cost over the next decade; and more than half of the states PricewaterhouseCoopers has surveyed will have more insurers offering plans under Obamacare. This is not only a sign that the health insurance companies don’t share the vision of an impending collapse, but also (free market alert) is good news in terms of competition for business, which will presumably mean lower prices. Oh, and did I mention that Medicare’s trustees reported last month that the law is helping extend the life of that beloved entitlement?

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

That might explain why Obamacare is diminishing as a political issue. A Gallup survey last month found that the number of people citing health care as the most important issue facing the country has been halved since January, from 16 percent to 8 percent. So Politico reported recently that Obamacare is not a major component of House Speaker John Boehner’s stump speech, while the same publication noted that GOP pollsters had tested 57 varieties of anti-Obamacare messages, trying to find one that moved voters. Fifty-seven? So much for the days when simply saying “Obamacare” was a sufficient scare tactic.

Indeed, Bloomberg's Heidi Przybyla reported yesterday that "Republicans are easing off their strategy of criticizing Democrats over the Affordable Care Act now that many Americans are benefiting from the law and the measure is unlikely to be repealed." Republican ads in the North Carolina senate race are featuring the issue half as much as just a few months ago, she writes, noting similar declines in Arkansas and Louisiana. "The party had been counting on anti-Obamacare sentiment to spur Republican turnout in its quest for a U.S. Senate majority, just as the issue did when the party took the House in 2010," Przybyla writes. "Now, Republicans are seeking a new winning formula, with the midterm election less than three months away."

Of course the law itself remains deeply unpopular, with more people disapproving of it than approving. But the same polls tend to show that majorities of Americans oppose its repeal. This is in part because it has taken on a polarizing life unconnected to its real world effects. As the Kaiser Family Foundation’s Drew Altman wrote last week in The Wall Street Journal “we could ask the public if the [law] will take us to Mars or solve the problem of climate change and the responses would split perfectly along partisan lines.”