Inspiration from the west: Sydney FC defender Nikola Petkovic (left) says the Wanderers' success in Asia has added to the rivalry. Photo: Getty Images

Watching Western Sydney Wanderers reach the Asian Champions League final has made Sydney FC even more determined to send their rivals crashing down to earth when they meet in round two, says defender Nikola Petkovic.

There is no hiding the greater importance of the Sydney derby for the sky blue half of the city now the Wanderers are just one game away from conquering Asia.

The October 18 clash at Allianz Stadium is already a hot topic of discussion within the Sydney FC camp despite the club still in preparation for their A-League opener against the newly branded Melbourne City at home on Saturday.

In a sign of Sydney's intent, Petkovic kicked off the war of words between the two clubs by criticising the Wanderers' defensive style of play.

Advertisement

The 28-year-old says there is little more to the Wanderers' game plan than their strong defensive discipline. He went further, saying he would not trade any of his teammates for a member of Western Sydney's roster.

"We can't compare our squad to them," he said. "If you ask me if I'd take one player from the Wanderers? For sure I wouldn't take anyone for [someone on] our team.

"But, they do well in defence. They're compact, it is teamwork. I think everything comes from their coach, [Tony] Popovic. I don't want to say anything bad but I don't think they have as much quality, they just work hard and defend. But, they do a great job in the Champions League, it's something unbelievable."

Petkovic was resolute when asked whether the Wanderers result in Asia spurred on Sydney FC for their round-two clash.

"Yeah of course," Petkovic said. "They did very well, they have results but we don't think about that. We just need to look at ourselves and if we do what we have to do and we have our best game it won't be such a problem because we have many quality players."

If Petkovic is already itching to play round two some six days before the opening game, it's because of his upbringing.

A staunch supporter of Red Star Belgrade since his childhood, Petkovic said the experiences of playing in the infamous Belgrade derby against Partizan provided somme of the highlights of his career.

The Sydney derby may not have that history, but it does provide a chance to rekindle those sentiments.

"For me it's always something special because I'm from Serbia, I'm born in Belgrade and all my life I support Red Star," he said.

"I love these [derbies] the most in football. We have Wanderers and Melbourne Victory and especially now because of the Wanderers, this will be very good for us and I can't wait for this second game because I like this games – I like the full stadium, I want to deal with this and I'm really excited to play this game."

The central defender barely had a holiday between seasons after spending most of his trip in Serbia helping small villages combat the devastating Balkan floods.

Together with some of his friends, Petkovic left Belgrade to travel to rural regions where he fought back bursting river banks by building sand-bank walls in some of the country's poorest towns.

"We care about this," he said. "I didn't do this for media or something. I went with a few friends, they're not sportspeople or anything, they're friends from school and it was something special for us, to help with these cities. It was a really bad, bad situation but we deal with everything."