State Rep. Jenny Horne drew national attention this summer for her impassioned speech to remove the Confederate battle flag from the Statehouse grounds.

To stay up-to-date on South Carolina politics, go to palmettopolitics.com or download the Palmetto Politics app for iOS or Android.

Now she’s ready to write a book about it.

A week after Horne, R-Summerville, appeared at a “change-the-flag” rally in Jackson, Miss., she confirmed plans to publish her account of what transpired.

“They were inspired by what South Carolina did,” Horne said last week of the various messages of support she’s received since the flag came down.

Following the June 17 shooting at Charleston’s Emanuel AME Church, Horne took up Gov. Nikki Haley’s call for lawmakers to remove the rebel emblem from the Statehouse grounds where it had flown since the compromise of 2000. As the House debate bogged down, Horne took to the microphone and focused on the loss of state Sen. Clementa Pinckney, the pastor at Emanuel, and one of nine people killed in the racially motivated attack.

“I cannot believe that we do not have the heart in this body,” she said, pausing to sob before raising her voice, “to do something meaningful, such as take a symbol of hate off these grounds.” She added, “Remove this flag and do it today because this issue is not getting any better with age.”

Horne, who said she has an agent, said her phone has been busy ever since. “My speech inspired the entire country,” she said, adding that it’s changed perceptions about the South, too.

Horne’s trip to Mississippi last week was her first speech outside the state, but she expects there would be more appearances elsewhere. She also believes that her grandfather’s oft-repeated story that she is related to former Confederate President Jefferson Davis is for real.

“Whether it’s true or not, I have no idea,” she said.

Horne was in Mississippi to attend a 400-person rally aimed at doing away with the Confederate emblem in that state’s official flag. She’s also been mentioned as candidate for higher office, including Congress, but for now is non-committal. “It could be just about anything,” she said of her future.

From dissing Haley to hugging her

The S.C. Chamber of Commerce has gone from opposing Gov. Nikki Haley’s first election bid to naming her the 2015 “Public Servant of the Year.”

“We are blessed to live in a place where our governor has put her heart and soul into making our state and the business community better,” S.C. Chamber President Ted Pitt said in making the announcement. “We especially applaud Governor Haley for her leadership after the Charleston tragedy in bringing our state together at a time when we could’ve easily been divided.”

The chamber previously backed Democrat Vincent Sheheen for governor during Haley’s first run, in 2010. In a reversal of that support, the chamber then sided with Haley in their 2014 rematch.

Haley is the only sitting governor in the past 25 years to get the award, the chamber said. The last governor who received it was Carroll Campbell.

Pitts is Haley’s former chief of staff.

Money in politics explainer

The League of Women Voters of the Charleston Area is sponsoring a “Money in Politics” forum Wednesday at the College of Charleston.

The discussion will include a history of campaign financing as well as insight in Supreme Court rulings on the habit today.

Among those taking part will be local state Rep. Jenny Horne; state Sens. Marlon Kimpson and Paul Thurmond; and Phil Noble, a consultant and activist.

The event begins at 6:30 p.m. at the Wells Fargo Auditorium, 5 Liberty St.

Presidential visits this week

Republicans

New York businessman Donald Trump will be at the Anderson Civic Center in Anderson on Monday for a rally that begins at 6 p.m. The venue was changed from T.L. Hanna High School.

U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., will make two stops. On Friday he will join S.C. Attorney General Alan Wilson at the Brookland Banquet and Conference Center, 1066 Sunset Blvd. in West Columbia, for a presidential forum and constitutional conversation hosted by the Conservative Leadership Project. On Saturday, Rubio will be in Greenville for a Concerned Veterans for America Town Hall at 11 a.m. at the TD Convention Center.

Former Fla. Gov. Jeb Bush will be on Daniel Island on Saturday morning as part of U.S. Sen. Tim Scott’s Town Hall series for presidential candidates. The event begins at 9 a.m. at Bishop England High School, Daniel Island, Berkeley County.

Former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina will have a two-day swing through the state this week. On Thursday she will speak to the Greenville County Republican Women’s Club at noon at the Poinsett Club. On Friday she will have a town hall at USC Beaufort at 2 p.m. followed by a 4 p.m. town hall at Sun City, Hilton Head Island.

Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee will take part in an Americans for Peace, Prosperity and Security forum Friday at 11 a.m. at Greenville Technical College.

U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham will address the South Carolina Construction Financial Management Association Monday on the threat radical Islam poses to United States, 12:15 p.m. at the Poinsett Club, Greenville.

Democrats

Former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley will be in Charleston on Thursday. Details to be announced.

Compiled by reporter Schuyler Kropf skropf@postandcourier.com