A reader offers his take on gun control. (Photo: AP)

Spinning the data

E.J. Dionne’s recent piece praised President Obama for politicizing the Oregon mass shooting. As with every snake oil salesman, Obama knows how to take advantage of a crowd — even while they are mourning. His political grandstanding peddled more of his worn out political wares such as, “The majority of Americans want stricter gun laws.”

That’s not true. Gallup polls, for one, show the majority of Americans want them left alone or weakened.

“We know that states with the most gun laws tend to have the fewest murders.” That’s also not true.

In fact, the opposite has been proven true, repeatedly.

The 4 states with the lowest violent crime rates in the nation are all right-to-carry states. The 10 states with the highest crime rates have the most restrictive gun laws. For example, Illinois has some of the toughest gun laws in the country, yet Chicago has seen 6,000 shootings and 1,679 murders since 2012 – way above the national average. Why didn’t Obama go there and give his speech?

Allan Carroll, La Quinta

Democrats and Republicans

Jonathan Gruber, one of the chief architects of Obamacare, was caught being unusually honest in a series of embarrassing videos that Democrats wish would go away. President Obama, Nancy Pelosi and top Dems tried the old, “Jonathan who?” routine only to have more videos come out showing each of them praising him.

He attributed the passing of Obamacare to the “stupidity of the American voters” and deliberately deceptive wording. To be clear, he was not talking about Republicans, who used logic instead of emotion.

Republicans are called “racists,” even though Ben Carson, an African-American, holds the top favorability rating. Republicans are at “war with women”, even though a woman, Carly Fiorina holds a top spot in popularity with conservatives. And Republicans are supposedly “anti-immigrant” even though Marco Rubio is a leading contender.

These false narratives are very effective for the low-information voters.

Republicans are blamed for there being no comprehensive immigration laws or gun control even though Obama could have passed both in his first two years when Democratics had total control.

Ron Greenip, Palm Springs

Kors has great track record

I am voting for Geoff Kors for City Council. Everyone I spoke to who watched the Candidate Forum on Oct. 15 was struck by his intelligence and command of the issues. But, he is so much more – he is a man of integrity, principle, fairness and uncommon humanity.

Geoff will be a unifying force for progress in our city. Geoff Kors has a proven track record of building consensus to get things done.

Lisa Middleton, Palm Springs

We know Moon all too well

We served on the Measure J Commission with Rob Moon for three years. Not a single Measure J Commissioner is endorsing him for mayor.

Do not be deceived by Rob Moon. He tries to sell himself as a leader, but when actually working with him, it is clear – his approach is command and control and is not collaborative in any way!

Rob’s leadership style is intimidation, both with commissioners and city staff. He did not work productively with others and he expected to get his way with anger, tantrums, threats, and humiliation. When he did not get his way, he was known to stomp out of meetings.

Recently, Rob quit the Measure J Commission. Evidently, he fails to understand the purpose of the Measure J Commission and the work necessary to fulfill its mission to benefit our community.

Rob is a shrewd and calculating guy and clearly has the verbal skills to convince people he is a leader. But don’t be fooled!

Rob Moon is neither the kind of leader, nor the kind of person, our community deserves as our next mayor.

Christine Hammond and Aftab Dada, Measure J commissioners

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1LEzrJp