FLORIDA SENATE, DISTRICT 6

Republican Primary Jan. 27

Early voting Jan. 17 through Jan. 24

TRAVIS HUTSON BIO – Republican

Prior to running for the Special Election for Senate District 6, Hutson served in the Florida House of Representatives. Hutson was elected to Florida House District 24, which includes Flagler County and parts of St. Johns and Volusia Counties, in 2012 and was subsequently re-elected.

While serving in the Florida House, Hutson championed crucial legislation for House District 24 and the state, focusing on the economy and public safety. In education, Hutson helped craft enhancements to Florida’s Career and Professional Education Act, responding to Florida’s critical workforce needs. Hutson closed loopholes in the release of sexual violent predators making Northeast Florida’s most vulnerable citizens safer. Also, Hutson improved the water quality in Florida, as he successfully carried Florida Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam’s water policy reform in the Florida House.

Hutson works in his family’s business, assisting in property and agricultural management and local charitable giving. He also sat on the board of directors for HandsOn Jacksonville and on the development committee for St. Augustine Youth Services and has been a member of the board of directors for EPIC in St. Johns County. Previously, Hutson was a realtor with Watson Realty. In 2010, Hutson worked for Ambassador John Rood with the Vestcor Companies and specialized in sales and acquisitions, as well as analyzing financial data for incoming and outgoing deals.

Hutson graduated from Lafayette College in Pennsylvania in 2007 with a bachelor’s degree in Economics and Business. He resides in St Augustine with his wife, Tanya, and their daughter, Taylor.

What is your major accomplishment in public life

While serving in the Florida House, I championed crucial legislation for House District 24 and the state. In the education arena, I helped craft enhancements to Florida’s Career and Professional Education Act, responding to Florida’s critical workforce needs. To enhance public safety, I closed loopholes in the release of sexual violent predators making Northeast Florida’s most vulnerable citizens safer. I also improved the water quality in Florida, as I successfully carried Florida Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam’s water policy reform legislation in the Florida House.

Have you ever been sued, arrested or filed for bankruptcy

No

HUTSON QUESTIONNAIRE

What are the major issues in your district and how do you intend to address them?

I am committed to reducing government waste and spending by limiting the role of government, improving our education system by empowering parents, and growing the economy and job base by keeping taxes low and ensuring fiscally responsible budget decisions are made.

I hold a deep passion for our Northeast Florida communities and want nothing more than to see our businesses and community members thrive for years to come.

Do you support expanding Medicaid in Florida? If not, what is your alternative?

I am opposed to the expansion of Medicaid that is proposed in Obamacare. I believe we need free-market solutions to health care that put patients first, not the government. I firmly believe big government has no place in the medical lives of Floridians, or any Americans.

What can the state do to improve mental health care in this state?

I believe we can work together with state agencies and already-established programs, including community mental health centers, local hospitals and schools, to provide the appropriate services to Florida’s families, children and adults.

Do you support deepening the St. Johns River for the port? Describe your environmental concerns related to the deepening.

I do. We must advance port improvements in order to compete with neighboring Southeastern ports. Improvements to the St. Johns River port would help us increase exports and imports, grow tourism and bring new jobs to the First Coast. That said, it’s essential that we collaborate with experts, like the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the St. Johns Riverkeeper, to ensure it is done safely and minimizes the impact on the surrounding environment.

Should the Florida Legislature have to comply with the same Government in Sunshine law that all other public officials must use?

While serving in the Florida House, I observed strict guidelines and always operated in the Sunshine; but, I always believe there is room for improvement and would support increased transparency measures that would expand Sunshine laws.

RONALD “DOC” RENUART BIO - Republican

State Representative Ronald “Doc” Renuart was born, raised, and educated in the great state of Florida. He is a descendent of a South Florida pioneer family that once owned a chain of 15 lumberyards located between Key West and Vero Beach. He has practiced internal medicine in the Jacksonville Beaches area for the past 20 years and is a past Chief-of-Staff of Baptist Medical Center Beaches.



Representative Renuart earned his bachelor's degree from the University of Florida and his osteopathic medical degree is from Nova Southeastern University in North Miami Beach. He completed his internal medicine residency with the University of Florida at what is now UF Health Jacksonville in 1994.

As a Colonel in the Florida Army National Guard, he served three combat tours including Iraq and Afghanistan. He served six years as the Chief Medical Officer for the Florida Army Guard. In 2007, he logged 120 flight hours in Blackhawk helicopters as a flight surgeon and flew on 29 combat missions. In June 2010, he retired after 20 years of decorated service.

In 2005, Rep. Renuart was appointed to the State Medicaid Pharmaceutical and Therapeutics Committee by Governor Jeb Bush.

“Doc” Renuart was elected to the Florida House of Representatives in 2008 and subsequently re-elected in 2010 and 2012. He is currently the Chairman of the Veterans and Military Affairs Subcommittee and he serves on the Health and Human Services Committee, the K through 12 Education Subcommittee, Health Innovation Subcommittee, and Government Operations Appropriations Subcommittee. He is also the Vice-Chairman of the First Coast Legislative Delegation and Chairman of the St Johns County Legislative Delegation.

Representative Renuart lives in Ponte Vedra Beach with his wife, Tamara. They have seven children.

RENUART QUESTIONNAIRE

What is your major accomplishment in public life?

For four of the six years that I served in the Florida House of Representatives, the state has faced significant reductions in revenue during some very tough economic times. During those sessions, we made some bold decisions that have paid off and set Florida on a responsible path to recovery. As other states raised taxes and focused on government-centered solutions, we kept taxes and regulations low and created an environment for private sector job creation to flourish. . Florida’s job growth rate is now among the best in the nation and our unemployment rate has been below the national average for nine straight months. We balanced the budget and kept our long standing commitments to our citizens. Because of our commitment to fiscal discipline more Floridians have the opportunity to achieve the American Dream.

Since being elected in 2008 to the Florida House of Representatives, I have advanced numerous pieces of legislation into Florida Law. Highlights include: sponsoring HB 291 that changed how student athletes, schools, athletic programs, and parents approached concussion prevention for youth athletics in 2012. In 2013, I passed HB 347 which relaxed some of the post-prohibition alcohol laws to allow the new craft distillery industry to develop in Florida.

This year, as Chairman of the Veterans and Military Affairs Subcommittee, I authored the Florida GI Bill HB 7015 which allows U.S. veterans to have access to Florida Colleges and Universities at instate tuition rates, preserves our state armories, protects Florida military families, and honors those who have served us. While the FDA is still debating federal laws, I also sponsored HB 169/SB 224 which makes it illegal for minors to purchase, possess, or use electronic cigarettes or vapored products. To benefit the Guana Tolomato Matanzas NERR and other aquatic preserves, I sponsored and passed HB 419/HB 7093, which will allow these environmental preserves the same abilities as state parks to have appropriate vendors such as kayak rentals, tackle stores, and snack bars which will allow more Floridians and tourist opportunities to enjoy some of our state’s ecotourism. I was also successful in gaining budget support for preservation projects in historical St Augustine, the St Augustine Lighthouse Maritime research, and a substance abuse center in St Johns.

Have you ever been sued, arrested or filed for bankruptcy?

No.

What are the major issues in your district and how do you intend to address them?

For the last 15 months, St Johns County has consistently been in the top five for the lowest unemployment rate in the state yet we still lag in industrial development and the tax base relies heavily on the residential sector for 86% of the county budget. I am committed to find ways that the state government can reduce the obstacles that hold new industries and business from locating to the first coast. My district continues to have the best schools, but we don’t have enough technical jobs to employ our graduates upon their completion of their education.

St Johns County’s success has caused a great increase in population growth. When the growth in a county exceeds 4%, it is difficult to maintain infrastructure to keep up. Because the county schools are ranked number one by most measures, they have become in high demand. County resources have been stretched. I have been successful in getting funding for current road projects and a capital funding for St Johns schools in the state budget.

St Augustine faces their 450th anniversary in August 2015. This will allow Florida to showcase the history of the first Europeans in the new world. We will need to have the infrastructure in place to support this endeavor and we need to create a positive experience for our visitors.

Do you support expanding Medicaid in Florida? If not, what is your alternative?

Unfortunately, the federal request for states to expand Medicaid does not come without significant risk with what may be limited advantage for Floridians as a whole.

Florida is currently in transition as we move to a managed care model for our current Medicaid enrollees because of the exponential rise in budget cost for our current enrolled members.

The Medicaid expansion is estimated to cost taxpayers $7.2 Billion per year within 8-10 years of initiating the program. The expansion does not create any additional coverage for children or those with disabilities. The Medicaid program is an inefficient program created to be a safety net and not the primary care program for Floridians. Of the 819,000 Floridians that would have been eligible for expansion, 91% rated their health as good to excellent when polled in 2010. 64% are without dependents and 60% are single.

The expansion cost to taxpayer is around $5400 per covered life. With this entitlement, able- bodied participants may be resistant to seeking employment where they would be facing PPACA requirements for coverage.

The ACA healthcare exchanges provide significant affordable options with limits on out of pocket expenses for those about the poverty level.

There still remains a gap for those who do not meet Florida’s requirements for Medicaid yet do not make an income level above the Federal Poverty Level and qualify for exchange subsidies.

I provided the Florida House of Representatives Select Committee on PPACA an alternative plan in 2012. Many of my provisions appear in the alternative plan HB 7169. This plan, as passed by the Florida House of Representatives, provided coverage for those in the gap. Care accounts, similar to HSAs, would be created with contributions from the state and $25 per month from the patient. Patients would be enrolled in Florida Health Choices for coverage.

What can the state do to improve mental health care in this state?

I have supported a mental health program for St Johns and Putnam Counties in the legislature. Because of budget limits, we were not successful for the current year’s budget. Mental Health does not receive the same support as other medical conditions and we have fallen behind as a state. We need to remove some of the stigmata associated with mental illness and there should be parity of coverage for treatment of behavioral conditions. Treatment for psychosis can be successful in the outpatient setting with the proper support mechanisms in place.

Do you support deepening the St. Johns River for the port? Describe your environmental concerns related to the deepening.

I support the deepening of the St Johns River for Post-Panamax ships. I believe that deepening towards the mouth of the river has less of an environmental impact than communities south of us that want to siphon surface waters from the St Johns River and its tributaries.

Should the Florida Legislature have to comply with the same Government in Sunshine law that all other public officials must use

The Sunshine Laws are in place to prevent the government from making decisions without input and knowledge of the public. I am in support of changes that would allow for more transparency that would not hamper the operation and function of the legislature.

DENNIS MCDONALD – Republican

What is your major accomplishment in public life?

To this point I would say the turning of Flagler County from blue to red in the 2012 presidential election. A group of us decided to stop wasting time listening to the media and let the silent majority to be heard. For me public life accomplishments are participating in a successful group effort.

Have you ever been sued, arrested or filed for bankruptcy?

No

What endorsements have you received?

Only personal. I decided late to enter this race and was a 12/1 entry. I was encouraged by supporters because the two declared candidates were unacceptable due to their resignations for newly elected House terms just days after a general election win. When I researched this I found that both had filed for District 6 Senate race before November 4 ! Outrageous.

The short cycle has made this difficult but I have name recognition and some awareness as I had run in the August Primary for BOCC and lost by 209 votes to a well known incumbent.

What are the major issues in your district and how do you intend to address them?

Education:

Remove the federal government from our Florida education process. I will be the education Senator working to repeal SB2120 and appealing to Governor Scott to return Florida back to standards that keep Classic Education the mainstay. Education represents over 60% of our tax bills.

Unfunded Mandates:

These actions by the legislature to pass down "Super Liens" are cowardly. I will work to oppose this process - it must end. Examples include, technology demands for education, class size, Better Value For our Tax $$:

We as individuals and business operators require this daily in every transaction we make, or we go elsewhere. Since the taxpayer can not chose to go elsewhere, the Legislature must create better value for Us as the executor of our public funds. Example: untested common core standards; invalid tests and accountability formulas

I would work to create a public rating system [pork filter] run by independents for the prior year's expenditures which would allow the voters to know how well their legislators spent their money. This would allow for a more informed election process.

Do you support expanding Medicaid in Florida? If not, what is your alternative ?

The expansion started in July to include coordinated mental health with Magellan that needs to be monitored for a positive result before taking the next step. Millions of Americans are hoping Congress will clean up the ACA disaster this year, which would further address Medicaid expansion.

What can the state do to improve mental health care in this state?

I would support more in depth gathering of information from our Sheriffs and opening a direct dialogue as to what they perceive as a direction to help them protect all Florida residents. This would also create a reference for accountability or direction for the Magellan experiment.

Do you support deepening the St. Johns River for the port? Describe your environmental concerns related to the deepening.

My environmental concerns start with knowing that the physics of water is complex and that when you deepen our rivers you increase the speed of water, creating greater erosion of our mainland. The ACoE has a long history of doing whatever the dredging industry, that is populated with former ACoE officers, wants, while the public concerns are side stepped. My knowledge of dredging is that dredging leads to more dredging. Their track record is abysmal, just ask those Louisiana folks !

As for my exposure to this topic, I would seek input from Hydrologists who are not ACoE influenced. This is an important matter that requires neutral expertise based on hands-on successes.

Should the Florida Legislature have to comply with the same Government in Sunshine law that all other public officials must use?

Sunshine is a very good commodity in government and the current compliance system is overseen by politically controlled personnel. We need to clean up the system we have first, before we add more wasted tax dollars to a flawed system. For example, Flagler County has a pending violation where Barbara Revels, a current BOCC member, acted out of the sunshine and was reported to the Ethics Commission in April, 2014, for not reporting that she voted for a $1.23M property purchase that was partly owned by a confirmed business associate of hers [as defined by FS]. And still 8 months later, the public waits to hear.

DAVID COX BIO - Democrat – General Election is April 7

In Florida’s Congressional District 6, we don’t need another politician.

David Cox is an educator, not a politician, and David is a candidate for Florida’s 6th Congressional District. It’s his experience in the classrooms of Florida that gives him the skills required to tackle the complicated problems of Washington with common sense answers Floridians can benefit from.

Born to a working class family in Buffalo, NY, David was raised to value opportunity for all people, has a strong work ethic, and believes people should give back their community.

After graduating from The State University of New York at Oswego with a degree in Technology Education, David relocated to central Florida to begin teaching in the Polk and Osceloa county school systems.

While educating our next generation, David returned to school to continue his own education, receiving his Masters Degree in Community Counseling from Webster University.

David currently serves as the Director of Resources at Bethune Cookman University, advocating on behalf of students and helping them navigate their first year of college by providing a network of resources that will prepare these students for successful undergraduate experiences.

In addition to his educational advocacy work, David has provided service through numerous community outreach initiatives in the greater Daytona Beach community.

QUESTIONNAIRE

1. Do you support the Simpson-Bowles budget plan or something similar to rein in the deficit? Describe what you do support.

I would support any budget plan that would rain in and reduce the deficit.

2. Do you support the Affordable Care Act? If not, what would you replace it with?

I support an opportunity for all Americans to get affordable health care, not just a wealthy few. The Affordable care act allows all Americans the access to quality health care at an affordable price. Since its implementation in 2013 more than 8 million Americans (nearly 1 million Floridians) have gained access to quality health care.

3. Do you support deepening the St. Johns River for the port? Describe your environmental concerns related to the deepening.

While I support the expansion of commerce and economic development for the St. Johns River and communities surrounding the waterway, I do not support the negative impacts it could have on our environment and the waterways of Florida. More research and impact studies must be done to ensure that there are no negative impact on our environment before the project moves forward.

4. Washington has been described as in partisan gridlock. What would you do to change that? If you disagree, explain why.

Change must come to Washington in 2015! The partisan gridlock cause by the Tea Party and my opponent must come to an end in November. We must work together across the aisle to better our communities, Florida, and our Nation.