The American Coalition for Healthcare Claims Integrity (ACHCI) today issued a statement regarding the Two-Midnight Rule Coordination and Improvement Act (S. 2082), introduced by Senators Robert Menendez (D-NJ) and Deb Fischer (R-NE). The bill proposes changes and additional enforcement delays to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Two-Midnight Rule, as well as additional suspensions to the Recovery Audit Contractor (RAC) program, while hospitals transition to the new rule.

"Our coalition strongly opposes the proposed extension to the Medicare oversight moratorium included in the Two-Midnight Rule Coordination and Improvement Act,” said Becky Reeves, spokesperson for the coalition. “Yet again, under the guise of ‘reform’, hospitals are vying for an extended Medicare oversight holiday. In January, healthcare officials already granted a one-year auditing break to hospitals, at an estimated $4 billion loss to the Medicare Trust Fund. As partners to CMS, Medicare integrity contractors solely enforce the policies set by healthcare officials. However, our coalition rejects the notion that suspending the Recovery Audit Contractor (RAC) program will aid hospitals in their transition to a new policy. We urge lawmakers to refrain from supporting this anti-oversight legislation.”

“The need for increased Medicare oversight has never been more urgent. According to CMS, the Medicare Trust Fund will be insolvent in 12 years, the rate of improper payments is trending upward for the third year in a row, and Medicare wasted a record $35 billion last year. In the face of these numerous financial challenges, lawmakers should be expanding integrity initiatives like the RAC program, which returned nearly $3.7 billion to the healthcare system in 2013 alone, while reviewing only 2% of medical records. On behalf of taxpayers and the 50 million seniors who rely on Medicare, our coalition will continue to support policies that boost integrity and extend the solvency of Medicare.”

For more information, please visit: www.properpayments.com