Jessica Holman’s family members and friends remembered her as a warm and kind-hearted person on Sunday at a memorial held near the spot where she was killed when a stolen pickup truck plowed into her Jeep.

“She was bigger than life, pure of heart, a wonderful aunt and daughter,” said her mother, Terry Holman.

Holman, 33, of Thornton died after the pickup crossed a median on a busy stretch of Wadsworth Parkway in Westminster near 94th Avenue.

Scores of people came for the memorial at the side of Wadsworth Parkway. A depression in the ground next to the road was filled with votive candles, flowers and balloons.

Lindsey Sunday, a friend of Holman’s who went to high school with her at Pomona High School in Arvada, said she had planned to get together with Holman some time this week.

“The last time I saw her was a few months back, but I was messaging her a lot lately,” she said, her eyes damp with tears.

Police have arrested Ignacio Paul Daigle, 19, and Patrick Engle, 28, in connection with the truck theft and accident that killed Holman.

The incident began during the Tuesday evening rush hour, when a man saw a pair of thieves drive off in his Ford F-350 truck, which was pulling his trailer loaded with two all-terrain vehicles.

The man followed his truck in another vehicle and called police to report the incident.

At one point, one of the two ATVs toppled from the trailer, but the driver kept going.

Officers joined in the pursuit and made an unsuccessful attempt to stop the carjackers.

The truck went north on Wadsworth and a pursuing officer made another attempt to bring it to a stop. At that point, the truck crossed a parkway median and smashed into Holman’s Jeep.

She died at the scene.

Westminster police investigators are working to determine the facts of the chase — including speed, road congestion and hazards — before they can determine if it followed police policies. That process could take several weeks.

“Stuff happens,” said Jesse Salas, who knew Holman. “It is hard to blame anybody except the guys in the truck running away.”

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or @dpmcghee