Handout Jon Ralston Political commentator Jon Ralston is a featured speaker at Directions 2013. Handout Jon Ralston (Photo: Handout)

Consistency is the hobgoblin of lesser senators.

That appears to be the motto of Nevada’s own Dean Heller, whose career of oscillation began as a moderate assemblyman, mutated to a maverick secretary of state, transformed to a sudden conservative (to beat Sharron Angle for Congress) and then, after prattling on about “anchor babies” to win a seat in the Club of 100, shifted back to being a “No Labels” kind of senator.

Sure, most politicians – heck, most humans – change over time, display inconsistencies, even hypocrisies. Heller has been more protean than most, though, with his most dramatic and convenient “evolution” in 2012 after his U.S. Senate victory. After months of sounding almost Trumpian in his immigration rhetoric, suddenly Heller was talking about being a bridge on reform, presaging his vote for the comprehensive bill in 2013.

All of this comes to mind after I obtained a recording of Heller’s speech at the Atlantis last month to the Republican Women of Northern Nevada, which revealed not only just how, ahem, flexible he is but how he forgot one of the basic laws of modern politics: If you are speaking somewhere, someone probably is taping you (in this case, a Democratic tracker).

In pandering to this group, Heller not only rewrote history and distorted reality but distanced himself from measures, especially immigration reform, that he had previously supported. It was nothing short of a masterful con job that Trump couldn’t have matched.

Let me count the deceptions:

•Immigration reform: Heller went on a bizarre riff on the word “comprehensive,” which made it sound as if someone spiked his lunch ice tea.

“Everything is comprehensive,” Heller said. “Comprehensive tax reform. Comprehensive immigration reform. Comprehensive that, omnibus, CR, if you go down and it’s huge and it is frustrating. Frankly, as a bunch of Republicans, we shouldn’t like comprehensive. That isn’t the way we work, or the way we think.”

Except that was the way he thought three years ago, after getting his mind right on immigration reform or perhaps seeing that he lost Nevada’s growing Hispanic cohort by a huge margin in 2012. He voted for the comprehensive bill, declaring at the time: “I am pleased that both Democrats and Republicans were able to find ways to work together and pass legislation that this great nation deserves.”

Shhh. Don’t tell those GOP women who were at The Atlantis.

•Harry Reid and the Democrats: Heller also tried to take a swipe at Senate Minority Leader Reid, saying, “And that’s why Harry had such a big problem when he was in leadership. Every one of his bills started with the name ‘comprehensive.’ We knew if it said comprehensive, it was just a big government bill. We’re not going to support a big government bill. So they try to get a 60-vote threshold, couldn’t get it, ’cause every Republican would vote against anything that said ‘comprehensive’. Because that’s just another word for big government.”

It is? Heller was one of 68 senators to vote for immigration reform, the comprehensive one, the big government one, the one he said “every Republican would vote against.” Hope none of those GOP ladies are reading this.

•Budget: Heller boasted to the group that the GOP Congress passed the first balanced budget since 2001 with many cuts.

“So we finally passed a budget, and frankly to me, that’s the most important thing Washington does,” Heller told the women.

It is? Passing a non-binding outline of spending is the most important thing Congress does? I certainly hope not.

•The Culinary and the Obamacare excise tax: In September, Heller stood up at a news conference and proudly read a letter from Culinary Union leader D. Taylor about repealing a key part of the Affordable Health Care Act. He would soon absorb lots of praise from the Culinary.

But last month, he told the GOP women: “It was the first time I think I’ve ever been on the same side as the Culinary Union, first time in 25 years of politics, we were actually out on the same side. Didn’t feel good, just so you know. It didn’t feel good.”

Strange, he didn’t seem to be suffering at the time as he genuflected to the heavily Hispanic union.

•Taxes: Heller made a thoughtful statement on tax increases and cuts to the group, saying, “In 10 years in Washington, D.C., I’ve never voted for a tax increase. If I get an opportunity to reduce your taxes, I don’t care what’s on the other side of it….”

That makes sense. Oh, it’s also not true. One obvious example: That bill to avoid the so-called fiscal cliff he voted for in 2013: That raised taxes.

•Ted Cruz: Heller, as is his specialty, was all over the map on Cruz. The senator told the group he votes with Cruz “90 percent of the time. So we’re pretty close.” He also mentioned Cruz had called him for an endorsement, repeated how philosophically in tune they are but said he wouldn’t embrace him because of his “terrible track record” on endorsements. (Can’t argue there: Jeb Bush, then Marco Rubio.)

Then, as the coup de grace, Heller also told the group Cruz had made the “Washington cartel” worse for his “own personal gain ... just one example of many as to why he has very few friends.” Any of you ladies supporting Cruz?

​I sought an explanation from Heller’s press secretary, Neal Patel, and his chief of staff, Mac Abrams. As Phil Collins might say: No reply at all.

Then again, what could they say?

Heller also said during his speech that he is champing at the bit to take over for Reid as senior senator so he can pick federal judges.

“I’ll tell you, I want nothing more than to be the senior senator from Nevada,” Heller said.

Nothing more? If we believe him – and you can see that is a risky proposition – that means he doesn’t want to come home in 2018, as some have speculated, and run for governor. Then again, maybe he’ll change his mind.

Again.

Jon Ralston has been covering Nevada politics for more than a quarter-century. See his blog at ralstonreports.com and watch "Ralston Live" at 5:30 p.m. weekdays on KNPB.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/1S3Cn4q