I met Harry Reid almost 30 years ago.

He was running for an open U.S. Senate seat. I was a wet-behind-the-ears political reporter.

Story Continued Below

I couldn’t believe this guy—this charismatically challenged, hushed-spoken congressman—was the favorite to take the legendarily smooth Paul Laxalt’s place. How could he win?

He did. Now, five terms later, the man who is arguably the most powerful and influential elected official in Nevada history has changed state and national politics by announcing he will not run.

I can’t believe it.

Reid may be a retiring sort, but I never thought he would retire. He has no real hobbies except pounding Republicans and brothers whose last name is Koch. I never figured this guy for settling into an easy chair anywhere, even in his new Las Vegas home, his feet up on the ottoman, watching Bryce Harper.

Even after his crushing eye injury, I didn’t think he would leave. But what I think happened is that, as someone close to the senator suggested, Reid decided that having his face blasted by a piece of exercise equipment forced him to step back and say: I’m old. It’s time.

He wasn’t afraid of losing. Even those who despise Reid know he has this special kind of vertebrae that don’t allow him to back down. His health is otherwise fine, and he arguably is more at home as a minority leader, launching political Scuds Mitch McConnell’s way.

This was an intensely personal and intensely secretive decision. Not even his closest friends knew until Reid and top aides started making phone calls before dawn in Nevada. This was between Reid and his wife, Landra, who is by far the most influential person in his life. Even some of his kids were not aware.

One person who knew put it succinctly: “The honest truth: He didn't want to be the old senile guy in the Senate. That people looked at and said he used to be sharp. And he wants to win the majority back and go out on top. Prospect of another eight years was too long. 2 or 4 yes; 8 no. And he would never allow his seat to be appointed by R governor. So now he can pick who he wants to run in his seat.”

He already has: Former Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto, who has said she wants to be a U.S. senator. If she runs, she will be the favorite, and Reid will try to do what Laxalt did unsuccessfully nearly three decades ago: Pick and elect his successor.

Reid’s legacy surely will be mixed. There are those who will say he was a nasty partisan, an obstructionist extraordinaire who destroyed the reputation of the world’s greatest deliberative body. (I believe the Senate may be libel proof.)

But for those who are not rabid haters or partisan critics, Reid’s impact on the state and country in other ways are indelible. It’s not hyperbole to suggest this guy was most responsible for the president’s signature legislative achievement and for preventing the worst bill targeting Nevada from ever taking effect.

I have always said that the Affordable Care Act should be called Reidcare not Obamacare because without the then-majority leader, the law would not have passed.

Reid all but bribed a few of his colleagues—remember the Cornhusker Kickback and the Louisiana Purchase?—to jam the bill through.

And does anyone really think that nuclear waste wouldn’t be buried 100 miles away from Las Vegas if Reid hadn’t been where he has been? He strangled the project, pushed favorable appointees to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and persuaded the president to take it off the table.

Reid also has been Prince-like in his wielding of political power, singlehandedly controlling who runs and who doesn’t, and not just in Nevada. In his home state, no Democratic candidate for major office in the last couple of decades has announced a candidacy without kissing Reid’s ring. He has been a grandmaster, moving the pieces on a board he controlled. His meddling occasionally has backfired, but for the most part, what Harry wanted, Harry got.

Reid surely is the most feared pol in Nevada and has been for years. Yes, this guy, the pale senator with the black hat, unafraid to get what he wants and by almost any means necessary.

My relationship with the senator has been like the New York New York rollercoaster on the Strip. He has cut me off repeatedly for offenses real and imagined, but I still feel as if he represents the bookends to one chapter, the main chapter of my career. He is still the most interesting man in Nevada.

Reid is known for not saying goodbye, for just hanging up on people, be it the president or a pesky reporter. How fitting that there was no buildup to his exit announcement, just a sudden ending.

This guy just hung up on all of us.