Battalion Chief Rick Davis completes national Executive Fire Officer Program

Though the firefighting profession is one of constant training, learning and relearning, Loveland Fire Rescue Authority Battalion Chief Rick Davis took that a step further when he embarked on the four-year, graduate-level extensive leadership program through the FEMA National Fire Academy.

After four core courses and research projects, Davis recently became only the second member of Loveland's fire department ever to complete the esteemed Executive Fire Officer Program, which is based in Emmitsburg, Md.

"It's a great opportunity to be around other chief officers and people that are in your profession and be able to learn from them and vice versa," Davis said.

Loveland Fire Rescue Authority Lt. Rick Davis stands at the department's fire training rounds Wednesday in Loveland. He has recently completed the four-year Executive Fire Officer Program. ( Jenny Sparks )

Davis applied for and was accepted to the program in 2009, joining firefighters in leadership roles across the country in Maryland each year for a two-week course. Back in Loveland, he had six months to work on a research paper that centered around the theme of that year's course, during his spare time in working at the LFRA.

Fortunately, Davis said he relished in the research aspect of the program, with dozens of books piled on his home office desk at any given time, and was prepared for the strenuous mental work.

"I like to continuously improve," Davis said. "I finished by Master's Degree and had my eye on the EFO."

Davis' task in the research projects was to relate the coursework to a problem faced by his department or community.

Advertisement

For example, in year two his paper dealt with the wildland-urban interface, and in year four, he focused on the challenges in transitioning from 24-hour to 40-hour administrative positions, which had real-life and real-time applications in the LFRA.

"It is important that these senior fire executives apply what they have learned in the classroom to existing situations in their own communities," U.S. Fire Administrator Ernest Mitchell Jr. stated in a news release announcing Davis' distinction. "This makes completion of the EFOP and the Applies Research Projects particularly valuable to these fire service leaders."

For the third year course, "executive analysis of fire service operations in emergency management," Davis completed his research project on situational awareness at the command level. Just last month, he was able to put some of that material and research into practice while working in the Emergency Operations Center during the flood.

"You're not only learning the curriculum, it's material that you can apply," Davis said.

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050 ext. 516 or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow me at Twitter @JessicaMaherRH.