Mavericks will be long on depth, short on experience

Dan McGlothlin has not spent the bulk of his adult life pining to become a high school tennis coach, and he certainly never harbored dreams of welcoming the challenge of starting a brand new program.

Yet sometimes new turns in life often arrive as a result of the company one keeps, and because of McGlothlin's frequent partner when it comes to playing tennis, he finds himself in charge of the inaugural program at Mead that is set to begin varsity competition this spring.

An avid lifelong player, that tennis partner and neighbor of McGlothlin's just happens to be none other than Mead principal Steve Payne. When Payne started talking about the fledgling Mavericks program over some lazy volleys last year, McGlothlin's interest was piqued.

"It's a pleasure to work with these girls. There's a good group of girls here," McGlothlin said. "(Payne) kind of talked me into it, but I'm glad I did it. It's a real good group of girls. Not knowing some of the competition real well but taking what I learned last year, I'm hoping we can be competitive against about half of them."

McGlothlin spent last season as the head coach at Skyline — his first experience as a high school head coach — and has experienced a pleasant surprise with the energy and enthusiasm he has inherited at Mead, even if the Mavericks and every other tennis team in the region have been unable to train outdoors yet.

The first-year Mavericks had 25 players come out for tryouts. Many more-established programs struggle to receive even half of that sort of turnout.

"I think we do have some good athletes that have never played tennis, but I don't know where that will go," McGlothlin said. "It will be interesting to find out. I started late last year (at Skyline) so there were a lot of the processes I didn't go through, such as just learning how the school system works and dealing with that. Getting all those ducks in a row. It's still a learning process. To be a good coach, I think it takes a few years. But we're going to give it a good effort this year."

While the Mavericks will boast impressive depth for a first-year program, Mead will be thin on varsity experience. The exception will be three Mead students who previously played at other programs, including two McGlothlin mentored last year at Skyline — sophomores Antonia Hanlon and Eryn Coyle.

Junior Cara Fitzpatrick also competed the last two seasons at Erie. All three of those players are candidates to fill out Mead's singles lineup.

"It's really exciting that we get to kind of create our own future with this team," Hanlon said. "We get to be the first people here to kind of start a chain reaction. I got a couple of my friends to join, and it's really exciting just to see how many people are interested in this, because I didn't think we were going to have as many as we do."

Follow Pat on Twitter: twitter.com/prooney07