Rebecca Pearce "There is no doubt that her expertise and industry experience will enhance our mission to provide health insurance shoppers with the information they need to make the right decision about choosing a health insurance plan."

HealthPlans.com, one of the most visited independent consumer health insurance sites, according to comScore, today announced the appointment of Rebecca Pearce to its health care advisory board. The appointment strongly aligns with the mission of HealthPlans.com, which is to help consumers get connected with the insurance plan that is the best fit for them.

Pearce served as the Executive Director of the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange from 2011 to 2013, where she was responsible for building the state-based exchange from scratch to be operational for the Affordable Care Act’s first open enrollment period. Maryland enrolled over 600,000 members during that open enrollment period.

Prior to her appointment, she held several roles at Kaiser Permanente, including serving as the National Product Director for Government Programs across the national Kaiser Permanente footprint. Here, she created short and long-term Medicare product strategy to maintain market share and grow membership across the program. She then served as the Director of Benefits Administration at Kaiser Permanente where she helped to develop the organization’s national preventive package as required by the Affordable Care Act.

"We're really thrilled to have Rebecca onboard as part of our team," Sarah Tann, Editor of HealthPlans.com. "There is no doubt that her expertise and industry experience will enhance our mission to provide health insurance shoppers with the information they need to make the right decision about choosing a health insurance plan."

Pearce joins Martin M. Quigley, M.D. on the HealthPlans.com advisory board. In addition to his 20 years of practice as a clinical physician, Dr. Quigley also served as a medical director for Humana and Universal Healthcare.

About HealthPlans.com

HealthPlans.com is one of the most visited independent consumer health insurance sites, according to comScore. With relevant news, expert advice, and interactive tools, HealthPlans.com helps consumers make sense of all things health insurance - from complicated health acronyms to the newest industry policies. Above all, Healthplans.com matches consumers to a health insurance plan that meets their needs and budget by using a fast, free, and consumer-friendly platform.