UNION CITY — After coming up short in the sectional finals three years in a row, Union City has it’s sets sight on one thing this season: a state championship.

The Soaring Eagles’ quest for a title could not have gotten off to a better start last night, as Union City knocked off Shabazz, 39-12, at Roosevelt Stadium.

For the second-straight year, Union City (1-0) opened its season up against the Newark public school, and after dropping last year’s season opener 34-22, the Soaring Eagles exacted a bit of revenge.

Nawell Rojas carried the Soaring Eagles to victory, as the junior running back ran for touchdowns of 22, seven and one yards in the second half, helping Union City put together five consecutive second-half scoring drives amounting in 25-unanswered points.

Although the end result was satisfying, Union City’s night did not get off to the start they were hoping for, as head coach Wilber Valdez’s team struggled early on.

After an unimpressive three-and-out on the team’s first offensive possession, Union City’s defense picked the slack up as a fumble recovery from Roger Riera allowed the Soaring Eagles to regain possession.

However, Union City gave it right back in grand fashion as Shabazz’s Wykel Johnson capitalized off of the Soaring Eagle’s sloppy play and returned a fumble 23 yards for a touchdown, putting the Bulldogs up 6-0 early on.

Union City made even more mistakes on the very next drive, as a Tamaine Boyd fumble gave Shabazz the ball back once again. Luckily for Union City, it’s defense was there to pick them up once more, as Dayber Licea hauled in an impressive interception.

Soon after, quarterback Renaldy Tavarez tossed an 11-yard touchdown pass to Daiquan Kelly to get Union City on the board.

Following another Shabazz touchdown, Boyd redeem himself with a 13-yard touchdown run to put the Soaring Eagles back on top for good at 14-12.

The second half was all Union City, as the defense completely shut down Shabazz’s offensive attack, while the Soaring Eagles’ offense exploded for 25 points to put the game well out of reach

After getting its season off on the right foot, Union City will set its sights on a meeting with rival North Bergen at home Sept. 20.

Shabazz (0-1) 6 6 0 0 — 12

Union City (1-0) 7 7 11 14 — 39

S: Johnson 23 yard fumble recovery (2-point conversion failed)

U: Kelly 11 yard catch from Tavares (Acosta kick)

S: Fogle 1 yard run (2-point conversion failed)

U: Boyd 13 yard run (Acosta kick)

U: Rojas 22 yard run (2-point conversion)

U: Acosta 23 yard field goal

U: Rojas 7 yard run (Acosta kick)

U: Rojas 1 yard run (Acosta kick)