By Dan Holtz, The Leader-Telegram, Eau Claire, Wis. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

June 13 --A chiropractor is accused of having inappropriate sexual contact with a female patient while working at Wolter Chiropractic in 2012.

Jeremy P. Stender slipped his hand under the patient's clothing and contacted her vaginal area while her ankles were strapped to an examining table during an appointment, police say.

Stender, 44, 303 Garfield Ave. , is charged in Eau Claire County Court with a felony count of second-degree sexual assault.

Stender is free on a $5,000 signature bond and cannot have contact with the victim.

As a condition of his bond, Stender also cannot conduct examinations of female patients without someone else present in the examination room.

Stender returns to court July 23 .

If convicted, prosecutors will seek to place Stender on lifetime supervision.

According to the criminal complaint:

The woman told police the sexual assault occurred during a July 19, 2012 , appointment at Wolter Chiropractic, 824 S. Hastings Way .

The woman said she began her chiropractic care with Stender in 2010.

Six months before the assault, the woman said Stender started talking to her about his marital problems.

He then began making inappropriate comments to her about her tattoos and clothing and that he was having sexual dreams about her.

As he started to remove the ankle restraints on the day of the assault, Stender told the woman "it would be his word against her word."

During an interview with police, Stender denied ever being inappropriate with the patient.

Stender said he leaves the exam room door cracked open during the woman's appointments because she's a "high risk patient."

Stender said the woman's allegation is financially motivated because she owes a "large balance."

Wolter Chiropractic's officer manager told police it is not common practice at the office to leave exam room doors open because of patient confidentiality laws.

The office manager said the woman's insurance paid for all the charges involving her office visits and that her account balance was always zero after the payments were made.

The woman began receiving psychiatric care following her July 19, 2012 , incident with Stender. Three months later a psychiatrist determined the woman was showing post-traumatic stress symptoms related to the inappropriate sexual touching by her chiropractor.

The woman's husband said she has weekly nightmares concerning the incident with Stender.

The state Department of Safety and Professional Services took formal disciplinary action against Stender in 2008 after he was accused of making sexual comments to a co-worker.

If convicted, Stender could be sentenced to up to 25 years in prison.

Holtz can be reached at 715-833-9207, 800-236-7077 or [email protected].

___

(c)2014 the Leader-Telegram (Eau Claire, Wis.)

Visit the Leader-Telegram (Eau Claire, Wis.) at www.leadertelegram.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 446

[jetpack-related-posts]