myfoxcarolinas.com

When you think “bed-rest,” you most likely imagine lying in bed all day watching Netflix marathons. Universal Hospital Services, however, has a different vision.

UHS is currently piloting the Total Lift Bed project at Carolinas Specialty Hospital in Pineville, N.C. The bed helps patients with breathing problems and speeds up recovery. According to a recent news story, the bed, “gives caregivers the ability to gradually increase patients’ weight bearing activities which can help patients improve their strength more rapidly.” Results of the project will be available in the fall of 2014.

The news story had this to say about a patient at Carolinas Specialty Hospital:

“Mary Pettis underwent surgery in May, and when she was transferred to CSH she was put in one of these Total Lift Beds. The bed allowed her to stand up: something she wouldn’t have been able to to do on her own. Being in an upright position for periods of the day also helped ease some of her breathing problems. Pettis did so well on the stand-up bed that she was transferred back to a regular bed and is now on schedule to leave the hospital and go home sooner than expected.”

The UHS website says the bed can tilt users from zero degrees to a full upright 82 degrees.

The website describes how the bed works,

“The TLB relies upon a tilting mechanism, in addition to the exclusive Foot Lifter™, which raises the bed while still maintaining the patient’s center of gravity towards the back, and brings their feet to floor level. Unlike anything else, the Total Lift Bed™ provides the revolutionary ability to gradually measure and increase weight bearing ratios earlier in treatment, which sets an unmatched industry standard for accelerated early mobility therapy. As a result, patient strength can be improved more quickly, potentially reducing length of stay in the health care facility.”

The Total Lift Bed also includes two scales and a digital screen to show the weight bearing ratio and allow caregivers to control and increase weight bearing capabilities to optimize patient recovery.