Buy Photo Veteran Patricia Mahaun went to the Louisville Veterans Affairs Medical Center as soon as she moved to town from Austin, Tex., hoping to get an appointment with a new doctor at a VA clinic. But she was told officials needed to determine if she was eligible for care (she'd been getting it for 15 years in Texas), and if she was eligible she would be seen in about a month. It turned out she didn't see her assigned doctor until 6 months and 8 days after that initial request. Mahaun, a retired Air Force colonel, said that's unacceptable and fits into a larger pattern being revealed nationally, in which veterans are being forced to wait months for care -- and some have even died while they waited. Mahaun said Louisville seems vulnerable to a similar tragedy. May 16, 2014 (Photo: By Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo Story Highlights 40 patients at the Phoenix VA Health Care System in Arizona may have died waiting for care

VA has set a goal of 14 days for wait times

Louisville's VA serves more than 150,000 veterans

Shortly after moving to Louisville, Patricia Mahaun stopped by the local veterans hospital in October, hoping to find a new doctor, get checked for a possible urinary tract infection and get a flu shot.

The Air Force veteran had been going to a Veterans Affairs clinic in Texas for years, so she expected no problem scheduling an appointment with the Louisville VA. Instead, she waited six frustrating months before she finally saw a doctor.

"Medical care delayed is medical care denied," said Mahaun, 64. "If I am experiencing this inexcusable delay, how many others in the Louisville area and beyond are also? It's high time that we start treating veterans like the heroes that the public claims we are."

Mahaun joins a growing chorus of veterans and officials outraged by delays in VA outpatient care being reported across the nation, prompting President Barack Obama to say last week that he will not tolerate them and to promise accountability.

RELATED: Alison Grimes calls for VA chief to resign

The controversy first erupted over allegations that 40 patients at the Phoenix VA Health Care System in Arizona may have died waiting for care — spurring similar accusations in several states, an investigation by the VA Office of Inspector General and face-to-face audits at every VA facility. Auditors visited the Louisville's Robley Rex VA Medical Center May 12, but have not released their findings.

Judy Williams, spokeswoman for the Louisville VA, said she could not provide average wait times at local clinics or say how many complaints the local agency has received concerning waits. But Stephen George, spokesman for U.S. Rep. John Yarmuth, D-3rd, said his office has recently heard from about 20 veterans complaining about waits that lasted three or four weeks.

Williams said when a new patient requests care, "every attempt is made to give the patient an appointment within 30 days of their desired date." Officials consider each patient's case based on medical needs, she said, providing immediate care to those with urgent needs.

Nationally, the VA has set a goal of 14 days for wait times. The agency cares for about 6.5 million veterans and other beneficiaries in its facilities, which include 150 medical centers and 820 community-based outpatient clinics. Louisville's VA serves more than 150,000 veterans living in a 35-county area in Kentuckiana.

"The department is very concerned about the allegations being made," Williams said. "We are here to provide the highest quality health care for our veterans. ... We want to improve services if there's a need to do that."

VA Secretary Eric Shinseki expressed similar sentiments at a hearing this month before the U.S. Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs. He said he was "mad as hell" about reports of waits and allegations of falsified record-keeping to cover up those waits, and wanted to regain veterans' trust.

He might not get the chance. Already, calls are coming for his removal — including last week from U.S. Senate candidate Alison Lundergan Grimes, a Democrat. Her Republican opponent, U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell, also called for a change in VA leadership.

READ | Grimes calls for Shineski's removal

Mahaun said she hopes focusing on this issue makes a difference. While she waited, she said, she suffered for weeks with pain in her left shoulder and arm that made it difficult to sleep.

"The good news is I don't have anything that's urgent," she said. "I wonder about the guys coming home from Iraq and Afghanistan missing arms, legs, eyes, PTSD, head injuries. ... Are they having to wait six months or longer?"

Waiting in Louisville

Mahaun joined the Air Force when she was 21 and served for 26 years before retiring as a colonel. In 1989, she was an assistant logistics officer in Panama during Operation Just Cause, the invasion to oust dictator Manuel Noriega.

After retiring from the military in 1997, Mahaun became eligible for VA care in Austin, Texas, receiving a 50 percent disability rating stemming from several surgeries. For about 15 years, she said, she got "excellent, timely care."

"In retrospect, I had no idea how good I had it there," she said.

She moved to Louisville in August to buy a home in St. James Court. On Oct. 3, she stopped by the admissions office at Louisville's VA hospital, where she said a woman told her she needed to provide a letter proving her disability rating and eligibility. If she was eligible, she was told, she would be assigned a primary-care physician within a month.

She said she wound up going to the VA emergency room that day to be checked for the urinary tract infection and receive a flu shot, then went home to wait to be assigned a doctor.

"Thanksgiving comes along. Christmas comes along. I was still waiting," said Mahaun, who kept track of her waits in her daily journal. "I thought they would keep their promise."

On Feb. 4, Mahaun said, she went back to the hospital and wandered the halls until an employee was able to listen to her complaint and check her eligibility on his computer.

The next day, she said, she was told she would be assigned to a doctor at a VA clinic in Shively, and was told to stop by the Kentucky Air National Guard on Feb. 12. There, she gave intake information and had a blood-pressure check and medication review, but never saw a doctor.

After suffering with shoulder pain for a couple of more months, she stopped by the clinic against the VA worker's recommendation March 31, and landed an appointment for April 11. The doctor eventually diagnosed arthritis.

Williams urged veterans facing similar difficulties to see patient advocates, who work at the hospital and at each of Robley Rex's eight Community Based Outpatient Clinics. Mahaun said she did not know about patient advocates.

"Our goal is to provide the best quality, safe and effective health care our veterans have earned and deserve," Williams said.

Some veterans and veterans' advocates said the Louisville VA seems to be meeting that goal. Jim MacDonald, an Air Force veteran who is state quartermaster adjutant for the state VFW, said he "hasn't heard any negatives" about the local VA.

"I use the local VA," he said. "I don't have no complaints."

Army veteran Ronald Erhardt, 81, said he's been getting care through the Louisville VA since 1990, and has never waited more than a week or two for a doctor's appointment.

"I've been to five different VA centers," he said, " and Louisville is by far the best one."

A national problem

In April, a national report from the VA pointed to screenings delays that prevented prompt detection of possible gastrointestinal cancer in 76 veterans at VA hospitals across the nation — and 23 related deaths.

None of the deaths were in Louisville, but the report notes that one local veteran was contacted about an "institutional disclosure," which occurs when patients may have been harmed by their care.

Williams said the VA in Louisville had no institutional disclosures related to consult delays. She would not elaborate.

Debra Draper, director of health care for the U.S. Government Accountability Office, said her office has never looked into delays at the Louisville VA health system. But in April, she testified at a Congressional hearing about the national scope of the problem.

She said in fiscal year 2012, the Veterans Health Administration provided nearly 84 million outpatient medical appointments at primary and specialty-care clinics nationwide. Her agency identified numerous delays at five VA medical centers they reviewed in Augusta, Maine; Denver; Gainesville, Fla.; Oklahoma City and Palo, Alto, Calif.

She gave examples of delays but did not specify where they occurred.

In three of 10 cases examined at one VA, she said, 140 to 210 days elapsed between the time gastroenterology consults were requested and the patient received care. And for four of 10 physical therapy consults reviewed at a VA, 108 to 152 days elapsed "with no apparent actions taken to schedule an appointment for a veteran."

Draper said VA officials blamed issues such as increased demand for services and difficulty hiring and keeping specialists in the areas of gastroenterology and physical therapy. She said some officials told investigators they tried to relieve backlogs by referring veterans to non-VA doctors, but those doctors weren't always available.

Shinseki has defended VA care as comparable to the private sector.

But a survey released this year by the national healthcare search and consulting firm Merritt Hawkins suggests wait times may be shorter outside the VA. The survey examined 15 metropolitan areas, finding Boston had the highest average wait time for an appointment with a physician — 45 days.

Williams said the VA audits are Shinseki's way of ensuring that national policy on scheduling appointment is followed at all VA hospitals and clinics, and that staff are trained on these policies.

In Washington, McConnell is co-sponsoring legislation along with 23 other Republicans and a Democrat that would make it easier to remove high-level VA employees for failures under their watch. A similar bill passed by the U.S. House has 151 co-sponsors, including Kentucky Republican Reps. Andy Barr, Brett Guthrie and Thomas Massie.

"Any misconduct found at VA hospitals should be met with swift punishment, and administration officials need to be held accountable," McConnell said on the Senate floor May 15. "America's ill and wounded veterans have already paid a price. They have a right to expect that our country will be there when they need help."

Mahaun said she hopes no other veterans have to wait as long as she did to see a doctor.

"I'm entitled to VA care; I earned it," she said. "The bottom line is there are a lot of people who say veterans are heroes and we need to do everything we can for them. But the VA is underfunded and there are inefficiencies.

"It's a bureacracy. It needs to be fixed."

Reporter Laura Ungar can be reached at (502)582-7190. Follow her on Twitter @lauraungarcj.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1gXM1Xv