Sen. Ted Cruz visits NH for the first time since announcing run for the White House.

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz stood next to former New Hampshire House Speaker Bill O’Brien on Friday and called Sen. Kelly Ayotte “a friend.” He also called embattled U.S. Rep. Frank Guinta “a good man."

Ted Cruz Ted Cruz (R) is a candidate for president in 2016. More

Cruz would not say whether he agreed with O’Brien that Ayotte should face a primary next year, saying that he is “focused on my own primary.”

Cruz was questioned about calls by Ayotte and other top Republicans for Guinta’s resignation in the wake of a finding by the Federal Election Commission that the New Hampshire congressman received excessive campaign contributions from his parents.

“That is a question ultimately for the congressman to decide and for the voters here in New Hampshire to decide,” Cruz said. “I’m certainly not going to insert myself into an issue of a local elected official.”

Cruz added, “I like and respect Frank. He’s a good man. And I think ultimately, those questions will get resolved. But it’s not my place to stick my nose where it doesn’t belong.”

O’Brien, a co-chair of Cruz’s New Hampshire presidential campaign, has been critical of Ayotte in recent Facebook posts.

After a member of Ayotte's senate staff was arrested in connection with a prostitution sting last month, O’Brien wrote on Facebook that Ayotte was exhibiting poor instincts for backing legislation combating human trafficking while failing to condemn the staffer, who resigned.

And when Ayotte voted to confirm Obama nominee Loretta Lynch as U.S. Attorney General, O’Brien again criticized Ayotte, asking on Facebook, “What is the difference between having a (Democrat) Jeanne Shaheen and a Kelly Ayotte in the Senate?”

O’Brien called for someone “of character” to challenge Ayotte in a Republican U.S. Senate primary next year. But he said he would not be the one to do so.

Cruz has also had differences with Ayotte. In 2013, she demanded in a closed Senate Republican caucus that he disavow a statement from a conservative group friendly to Cruz attacking her and 24 other Republican senators for supporting a procedural vote that the group considered support for the Affordable Care Act.

In December 2014, Ayotte was critical of a move by Cruz and Sen. Mike Lee of Utah to force a series of votes related to overturning President Obama’s executive action on immigration as part of a fight over a key spending bill. The move forced the Senate to delay its holiday recess.

Ayotte backed Republican Senate candidate Scott Brown over former U.S. Sen. Bob Smith during last year’s Republican Senate primary. Smith is also a co-chair of Cruz’s state campaign and was with Cruz and O’Brien on Friday.

Standing between the two Granite Staters, Cruz declined to say whether he believes Ayotte should be challenged in a primary next year.

“I like Senator Ayotte,” Cruz said. “She’s a friend. I think well of her. And I think it is incumbent on every elected official to make the case to his or her constituents that we’re going to do the job we’re elected to do. And so I will leave those suggestions to the voters of New Hampshire to determine that for every elected official.

“But I’ve certainly been very happy to work with Kelly on a number of issues, and I expect to continue doing so, working side by side,” he said.

“I’m focused on my own primary,” Cruz added. “And I’m focused on making the case that we need a proven conservative. Not just someone talking the talk, but someone walking the walk, standing up and fighting for conservative principles, for free market principles and our constitutional liberties, over and over again.”

(WMUR Political Director Josh McElveen contributed to this report.)