jr runwithgrace 061315 p01 Lisa Lovegrove (center) and Ricky Lovegrove (left) walk away from the starting line during the Run With Grace memorial run at the Patrick Henry High School trail in Roanoke on Saturday. This is the 10th and last year of the run to celebrate their daughter, who loved to run.

jr runwithgrace 061315 p02 Kerri Dalton, 20, runs in the Run With Grace race at the Patrick Henry High School on Saturday. Proceeds from the race have funded a memorial scholarship in Grace’s name.

jr runwithgrace 061315 p03 Ricky Lovegrove cheers on runners during Saturday’s Run With Grace memorial race at Patrick Henry High School.

jr runwithgrace 061315 p04 Elly Roller, 22, and Madeline Lovegrove, 21, cross the finish line during the Run With Grace memorial run at the Patrick Henry High School track in Roanoke on Saturday. "I think this being the last year is a right time to finish. It's Coach Cox's last year and it just feels right," said Lovegrove. Roller and Lovegrove are cousins to Grace Lovegrove, 18, died of sudden cardiac arrest at Christopher Newport University. Proceeds from the race are used to benefit a scholarship bearing her name. This is the tenth and last year of the run.

jr runwithgrace 061315 p05 Racers from the men's 5K class start the Run With Grace memorial race for Grace Lovegrove at the Patrick Henry High School track in Roanoke on Saturday. Grace Lovegrove, 18, died of sudden cardiac arrest at Christopher Newport University. Proceeds from the race are used to benefit a scholarship bearing her name. This is the tenth and last year of the run. Proceeds from the race are used to benefit a scholarship bearing her name.

jr runwithgrace 061315 p06 Katelyn Williams, 28, shows off a tattoo of a winged track shoe and the initials of Grace Meredyth Lovegrove at Patrick Henry High School track during the Run With Grace memorial race. "Grace said that she wanted to get a tattoo like this when she could. So I got it for her," said Williams. Grace Lovegrove, 18, died of sudden cardiac arrest at Christopher Newport University. Proceeds from the race are used to benefit a scholarship bearing her name. This is the 10th and last year of the run.

jr runwithgrace 061315 p07 Patrick Henry High School track coach Chad Cox runs in the men's 5k Run With Grace memorial race in Roanoke on Saturday. Cox was Grace Lovegrove's running coach before she headed to Christopher Newport University where she died of sudden cardiac arrest at Christopher Newport University. This is Cox last year at Patrick Henry High School and the Lovegrove's feel the race won't be the same with out him. Proceeds from the race are used to benefit a scholarship bearing her name. This is the 10th and last year of the run.

jr runwithgrace 061315 p08 Lisa Lovegrove and Ricky Lovegrove thank family, friends and racers for coming out to Patrick Henry High School track during the Run With Grace memorial race in Roanoke on Saturday. Their daughter, Grace Lovegrove, 18, died of sudden cardiac arrest at Christopher Newport University. Proceeds from the race are used to benefit a scholarship bearing her name. This is the 10th and last year of the run.

jr runwithgrace 061315 p09 Patrick Henry High School track coach Chad Cox speaks to Lisa Lovegrove and Ricky Lovegrove at the Patrick Henry High School track during the Run With Grace memorial race in Roanoke on Saturday. The race is for the Lovegroves daughter, Grace Lovegrove, 18, who died of sudden cardiac arrest at Christopher Newport University. This is Cox last year as coach at Patrick Henry High School and the Lovegrove's feel the race won't be the same with out him. Proceeds from the race are used to benefit a scholarship bearing her name. This is the 10th and last year of the run.