People Moves of the Week: Centerview, Delta Galil, SunTrust Robinson Humphrey

Centerview taps chemical M&A specialist; apparel company Delta Galil names new CEO; SunTrust hires a team of nine, including Sugeet Madan as managing director in San Francisco

Centerview Partners — Paul Collins has joined the New York investment bank as a partner. Originally, Collins was with Barclays plc, where he was vice chairman and global head of chemicals. Prior to that, he oversaw the chemicals group at Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch, and served as managing director at the Blackstone Group. Previously, he advised Carlyle Group’s $4.9 billion acquisition of Dupont Performance Coatings.

Delta Galil Industries Ltd. (DELTY.PK/OTCQX) — The Tel Aviv-based apparel manufacturer for men, women and children has named Maurice Reznik president of the company’s USA segment, effective Jan. 5, 2015. Reznik joins after serving as CEO of Maidenform Inc., where he helped establish the company's specialized bra and shapewear categories — key areas that Delta Galil has targeted for growth. At Delta Galil, Reznik will also be CEO of the company's women’s intimate apparel unit for both the U.S. and U.K.

Dresner Partners — The Chicago investment bank has hired W. Robert Friedman as managing director. A medical device expert, Friedman joined Dresner from Northeast Securities Inc., where he was a managing director. Prior to that, he was the co-head of Burnham Securities' health care investment banking practice for seven years. Friedman also ran the health care practice for Dominick & Dominick, and ran the health care industry group for merchant bank Flemings as a managing director. He also held a variety of positions at several other firms including Citibank, Montgomery Securities, Prudential Bache, L.F. Rothschild and Unterberg Towbin. The announcement was made on the heels of Dresner's hiring of Nishant Bubna as vice president. Bubna was called to Dresner from KPMG Corporate Finance, where he was a senior associate. Prior to joining KPMG, Bubna was at several other investment banks, including Houlihan Lokey, Kinetic Advisors LLC, Charterhouse Equity Partners LLC and UBS.

K&L Gates LLP — The Wilmington, Delaware, office of the law firm tapped Lisa Stark as a partner within the corporate M&A practice. Stark joins K&L Gates from National Corporate Research Ltd., where she served as in-house counsel. Stark specializes in advising boards of directors and significant stakeholders on various fiduciary and statutory obligations, as well as corporate governance matters.

Santander Bank NA — Albert Spada has been named managing director and head of asset-based lending. Prior to joining Santander, Spada was with RBS Citizens Business Capital, working as a senior vice president and a national sales leader. Spada also held a variety of leadership positions at CIT Commercial, GE Commercial Finance, the Bank of New York and Goldman Sachs Group (NYSE: GS).

SunTrust Robinson Humphrey— The Atlanta-based investment bank has added nine advisers. John McCracken and Sugeet Madan join SunTrust as managing directors in San Francisco. Previously, McCracken was at US Bancorp, while Madan worked at Bank of America/Nations Bank. Joining them in San Francisco are Aaron Eichler and Kevin Lowe. Eichler joins SunTrust from Bank of America Merrill Lynch (NYSE: BAC), where he was a client manager and senior vice president. Lowe joins as a director, having spent the past seven years at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Managing directors Erik Velastegui and Deborah Ironson Katz have jumped over to SunTrust's Los Angeles team, while Mike Chryssikos—also a Bank of America veteran—will oversee the bank's Southwest Region services out of Houston. Will Rowe, most recently at RBS Citizens, has also come aboard as a managing director in Boston. David Nackley, also an RBS Citizens veteran, joins SunTrust in New York as a managing director.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: