A camera crew interviews Dr. Noah Kaufman in the emergency department at Medical Center of the Rockies in Loveland. The crew shot footage of the emergency physician at the hospital in May. Dr. Kaufman will be featured as a competitor on "American Ninja Warrior" on NBC on Monday night. ( Courtesy of University of Colorado Health )

He swung like a modern-day Tarzan, and instead of vines he gripped chains.

Noah Kaufman — Fort Collins resident and local doctor, competing in the 2013 Venice Beach qualifiers for "American Ninja Warrior" — had to overcome a number of obstacles to make it to the next round. He not only made it through the qualifying round in 2013, but out of hundreds of initial competitors, he finished in the final 20.

Kaufman, who works for Emergency Physicians of the Rockies that staffs the UC Health emergency rooms at Medical Center of the Rockies, Poudre Valley Hospital and West Greeley Emergency and Surgery Center, is back again this year.

The 39-year-old competed in the qualifying round of "American Ninja Warrior" in Denver, which will air Monday on NBC.

"This year, I've trained for the competition," he said. "It's a great way to inspire people and to spread a message of health."

Kaufman's reasoning for competing in "American Ninja Warrior" is that he wants to reach an audience larger than just the patients he treats. He wants to demonstrate the importance of health and fitness, which he has been passionate about the majority of his life. From a young age, his father demonstrated for him the importance of good health and inspired him to stay active.

He said that after last year's competition, many people reached out to him and thanked him for inspiring them to get healthy, lose weight and even quit smoking. His patients recognized him on the show. People even found him through the Internet to thank him, too. His Facebook page has 482 likes.

Advertisement

"That was really motivating," Kaufman said of people reaching out to him to thank him. He decided to compete again this year, and hopes to compete again in years to come.

"I want everybody to quit smoking, to get out and be active every day and to eat a healthier diet," he said.

Kaufman began rock climbing 25 years ago, an activity he still does regularly today. Last year, he did not train for "American Ninja Warrior," but rather said he participated "right off the couch" after hearing about the competition from a friend.

This year, he built an intensive upper body training course in his basement. He continued to rock climb, and he used what he called a broad training methodology that involved around 30 hours per week of training. He ran regularly, often with his colleagues. He also lifted weights, bicycled and ran wind sprints. He said he hoped his broad methods of training would help him to adapt to the new obstacles in the course of the show.

The hardest part of competing is the pressure, he said, because competitors have just one chance to make it through the obstacle course. He also said, though, that successfully completing the obstacles is the most fun.

"The competition has been very motivating," he said. "It's pushed me to eat healthier, step up my game and I've been able to progress out of a very long-standing plateau of physical fitness."

He said that training with his colleagues was helpful because, when he's with his friends, there's no room to hide anything. It forces him to push himself further. The training and the competition have been amazing because he used to think his best years were behind him, but training for the competition has convinced him that his best years are actually ahead of him, he said.

Kaufman not only hopes to inspire his patients and people who watch the show. He said he also wants to be a good role model for his 2-year-old son, Zun.

"I want to show him you can do anything you set your mind to," he said. "You can excel at anything you want."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Cassa Niedringhaus at 970-635-3691 or news@reporter-herald.com