Ohio Gov. John Kasich’s presidential poll numbers may not be climbing much, but Ohio’s Medicaid costs certainly have.

The state’s annual Medicaid spending has increased by nearly $6 billion since Kasich took office. Based on “all funds” figures from the Ohio Department of Medicaid, spending skyrocketed by 30 percent from 2011-15.

Campaigning for the Republican presidential nomination as a budget-balancing welfare reformer, Kasich points to Ohio’s Medicaid growth as proof he’s kept spending in check.

“Our Medicaid program, by the way, is growing at less than 4 percent,” Kasich told Sean Hannity during a July 21 Fox News interview. “It’s like the best growth rate in the country.”

“We have taken Medicaid from a growth of 10 percent when I came in, in my second budget was at 2 percent without taking anybody off the rolls and without cutting any benefits,” Kasich said during a Sept. 1 New Hampshire campaign stop.

Averaged over Kasich’s first two budgets, Ohio Medicaid spending increased by 7.4 percent per year — according to numbers from Kasich’s own administration.

Kasich’s first two budgets covered fiscal years 2012-13 and 2014-15. Ohio’s Medicaid spending increased by 4.1 percent in fiscal year 2012, 2.5 percent in 2013, 10.6 percent in 2014 and 12.5 percent in 2015.

What numbers is Kasich using when he says Ohio Medicaid spending “is growing at less than 4 percent?” Not the state’s frequently-cited General Revenue Fund expenditures: GRF spending on Medicaid has increased by 34 percent under Kasich.

Kasich’s campaign failed to respond to a request for explanation.

“I am sure the Governor is quoting average spending per Medicaid enrollee growth,” State Rep. Jim Butler, a Republican from Oakwood, told Ohio Watchdog.

But while Kasich spins per-member cost growth as equivalent to overall Medicaid growth, his Obamacare expansion has swelled Ohio’s Medicaid rolls by 620,000 members.

BACKGROUND: Ohio’s dependence on Medicaid is the worst in the Midwest

Kasich’s Obamacare expansion “has likely masked the unsustainable increase in spending that is occurring with the Medicaid system,” Butler said, because Obamacare expansion enrollees typically have lower health care costs than traditional Medicaid recipients.

Obamacare expansion covers working-age adults with no kids and no disabilities. Traditional Medicaid covers children, pregnant women, poor families, the elderly and the disabled.

Butler said Ohio’s per-member Medicaid costs are still increasing at an alarming rate, considering how rapidly enrollment has climbed under Kasich.

In fiscal year 2011 — the final year of Democrat governor Ted Strickland’s final budget — Ohio Medicaid spending totaled $17.7 billion. In fiscal year 2015, which ended in June, Ohio Medicaid spending totaled $23.5 billion.

Kasich’s Department of Medicaid projected this winter that Ohio Medicaid spending would total $28.2 billion in 2017, a staggering 59 percent increase from when Kasich took office in 2011.

By contrast, Ohio’s budgeted 2017 spending for the attorney general’s office, Department of Public Safety and Department of Rehabilitation & Correction is just $2.2 billion combined.

The 2017 Ohio Department of Education budget is $11.1 billion, and the 2017 budget for the Ohio Department of Higher Education is $2.6 billion.

Instead of investigating Ohio’s skyrocketing Medicaid costs, newspapers across the state seem content to quote Ohio Department of Medicaid press releases. In July, ODM announced total 2015 Medicaid spending was $1.9 billion less than expected.

“Ohio’s total Medicaid spending was nearly $2 billion below estimates for the fiscal year that ended in June, despite more newly eligible enrollees,” the Associated Press reported.

Throughout the AP story, Ohio’s smaller-than-expected Medicaid spending increase was described as a “savings.”

“Medicaid spending was nearly $2 billion below estimates,” gloated the left-wing editors of the Toledo Blade in an editorial bashing “anti-government extremists” opposed to Obamacare expansion.

Traditional Medicaid enrollment was lower than expected in 2015, but Kasich’s Obamacare expansion cost $1.5 billion more than projected in its first 18 months.

Butler told Ohio Watchdog the overall ODM figures aren’t so sunny upon closer inspection.

The state didn’t make an annual payment of nearly $600 million to hospitals in 2015, and there was overlap between spending budgeted by the General Assembly and spending budgeted for Obamacare expansion by the Ohio Controlling Board.