This year has led to a lot of changes for Multi-County Community Service Agency. In January a ribbon cutting was held for its new building, and in June the long time director for the agency retired.

Proud of the agency's past accomplishments, MCCSA officials say they are looking to do even more in the future.

"We've always had the vision of helping people help themselves, and that's what we're going to do," says MCCSA Interim Director, Angela Hicks. "We're going to be adding more programs. Securing additional funding for some programs, and revamping some programs."

Currently, MCCSA officials are seriously examining the possibility of offering public transportation to: the elderly, people with medical conditions and veterans. Also, in an effort to better serve clients, the agency's office in each county it serves will have at least one worker who is always there, and all staff members for MCCSA are being cross trained.

"If an individual needs, Meals on Wheels, and if that same individual needs energy assistance, or has a challenge getting social security, that one person who has seen them for Meals on Wheels can now see them for all of those services," says MCCSA Consultant, Sollie Norwood. "So, the individual will only have to get familiar with one person, and this will also free up other staff to go into other areas. "

Agency officials are also raising the bar in terms of how workers answer phone calls, and how clients come to the office.

"Clients, you come as you are if you don't have anything, but you're not just going to walk up in here with house shoes on," says Norwood. "You're not going to walk in here with rollers in your hair. It's not to put anybody down, but we want to try to put you on the track to a better life, and presentation means a whole lot."

MCCSA serves 9 counties in the eastern and central parts of Mississippi. In recent years it has offered 13 programs. Some of those programs included: Energy and Weatherization Assistance, Meals on Wheels, South Harbor Homeless Shelter for Families in Meridian, and the Foster Grandparents Initiative.