THANKS BOB & GINNY

On Friday evening my wife, granddaughter and I went to the Erin Pub for dinner. I was carrying festive balloons since it was celebrate our 67th wedding anniversary. After we were seated for a bit, a complete stranger who was sitting at the bar came down and approached us. After a few words, he insisted on paying for our dinner. He wouldn’t take no for an answer. He said a little prayer with us and then just walked away. We’ve never experienced anything with such an overwhelming feeling of kindness. We’ll surely pass that on to someone else in the near future. Thank you Bob and Ginny wherever you are, we won’t forget your kindness.

BILL AND MARY

OBAMACARE IS GREAT

“Constitutional Courier” is so addicted to Fox News they actually think that Obamacare isn’t working. Well, let me tell you something: You’re absolutely wrong. Even if Republican is elected president 2016 — I hope not — Obamacare isn’t going anywhere. Too many people are happy with it.

FREIND RIGHT AGAIN

Chris Freind made a great point last week: Americans’ attention span is gone. It’s is not just the toys that people obsessed with, sporting events are the same thing. Every time there is a stoppage of play or between innings of baseball games you are inundated with all this stuff because they’re afraid everybody is going to get bored and can’t pay attention for more than 5 seconds at a time.

Advertisement

OBAMA BLAMES FOX

They had Obama on Fox News last week. He’s always criticizing Fox News for telling the truth, yet he doesn’t criticize any of the other news stations or newspapers. Why is that? Oh, that’s because the government owns them and they’re told not to speak the truth.

CHICKEN LITTLE

“The End Is Near” sounds like Chicken Little, “The sky is falling, the sky is falling.” Where I work we’ve been busy for the last two months and we are booked up for next month, so the economy apparently is doing pretty well.

FOX MATHEMATICS

To The End Is Near,” if 93 million Americans are out of work like you say, the unemployment rate would be close to one-third. You better get your money back on that Fox News math class you took. You were right though about the American economy being in free fall, but it was before 2008, not after.

WHEAT IS FOR THE BIRDS

I threw some wheat bread out for the birds and they turned their nose up at it. It’s weird that they get that they can be choosy about the bread they get for free.

SHUSH

To my wife: Please stop hollering at the kids so loud when I’m sitting right next to you. It hurts my ears.

GET OFF THE KOOL-AID

To “Overseas Money” and “No Jobs,” based on your comments I’m assuming you mean manufacturing jobs when you talk about jobs going overseas. Despite the fact that manufacturing is alive and well in the U.S. (We just don’t pay people $80 an hour to make knickknacks anymore.) Let’s assume all the class warfare nonsense Democratic strategists and union leaders tell you is true and everything is made overseas. So what about the engineers who design the products in the U.S.? What about the people who set up the contracts with the overseas factories? What about the importers who bring the products over here? What about the longshoremen? What about the warehouse crews? The truck drivers and railway workers? What about the ad agencies getting the contracts to market the products? What about the sales representatives getting the products placed in retail stores? Oh, I forgot. Manufacturing is holier than thou when it comes to other jobs, and every economic woe could be solved in we just made more disposable widgets in this country again. Stop drinking the Kool-Aid.

DEAD ANT, DEAD ANT

To get rid of the ants without the expense of an exterminator or messy sprays, you can buy ant traps at any store. You can get the ones in a four-pack at dollar stores.

We just had a problem with ants and the traps really do work, but be patient. It takes a couple of days to kill them all.

I see the House approved $612 billion for defense spending, and yet they went to slash money for Amtrak. Where are their priorities? Oh. I know, with the defense lobbyists, that’s where they are.