ISTOCK

JAMES ALLEN: Walk the halls of any fast-growing, entrepreneurial company, and there’s a good chance you’ll see some fights. I don’t mean colleagues throwing punches, of course, but at many small businesses, conflict tends to bubble up pretty quickly.

Smart businesses also know instinctively that conflict is good—as long as it gets resolved quickly. Both the company and its customers benefit when they have passionate advocates willing to go to the mat for what they think is right.

But as small businesses start to get bigger, they often learn to hate conflict—and the conflict simmers under the surface rather than being addressed head on. Disputes become personal, or infest entire teams, pitting one group against the other. Worse, the company begins to view it as unprofessional to disrupt a carefully scheduled meeting agenda with an unresolved dispute. People start to frown on dissent.

The solution is a Monday morning meeting designed to unblock any organizational obstacle that keeps people from doing their jobs effectively. The best companies have weekly meetings with a clear cultural norm: meet, fight and then resolve. This ensures that conflicts don’t linger, which would hamper the rest of the organization’s ability to act. And while such meetings help the leadership team to keep tabs on the issues that might prevent the front line from acting, the front line learns that they can’t let a conflict fester for more than four business days.

“We love conflict,” the chief executive of a Turkish firm told me. At his weekly leadership team meeting, he said, “I expect major fights.” At one meeting, his team debated what to do about some products that had been poorly packaged in off-brand colors. Pulling the stock would likely cause stock-outs at its retail partners. The chief executive grew angry, not because of the packaging snafu but because certain executives didn’t advocate for brand consistency. “Our head of marketing was being way too reasonable,” the executive recalled. Understanding the consequences of stock-outs, he was too quick, in the executive’s opinion, to say that the color issue wasn’t that bad, when he should have been advocating for brand consistency. “During a break, I told him that he was not doing his job.”

That executive understands that good organizational design encourages conflict—not for the sake of conflict, but so the ultimate decision flows from full-throated, passionate debate. Too often, companies suppress debate, allowing unresolved conflicts to paralyze employees and suck away their energy. The Monday morning meeting is a simple mechanism to remind everyone that fighting isn’t the answer, but can be a great way to find the answer.

James Allen is co-leader of the global strategy practice at Bain & Company.

Read the latest Small Business Report.