American Abstraction, 1930-1945

Michael Rosenfeld

100 11th Ave., (212) 247-0082

Through Jan. 4

ENLARGE Dwinell Grant's 'Untitled' (1941) at Michael Rosenfeld. Michael Rosenfeld Gallery LLC, New York, NY

During the years between the world wars, modern art in America was really no more than a pale reflection of that in Europe. But while the American abstractionists of the 1930s and 1940s seem in the standard textbooks to be hardly the equals of such continental giants as Pablo Picasso, Joan Miró, or Vasily Kandinsky (Emil Bisttram, Werner Drewes, Agnes Pelton and Esphyr Slobdokina aren't exactly household names), their work looks better. It's more philosophically disciplined, graphically inventive and chromatically cheerful (even into the World War II years)—each time we have the chance to see it anew.

This exhibition of mostly paintings and a couple of sculptures by 22 such artists (those mentioned above, plus the more well-known Burgoyne Diller, Theodore Roszak, Jean Xceron and others) is the brightest show on view in Chelsea right now. The visual power of pictures no bigger than the tops of end tables is astonishing. It's the optimism, the sincere belief that art can point to universal truths, that does it.

Kris Kuksi: Revival

Joshua Liner

540 W. 28th St., (212) 244-7415

Through Jan. 18

ENLARGE Kris Kuksi's 'Churchtank Type 13 (Retired)' (2013) at Joshua Liner. Joshua Liner Gallery

If the aliens in "Close Encounters of the Third Kind" had modeled their advanced civilization on 17th-century Baroque Catholic architecture and statuary, the mother ship might have looked a lot like one of Kris Kuksi's mixed-media assemblages. Mr. Kuksi (b. 1973) cobbles together his objects with a jeweler's touch from toy parts, plastic figurines and detritus from model kits that he obtains from all corners of the globe.

What initially comes across as a slightly sooty marzipan concoction of strange ornaments turns out, on closer inspection, to have a dark side. These wall-mounted half-chandeliers contain chains and swords and helmets and guns and fangs and all sorts of goth accoutrements, which combine to give Mr. Kuksi's art an overall video-game vibe. It's about as close to "Assassin's Creed" as immobile objects can get.

The anomalous, freestanding "Churchtank Type 13 (Retired)"—a cathedral-like superstructure upon a war machine's base—is the artist's sole venture into outright social comment. As sculpture, it's a cut above anything else in the show, but the bluntness of the piece's op-ed quotient is at odds with Mr. Kuksi's principal artistic virtue, which is to cram so much portentousness into his work that each Deep Hidden Meaning cancels out another, so that everything ends up just good, clean, malevolent fun.

Sean Scully: Night and Day

Cheim & Read

547 W. 25th St., (212) 242-7727

through Jan. 11

"Dependable" is the word for the Irish-American painter Sean Scully (b. 1945). There's an absolutely solid floor under his big, viscous, painted-with-a-wide-brush, striped and rectilinearly tiled abstractions. On the other hand, a fairly firm ceiling hangs over his rough-but-stately work. It never really soars. Maybe it's the consistency—Mr. Scully hasn't changed his basic, almost trademarked, configuration in decades. Or perhaps it's the safe and sane hues—what I think of as "sports-jacket abstraction"; the color combinations wouldn't look bad as a tweed.

When Mr. Scully began his long, sincere and quite honorable trek as a painter, abstraction had been fairly academicized. The curator Marcia Tucker used to refer semi-derisively, in the 1970s, to "M.A.A. art," which meant "major ambitious abstract" art that tended toward large, grid-based paintings waxing gray. Many painters caught the scent of figurative neoexpressionism waiting in the wings and changed styles, while others heard the painting-is-dead drumbeat and started making installations or videos. Bolstered by an admiration for Piet Mondrian and Mark Rothko, and inspired by what he saw on an early trip to Morocco, Mr. Scully kept the faith not only of painting but of abstraction, and the art-school dictum that the first four lines of any pictorial composition are the edges of the rectangular format, with the strongest pictures those that reiterate those boundaries.

All that said, this is a handsome show, with a capital "H." Although the horizontally banded "Landline" paintings (2012 and 2013) and the enormous "Night and Day" (2012), over 9 feet tall and about 27 feet wide, are better than the slightly more feathery, interlocking-rectangle "Wall of Light" pictures (from both last year and this one), Mr. Scully's painterly sweep is impressive throughout. Exhibitions are more properly reviewed according to the work on view, not the artist's trajectory. A painter can be criticized for staying the same, but not the art. It is what it is and, in Mr. Scully's case, is and is and is and is.