State Rep. Douglas Overbey, R-Maryville (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Insure Tennessee is a measured, straightforward and conservative approach.

State taxpayers would not incur any new taxes if Insure Tennessee is implemented.

No one is happy with Obamacare, but the damage has already been done.

"These are the times that try men's souls." Certainly, Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee proposal is not quite like forging a new nation, but, like Thomas Paine and our Founding Fathers, we had the opportunity this year to chart a new course in health care for the citizens of Tennessee.

Insure Tennessee is a product of two years of concentrated negotiations between Gov. Haslam and the federal government to develop a Tennessee-specific approach to health care and insurance coverage for over 200,000 hard-working Tennesseans caught in a coverage gap.

Insure Tennessee would help steady rural hospitals in the state, alleviate their financial strains and even keep some from closing their doors. Equally important, it would allow our state's military veterans access to the affordable care they deserve.

Unfortunately, opponents of Gov. Haslam's proposal were able to convince my Senate colleagues that Insure Tennessee was merely Medicaid expansion by another name. There are, however, critical, important distinctions:

•Insure Tennessee would put market principles in place that do not currently exist. Circuit breakers would render the program null and void if, after two years, it is determined to be unsuccessful. Moreover, the program demands accountability from all participants.

•Perhaps the most bright-lined distinction between the two is the manner in which individuals are placed on Medicaid rolls. Under traditional Medicaid expansion, states merely add eligible individuals to their rolls. In fact the Affordable Care Act was intended to strong-arm states into adding all individuals below the 138 percent threshold of poverty to their current Medicaid system, regardless of whether they qualified under existing categories.

Under Gov. Haslam's plan, newly-eligible participants between the ages of 21-64 would not be enrolled in TennCare, Tennessee's version of Medicaid. They would be enrolled in either the Volunteer Plan or the Healthy Incentives Plan created by Insure Tennessee. Under either plan, Insure Tennessee is not entitling our citizens to anything. Rather, participants must do certain things, such as pay premiums and copays, before they are able to reap the benefits of the program.

At its core, Insure Tennessee is a measured, straightforward and conservative approach to provide health insurance coverage to uninsured, working Tennesseans, ages 19–64, earning less than 138 percent of the poverty level, which equates to approximately $16,000 a year or $8 an hour.

The program uses federal taxes required by the Affordable Care Act that all Tennesseans currently pay, but have nothing to show for it since none of those funds have come back to the state. State taxpayers would not incur any new taxes if Insure Tennessee is implemented, as the state's hospitals have agreed to cover any cost from the program when federal funding drops below 100 percent after the two-year pilot. Should either the federal funding or our state hospital funding be altered in any way, the plan automatically terminates.

I am cognizant of the apprehension about whether the federal government will actually make good on its end of the bargain. My colleagues and constituents alike have asked: How can we trust our national government to keep its promise? I would echo what Gov. Haslam has said and simply answer that question with another question: When has the federal government ever not made its Medicaid payments?

No one is happy with Obamacare, but the damage has already been done — our taxes have already been raised. It is a broken mandate that has been a fiscal and logistical nightmare from the start and one that begs for reform. Insure Tennessee provides us, as lawmakers in this great state, with the opportunity to bring meaningful reforms to our Tennessee.

Changing a broken program is tough work. Sure, there might be difficult decisions down the road, but a difficult decision in the future does not mean Insure Tennessee is the wrong decision now.

Doing nothing maintains the status quo, which means that hundreds of thousands of Tennesseans are left without health coverage and some of our rural hospitals will close.

We can all agree that the Affordable Care Act was the wrong decision, but isn't it time to start bringing the federal tax dollars we are already paying back to our state to provide health insurance coverage for the working poor who so desperately need it?

As Gov. Haslam said to a joint session of the General Assembly in February, sitting back and doing nothing is not an option. We have to do something. The time is now, and Insure Tennessee is the right choice.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1G8N2V9