Topics: 4th amendment, African Americans, darren wilson, Editor's Picks, FEAR, Ferguson, Law enforcement, michael brown, Police, police militarization, Race, Racism, Politics News

Recently, Tamara Nopper and Mariame Kaba authored a haunting article, “Itemizing Atrocity,” analyzing reactions and analyses of the police shooting of Michael Brown and the seemingly sudden militarization of the police. They point to Ferguson as an example of the excess of the spectacle that draws attention to the most extreme cases of brutality or violence, and simultaneously renders the daily, hourly, violence faced by black Americans as ordinary and therefore unworthy of the empathy engendered in extreme cases.

Attention is drawn to the “spectacular event” rather than to the point of origin or the mundane. Circulated are the spectacles — dead black bodies lying in the streets or a black teenager ambushed by several police officers in military gear, automatic weapons drawn.

Their insights resonated as every major media outlet covered the repeated, more extreme, ever-growing confrontations between protestors and Ferguson law enforcement. The sympathy for the brutalized in Ferguson emerged as a response to the documented ill treatment of relatively privileged and protected whites (reporters, supporters, observers) who momentarily faced the same treatment that is de rigeur for vulnerable blacks — in Ferguson, St. Louis, Chicago, Paterson, Charlotte, Houston, New Orleans, Los Angeles and elsewhere.

The other aspect of the extreme spectacle is that it allows Michael Brown’s death to be seen as contingent, accidental and not part of a pattern. Such extremes of violence garner attention to the murderous injustices faced by blacks, but emphasize that such injustices are somehow race-neutral, as in the sudden attention drawn to the militarization of the police — as a problem affecting not only blacks, but “everyone.” As Nopper and Kaba state:

We can also consider this an example of “the precariousness of empathy,” with blacks required to tether their suffering to non-blacks (and processes often erroneously treated as non-black, such as “militarization” and “globalization”) in the hope of being seen and heard. This is also a marker of the compulsory solidarity that is demanded of black people without any expectation that this solidarity will be reciprocated.

In that light, it is striking that the New York Times, which has explained the racial history of Ferguson, chooses a race-neutral standard by which to explain police shootings. In an article entitled “Key Factor in Police Shootings: ‘Reasonable Fear,” Michael Wines and Frances Robles describe the conditions under which police officers are trained to shoot. They explore the standard of “reasonable fear,” as developed in Graham v. Connor, a 1989 decision in which the Supreme Court rejected a young man’s claim of excessive and brutal treatment by police. As Wines and Robles explain,

“a police officer’s use of excessive force must be seen in the context of what reasonable officers would do in the same situation, given the danger and stress of police work.”

The original case is germane to the shootings of Mike Brown in Ferguson and the cold-blooded shooting of Kajieme Powell in St. Louis several days later. In the 1989 case, a diabetic young man, Dethorne Graham, living in Charlotte, North Carolina, asked a friend, William Berry, to drive him to a store to buy some orange juice to counteract an insulin reaction that he was having. A police officer (Connor) noticed the haste with which Graham entered and left the store. After following him for a short distance, Connor stopped Berry and Graham. Graham eventually passed out for a few moments (presumably from insulin shock). Despite his friend’s explanatory pleas that Graham was having a diabetic reaction, Connor refused to release him and called for backup. Accusing Graham of being drunk instead, the officers restrained him on the sidewalk until they received a report from the store that nothing was amiss.

The Rehnquist Court circumscribed “reasonableness” as an objective standard by insisting that intent and motivation (presumably of the police officers) are irrelevant to judging whether excessive force was used:

[T]he question is whether the officers’ actions are “objectively reasonable” in light of the facts and circumstances confronting them, without regard to their underlying intent or motivation. The court views the issue of “reasonable fear” from the perspective of the police officer. The standard is to be established based on the “threat analysis” — to the police officer — who is presumably trained, armed, and focused to attack, defend, and even kill.

Every step, however, is overshadowed by a single imperative: If an officer believes he or someone else is in imminent danger of grievous injury or death, he is allowed to shoot first and ask questions later. The same is true, the courts have ruled, in cases where a suspect believed to have killed or gravely injured someone is fleeing and can only be halted with deadly force.

What we know, then, is that police officers are allowed to shoot first and ask questions later, presumably in order to act in the interest of themselves and the public interest. This, apparently, is what is meant by the “objective standard of reasonableness,” by what constitutes “reasonable fear.”

Notice several things about the summary of the Graham case and judgment:

1. Neither the racial backgrounds of the police officers nor of Graham and his friend are ever mentioned. However, given the profanities that the police officer used to describe Graham, the refusal to listen to his friend’s interventions and the town in which this event occurred, where 31.8% of the population was black and 65% was white, I would wager that Graham and Berry were black and at least one, most likely both, of the police officers were white.

2. The “reasonable fear” standard is based exclusively on the perceptions, danger, stress level and cognitive focus of the police officer. There are a number of assumptions predicated in this opinion: that police work is exclusively about danger, criminality and maintaining control (qua “peace and safety”).

3. Correlatively, there is no discussion of the level of familiarity or intimacy with the community where the officer is employed or patrols — presumably because that is not the operative framework of either the police department or the Supreme Court.

4. The case is decided based on the 4th Amendment rights to search and seizure — in 1989. Two and a half decades later, in a world where the assumption of such a right has been starkly diminished through the operative framework of National Security, where the state has established increasing authority to encroach upon one’s person, property and effects, how would such a lawsuit be entertained by the courts today?

All of this raises the obvious question: Is the notion of a “reasonable fear” standard, well, reasonable?

The standard of the “reasonable person” has a longstanding history, and can be found in various places, such as the 17th century writings on liberalism by philosopher John Locke. For Locke, reason was supposedly a capacity issued to everyone “who will but consult it.” One’s proof of possession of reason was the ability to accumulate property (and visibly demonstrate that ability in a form understood by 17th century Englishmen — colonialists, parliaments and royalty). Needless to say, this ability was not possessed by American Indians, or those who were poor, dumb or slaves. (White) women could demonstrate a limited form of reason, but in cases of controversy, the ultimate arbiter of reason would be her closest living male relative.