People Moves of the Week: Berkshire Partners, WeiserMazars, Keybanc

Berkshire promotes three; WeiserMazars hires new partner; KeyBanc brings in Scott Irvin

Berkshire Partners LLC — The Boston private equity firm has promoted three people. Dave Bordeau, Marni Payneand Raleigh Shoemaker were each named managing directors, effective Jan. 1. They join a team of 19 current managing directors. Bordeau joined Berkshire in 2006 and has experience with the firm’s consumer products, retail and business services companies. Payne joined Berkshire in 2000 as an associate and returned to the firm in 2004 after business school. She works with the firm’s consumer products and retailing companies. Shoemaker joined the firm in 2006 focusing on business development activities. He became director of investor relations in 2013.

KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc. — The investment banking arm of Cleveland-based KeyCorp (NYSE: KEY) brought in Scott Irvin (pictured, above) as a managing director and head of ratings advisory — a new position. He will serve in the debt capital markets group out of Atlanta, where he will advise client management teams on all aspects of the ratings agency process.

Quarles & Brady LLP — The law firm named partner Katherine Maloney Perhach (pictured, left) managing partner of its Milwaukee branch. Perhach regularly advises and represents clients in bankruptcy and chairs the firm's financial institutions litigation group. She succeeds Kathryn Buono, who took the position in March 2014. Buono is leaving Quarles & Brady for Briggs & Stratton Corp. where she will be vice president, secretary and general counsel.

WeiserMazars LLP — The New York tax and advisory services firm hired Ethan Kahn as a partner. He is expected to strengthen WeiserMazars' services to the not-for-profit sector, particularly in the area of consulting and audit services. Previously, Kahn ran his own practice serving various not-for-profit organizations. He has more than 16 years of accounting experience.

Find out more information about people mentioned in this article from our People Database:

Scott Irvin



For more information on related topics, visit the following: