Melissa Golden for the Wall Street Journal Sen. John McCain speaks to reporters at a Wall Street Journal-hosted breakfast in Washington, D.C., Sept. 11.

Sen. John McCain isn’t merely a critic of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad; he’s also a passionate defender of the opposition forces seeking to overthrow him.

Speaking at a Wall Street Journal breakfast Wednesday morning, Sen. McCain (R., Ariz.) sharply disagreed with those who assert that Syrian opposition forces are so populated with Islamic radicals that they don’t deserve American aid.

Instead, he insisted that his regular contacts with the opposition convince him that Islamic extremists, including those who hail from the radical al Nusra offshoot of al Qaeda, “are in the minority” and lack a large following among Syrians.

“The Syrian people are moderate,” he said. “The Syrians are not going to stand to be governed by al Nusra and foreign fighters. They’re not. They’re the most highly educated, most literate nation in the Middle East.

“And to somehow believe they are going to fall prey to al Qaeda and al Nusra is not a possibility.”

But, Sen. McCain argued, a lack of American support for the opposition might increase the popular appeal of Islamist forces as the alternative to the Assad regime.

“If they feel abandoned, I worry about the consequences,” he said. Regime foes will, he said, “turn to whoever will help them in this struggle.”

Though Sen. McCain generally praised President Barack Obama‘s speech to the nation Wednesday night, he faulted the president for failing to include any notes of support for the opposition, led by Gen. Salim Idris, head of the Free Syrian Army.

“I guarantee you I’m going to hear from Gen. Idris today, and he’s going to say, ‘Have you abandoned us? Have you abandoned us?’ ”

Watch video from the Wall Street Journal breakfast in which Sen. McCain discusses opposition forces in Syria:

For critical perspectives on politics and the economy from Jerry Seib & David Wessel, visit Seib & Wessel and follow them on Twitter @GeraldFSeib and @davidmwessel.

More:

McCain Calls Russia’s Syria Plan a Stall Tactic

Obama Holds Fire on Syria, Waits on Russia Plan