Mitchell, SD

Three more cases of the measles have now been reported in South Dakota -- bringing this week's total to nine.

All are confirmed in Davison County, which is leading to a surge of interest at a Specialty Care Clinic in Mitchell.

It's been a busy day at the Avera Pediatrics Plus Clinic in Mitchell. It's usually a busy time of the year with parents bringing in children for flu season, but this year, there's some extra traffic.

"We've been receiving a lot of phone calls about measles, and measles exposure, and measles vaccination and if people need to be further vaccinated," Jennifer Tegethoff said.

It's because of the news that the number of cases of measles is on the rise in the area.

The nine people that are confirmed to have measles range in age from 19 months to 41 years old. All nine cases are from an extended family group, eight of them are from right here in Mitchell, and one is from out of state.

Pediatrician Jennifer Tegethoff says there's another big key to the nine cases - they were all unvaccinated.

"It's pretty easy from one person to another unvaccinated person. It's transmitted by respiratory droplets by close contact. It can be transmitted through the air for even up to a couple hours after somebody has been in a certain location," Tegethoff said.

The Avera clinic is using precautions to keep the diagnosing and treating of the disease to one location. As for what people can do to stay healthy, Tegethoff says just make sure you're vaccinated.

"I think this is a really prime example of a case where we do have a vaccine preventable disease that we're now having spread throughout our community because of some unvaccinated individuals," Tegethoff said.

A serious virus with a simple solution.

These nine people are the first confirmed cases in South Dakota since 1997.

If you're not sure if you or your family members are up to date on your vaccinations, you should contact your doctor.

HealthBeat

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.