Syracuse, N.Y. — Ten years after its founding by four Central New York companies, MedTech Association has spread its wings throughout New York.

The bioscience and medical technology trade group has seen its membership rise from 87 companies in June to 102 this month, said Nichole Wenderlich Owens, the association's marketing manager. Its members employ about 75,000 people, both in and out of New York, she said.

Jessica Crawford, who became the association's president in October 2012, said the organization has evolved from a group with a focus on Central New York to one that represents medical technology and service providers throughout the state the beyond.

The association originally was named CNY MedTech because its members were all based in Central New York. (Its initial members were Sensis Corp. (now Saab Sensis) of DeWitt; ConMed Corp. of Utica; Welch Allyn Inc. of Skaneateles; and Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., which has a pharmaceutical plant in DeWitt.)

It dropped CNY from its name in 2007 as it began to attract members from Rochester, Buffalo, Albany and other Upstate New York cities. In 2012, it began recruiting companies from the downstate area, too.

"We've really tried to elevate our brand," said Crawford. "We've really done a better job getting our name out there."

From its offices in the Syracuse Technology Garden in downtown Syracuse, MedTech offers its members networking opportunities, training and education programs, and advocacy with state and federal officials on issues affecting the medical technology industry.

Among the issues it has focused on is the Affordable Care Act's 2.3 percent tax on the sale of medical devices and instruments. The tax, which took effect in January 2013, is very unpopular with medical equipment makers such as Welch Allyn, a manufacturer of medical diagnostic devices.

MedTech is lobbying lawmakers to repeal the tax, which the association says will deal a major blow to all medical device companies and especially smaller firms with weaker profit margins.

Among MedTech's newest members:

Baxter, of Medina, a medical products maker.

BioSpherix Ltd., of Lacona, a manufacturer of advanced laboratory equipment.

Dhurjaty Electronics Consulting, of Rochester, a designer of medical devices.

Medical Acoustics, of Buffalo, a developer of devices employing acoustic technologies for diagnostic and therapeutic medical applications.

Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, of Rensselaer, which develops and manufactures medicines for the treatment of serious medical conditions.

Contact Rick Moriarty at rmoriarty@syracuse.com or (315) 470-3148. Follow him on Twitter @RickMoriartyCNY and on Facebook at rick.moriarty.92.