People Moves of the Week:

Goldpoint Partners, Deloitte, CMF Associates

Goldpoint taps former Blackstone exec to be CFO; Deloitte hires FDIC veteran; CMF expands Detroit office with Ashley Dunbar

Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. — The New York financial advisory firm has named John Altier and Andrew Javorsky managing directors. They will each work within the fixed income team. Altier will focus on U.S. government agency and U.S. Treasury securities while Javorsky focuses on mortgage products. Prior to joining Cantor, Altier served as a partner at CRT Capital Group. Earlier, he worked as a managing director at UBS. Before joining Cantor, Javorsky worked as a managing director in mortgages and structured product sales at Royal Bank of Scotland. Previously, he served as senior managing director at Bear Stearns.

CMF Associates — Ashley Dunbar has been named a principal in the accounting firm’s financial and operational consulting team. She will be based in Detroit, expanding CMF’s ability to serve private equity funds into the Midwest. Dunbar began her career in the assurance practice of Ernst & Young.

Deloitte — Robert Burns, former deputy director of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.'s complex financial institutions group, has joined the firm as a director. In this role, Burns will advise banking clients on their resolution planning, capital stress testing, liquidity coverage, regulatory reporting and credit risk management efforts. Burns served in numerous roles over the course of 25 years at the FDIC, including as the associate director in the large bank branch team, where he worked on a number of key policy initiatives stemming from the Dodd-Frank Act.

Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP— Philip Crump will join as a partner in the London office. Formerly a partner with Kirkland & Ellis in London, he will continue his debt finance practice at Gibson Dunn.

Goldpoint Partners — The private equity affiliate of New York Life Investments hired Blackstone Group LP's (NYSE: BX) Sean Gelb to be chief financial officer. He stepped into the role in May. Previously, Gelb worked at Blackstone where he served as senior vice president of private equity tactical opportunities, finance and accounting. He began his career as an auditor at PricewaterhouseCoopers and, before that, Eisner LLP.

Investcorp — The private equity firm has hired Tony Robinson as the chief financial officer effective July 1. Bahrain-based Investcorp, which formerly owned Mergers & Acquisitions parent company SourceMedia, stated that Robinson will be replacing Rishi Kapoor who will become co-chief executive on the same date along with Mohammed al-Shroogi, who is currently president. The pair are replacing Nemir Kirdar, who retires from his positions as executive chairman and chief executive on June 30. Kirdar, who helped found Investcorp in 1982, was subsequently appointed chairman of the board of directors, effective from July 1, according to a company statement. Robinson was with Investcorp for 14 years until 2008. During that time, he worked for the sovereign fund Mumtalakat.

McKenna Long & Aldridge — The New York law firm has announced the return of three lawyers, including Jeniffer De Jesus Roberts in Washington, D.C.; Kevin Lombardo in San Francisco; and Kelvin Wyles in Los Angeles. Each began their careers at McKenna, and will be named partners when they arrive. McKenna also hired Mordecai Boone and Steven Berson as partners in San Francisco and Atlanta, respectively.

Sheppard Mullin Richter & Hampton LLP — Dawn Crumel has joined in the New York firm’s health care practice based in the firm's Washington D.C. office. Previously, Crumel was with Shipman & Goodwin, as well as Meritus Health in Maryland, where he served as vice president.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: