Despite a government report indicating that more than 16 million more people have health insurance than before Obamacare, the author of the latest effort by Congress to repeal the law remains steadfast in his opposition.

Officials from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services hailed Monday's report as a sign that the Affordable Care Act is working as intended. The increase of 16.4 million American adults with insurance represents a 7.1 percent decrease in the uninsured rate.

But U.S. Rep. Bradley Byrne, R-Fairhope, said Tuesday that the report does not change his view that the law is bad for the country. In fact, he added that he doubts the veracity of an estimate derived from Gallup polling data.

"I think it's bogus," said Byrne, whose bill to repeal Obamacare sailed through the House of Representatives last month. "It's totally unbelievable."

Byrne questioned why the Department of Health and Human Services could not produce hard figures for the number of people with insurance or provide a state-by-state breakdown for its estimates. He said Congress has sought such information for months.

"It's data they should have," he said.

The government has published the number of people who have enrolled in health plans offered on the government's online exchange and the number of people added to Medicaid rolls. For Alabama, that is 171,641 enrolled on the exchange. Medicaid statistics are largely unchanged because Alabama refused an offer for federal funds to expand the program.

Health and Human Services officials say they created the statistical model to provide a more comprehensive picture - the percentage of adults with insurance from all sources, including employers, compared with the proportion insured before the law took effect.

Byrne said the 16.4 million Americans, assuming the government estimate is correct, represents a small portion of the U.S. population. According to the Census Bureau, it's about 5 percent.

"We have changed insurance for 100 percent of the people in America to fix a problem for (5 percent) of the American people," he said. "The deductibles are killing people."

Phillip Mixon, a Troy University professor who co-authored a study questioning the benefits to Alabama of expanding Medicaid, said he believes the law has met its aim of reducing the uninsured rate. But he said he does not think the law has done enough to increase access to primary care physicians.

"If the law was meant to get more people health insurance, yes, it's gotten people more health insurance. That should have been the case, by definition," he said, pointing to the mandate requiring people to buy insurance. "Just having health insurance might not be the best measure of, are you better off?'

Mixon said much of Alabama has a shortage of primary care physicians, a problem that predates the Affordable Care Act but that that is exacerbated by increasing insurance rolls.

"My doctor has stopped taking new patients because he's full," he said.

Byrne's bill would repeal the health law and instruct relevant congressional committees to devise a new plan. It so far has not come up for a vote in the Senate, but Byrne said Republican Senate leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., has committed to bringing it up for a vote.

Although in the minority, Democrats still have enough votes to block the bill with a filibuster if they hold together. But Byrne said he thinks there will be strong support to revisit the entire law if the U.S. Supreme Court determines that the law as written provides subsidies only to people who live in places where states their own exchanges. The court recently heard arguments in that case.

If Congress does try to rewrite the law, though, Mixon suggested that it will be difficult for lawmakers to devise a less expensive, less disruptive plan that achieves the goals of the Affordable Care Act.

"Right now, I don't know of a better plan," he said. "That doesn't mean I'm endorsing it. I would have to see what they propose."