Most of the GOP 2016 field has said they would probably tear up President Obama's Iran deal if elected. But Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin has taken it a step further, saying this weekend that “it's very possible” he would take military action on his first day in office.

The dispute came amid one of the first significant foreign policy disputes between Walker and former Florida governor Jeb Bush, two leading contenders for the nomination. Walker is trying to present himself as the more aggressive alternative in a field of Republican candidates who, with the exception of Sen. Rand Paul, have promised a more assertive foreign policy than Obama. Bush, while not trying to cede ground in criticizing Obama, questioned Walker's maturity.

Walker has been attacking Obama's Iran negotiations for months, amping up his criticism as a deal was reached last week. His critique of the deal is usually a big applause line in his stump speech.

“Looking ahead, we need to terminate the bad deal with Iran on day one, put in place crippling economic sanctions, and convince our allies to do the same,” he said in announcing his candidacy last Monday.

Bush mocked that approach in a town hall meeting on Friday, during a response to a voter's question about the deal, according to the Weekly Standard.

“One thing that I won't do is just say, as a candidate, 'I'm going to tear up the agreement on the first day,'” said Bush, who was also highly critical of Obama and the deal in his comments. “That sounds great, but maybe you ought to check in with your allies first. Maybe you ought to appoint a secretary of state, maybe secretary of defense. You might want to have your team in place before you take an act like that.”

On Saturday, Walker was asked by reporters about Bush's statement, and responded that the next president may not have the luxury of time.

“It's very possible -- God forbid -- but it's very possible that the next president could be called to take aggressive actions, including military action, on the first day in office,” Walker said. “And I don't want a president who is not prepared to act on day one. So, as far as me, as far as my position, I'm going to be prepared to be president on day one.”

The dispute echoes, to some degree, the clash between Obama and Hillary Clinton in the 2008 Democratic presidential primary. Obama said he would meet with leaders from outlaw nations such as Cuba, Iran, and North Korea without preconditions. Clinton called that naive. “I don't want to be used for propaganda purposes,” she said during a 2007 debate.

Such debates can have serious policy implications. Fast forward to 2015: Obama has brokered a nuclear deal with Iran and, today, he officially restored diplomatic ties with Cuba.