Lee Deakins Hieb (Photo: Special To The Register)

There are five candidates in the general election: Republican Terry Branstad, Democrat Jack Hatch, Jim Hennager of the New Independent Party Iowa, Lee Deakins Hieb of the Libertarian Party and Jonathan Narcisse of the Iowa Party.

Lee Deakins Hieb

Age: 61

Date of birth: Oct. 21, 1952

Place of birth: Chicago, Ill.

Grew up: Logan, Ia.

Current home: Logan, Ia.

Education: Logan Magnolia High School, 1969; Grinnell College and University of Iowa; MD degree from University of Rochester, School of Medicine and Dentistry, 1980; orthopaedic surgery residency; U.S. Navy, 1987; Louis A. Goldstein Fellow of Spinal Surgery, Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, N.Y., 1989

Work history: I began working at age 12 at Dusty and Dewey's Grocery in Logan, Ia., for 50 cents an hour. After college I sold auto parts for three years at Fochtman Motor Company in northern Michigan till 1975. After medical training, I served as a Navy doctor with the U.S. Marine Corps. I was in private solo practice of spinal surgery till 2009. In the last 5 years, I have been a private contractor practicing orthopaedics at a critical-access hospital in an underserved area of Iowa.

Political experience: My best qualification is that I am not a professional politician. When my husband was stationed in Arizona, I was in private practice and was elected chief of staff at Yuma Regional Medical Center, a 250-bed hospital with 220 physicians. I am past president of the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, and a national speaker on the perils of government-run health care.

Civic involvement: When I was in full-time practice, I worked 100-hour weeks caring for all comers in the emergency room. My charity was done at work. Now, I volunteer time to teach ethical medicine to today's medical students and have served on the Board of the Arizona Medical Association.

Family: I was married 30 years to a USMC officer, Ross Hieb. My son Nathan is 25 and a senior medical student at Creighton University. My son Mason is 21 and a junior electrical engineering student at Tulsa University.

Religious affiliation: Was raised in the Christian Church, not currently a member of a particular congregation.

Campaign website: www.Hieb2014.org



Twitter handle:@Hieb2014

Facebook page: Facebook.com/hieb2014



Top three issues

Education: End Common Core by saying no to the federal programs that have brought us increased expense without increased educational benefit. Do we really want federal employees sitting in our classrooms (as outlined in the federal DOE website as the "ambassador" program) insuring compliance to this program? We were top of the educational pyramid when we actually had local control -- no departments of education to give us "standards."

Health care: Save Iowa's budget by ending the Obamacare exchanges which are totally unaffordable and will not improve access to health care. Cost-effective medicine was practiced for over a hundred years in Iowa. My father charged $3 for an office visit and $6 for a house call in 1970. Today it costs on average $68 just to bill a third party. The answer (details on my website) is the 3 C's -- cash for outpatient care; catastrophic insurance, not prepaid health care; and local charity for those in need.

Business: We need to diminish the heavy-handed regulations and taxation that are killing our small businesses and driving jobs out of Iowa. Big businesses are able to withstand the regulations that put smaller businesses out of business. Regulators are incentivized to regulate to keep and expand their jobs at the expense of the private citizen who then cannot afford the compliance expense. We are at a tipping point. We have 20 percent more government workers per capita than California. We need their jobs to be shifted to the private sector, which will then blossom.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1x8OuSg