29 Flares Filament.io 29 Flares ×

In 2010 and 2012, Congressman Pete Sessions ran the National Republican Campaign Committee (NRCC), the official arm of the Republican Party designed to elect more Republicans to the US House of Representatives. He now serves as Chairman of the House Rules Committee and is a member of the right-wing Republican Study Caucus and TEA Party Caucus. With his right-wing committee credentials and financial connections from the NRCC, one would think Pete Sessions would be safely indoctrinated from a right-wing TEA Party challenge.

However, anyone applying logic to this situation would be wrong.

Yesterday, Katrina Pierson declared herself a candidate for the Republican Party's nomination for Texas' 32nd congressional district. She is the founder of the Garland TEA Party, is a Steering Committee Member for the Dallas TEA Party, and a member of the Texas TEA Party Caucus Advisory Committee. She also hosts an online right-wing radio talk show.

Texas' 32nd Congressional District, anchored in Northeast Dallas County, gave President Obama 41.46% of the vote in 2012; President Obama's best performance in a congressional district currently held by a Republican in Texas. Rep. Sessions was first elected to congress in 1996 and has represented the 32nd district since 2003.

Click below the jump to read about the amazing “cat fud” flying between Republicans in North Dallas as well as how Ms. Pierson is politicizing the tragedy of 9/11.In her press release, Ms. Pierson introduced herself by talking about the number one issue that concerns voters today: Benghazi.





“As you may know, today is also the one-year anniversary of the day the Benghazi cover-up began. Americans were killed. And corruption and cover-up once again reared their ugly head. Far too often politicians who have been in Washington too long put their interests ahead of us – my family – my neighbors. Their selfish, corrupt dealings are harming our freedoms and rapidly stripping us of our liberties that were bought at the ultimate price. Politicians who have been in Washington far too long — who once had the appearance of stellar voting records — have rapidly sacrificed their principles in the name of political expediency.”

Three paragraphs later, Ms. Pierson finally mentions, briefly and callously, the other tragedy that occurred on a September 11th:





… Some members of Congress … are trying to take our country to war in defense of the same terrorists who hurled hijacked planes full of American citizens into buildings in New York City. This can't really be happening.

Rep. Sessions, by the way, is a “No” vote on proposed action in Syria.

Ms. Pierson went on to rail against “Obamacare.” While she isn't explicit in her language, it appears she would support a government shutdown in an attempt to defund the Affordable Care Act, an idea that will not work:



And there is perhaps no single government program that poses a greater threat to our life, liberty and prosperity than Obamacare. The House Republican leadership argues that we should stand down until we have a chance to repeal Obamacare, some years down the road. My message to them, and to my fellow Americans, is this: America can't wait for 2017. Obamacare is already costing American jobs, and forcing many struggling Americans from full-time to part-time employment. America can't wait, and shouldn't have to wait. No more excuses. It's time to defund Obamacare now.

Hours after announcing her run, the financially flush, right-wing astroturf committee, Freedomworks, endorsed Ms. Pierson saying:





Katrina Pierson has led the fight to elect principled conservatives across the state of Texas for years. While incumbent Rep. Pete Sessions seems more concerned with keeping his seat at the leadership table, Katrina understands the importance of connecting to the grassroots at home and sticking to your guns in Washington.

Congressman Sessions will have his work cut out for him next year deflecting flack from his right flank. As mentioned above the jump, CD-32 was President Obama's best preforming congressional district in Texas that is not currently held by a Democrat. While no Democrat has announced thus far, with the spectacle of a TEA Party upset looming, expect one to appear before the filing deadline on December 9, 2013.