Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

Onex has been rushed to the hospital. The Canadian firm said it has invested in Schumacher Group, a provider of outsourced physician and administrative services to hospital emergency departments, Chitra Vemuri reports. GE Capital’s health-care financial services business in October said it would serve as the administrative agent on a $120 million senior credit facility for Schumacher.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers: Jeld-Wen Inc., an Onex-backed maker of residential doors and windows, is proposing financing to fund a roughly $420 million distribution and potential add-on acquisitions…Phoenix Tower International, a Latin American operator of wireless infrastructure sites that is owned by Blackstone Group’s Tactical Opportunities business, acquires T4U Holding Brasil SA…and Ollie’s Bargain Outlet Holdings Inc., a discount retailer backed by CCMP Capital Advisors, files for an initial public offering.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

Gunmaker Colt Defense LLC is racing toward an early August bankruptcy auction that its backer Sciens Capital Management hopes will allow it to hang on to the iconic business, Peg Brickley and Matt Jazemsky report for The Wall Street Journal.

TransUnion Corp., backed by Advent International and Goldman Sachs Group’s private equity unit, unveiled estimated terms of its initial public offering that would give the credit-reporting company an equity valuation of about $4 billion, Chelsey Dulaney reports for the Journal.

Alexander Dibelius, one of Goldman Sachs’s best-known investment bankers in Europe, will resurface at CVC Capital Partners later this year after he steps down from the investment bank next month, Lucy Burton reports for U.K. publication Dow Jones Financial News (subscription required).

Falconhead Capital appoints Robert Fioretti managing director, according to Reuters.

Blackstone hired Jonathan Pollack from Deutsche Bank to be chief investment officer of its property-debt unit, which oversees almost $10 billion of investor capital, according to Bloomberg News.

Write to Thomas Dunford at thomas.dunford@wsj.com