The West Wing reorientation is aimed at quickly making up for years of lost time. W.H. to launch new political office

Democratic campaign operatives have been getting worried that the White House wasn’t doing enough to help them in the midterms, and that President Barack Obama didn’t care enough to change that.

Friday, Obama responded: David Simas, a longtime aide who returned to the White House after running polling and focus groups for the reelection campaign, was named director of a new Office of Political Strategy and Outreach.

Story Continued Below

The re-establishment of an internal political operation marks a significant shift for the White House, and the latest step in a 2014 West Wing reorientation that’s aimed at quickly making up for years of lost time, both on Capitol Hill and around the country.

( POLITICO Podcast: Indictment insanity, State of the Union preview & more)

Repeatedly, in public and private, Obama has been calling the November elections a top priority. He knows what’s at stake: Democrats losing the Senate would mean a daily barrage of misery for him and the effective death of his agenda. Winning the House — long shot though it is — could allow him to completely transform his legacy in his final two years.

But one month into the year and a third of the way through the first fundraising quarter, Democratic operatives on campaigns and at the central campaign committees were still waiting to hear what that would amount to.

Many didn’t even know whom to call to ask for an update.

High-level Democratic campaign aides asked about the White House political operation responding with variations of: “What operation?” or “It’s a good question.”

( Also on POLITICO: E-cigarettes reignite tobacco wars)

Simas, whom the White House is portraying as a one-stop shop for all things midterms, is the answer: he’ll be the point of contact on requests for presidential visits, fundraiser appearances and sign-offs on direct mail and email blasts. He’ll also oversee strategic planning and be the one administration officials turn to for guidance on what they can and can’t legally do on the campaign trail, a White House aide said.

Unlike Patrick Gaspard, who moved from Obama’s 2008 campaign to serve as the political director for the first two years of the administration, Simas comes from a less purely political operative background. A former elected official himself — he served on the city council in his hometown of Taunton, Mass. — he became an an aide to Gov. Deval Patrick before joining the White House. The mix of that résumé had people talking about him last year as a potential interim pick for John Kerry’s Senate seat or even as a gubernatorial candidate back home.

Instead, he stayed in the West Wing as Obama’s deputy senior adviser for communications & strategy, a position in which he’s overseen polling and message development, spending much of last year coordinating outreach on Obamacare. That put him in touch with many of the political operatives he’ll now be more directly in touch with now.

He’ll start next week and eventually direct a staff of five to seven people, working closely with deputy chief of staff Alyssa Mastromonaco and senior adviser Dan Pfeiffer. That’s a significantly smaller and more streamlined operation than the previous Office of Political Affairs, which had about 15 staffers with a much wider reach.

( Also on POLITICO: Supreme Court grants temporary reprieve from contraceptive mandate)

As any second term president in the midterms, and especially with his own battered poll numbers, Obama’s role in the campaigns is going to be defined as much by what he does as what he avoids doing as what he actually does.

The main thing Democratic operatives want from Obama is fundraising help — for individual campaigns, for campaign committees and even for a super PAC that could offer help countering well-funded anti-Obamacare efforts that are depressing Democratic candidates’ poll numbers pretty much everywhere. Engaging big donors and former staffers to help would be an easy ask for the president, they argue. Instead, after re-election campaign manager Jim Messina arranged commitments to the fundraisers Obama did in 2013, he and other former Obama aides have focused on their own private clients and 2016 efforts.

But party operatives also want a smarter and more comprehensive approach to how and where the president spends his time on the trail, as well as what sort of things that get priority in the presidential agenda and what don’t. They take note of episodes like when Obama in November went to Ohio — where Democrats are trying to beat Gov. John Kasich based on his economic record — and talked about the improving economy in the state, or when Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius went to Michigan last week and got pulled into a local political flap about Obamacare, and Senate candidate Rep. Gary Peters only learned about the trip after it was publicly announced.

( Also on POLITICO: Koch World 2014)

The main question Simas will face from operatives — still steaming over years of feeling Obama isn’t interested in getting anyone elected but himself — is what kind of pull he’ll have internally, and whether any one man can really change the White House’s overall approach.

Democratic campaign operatives have been alternating between anger and resignation when speaking about the lack of political help and basic coordination from the White House. From trying to schedule fundraisers to attempting to weigh in on targeted presidential visits, campaigns and party committees have gotten so used to long waits in response to requests — and often getting no substantive answers at all — that many had all but given up trying.

Authors: