By Deena Winter | Nebraska Watchdog

LINCOLN, Neb. — Lincoln accountant Todd Blome has made a decision: After learning his individual health insurance plan was being terminated and he’d have to find a new one that complies with Obamacare mandates, he’s found a new plan.

Blome and his family of five were among the first Americans to go public after learning their insurance plans were being terminated and they’d have to pick a new plan.

Blome wasn’t happy about it then, and he still isn’t happy now. But he does have a new insurance plan picked out.

Blome was one of 46,000 Blue Cross Blue Shield of Nebraska policyholders who were notified by letter of their plan terminations and options. Blome was told he could buy a similar Blue Cross plan — with the 10 essential benefits mandated by Obamacare — but his premium would go up 65 percent, or nearly $4,000 per year.

Blome didn’t like having to submit what he considered an “overwhelming amount of personal information” to shop around for a policy on the federally run Healthcare.gov website. Instead, he contacted three of the four insurance companies offering insurance on the federal exchange, as well as two private insurance brokers.

In the end, Blue Cross’s offer was the best deal for his family. His premium will increase from $502 to $780 per month, a 55 percent jump over what he pays now. His family’s deductible went from $10,000 to $12,700, and he expects to meet it.

All in all, his new policy will cost him an additional $6,000 between increased premiums and deductibles. While Blue Cross has estimated about half its customers who buy their own insurance will be eligible for federal subsidies to help pay their premiums — available to a family of four earning between $23,550 and $94,000, for example — the Blomes don’t qualify for the tax credits.

While President Obama has said many Americans getting cancellation letters had “cut-rate plans” without real protection, the Blomes’ insurance policy was not junk, and they liked it.

Under Blome’s new plan, if his family ends up getting care out of its network, the deductible is $25,300 — the lowest he could find. CoOportunity Health, a federally funded cooperative selling plans in Nebraska, would have had an out-of-network deductible of $40,000, and Blome said the group has a small network. Coventry’s was $12,500 with a 50 percent copay after the deductible was met and there was no limit on the out-of-pocket copay.

Tough choices, and he’s not the only person making them. As an accountant, he fields lots of questions from customers about Obamacare.

“Health insurance has continued to be the number one topic of conversation with clients when I speak with them,” he said. “It’s affecting a lot of people.”

One of his clients is giving up health insurance and paying the federal fine rather than pay a much higher premium. Another business client has about 45 employees and desperately wants to open a new business, but that would put him over the 50-employee threshold and trigger the Obamacare requirement that he offer health insurance to all of the employees. He has decided not to open the new business.

“Crazy times,” Blome said.

The president apologized Thursday to Americans losing their health insurance plans, despite his repeated assurances to the contrary, but that was little comfort to Blome.

“His apology doesn’t change the fact that millions of perfectly fine health insurance policies were cancelled and replaced with much more expensive and less generous policies,” Blome said.

Contact Deena Winter at deena@nebraskawatchdog.org. Follow Deena on Twitter at @DeenaNEWatchdog

Editor’s note: to subscribe to News Updates from Nebraska Watchdog at no cost, click here.