On the eve of an election in which control of the U.S. Senate hangs in the balance, both incumbent Sen. Mark Warner and his Republican challenger, Ed Gillespie, stopped in the Roanoke Valley on Monday to ask their supporters for one last burst of energy to close the campaign.

Election 2014: Complete coverage for today's vote

It is a race Warner, the Democratic former governor, has led throughout. Warner’s long history in Virginia politics, combined with his national reputation as a leader of the bipartisan “Gang of Six,” gave him a strong advantage in name recognition to begin the campaign.

Gillespie, though, has recently narrowed Warner’s lead, according to several polls. His campaign, in Roanoke and elsewhere, has made the election all about the incumbent Warner, simply offering Gillespie as an alternative.

During a rally in the back room of Gillespie’s local headquarters, a Roanoke County strip mall storefront, local elected Republican officials including incumbent congressional candidates Reps. Bob Goodlatte, R-Roanoke County, and Morgan Griffith, R-Salem, heralded the potential impact of the race on the Senate picture, and then turned it over to Gillespie.

The former lobbyist and political operative thanked the assembled supporters, and then jumped quickly into a sing-song routine where he demanded to know of the crowd, “Can we afford six more years” of various policies Warner has supported.

He ran down the Democrat’s voting record, holding up as questions Warner’s positions on taxes, the federal deficit, energy and the sequestration of military funds. After each one, the crowd shouted “No!”

“I’m the only one running on his record,” Gillespie said after the rally. “He’s running away from it.”

A short time later, Warner arrived in Roanoke alongside fellow Sen. Tim Kaine and, after an impromptu stop at Mill Mountain Coffee and Tea, addressed a group of sign-wielding supporters in the more cavernous confines of Roanoke’s old downtown fire station.

After an introduction from state Sen. John Edwards, D-Roanoke, Kaine recounted the interlocking histories of his career and Warner’s, and of Virginia’s transformation into a state where all five statewide offices are held by Democrats.

Throughout that run of revelatory election success, he said in imploring the onlookers to turn out the often feeble midterm vote, Democratic supporters have had to work through person-to-person campaigns.

“If, if, it comes down to who can run the most negative TV ads, we can’t win,” Kaine said, referencing the messages targeting Warner’s voting record, advertisements that often deride Warner for voting for policies supported by President Barack Obama.

Warner, after recognizing Total Action for Progress founder Cabell Brand and political strategist Dave “Mudcat” Saunders in the audience, portrayed his record as one bent on solving the country’s most vexing problems.

He touted a bipartisan approach that Gillespie has contended he lacks. Warner instead briefly chided Gillespie for labeling himself a “partisan warrior,” saying that no political party “has a monopoly on truth or virtue.”

He then touched on several priorities, including lowering the student debt burden and creating an independent redistricting system, “so that voters choose their legislators rather than the other way around.”

“It just takes people with common sense and a willingness to put country first,” Warner said.

Warner also paused to address the proposed natural gas pipelines creating controversy in several parts of the region, as some attendees brought signs protesting the projects. The senator said he would work to ensure everyone got a fair shake in the process, and that no property rights or historic assets were compromised.

During his rally earlier Monday, Gillespie put forth his five-point economic plan, set on reversing many of the policies he criticized Warner for supporting, such as the Affordable Care Act (commonly known as Obamacare) and regulations on coal companies. Cathy Gillespie, the candidate’s wife, joined him on the stop, along with state Sen. Ralph Smith, R-Bedford County, who led a delegation of General Assembly members offering support.

First-term Del. Sam Rasoul, D-Roanoke, joined Edwards in support of Warner.

Libertarian Robert Sarvis, who ran a distant third in last year’s gubernatorial election, is also seeking the Senate seat.