States want to be able to spend their federal exchange grants into 2015. States want more time on ACA funds

States running their own Obamacare exchanges were supposed to wean themselves off federal funding by the end of this year, but some of them want that Obama administration spigot open a bit longer.

The states aren’t asking for the feds to dole out more money on top of the $4.6 billion already dedicated to exchange planning and construction. But they do want to be able to spend their federal exchange grants into 2015 as they grapple with core components of the insurance portals that are balky, unfinished or in disrepair.

Story Continued Below

The viability of state exchanges became more urgent this week after conflicting court rulings created uncertainty about whether Affordable Care Act subsidies would be available through the federal exchange — or whether the state market would be the only legal route.

A POLITICO survey of the 15 state-run exchanges (including Washington, D.C.) found that 11 are thinking about using federal dollars in 2015 — and four of those states have already applied.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama's throwback campaign)

Exchange officials say they need extra time to use the money because of constantly shifting technical requirements and changing demands from Washington. The expression that keeps coming up: Constructing an Obamacare exchange is like flying an airplane while building it.

In the New York State of Health Marketplace, for example, the feature that will let people automatically renew their health plan for 2015 is still under construction, said deputy director Danielle Holahan, who expects to request a funding extension around October. That’s partly because New York is also catching up on building tools for tasks the federal government initially planned on handling, such as approving exemptions from the individual mandate and calculating cost-sharing reductions for low-income people.

Under Obama administration guidelines, states can only keep spending federal exchange funds on essential building blocks. They can’t be used for salaries, offices or administrative expenses.

CMS officials referred questions about individual applications to the states, but said extending federal grants is a routine practice if they don’t cost more, and it’s hardly unique to the exchanges. States submit blueprints for how they plan to use the money. Those blueprints are reviewed and revised to ensure prudent use of taxpayer dollars.

( Also on POLITICO: An Obamacare gotcha moment)

Sometimes extensions are made for money already spent. For instance, Mila Kofman, the executive director of the District of Columbia exchange, said if the District ends up needing to seek an extension, it would likely be because the bills from vendors were late coming in.

Yet the extension for the startup funds is drawing howls from opponents. They wonder whether it’s simply forestalling the inevitable: a second wave of failed state exchanges forced to give up and join the federal exchange, HealthCare.gov. Several states that ran into problems in year one, like Oregon and Nevada, already have said they will migrate to HealthCare.gov.

“The Obama administration should stop propping up state-based exchanges that have failed to gain traction with consumers, and have wasted hundreds of millions on faulty technology,” said Josh Archambault, senior fellow at the Foundation for Government Accountability in Massachusetts, a state that may also switch to the federal portal. “Any delay kicks the can down the road two to three years when additional state-based exchanges are likely to close their doors because they still remain unsustainable.”

State officials, however, said that in the short-term, inadequate funding would not necessarily mean the exchanges would fall apart. Budget challenges at this point are more likely to affect outreach programs and call centers — and, by extension, hold times for prospective customers. This year, it’s less a question of whether the exchange itself actually works.

( Also on POLITICO Magazine: How the left took over the Democratic Party)

Still, Rhode Island, Minnesota, Hawaii and Kentucky already applied to continue spending federal dollars in 2015. California, Connecticut and Vermont say they intend to apply. Washington state and Massachusetts are still thinking about it, depending on whether Massachusetts is still trying to salvage its exchange, rather than switch to the feds.

Colorado is the state exchange that’s working well and has no plans to continue spending federal funds next year (although it’s not clear how much federal money it will have left). The Washington, D.C., and Nevada exchanges expect to use up their grant money before the year is up; there’s nothing to extend. Oregon and Maryland are shutting down their broken exchanges, so they won’t ask for an extension. Oregon is going federal, and Maryland is trying to adopt Connecticut’s technology to make its market work the second time around.

CORRECTION: Correction: An earlier version of this article mischaracterized the timing of Washington state’s extension request. Richard Onizuka is waiting for the exchange board’s 2015 budget request, not for the legislature to approve a 2015 budget.