Topics: don draper, Editor's Picks, Mad Men, Television, TV, Entertainment News

Perhaps it should have ended on that bench, with Don looking as if Hopper had painted Gump, detached and oddly contented, having just given the automobile he waited a week to have repaired to a young hustler, a former version of his conflicted self. I would have been cool with that, fading to black on a man about to dispense with the last 80-proof swig of his identity, if not his soul.

Or perhaps it should have ended one episode earlier. I might have been OK with each of our uniquely flawed protagonists balking at and ultimately rejecting joining the mega-agency McCann-Erickson. Joan cuts a deal she can almost live with. Don bails on his first gang bang of a meeting at the new place (though did he really need another gathering of empty suits to have the epiphany that this would never work?). I would have been fine ending on Roger playing the organ back at the abandoned offices of SC&P, drunkenly serenading the drunkenly roller-skating, partially liberated Peggy. Who knows what would have come next? Who cares? They were rejecting conformity and toasting a renegade existence. They had been on an eight-ish season voyage and, as Roger said, “It was a hell of a boat.”

I would have been OK seeing them all go down on that boat together.

But there’s more. There has to be. We hate the thought of final episodes for iconic shows but once the announcement is made we fetishize it and embrace it. We speculate and hope, demanding closure, fulfillment, answers, blood baths, reconciliation and perhaps (but hopefully not) some sort of maudlin montage. More.

I’m guessing that on Sunday night we will get none of that. Because “Mad Men” was never about plot in the traditional sense. I rarely left one episode anxiously wondering what happens next week. I usually sat scratching my head, wondering about the notion of family, capitalism, nostalgia, my own advertising existence and what it means to live a meaningful 21st century life. In fact, whenever plot became more about individual character rather than the crew of Roger’s “boat,” the show tilted toward sentimentality and familiarity. If anything, the protagonist that illuminated the most human of truths wasn’t human; it was the boat.