The Complete Hitchcock

Film Forum

209 W. Houston St.; (212) 727-8110

Friday-March 27

ENLARGE Ivor Novello in Alfred Hitchcock's 'The Lodger.' BFI/Park Circus Films

Alfred Hitchcock died in 1980, yet his films still feel as elemental and profuse as the weather. Even someone who thinks he or she has seen all of them will come across something new in "The Complete Hitchcock," a 57-film retrospective that reaches back to 1925 and "The Pleasure Garden," the Master of Suspense's first feature, and includes lesser-known English films such as "Waltzes from Vienna" along with the silent-era classic "The Lodger." If you've never seen "Dial M for Murder" in 3-D, or both versions of "The Man Who Knew Too Much," here's your chance.

Hyper-Reality

UnionDocs

322 Union Ave., Brooklyn; www.uniondocs.org

Saturday

Scotland-based filmmaker Duncan Campbell presents three works that illustrate his highly subjective approach to making documentaries, which he calls "a peculiar form of fiction." The films include "Make It New John," which looks at automobile designer John DeLorean, and "Bernadette," whose subject is the Northern Irish activist Bernadette Devlin. Mr. Campbell also will discuss his methods, which take creative liberties with reported history and archival materials.

Film Comment Selects

Film Society of Lincoln Center

165 W. 65th St.; (212) 875-5601

Through Feb. 27

ENLARGE Antonio de la Torre in 'Cannibal.' Film Movement

This annual program is the friskier flip side of the New York Film Festival, with a taste for freaky genre films, overlooked efforts by established directors and new work that challenges audiences in unexpected ways. Horror fans haven't one but two movies about cannibalism (one is even called "Cannibal"), guided by artful perspectives. Viewers can also catch up with two early films from leading German director Christian Petzold ("Wolfsburg" and "Ghosts"), take in a marathon screening of Jane Campion's miniseries "Top of the Lake" and sample the new wave of Iranian film, represented by the bizarre father-son drama "Fat Shaker."

Kino Polska: New Polish Cinema

BAMcinematek

30 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn; (718) 636-4100

Through Sunday

ENLARGE Jakub Gierszal in 'Lasting.' Jacek Borcuch

Nine new films argue for the vitality of contemporary Polish cinema in this showcase, selected from the popular Gdynia Film Festival. Some personalize the history of postwar Poland, looking at the early 1960s and the ghosts of the Holocaust ( Pawel Pawlikowski's black-and-white character study " Ida ") or the last decade ( Ryszard Bugajski's "Closed Circuit," based on news reports of government corruption). Others take on more intimate themes, focused on couples whose love may not sustain them, as in Jacek Borcuch's "Lasting" and Slawomir Fabicki's "Loving."

Russ Meyer & Roger Ebert

Anthology Film Archives

32 Second Ave.; (212) 508-5181

Friday-Sunday

ENLARGE A group shot from 'Beyond the Valley of the Dolls,' written by Russ Meyer and Roger Ebert. 20th Century Fox

While widely remembered as a film critic, the late Roger Ebert also penned a pair of screenplays that earned notoriety in their day—collaborations with friend Russ Meyer, "The King of the Nudies." The satirical, sexploitation romps are revived this weekend on 35mm, including "Beyond the Valley of the Dolls" (1970) and its sequel "Beneath the Valley of the Ultra-Vixens" (1979). Also showing is "Up!" (1976), an erotic murder mystery to which Ebert contributed dialogue.