Step right up folks, sit right down in your favorite reading nook — hmm, you need to replace that toilet paper roll — and dive into the 2015 edition of the Old Columnist's Almanac!

Once again, the Old Columnist's Almanac tells you everything you need to know about the coming year, including our reliable weather predictions (summer will be hot, winter will be, um, sort of cool-ish). And that's just the start of our many fearless predictions for 2015.

These are indeed fearless predictions, as we have absolutely no fear that you can prove they are wrong, at least not yet. So while our 2014 predictions may have been a teensy bit off — we didn't see the Kansas City Royals coming, did you? — the Old Columnist once again fearlessly predicts these developments:

—The stock market will continue to rise to unprecedented heights, with the Dow Jones Average topping 20,000. But then there will be a catastrophic crash, after a Wall Street Journal investigative report shockingly reveals: "Know what? This isn't actual money, it's just a bunch on numbers on computer screens! Also, we found out that Dow Jones is actually below average!"

—Obamacare will remain in effect, but your own personal heath care costs will increase. Or alternatively, Obamacare will be repealed, in which case your health care costs will still increase. (We feel especially confident about this prediction.)

—Robots will perform still more tasks that used to be done by humans, now including taking out the garbage, reorganizing your sock drawer, picking out Mother's Day gifts, going to teacher-parent conferences, scratching that itch in the middle of your back where you can't reach, etc.

—Congress will continue to be politically polarized, with the two parties so far apart they get mired in endless debate over a bill to designate prickly heat as the official National Rash.

—Russian President Vladimir Putin will make more aggressive overtures toward Ukraine, Georgia, Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia, threatening to bombard them with more photographs of him with his shirt off.

—The Washington Redskins – now generally referred to by the media as the Washington Team that Dare Not Speak Its Name — will begin the 2015 season filled with optimism. Hopes vanish on opening day, however, when all three quarterbacks on the roster trip on the steps coming out of the locker room and break their ankles.

—As AMC concludes depicting the 1960s in "Mad Men," it announces a new television series with a dark, edgy look at the 1970s, titled "Men in Astonishingly Ugly Clothes."

—As the race for the 2016 presidential nominations begins, several Democrat hopefuls will try to dislodge Hillary Clinton as the presumed front runner, led by Martin O'Malley's "Kiss Me, I'm Irish" initiative and Joe Biden's slogan, "I look better in a pantsuit."

—On the Republican side, meanwhile, the presidential contenders will engage in their quadrennial "I'm more conservative than you are" competition, with one accusing another of liberal squishiness for failing to support mandatory gun ownership for everybody, including infants.

—Hollywood will make history by finally producing a summer movie season in which every single blessed film is a sequel.

—As petroleum prices continue to tumble, several Middle Eastern principalities will suddenly find themselves strapped for cash, and start promoting tourism as a moneymaker. Street vendors will be selling "Maps to Homes of the Sheikhs."

—The folks at Apple will continue to bestow upon us new electronic gadgets we didn't realize we needed, including the iCatheter, the iEarwax Remover, and the iEtch-A-Sketch.

—Economic relations between the United States and Cuba grow, as grateful Cubans discover they can get parts for their ancient American automobiles from those auto-parts yards on Route 17 in York County.

—In a reversal of policy, North Korea will launch a "charm offensive," trying to soften its image by entering the toy market with its cuddly "Tickle Me Kim Jong Un" dolls.

—Finally, the prediction you're all waiting to hear: The University of Virginia and Virginia Tech football teams both will have undefeated seasons, playing each other to a tie in their season-ending game, thus setting up a rematch in college football's championship game. (Don't ask us to predict that outcome here; that'll be in 2016.)

That's all for now from the Old Columnist's Almanac, but don't forget to check out our household advice ("Weatherproof your Dog with Tar Paper," page 27; "Spackle As a Condiment," page 46), and — oh my, you're all out of toilet paper, aren't you?

Don't fret. As an addition valuable household service, the Old Columnist's Almanac has those several extra blank pages.

Reach Tony at tgabriele@dailypress.com.