The marketing robots located Pete Robison about a year ago.







They knew about the article he read online. They saw him download that white paper — and convinced him to type in his email address in the process.







Then they started sending him subtle emails designed to lead him back to HubSpot.com.







And Robison kept going back to the software company's website to learn more about this marketing automation topic he'd been reading about.







The robots spotted him each time. Eventually, they sensed that he was a hot lead and alerted a human in the sales department, who gave Robison a call.







He was amazed. Sure, it was “a little Big Brother-ish,” but he didn't mind. He was more interested in figuring out how his employer — Meyer Products, a Cleveland company best known for making yellow snow plows — could use some of the same techniques.







Today, Meyer is one of many Northeast Ohio companies that are using marketing automation software to home in on people who are most likely to buy their products and give them the extra nudge that might make them pull the trigger.







The technology isn't new, but a few local marketing firms said a growing number of their clients want help implementing automation software and coming up with content for the many emails they need to send out.







One of those marketing firms is thunder::tech. The Cleveland company issued a report ranking marketing automation as the top marketing trend for 2015. Why? For one, the industry is hot at the national level, according to thunder::tech president Jason Therrien. He mentioned a few big software companies that have made headlines lately: HubSpot went public this past fall, and Marketo did so in 2013. Two of their competitors, Pardot and Eloqua, have been scooped up by bigger companies over the past few years.







Thunder::tech has seen the trend first hand, too. The company started helping some of its own clients get into marketing automation early last year, and now that work is becoming a bigger part of thunder::tech's business. One of those early clients was Meyer Products.









Revealing messages

Though Robison was impressed by how HubSpot used its own software to identify him as a hot sales lead, he shopped around. Meyer ended up buying software from Pardot last spring.

It's working well so far, according to Robison, vice president of marketing and digital integration for the company.







For the past year, Meyer has been gathering information from people who visit the company's website piece by piece, a technique called progressive profiling. Visitors are anonymous and can't be contacted until they willingly give the company an email address or other information — a phone number, a job title, maybe the name of an employer.







Companies can get that information by offering something of value. For instance, this past fall, a time of year when many people buy snow plows, Meyer offered a rebate coupon on its website. The company got a lot of good contact information from people who downloaded it, Robison said.







Information is valuable. For instance, today, Meyer routes hot leads to its call center, but now it can often identify the region where those people live. So the company wants to start routing those leads to distributors who are located nearby.







But Meyer is just getting started. The company is using Pardot to figure out which marketing messages led people to buy products and which ones didn't, Robison said. “That's going to reveal a lot,” he said.







Bigger companies have used marketing automation tools for years. Now, however, more small and midsize companies are doing it, according to Andy Walton, senior account executive at Fathom, a digital marketing firm in Valley View.







As companies have put more emphasis on marketing themselves via email and other digital channels, they've realized that they don't have time to follow up on every lead, Walton said. Automation software helps them narrow down the list.







It's also popular among companies that sell to other businesses and have long sales cycles. The software makes it easier to keep in touch with potential customers over a longer period of time, he said.







“Once you've done all the leg work to get those leads, you don't want to let them die,” he said.







Those are some of the reasons why Nook Industries decided to implement Marketo's software, with Fathom's help. But there have been other benefits, too, according to marketing manager Jeff Naymik.





Right place, right time

The system lets the Cleveland-based company — which makes specialized screws and linear motion control products — send different marketing messages to different people. So someone who wrote down their email address at a trade show might get a different email than someone who went to the company's website. The hard part, in Naymik's view? Coming up with stuff to put in all those emails.

That's where many companies fail, according to several people who spoke with Crain's.







Actually, Joe Pulizzi says that most of his clients that use marketing automation software haven't gotten much out of it. They often don't have interesting content in their emails, so recipients just ignore them, according to Pulizzi.







He's founder of the Content Marketing Institute. Even that organization had trouble getting the most of the Act-On marketing automation software it's been using for the past two years. Only now is the organization starting to see benefits.







“We're the Content Marketing Institute, and we didn't have enough content in the right places,” he said.







Developing content that customers want is “the hardest part of any one of these campaigns,” according to Rick Neiman, global director of digital marketing for Avery Dennison's label and packaging materials group in Mentor.







But during the four years that he's been using Act-On, he's noticed that people are more likely to watch a how-to video than something that's overtly promotional.







Avery Dennison doesn't just send electronic content, though. It also sends physical samples to people who qualify as hot leads. And they better be pretty warm: Though some samples are only the size of a piece of paper, others come in the form of 500-foot-long rolls.







“We don't want to send a sample to anybody who goes to our website or opens an email,” he said.







The software also helped the company pinpoint problems. For instance, Avery Dennison used to send lots of email to prospects in the Asia-Pacific region. But with the software, the company noticed that people in those regions usually ignored the emails. So now Avery Dennison focuses on getting phone numbers for people in that part of the world. Then the company can send them text messages.







“It's OK to get bad results because at least we know not to do it again,” he said.