Everyone has a particular trait that they find attractive in a potential mate. For 31-year-old Kyle Jones, it's age. Lots and lots of age. The Atlanta, Ga., man is in a casual relationship with 91-year-old Majorie McCool, and despite the 60-year age gap, the couple isn’t lacking sparks in the bedroom.

From age 12, Jones remembers liking older women. “Everyone’s brains are wired differently. I’m wired towards older women,” Jones explains in a YouTube video. Jones meets his older ladies via online dating websites, but his affections are not always warmly met. "Whenever I'm trying to speak to an older woman, the first reaction I get is 'You're way too young.' I find persistence is good, so I tell them it'll be fun,'" Jones told the Daily Mail.

91-Year-Old Main Squeeze

Although Jones is involved in a number of open relationships with older women, his "main squeeze" is 91-year-old McCool, Gawker reported. The great-grandmother couldn’t be any more delighted to have a boyfriend so much younger than herself, although she admits that at times things get confusing. “Sometimes I feel he’s like another son, until we hop into bed and then I feel different,” McCool said. The age gap has not seemed to make any noticeable difference in their sex life. "The physical side of our relationship is wonderful. I amaze myself, he amazes me. There's nothing better. I wear sexy outfits to bed. I try to keep my bra on though because I don't have much left,” she said.

Friends and Family Cool with It

Friends and family of the couple may have been skeptical at first, but after five years of dating, they've come to accept the non-traditional relationship. "My family consists mostly of boys, and they don't really care — what I do is my business,” McCool said. Jones’s mother at first viewed her son’s preference for older women as a phase. “I think a lot of children have crushes on their teachers, so it didn't strike me as strange. I really wasn't sure if that was something that he was going to stay with or if it was just a cougar phase some young men go through,” Ceceila Jones Clark, 50, Jones's mother told the Daily Mail. However, after she starting spending quality time with his older girlfriends, Jones’s mother came to realize this wasn’t a phase but a lifestyle.

Nature Prefers It the Other Way Around

From a biological viewpoint, this partnership is quite unique. Older man plus younger woman means more children, but the other way around leaves a couple childless. Men maximize their “evolutionary fitness," meaning their ability to pass on their genes to future generations, by mating with a women 14.6 years younger, The Telegraph reported. Dr. Samuli Helle from the University of Turka in Finland observed that in the nomadic Sami people of Finland, couples with this ideal age ratio had the highest number of children surviving to adulthood. “Young Sami women were the most fertile and had the highest reproductive value, whereas older Sami men had acquired enough skills needed for successful hunting, fishing and reindeer herding and, most importantly, wealth to be good providers for the progeny and thus desirable mates," Helle and his partner concluded.