Finn Rollings, left, joins his classmates in the new entrance at Boulder's Jarrow Montessori School on Thursday. A University of Colorado environmental design class worked with students at Jarrow to design a new entrance for the private school. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Elementary students at Boulder's Jarrow Montessori School recently designed a pavilion for the school's front entrance using toilet paper rolls, construction paper, various other bits and pieces, and lots of glue.

The elementary students participated in a design workshop led by 13 college students in the University of Colorado's environmental design program. The CU students, all juniors, are designing and building the pavilion as a class project.

"We had a blast with the kids," CU junior Preston Reed said. "It was really eye-opening. They had some really great ideas."

He said designing and building a project in a semester has been "a long road, but a lot of fun."

"To design something from scratch and see it being built has been really cool," he said.

A model of the new Jarrow Montessori School entrance designed by a University of Colorado environmental design class that worked with students at the Boulder private school. (Courtesy photo)

CU instructor Jade Polizzi said the project's goal is a protected space where children can wait after school that also creates "a new face for the campus" to mark the school's 50th anniversary.

Along with teaching the students to work with a client, she said, the project educated them about the city's permitting process, how to design within city regulations and how well certain materials translate into design details.

Once they came up with a final design, the students worked with an engineer to make sure the structure, made of wood, steel and concrete, would be sound.

They started building over spring break — including pouring 22,000 pounds of concrete for the benches — and hoped to finish this week.

Advertisement

"We're getting students into the real world to do projects," said Polizzi, whose daughter attends Jarrow.

Michael Girodo, Jarrow's head of school, said the project was a good match with the hands-on Montessori philosophy and a cost-effective way to get a custom entrance. The school paid for the materials, while the students handled all the design and labor.

"We got a wonderful structure," he said.

Jarrow students said they liked sharing their ideas. There were practical ones, like a slanted roof for rain and wide benches so they could sit together with their friends. And more imaginative, like slides and a backpack shooter so students wouldn't have to carry their packs to their cars.

Second-grader Owen Stanzel came up with the backpack shooter idea — which remains just that, an idea. He also used foam blocks, straws and paper to create a canopy.

"I used my imagination," he said. "It was really fun."

Classmate Julia Peterson went with a big roof and a little cave as the entrance, adding "a bunch of little buildings you could rush into if it rained."

She said she liked that the designers asked the students' opinions.

"It's our school, and they wanted more ideas of how we would like it," she said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa