Making America Really Great Again

We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.

The economic anxiety, spiritual malaise, and geopolitical unease gripping America these days has nothing to do with Donald Trump and his hostile takeover of the Republican Party. Nor, amazingly, does it have anything to do with Hillary Clinton, whose mug has been in our faces since 1992 and who shows no signs of willingly departing absent death, deportation to St. Helena, or forcible retirement.

Nor does it have anything to do with the collapse of the GOP, brought low by its misrule by the Bush family, and done in by the wasted lives and money in the misbegotten Iraq and Afghanistan adventures -- "wars" that have dragged on three times longer than World War II and are unlikely to abate... ever.

Nor is it the result of the Obama administration, a kind of practical joke on the part of David Axelrod that was visited upon a good-hearted and unsuspecting American public, sold as "historic" solely by reason of the candidate's skin color (how racist is that?), and which has done its level best to effect the "fundamental transformation" of a nation that didn't need it in the first place.

Don't think that electing a new president is going to ameliorate matters. The country is run neither by the president (whose principal jobs are to faithfully execute the laws passed by Congress and to act as commander-in-chief) nor the Congress, which at least since the FDR administration has abdicated its authority as the "sole legislative power" mentioned in the Constitution, and has ceded lawmaking power to agencies it created but has placed under the authority of the executive branch.

And don't even think about what should be the last and least branch of the federal government, the courts. The Supreme Court -- the only court mentioned in the Constitution -- has given us all manner of unconstitutional excrescences, including Obamacare and gay marriage, and soon enough will likely rule that any distinctions between (or among?) the sexes are "discriminatory." And the lower courts -- which, just like the federal agencies, Congress could eliminate overnight -- act as feeders, serving up case after case to a body that seized power in Marbury v. Madison and has never relinquished it.

Nor should we look to the several states for succor. The Civil War, for both better and worse, put paid to the Tenth Amendment and the notion of states' rights (now viewed as code words for racism), and the federal doctrine of "incorporation" has inexorably blurred the line between the feds and the states. What, at this juncture, is the point of even having 50 different states, other than to keep pettifogging, power-mad unemployables on the state payroll?