As a Longview native assumes his post, exiting Longview Regional Medical Center CEO Jim Kendrick said he carries much of the community with him as he goes.

"This is where I've raised my kids," he said. "When I first moved to Longview, I had a child in fourth grade, in second grade and an infant. In the time we've been here, two have graduated high school and are going off to A&M."

Kendrick said it's a place that has served him — and his family — very well.

"Longview is home," he said. "It'll be a long time before I don't consider Longview home."

But will he be back?

"We've been here 10 years, and we've made so many close friends, so we will definitely be back from time to time," Kendrick said. "Longview is a place we will always have in our hearts."

Friday was Kendrick's final day at the helm of Regional.

The growth the Longview hospital has experienced in the past decade — as well as that of the entire health care industry in the area — is something of which Kendrick said he is most proud to be a part.

"There are considerably more people in Longview who are comfortable getting their health care here, instead of driving to Dallas or another major market," he said. "That's probably my biggest accomplishment, that we've been able to work to bring the services, providers and technology to the market that gives people a comfort level to get their care here in Longview."

One pivotal moment for the hospital during Kendrick's tenure came in 2012, when Longview Regional merged with Diagnostic Clinic of Longview, ending physicians' part ownership in the hospital.

"It gave us the support of some of the most established and high-quality physicians in the community. With that committed support, we were able to step out and make larger commitments to expand the hospital — spending a significant amount of money to improve the services we can provide to the community," he said. "That commitment of them aligning with us gave us the ability to go out and do that. So that's really a catalyst for growth and change and expansion."

If there's any disappointment to leaving Longview, Kendrick said it is not being able to be a part of the bright future he's certain the hospital is headed toward.

"Everything is a continuum, it's a timeline. The progression of health care is not an end point — a place you're trying to get to — but rather about making progress," he said. "You always want things to move along faster than they are — and I'm very proud of what we're able to do here and (Longview Regional) has a bright future — but if there's anything that makes my heart hurt about my time here, it's not continuing to be here on a daily basis to be a part of helping it grow."

Casey Robertson, who since 2010 has been CEO of Woodland Heights Medical Center in Lufkin, began taking the reins at the Longview hospital last week and said he's eager to advance the upward trajectory of his predecessor.

"A decade of Jim's leadership has set this hospital on the path for success, and our goal is to continue on this same path," he said. "We will continue to look at what services our community needs and what we can do enhance the care we provide."

Robertson said ascending to the position of CEO at Regional hits home for him.

"As a native to Longview, it's a privilege to join Longview Regional's long history of providing outstanding care to the East Texas community. In the short week that I've been here, the community has welcomed me warmly," he said. "I have so many wonderful memories from growing up in Longview, and the city has grown tremendously since then. I can see that there is so much in store for this community."

Seeing how his hometown has grown inspires Robertson to help take the hospital to the next level.

For example, he said in May, Regional performed the area's first successful aortic valve replacement procedure, a procedure for high-risk heart patients and those too sick for open-heart surgery

"Longview Regional is the third in Texas to offer this procedure following behind Dallas and Houston," he said. "Our goal is to continue to bring the community innovative and personalized health care opportunities close to home.

"I look forward to working closely with our board, medical staff and hospital administration to ensure that our services and community-based programs continue to realize their potential."

Kendrick said some of the biggest challenges to local hospitals such as Regional are how they are able to manage the broader national healthcare issues such as the Affordable Health Care Act and Medicaid expansion.

"There are a lot of people out there who do not have the ability to pay for their care, and by (Texas) not expanding Medicaid, that's going to make it more difficult for institutions like ours to be able to meet the needs of that population," he said. "We always try to find a way to make that work, and it remains a big challenge, not only for my successor but for everyone in the industry."

Kendrick said the health care industry is challenged by complex payer models that make it difficult to recapitalize. "People think health care costs are so expensive, but when they want an MRI they want it the next day, they don't want to wait six months for it," he said. "That kind of availability and access to care is very expensive."This high expense — when combined with more people being unable to pay for care — makes it increasingly difficult for the industry, Kendrick said."It's a challenge we're all facing and will continue to juggle, and (Regional) is certainly no exception to that," he said.Though ultimately competitors, Kendrick said he valued the professional relationship he enjoyed with Good Shepherd CEO Steve Altmiller and the companies' common goals.

"He's been a pleasure to work with. I think he's a very intelligent man, and I think he will do everything he can to get that organization back on track to be as successful as possible," Kendrick said. "We want good health care in the market, whether you're coming to Regional or not. I know that's what I want, and I assure you that's what Steve wants, for people to be getting good health care. That's the common ground that we share."

Moving on to the newly created position as network CEO for 10 Community Health Systems-affiliated hospitals in Oklahoma, Kendrick said bringing together a diverse group of organizations is the task set before him. "I will be working with the CEOs of those hospitals trying to drive toward a common statewide initiative to improve access to care and to be a more efficient operation from a system perspective," he said. "Right now, they're 10 independent hospitals, and I want to get them to operate as 10 hospitals that are all supporting a common system-wide goal."