As the presidential primary caucuses and elections progress toward the Republican and Democratic conventions this summer, it seems health care issues are taking less prominent roles in the campaign. Is it because there is a lack of new ideas?

It is clear all the Republican candidates want to repeal the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), while Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders wants to change our healthcare system to a totally government-run single payer system similar to Canada’s. Only Hillary Clinton wants to keep and improve the ACA.

Even though the ACA has been in effect since 2010, the Republican presidential candidates have yet to come up with a comprehensive healthcare plan to replace Obamacare.

The Republican candidates’ proposals for healthcare all promote more competition in private insurance, allowing insurance to be sold across state lines since there are large differences in health insurance premium prices from region to region. Most Republican candidates have also mentioned using tax credits and health savings accounts to make private insurance more affordable, and requiring more transparency of prices in healthcare to let people know the cost at each location for their care.

These proposals had all been set out prior to the ACA, and one basic part of the ACA uses tax credits to make private insurance plans — that are standardized from state-to-state — more affordable. The ACA’s private insurance plan design has levels called platinum, gold, silver, and bronze that offer benefits that are the same for each level in every state. It is the cost of the premium that differs from region to region, though the ACA’s insurance benefits and the percentage of out-of-pocket cost sharing do not differ. Those percentages of cost sharing depend on the level, for example all silver plans have a fixed percentage of 70 percent for actuarial value that is the same state-to-state.

The problem is that even when the same insurance company offers the same bronze, silver, gold, or platinum plan across state lines, the cost of the plan and the hospitals and doctors who are available in that plan are very different. That is, the main reason insurance prices vary so much across state lines is not the insurance company, but the hospitals’ and doctors’ prices and utilization that vary tremendously from region to region, even in the same state. The differences are not due to the insurance company — it is the local providers who have different practice patterns and prices for their services.

This basic but sometimes huge difference in health care provider prices from region to region seems to elude the awareness of many politicians who still think that allowing insurance to be sold across state lines is a good solution to our healthcare problems. In the ACA insurance exchange there are up to three-fold differences in insurance premium costs from region to region, even with the same national insurance company and the same benefit levels.

In the ACA, there is a requirement that all insurance companies are limited to using no more than 15 percent of their premium cost for their administrative costs and profits. There are differences in insurance companies with regard to efficiency, and there are some that are mutual, not-for-profit, or for-profit companies who pay dividends to their stockholders. But the fact is some companies that sell insurance in multiple regions still show large differences in prices from region to region. The national company doesn’t change across state lines, though for some non-ACA products the benefits may differ. Those differences in benefits though are eliminated by the standardized ACA products.

Health insurance companies in Iowa can offer insurance much cheaper than the same company can offer it in New York City, for example, but they couldn’t sell the Iowa policy to a New Yorker — unless they want to get all their care in Iowa or another region with less utilization and lower prices for local services.

So, buying insurance across state lines won’t work because the main difference in premium costs is the price and utilization decided by the health care providers — not the insurance company.

There is a website, www.Whynotthebest.org, where one can easily see the huge regional differences in prices for services in healthcare. The “average covered charges” for a major joint replacement at Mary Greeley Medical Center in Ames is $36,505, while in a New York City hospital the average covered charge is $98,660 for the same procedure.

The average covered charge for a urinary tract infection with complications is $12,437 at MGMC, and the same diagnosis costs $34,933 at a New York City hospital. For a simple pneumonia with complications, it costs $18,875 at MGMC, and it costs $42,450 in New York City.

These price differences are only a few examples of why selling insurance across state lines is not going to succeed. Unfortunately, the higher value (high quality, low cost) of healthcare in Iowa has been ignored by the presidential candidates. The same website as well as others also shows that higher quality of care in some regions and hospitals is also associated with lower costs.

Higher value in healthcare should be promoted by all politicians who have plans for health care. Better care with lower costs is possible, as it is being done in many areas, including right here in Iowa.