In an effort to promote healthy living and cut health care costs, companies in The Woodlands are taking steps toward improving the health of their employees by implementing wellness programs.

Corporate wellness programs range from online programs and seminars to offering on-site fitness centers and medical clinics. Regardless of a company’s level of involvement, these programs have the same goals.

Erin Griffin, director of health and wellness at Memorial Hermann The Woodlands Hospital, said these programs not only aid in mitigating health care costs, but they have also been shown to reduce turnover and improve employee engagement.

“Employee wellness programs are important for both the employee experience and the success of an organization,” Griffin said. “When a company invests in its employees—their greatest asset—they tend to lead healthier lifestyles, stay at their job longer and work harder when they are there.”

During her tenure in health care, Griffin said she has witnessed a shift from web-based wellness programs to more meaningful, interactive programs that produce better results. She said many company programs are taking wellness one step further by promoting emotional, communal and financial well-being.

“When companies implement effective health and well-being strategies, it impacts the entire community,” Griffin said. “Many employers recognize that community involvement leads to a greater sense of well-being, and having healthier, happier employees means that they’ll have the energy to connect with their community in new and exciting ways.”

Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, headquartered in The Woodlands, is just one of the companies in the area with an employee wellness program. The organization has offered an on-site fitness center and medical clinics for employees at its Woodlands headquarters since the campus opened in 2003.

“By providing programs like wellness to employees, you’re not just making a financial investment for positive returns,” said Scott Satterfield, director of global benefits for Anadarko. “You’re also sending a message to employees: ‘Hey, you’re important enough that we are willing to invest in your health and well-being. We care about you.’ That’s a powerful message for employees to hear.”

Griffin said the Affordable Care Act was instrumental in the upward trend of corporate wellness programs.

”The Affordable Care Act produced guidelines for employers seeking to implement certain health and wellness programs,” Griffin said. “The guidelines have produced a buzz around employee wellness and encouraged more employers to join the conversation and consider implementing wellness strategies.”

Griffin said starting corporate wellness programs can be overwhelming. However, Memorial Hermann hosts quarterly employer advisory board meetings in The Woodlands where employers can seek information from professionals on where to begin.

“Employers shouldn’t wait until they have a significant budget to get started,” Griffin said. “Starting small can have significant impact on long-term sustainability and growth of an employee well-being strategy.”