An analysis done by The New York Times found that the poor, including legal immigrants, achieved the greatest gains during the first full year of Obamacare.

Use of SPF30 sunscreen appears to delay the onset of melanoma in sun-worshiping mice, according to researchers at The Ohio State University who reported their findings at the American Association for Cancer Research meeting. Read full MedPage Today coverage of the AACR from Charles Bankhead here.

A new report from IMS Health found a significant decline in hydrocodone prescriptions, but as scripts go down, use of heroin and "illicit fentanyl" is increasing. (Pain News Network)

In what is described as the first worldwide vaccine shift, public health workers in 155 countries are switching to a new oral polio vaccine that targets two, rather than three, strains of the disease. The switch should be complete by May 1. (NPR)

Skin in the game? Japanese researchers are perfecting e-skin, which can be worn as a "second skin for biomedical and other applications." (Forbes)

Kids are kids regardless of parenting unit: study comparing same-sex couples to heterosexual couples finds parenting done by Dad and Dad, Mom and Mom, or Mom and Dad equally effective. (CNN)

New wrinkle in the e-cigarette debate: a lawyer representing a 14-year-old New York boy is claiming his client was severely injured when an e-cigarette exploded in the boy's face. The incident happened at a Brooklyn shopping mall. (CBS)

John Gonzales, MD, MBA, thinks doctors have fallen out of love with medicine, and that is a bad thing. (via KevinMD)

Bad news for air dry fans: turns out those hand-dryer units are blowing around viruses. Pass the paper towels, please.

Health insurers in Oklahoma are now required to cover autism spectrum treatments. Hear, hear for the Sooner State.

A case for circumcision? Sixty-two Canadian men "had their genitals poked and prodded" to determine if a foreskin adds to sexual pleasure. The study, published in the Journal of Urology, concluded that it doesn't. (Vox)

Kathy Magliato, the heart surgeon who is the inspiration for NBC's latest doc show, Heartbeat, tells STAT what it's like to be a surgeon who is also a TV character.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.