Under the Affordable Care Act, more New Mexicans have health insurance than ever before, and that means more people are also falling victim to a common problem… surprise medical bills.

If you’ve gone to the Doctor thinking you were covered by insurance, and then received another bill in the mail weeks later, John Franchini, Superintendent of Insurance in New Mexico, says your not alone.

“We know that 35% of all the medical bills in this country are sent out with high then expected costs to the billings,” Franchini said. “So, it’s a very common problem. And very few people respond and try to ask about it. We’re here to tell the people they can ask about it, and they can get their bills lowered.”

Franchini says one of the most common places this happens is in emergency rooms, when they see a doctor who contracts with the hospital, but isn’t licensed with their health maintenance carrier.

“They usually go to an emergency room,” Franchini said. “And they have a co-pay, and a deductible, so they pay it and then they come back and they think their done with their health maintenance plan, and they find out they get a bill for $2,000 over what they paid, and most of them say well that must be what I owe, it isn’t what they owe, it’s extra billing.”

Franchini says some bills like this can be extreme, like one couple in Albuquerque that were rushed to the emergency room to have an emergency delivery of triplets.

“That couple ended up getting a $3.5 million bill for their care,” Franchini said. “And ultimately, after we helped them, and we went back to the institutions that were charging these bills, they paid $25,000 for their co-pay and $1,000 for their deductible, and the rest was paid for by the hospitals and the doctors involved in the operations.”

Franchini says if you are confused by a medical bill, try calling your doctor or insurance company, and if you don’t like the answer you can call the superintendent of insurance.

“We’re here to help them solve that,” Franchini said. “They can call the Department of Insurance and ask for managed health care, and our managed health care department is designed to help people with this very problem.”

For more information, visit osi.state.nm.us.