Santos Astacio pictured with Eliza Byard, executive director of GLSEN in New York at last month‘s Respect Awards.

When Long Branch teen Santos Astacio got permission from his high school to take his friend, Jason Thompson, as his date to senior prom, he said he was initially excited. Then, he worried about how his peers would react, despite that his friends and classmates accepted he was gay.

The 18-year-old, who was nominated for prom king, definitely did not expect what happened at the May 30 prom.

“You would have thought the entire place was on fire,” Astacio said. “People were screaming so loud when I got there. They were going crazy, they loved it.”

The graduating senior at Long Branch High School said he never encountered any problems with peers over his sexuality, and added that his school always had been supportive.

On April 2013’s National Day of Silence — where students across the country vow to take a form of silence to call attention to bullying against people who are lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender, or LGBT — Astacio said Long Branch High School had more than 300 participants.

After being bullied in his childhood years and having to change schools because of it, Astacio said he is now comfortable with the LGBT community and advocates for acceptance in school.

Astacio has served as the president of the school’s Gay-Straight Alliance and attends conferences as a board member of the Central New Jersey chapter of the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network. He is trained to teach educators at his school about how to address LGBT students and make their learning environments more comfortable.

Astacio gave a speech at his June 20 graduation as student body president. He has enrolled in Brookdale Community College’s Culinary Education Center and will either continue with his education in the program or pursue studies in social work law and non-profit business in the fall.

GRADUATE SPOTLIGHT

Do you know of a 2014 graduate who has an interesting story to share about his or her experience? Email Learning Editor Alesha Williams Boyd at awilliams@

app.com and they could

be featured here.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1qfwbbj