JOLIET – The Schultz family in Joliet struggled for months to find doctors who would care for them.

Kevin and Erin Schultz needed a doctor for their two daughters. Erin also needed a doctor for herself when she became pregnant in December, one who would monitor her closely because of past complications with giving birth.

But when their health insurance coverage changed under the state Affordable Care Act last fall, Kevin Schultz said they went through a nightmare ordeal with a new insurer that caused them to go through several doctors and limited their access to a local hospital.

The Schultz family is one of millions who have undergone changes in their health care after a 2010 federal law that requires citizens to obtain health insurance or face fines. Provisions of the law – which the public still is divided on, according to an August Kaiser Family Foundation poll – were enacted in 2013 to expand Medicaid coverage, as well as private insurance coverage, to more people.

The impact of the law has varied. In an April survey of 1,506 people from the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonpartisan health policy organization, 56 percent reported no direct impact while 19 percent said it helped them and 22 percent said it hurt them.

The Schultz family is among those who said the law has made their health care coverage more than difficult. While they’ve been able to secure doctors for their children and Erin, who is due to give birth this month, the fight has left its mark.

“My children do have a decent pediatrician, but we’re talking about how long for a fight? This was almost a full year of fighting with insurance companies, fighting with doctors,” Kevin Schultz said.

Hunt for doctors

Kevin Schultz said his problems began in September 2014, when the state changed his family’s health insurance plan because of the Affordable Care Act. Previously, they were on Medicaid but now are required to receive that coverage through a private insurer, Erin Schultz said.

They were given a list of insurers and chose Harmony Health Plan, a branch of Wellcare Health Plans.

By December, Kevin Schultz wanted out.

He said the insurance company gave him a list of four doctors – in Joliet, Bolingbook and Lockport – to visit. Over the course of several months, he said he was unable to receive care from the first three doctors he visited – either because they didn’t exist, couldn’t accept his family as patients because of their insurance or because of the type of medical treatment they sought.