Buy Photo A quiet zone had been approved by federal authorities more than three years ago. Work is now set to begin at the Washburn Avenue CSX railroad crossing. (Photo: Aaron Borton/ Special to The Cou / Aaron borton/Special to the Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Work is expected to begin Sept. 8 to create a long-awaited "quiet zone" without train horns blasting at the Washburn Avenue CSX railroad crossing in St. Matthews, between Westport Road and New La Grange Road.

The work -- which should last five days -- had been expected to start earlier but a railway "emergency" elsewhere caused a delay and a mix-up in signs posted along Washburn about the schedule added to the confusion, Kenan Stratman, St. Matthews' city engineer, said. The project also involves Lyndon and Louisville, with each of the three cities contributing $70,000 to pay for the cost, he said.

"We want to keep the road closed for as few days as possible," St. Matthews Mayor Rick Tonini said. After the quiet zone is established, there's a waiting period of 30 or 60 days, according to different accounts, before the train horns have to stop sounding.

Federal authorities had approved the quiet zone at Washburn more than three years ago, and residents are ready to be able to open their windows in the fall and not be jolted awake in the middle of the night by the horn noise. But safety improvements have to be made at crossings to make them suitable for quiet zones. And CSX plans to switch out some equipment at the crossing.

"You kind of start to give up hope after a while," Kelli Wilder, a resident of nearby Fenley Avenue, said. "Thinking it may be around the corner is definitely exciting."

Quiet zones already have been created at other sites in the St. Matthews area, including at the five-way intersection at Shelbyville Road and Chenoweth Lane.

Road closing signs have been posted along Washburn, along with orange signs denoting a detour route along Westport Road and Herr Lane. The local Cornerstone Contracting company will install medians in the road and new curbing, and CSX will put in some new rails and rail ties, Stratman said. Crossing gates already are in place.

The timetable for the planning process and start of the work has largely been determined by CSX, Tonini said.

Because the elevations will be changing slightly Louisville Metro Public Works will be making some interim repairs and putting in a temporary layer of asphalt at the railroad crossing before doing a repaving project afterward along most of Washburn that already had been planned, Jeff Brown, with the department, said. Once the word came from CSX about the quiet zone work, "we drop everything to do it," Brown said.

Washburn will be repaved from about 150 feet north of the railroad tracks to New La Grange Road, although the work may not start until next year because of other projects, Brown said. The rest of Washburn already has been repaved. Only one lane will be repaved at a time, and traffic flow will be maintained, he said.

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061 and melson@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1EKqzkc