Kim Davis, a county clerk in Kentucky, found herself smack dab in the middle of the ongoing religious liberty debate that is raging in America in the wake of Obamacare and the Supreme Court’s recent ruling on same-sex marriage. Davis, who was incarcerated because she refused to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, has also found herself in the middle of the 2016 Republican presidential race.

Davis’ release from jail just happened to coincide with a rally that was put on by Mike Huckabee’s 2016 presidential campaign, which was staged just outside of the Carter County Detention Center, where Davis was being held. Not only were streets shut down for Tuesday’s rally, but school was also canceled. The #ImWithKim Liberty Rally drew national media attention, and her release only made it more newsworthy.

While the news on Tuesday was about Davis’ release, the debate over her refusal to issue marriage licenses is far from over. Similarly, the time Davis spent in the midst of the 2016 presidential campaign isn’t likely over either. What was fascinating about the Davis rally in rural Kentucky is that it also may have given us a glimpse of what’s to come in the lead up to the Iowa caucuses.

Texas Senator Ted Cruz has built his presidential campaign in Iowa upon the religious liberty issue. Last month, his campaign pulled together an impressive campaign event in Des Moines that featured a whole host of individuals who have found themselves caught up in the religious liberty debate. Dick and Betty Odgaard were the most familiar to Iowans. They are the central Iowa couple that was forced to close their wedding businesses because they refused to host ceremonies for same-sex couples.

Cruz’s Rally for Religious Liberty wasn’t just impressive because nearly 2,500 people attended the impeccably organized event on a Friday night in Des Moines, it was impressive because the Cruz campaign made it abundantly clear that they were going to own the religious liberty issue in the 2016 presidential campaign.

Yet when Davis came under for refusing to issue marriage licenses, it was Mike Huckabee who was the first to give a full-throated defense of the Rowan County Clerk, not Cruz. In fact, Cruz’s initial response was measured. “We should make it possible for believers, such as Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis in Kentucky, to hold government jobs without having to violate their religious beliefs,” Cruz wrote on his Facebook page. “We can work together to come up with alternative ways to ensure that government functions are accomplished without infringing on religious liberty.”

Meanwhile, Huckabee reached out to Davis and made it abundantly clear that he stood firmly behind her. “Kim is a person of great conviction. When people of conviction fight for what’s right they often pay a price, but if they don’t and we surrender, we will pay a far greater price for bowing to the false God of judicial supremacy,” a Huckabee press release stated. “Government is not God. No man – and certainly no unelected lawyer – has the right to redefine the laws of nature or of nature’s God. Five unelected lawyers have abused their power by ruling in favor of a national right to same-sex marriage with no legal precedent and with nothing in our Constitution to back it up. They have violated American’s most fundamental right guaranteed by our Constitution – religious liberty.”

Huckabee added, “I stand with Kim Davis and every American of faith under attack by Washington elites who have nothing but disdain for us, our faith and the Constitution.” Huckabee didn’t just talk, his team sprung into action. On September 3rd, the same day that Davis was taken into custody, Huckabee announced plans for this past Tuesday’s rally.

Cruz changed his tune after Davis was arrested. Instead of seeking a common ground where Davis could do her job without violating her religious beliefs, Cruz warned in a press release that, “judicial lawlessness crossed into judicial tyranny.” Cruz went on to say, “Today, for the first time ever, the government arrested a Christian woman for living according to her faith. This is wrong. This is not America.”

It’s easy to understand how Davis’ incarceration changed they dynamics of things andcaused Cruz to take a different approach, but Huckabee acted instinctually, and in doing so, he essentially stole the political spotlight from a candidate like Cruz who should have been able to capitalize politically on Davis’ unfortunate situation.

The most noteworthy thing about Huckabee’s rally on Tuesday is that nowhere did you see a campaign sign or a Huckabee logo. Yet, the image that will come to symbolize Davis’ release is a picture of her with Huckabee. While nobody will know what the judge’s motives were to release Davis in the midst of the rally, it would not be wrong to suggest that the rally Huckabee organized may have played some roll in building the necessary political pressure for Davis to be released.

The political gamesmanship between Huckabee and Cruz, who was also in attendance, has been equally fascinating. Much has been made about the video that has surfaced that shows a Huckabee aide preventing Senator Cruz from speaking to the media that were assembled there. There has also been some people who were disappointed that Cruz was not allowed to speak at the rally.

On Wednesday, Huckabee addressed some of those concerns in an interview with Newsmax. “My team put it [the rally] together. We’re the ones who recruited the people not only to be on the program, but we’re the ones who coordinated the effort. We’re the ones who secured the permits, the staging. We had no idea Ted Cruz was even going to show up until the day before, and he didn’t call us. He called several other people on the program and asked about it.”

Some Cruz supporters may not like the way everything went down earlier this week, but the people they should be upset with is Cruz himself and his campaign staff. Huckabee and his campaign team out-maneuvered and out-messaged Cruz on the very issue that is at the heart and soul of his campaign. What transpired on a Tuesday afternoon in Kentucky doesn’t make or break an entire campaign, but Huckabee’s success this week should cause some concern for the Cruz campaign.

When it comes to issues like religious liberty or other social issues, there is an authenticity in Huckabee that seems difficult for Cruz to achieve. When attempting to sway evangelical voters in a state like Iowa, a candidate’s authenticity becomes incredibly important. In the past week, Huckabee has demonstrated that when it comes to issues of faith, he’s not going to take a backseat to anyone.

Even though there are many strong conservative candidates vying for the Republican nomination, thus far in Iowa, it looks like it is shaping up to be a battle between Huckabee and Cruz for the religious voters. Huckabee’s prowess in handling the Davis situation wasn’t by chance. He acted based on his on convictions, and he reaped the rewards.

If what transpired this week in Kentucky is any indication of how the fall campaign is going to play out, the Cruz campaign should be concerned.