Design has sea animals in mind | May 24

Plastic doesn't litter itself

The plastic detritus littering our oceans, waterways and roadsides is not the fault of the plastic. To paraphrase Pogo, "We have found the villains and they are us." Plastic doesn't throw itself into the water. Instead of taking our trash home, we thoughtlessly toss it overboard or out the window, or along the beach and countless other places.

Bravo to SaltWater Brewing for designing an edible six-pack ring. I hope they think up other uses for the new material to replace plastic and get rich. I do wish I could toss back a couple of their cool ones, but my doctor says I need to cut back on my sodium.

Ken Clanton, Lutz

Pasco panel bans 'Perks of Being a Wallflower' at one school | May 24

Solution short of a book ban

After the turmoil created when Pasco County school superintendent Kurt Browning summarily removed a novel from the eighth-grade summer reading in 2014, I was pleased to see that the administration is striving to resolve the current book challenge through duly established procedures.

One of them offers parents the option to request an alternative to any assignment they find objectionable for their child. Instead, the administration has chosen to interfere in the education of all students. Another guideline could have helped the review committee to retain the book: the "fact that sexual incidents or profanity are included should not automatically disqualify an item." Rather, a decision should be made "on the basis of whether it presents life in its true proportions, whether the circumstances are realistically dealt with, and whether the item is of literary value."

The Perks of Being a Wallflower is an award-winning novel that is read and beloved by countless adolescents precisely because, in the words of one high school student who fought against a school ban in Glen Ellyn, Ill., that was later reversed, it spreads awareness about "stuff that does actually happen in real life."

Svetlana Mintcheva, New York

The writer is director of programs for the National Coalition Against Censorship.

Charter school parents fear their zoned schools | May 23

Support your local school

Parents of charter schools that are under scrutiny may want to take a deep breath and get involved with their local public school. If you are a property owner, take a look at your TRIM notice and you will see that the School Board takes the largest portion of your taxes. The public schools are staffed by competent, caring teachers who live down the street from you and have kids on the same youth teams. Get involved in your community and support your local school. No need to panic.

Gary Curtis, North Redington Beach

Speed up waiting rooms | May 21, letter

Why the wait is so long

I'm not a doctor, but at age 72 and a diabetic, I spend enough time in an office every three months to qualify being able to address the writer's frustration. I'm in complete agreement that the waiting time is too long but instead of complaining about a doctor's scheduling practices, I asked my doctor why the times have been getting so much longer over the years.

Years ago, a doctor would see you, diagnose your ailment and prescribe a corrective procedure — visit completed and you're on your way. Nowadays, your doctor will ask a multitude of questions regarding your lifestyle, your habits and, in my case, previous visits and corrective steps I've taken to reduce my ailment. All this information must be logged in and filed for future use, and all this before an exam is even given. Now comes the shocking part.

All this is required of your doctors by the bureaucrats who run the Medicare and Medicaid programs in Washington — not for the benefit of getting you better care but for their job security at taxpayers' expense: keeping track of your doctor's time and method of procedure for reimbursement.

Blame the Affordable Care Act for your longer wait time, not your doctor. Then, after the paperwork is completed because the government considers this more important, your examination is performed.

The letter writer needs to take his frustration where it would help by writing to Congress, telling his representative to streamline the system.

John P. Doreika, Clearwater



The obituary pages

Thank vets while they're here

Since becoming a septuagenarian a few years ago, I am drawn to the obituary pages of my daily newspaper — specifically the ones with the American flag heading the notice. When the age of the deceased is in the high 80s or early 90s, there is usually one sentence in the notice mentioning military service. These lines amaze me.

For instance, George was assigned to the Eighth Air Force in England and flew 26 combat missions over France and Germany. Harold was part of the 29th Army Infantry Division that landed on Normandy on June 6, 1944. Michael was wounded and received a Purple Heart medal during the Battle of the Bulge in 1944. Helen was a nurse during the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Benjamin fought in the battles at Saipan and Okinawa in 1944 and 1945. Joseph was a Marine who saw action at Iwo Jima in 1945. Salvatore was a fighter pilot flying P-51 planes over France. Robert was a U.S. Navy radioman whose ship was hit by a Japanese Kamikaze plane during the Battle of Okinawa.

What great stories there must be in these brief notations. What of their comrades' fates? Was it all worth the sacrifice? Had they told their stories to loved ones? Soon all the World War II veterans will be gone and, with them, the tales of their service. Out of the 16 million who served during the war, an estimated 696,000 survive today. About 430 deaths occur daily.

If you get the opportunity to meet one of the older veterans, please shake their hand and give them a respectful thank-you. They were a special breed.

Ken Duddleston Sr., Lutz