BOSTON (CBS) — With just two days to go until Massachusetts voters get their chance to weigh in on the presidential race, Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders campaign surrogates held a mini-debate with WBZ political analyst Jon Keller.

Setti Warren, mayor of Newton, represented Clinton’s campaign, while former Massachusetts Democratic Party chair Phil Johnston represented Sanders’ campaign.

First, Jon asked which candidate would be better equipped to steer the country through another economic recession. Warren answered that Clinton had experience in investing in people, so they could afford to live in their communities, contribute, and have good paying jobs.

“Myself and twelve other mayors around the state of Massachusetts believe that Hillary Clinton understands what needs to be done in job creation, investment, and education,” said Warren.

Johnston said the core of Sanders’ message was that the country needs to invest in infrastructure to create new jobs and ensure that everyone has access to affordable healthcare.

“We need to focus on the economic inequities that have developed over the last several decades,” said Johnston. “Bernie Sanders is very focused on that.”

But which candidate has a better idea of how to get the money to make these things happen?

“I think that Senator Sanders has a very specific plan to raise significant revenue,” said Johnston. “Only the wealthy are going to be taxed in a serious way–and they should be. As he says, we bailed out Wall Street, now it’s time that Wall Street helped us.”

As for Clinton?

“What Secretary Clinton talks about is the transactions that go on on Wall Street, and making sure those are taxed, so we make the investments that matter on Main Street, in all of our cities and towns,” said Warren.

Jon asked the surrogates how their candidates would reduce the cost of healthcare. Johnston mentioned Sanders’ support of medicare.

“We need a simpler kind of system in this country, and I think the medicare for all plan makes enormous sense in terms of access and in terms of cost containment,” said Johnston.

Warren noted that Clinton wants to build off the Affordable Care Act.

“She still believes in the public option, and she believes that we need to work with states to impliment that,” said Warren. “That could help expand access to healthcare for folks. We want to bring down the costs, including deductibles.”

Watch the mini-debate here:

And view the extended segment here: