LOS ANGELES, Calif., Aug. 26, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- via PRWEB - mPulse Mobile, a mobile experience-management company focused on consumer health and wellness, recently closed on a $1.7 million investment round (pre-series A) lead by OCA Ventures. This funding will enable mPulse to continue its organic growth and expand the sales and client support teams to further support its leadership in delivering mobile population health and member engagement solutions to health and wellness companies. OCA Ventures led the round with participation by Jumpstart Ventures, Merrick Ventures and individual investors.

mPulse Mobile provides SaaS-based, HIPAA-compliant mobile messaging solutions that enable the secure delivery of health-related information. The mPulse contextual messaging platform improves message relevancy and ultimately engagement, driving significant ROI for the largest health plans and providers in the U.S. The mPulse solution has helped clients reduce readmissions and no show rates, and improve chronic care management, population health management, enrollment rates and medication adherence.

"The Affordable Care Act has made patient engagement a critical part of the healthcare ecosystem. This, along with very high penetration of ubiquitous mobile devices, has created a compelling opportunity for HIPAA-compliant patient engagement solutions using mobile communications," said Bob Saunders, General Partner, OCA Ventures. "mPulse is a strong fit to a key theme in our healthcare investment activity at OCA. We are pleased to play a role in advancing their market leadership in delivering high-value, consumer-oriented mHealth solutions to healthcare payers and providers"

"We're seeing great demand for mobile engagement solutions as health and wellness companies look to build more consumer-oriented strategies," said Chris Nicholson, CEO, mPulse Mobile. "With this round of funding and the recently announced acquisition of Archer's Healthcare Division, we further strengthen our ability to meet and deliver for the market."

About mPulse Mobile



mPulse Mobile offers healthcare organizations consumer-focused mobile messaging solutions that improve engagement and health outcomes. Delivering communications through multiple channels, mPulse capabilities include a secure, context-based, HIPAA-compliant platform. mPulse enables the leading health plans, providers and pharmaceutical companies to improve the health and wellbeing of consumers by making health care communications relevant to the modern lifestyle. For more information, please visit mpulsemobile.com.

This article was originally distributed on PRWeb. For the original version including any supplementary images or video, visit http://www.prweb.com/releases/2015/08/prweb12921329.htm

mPulse Mobile, Inc. Paige Mantel +1 650-450-0425