Rehabilitating horses became a passion for the Siggins family after they received three horses early last year.

"When we got the horses, they were not well taken care of. One of them was an old race horse that had been basically put to pasture," Jenny Siggins said. "We put a lot of effort into bringing these horses back to health and giving them a home."

The family unfortunately had to make the difficult decision a few weeks ago to find the horses a new home after Jenny's husband abruptly lost his job November 1st.

"It was in the best interest of the horses to go somewhere where they could be properly taken care of," Jenny said.

But Jenny says the horses never got that chance.

On the morning of Saturday, November 23rd, the Siggins realized the two horses they hadn't placed yet, had disappeared from the five acres of land behind their home near 143rd St. East and 31st St. South. The property is in Sedgwick County in the Andover area.

They're now pleading for help to find the horses and bring them home safely.

"It makes me sick. I am so worried that they have been taken to an auction, which most of those horses go to a slaughter," Jenny said. "I just have to assume that whoever has them took them, did it because they want horses but couldn't otherwise buy them and that they are safe and well taken care of."

The Siggins say at first they thought the horses might have strayed to a neighbor's yard. But they say there are no broken fences and the neighbors haven't seen the horses.

They say to solidify their belief the horses were stolen, the barn on their property was broken into. Several horse supplies were taken.

They filed a report with the Sedgwick County Sheriff's office which is investigating the case.

The two missing horses include an adult male ridge back Dunn. The Siggins say the horse has a distinctive silver dollar-size white spot on the back of the front right leg. Also missing is a one-year-old female which has a three-inch scar on the nose.

The Siggins say in the week before the theft, they did have two people over to see the horses. But they don't think either one of them has anything to do with why the horses are missing. Jenny says she was careful not to post pictures or any information online that identified to others where the property is.

They do say this is the third time their property has been hit by thieves in the eight years they lived in the home. None of the past thefts have involved horses or horse supplies.

Since the alleged theft, Jenny has spent hours on social media trying to get the word out. She says people online have been very supportive but so far there are no solid leads.

She's hoping that by sharing the story, the horses can be found soon.

"My goal is to bring them back home and find a way to keep them," Jenny said.