Here’s the problem. The city’s public hospital system has been a burden on the budget for de-cades and a headache for the last four mayors, each of whom sought a way to make it sustainable. Now the expansion of health care under the Affordable Care Act has made NYC Health + Hospitals even less competitive. Yet, it is a crucial safety net for the uninsured in New York and a massive employer with more than 40,000 people on the payroll, making changes almost impossible, politically.

What’s a mayor to do? If you are Bill de Blasio, you increase your annual contribution by hundreds of millions of dollars, promise not to impose drastic layoffs or downsizing, and announce a somewhat vague plan to transform the system, which has 11 hospitals and about 70 clinics.

Let’s begin with the feeling of deja vu all over again. David Dinkins promised reforms to fix a “maze” of problems. Nevertheless, Rudy Giuliani confronted red ink and poor care. He failed at privatizing the system, so he appointed a CEO who pledged to remake it to “keep it competitive.” But the Bloomberg administration was forced to provide more money to stabilize the finances. It obviously did not succeed.

Now the long-term trends in health care and the Affordable Care Act are making matters worse. The rise of outpatient centers and the emphasis on shorter hospital stays has reduced demand for beds throughout the city. The nonprofit hospitals, almost all of whom have better reputations than Health + Hospitals facilities, have targeted the Medicaid patients they once shunned to fill those beds.

Given new choices, those patients are increasingly choosing nonprofits rather than public hospitals. Even though Medicaid covers more people because of the Affordable Care Act, H+H has seen Medicaid managed-care patient stays decline while its rivals have seen increases.

Meanwhile, H+H’s insurance subsidiary is losing market shares among insurers targeting Medicaid recipients, while it has been able to attract only about 75,000 other customers. Approximately $1 billion in safety-net support payments will disappear over the next several years—a 36% drop—because the number of uninsured has declined.

De Blasio’s response follows the traditional playbook: Put in more money and promise a plan to make H+H better. His predecessors failed with that approach, and there is no reason to believe he will fare any better.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments