A case study in the New England Journal of Medicine shows the results of the world’s first thought-controlled bionic leg–a prosthetic leg that moves when the wearer thinks about it moving. The U.S. Army’s Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center funded the study, which took place at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, to the tune of an $8 million grant.

“This new bionic leg features incredibly intelligent engineering,” Levi Hargrove, lead scientist of this research at the RIC, in a press release. “It learns and performs activities unprecedented for any leg amputee, including seamless transitions between sitting, walking, ascending and descending stairs and ramps and repositioning the leg while seated.”

Only thought-controlled bionic arms were available until now.

According to a release:

The case study focuses on RIC research subject Zac Vawter, a lower-limb amputee who underwent targeted muscle reinnervation surgery — a procedure developed at RIC and Northwestern University — in 2009 to redirect nerves from damaged muscle in his amputated limb to healthy hamstring muscle above his knee. When the redirected nerves instruct the muscles to contract, sensors on the patient’s leg detect tiny electrical signals from the muscles. A specially-designed computer program analyzes these signals and data from sensors in the robotic leg. It instantaneously decodes the type of movement the patient is trying to perform and then sends those commands to the robotic leg. Using muscle signals, instead of robotic sensors, makes the system safer and more intuitive.

“The bionic leg is a big improvement compared to my regular prosthetic leg,” Vawter said in the release. “The bionic leg responds quickly and more appropriately, allowing me to interact with my environment in a way that is similar to how I moved before my amputation. For the first time since my injury, the bionic leg allows me to seamlessly walk up and down stairs and even reposition the prosthetic by thinking about the movement I want to perform. This is a huge milestone for me and for all leg amputees.”