A robot named Bibli is seen at the Longmont Library on Monday. The robot was built in a collaboration between the Longmont Public Library and ROBAUTO, a robotics engineering firm. Bibli was created to help children on the Autism spectrum practice their social skills and interact with the library. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Editor's note: This is a corrected version of of the original article, which had the wrong name of the library representative being quoted.

The Longmont Public Library's newest employee is, admittedly, a little strange looking, even for a robot.

It has large googly eyes, unruly hair made of foam, and all the wires, plugs and circuits are hidden by a colorful knit sweater. But Bibli, powered by a roomba and a remote laptop, has a higher purpose than just looking good— it's meant to communicate with children on the autism spectrum.

The idea came from the minds of Jalali Hartman, founder of the Longmont startup ROBAUTO (a company that works to accelerate robotics innovation in healthcare and education) and Katherine Weadley, librarian at the Longmont Public Library. Hartman's company was working to build low-cost robots and Weadley's was interested in finding a way to make the library experience better for children on the autism spectrum.

"Our goals were the same," Weadley said of Hartman. "We were surprised by each other. He said, 'Let's build a robot,' and I said, 'yes. why not.'"

The result was BiBli, a robot that stands a little under four feet and has a camera and screen to view and communicate with anyone it encounters. Anyone can control the robot from a remote laptop, writing messages that would appear on the screen and interacting with people from a distance.

Advertisement

"We found that some people with social anxiety or issues with communication and interaction seemed to be more open to communicating through a robot," Hartman said. "There is no body language and they are very consistent. We were surprised to find that there really isn't a low-cost social robot available on the market so we started to design one."

The reason for the robot is to make kids who may not be comfortable interacting in a face-to-face manner (like those with anxiety or who are on the autism spectrum) feel more comfortable and more willing to interact in certain situations, using the robot as a buffer of sorts.

"The kids feel safe with speaking to a robot and the people operating the robot as well are free to interact," Weadley said.

Weadley refers to the robot as "a step between a human and a non-human."

To fund the design and construction, Weadley and Hartman received a grant from the Friends of the Longmont Library as well as money from Oskar Blues' C'AND aid Foundation

As far as the design goes, Hartman and his team worked with kids on the spectrum to figure out exactly what they needed.

"It was a team of neurological atypical kids," Weadley said. "It was made for people on the spectrum by people on the spectrum."

BiBli's debut was at Denver Comic Con a few weekends ago, and it went well.

"The kids enjoy using it to interact and people are truly engaging with BiBli," Hartman said.

Right now BiBli is at the Longmont Library, but is waiting on some kinks that need to be fixed before it can become operational. Weadley said she plans to bring it out "on special occasions."

Hartman said his company is working on more prototypes, and hopes to make BiBli commercially available by the fall.

Weadley said that innovations like BiBli are a major development for people she refers to as the "hidden population," like children on the autism spectrum that may not look different outright but have different needs and experiences.

She said that work like this, as well as the partnership with a start up is a "model" Longmont Library is happy to create.

"We want to be a model for other libraries by creating unusual partnerships and really expanding our services for kids on the autism spectrum," she said. " Everybody is on board and we want to be a welcoming and engaging library for kids on the spectrum."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones