In between the messages about Israeli policy and Pakistan's nuclear weaponry, Hillary Clinton's inbox contained plenty of gushing emails that the former secretary of state, her aides and her acquaintances freely tossed about.

The latest trove of Clinton's emails released by the State Department Monday night show the unabashed love fest, with the affection often flowing both ways during her time at Foggy Bottom. A simple search on State's website reveals the words "thank you" came up often in the emails.

Story Continued Below

Here are 11 of the most doting messages:

New Year's wishes

Clinton wrote an email to Anne-Marie Slaughter, the State Department's director of policy planning, on Jan. 1, 2010, thanking her for two recent memos and for her "wonderful year of work, creativity, collaboration and progress."

"I know the start for all of us was shaky, but we have hit our stride and you are such a valuable member of the team, a generator of ideas, a conductor of talent and even a necessary nudge from time to time. Thank you for making this journey w me," she wrote.

Slaughter responded in kind, thanking Clinton for "such a lovely note."

"Life seems very sweet indeed this New Year's Day, and all the more so with the privilege of doing meaningful and important work with a great team of people and a leader whom I am proud to serve," she wrote. "It has been quite a journey indeed, one thathas been hard at times, but immensely rewarding. Happy New Year, and here's to a great 2010."

The Oscars and politics

On March 8, 2010, after Kathryn Bigelow became the first woman to take home the Academy Award for Best Director for her film "The Hurt Locker," Sidney Blumenthal opined that "it was Hollywood's re-voting of the 2008 primaries."

Bigelow prevailed in the category over ex-husband James Cameron, who directed the box-office behemoth "Avatar," a fact that Blumenthal described as "not giving it to the 'Avatar,' but to the tough woman."

Praise from Gordon Brown

"Bravo! Brava! Issue your statement!" Blumenthal wrote in a February 2010 email congratulating the secretary of state on her role helping reach an agreement in Northern Ireland to devolve powers from the British parliament.

"I will be doing a press event at 8:30. Do you know if Gordon mentioned me? Can you find out?" Clinton asked, referring to then-Prime Minister Gordon Brown. Blumenthal responded that ambassadors at the event would praise her role.

State aide Jake Sullivan followed up with an update on what the British prime minister said.

"Great ideas (no surprise)"

An email forwarded by aide Cheryl Mills to Clinton in January 2010 contained ideas from education activist David Domenici, Mills' domestic partner, on how to rebuild infrastructure in Haiti following the devastating earthquake that struck the island the previous week.

"Read all the way down (2 emails)," Mills wrote in her message.

Clinton's response: "Great ideas (no surprise). Let's work toward solid proposal maybe to Red Cross and Clinton Foundation since they have unencumbered $."

"My favorite secretary of state"

In an August 2010 email, Kris Durmer, general counsel for the General Services Administration, wrote Mills to convey his congratulations "to my favorite Secretary of State for the re-launch of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations."

"Good stuff! Would love to swing by to say 'hello' to you all if you ever have a moment. Let me know," Durmer wrote in the message, which Mills forwarded to Clinton.

"Pls add to dropby list," Clinton instructed an assistant.

Diane Reynolds'/Chelsea's "favorite secretary"

In an email chain from February 2010, Chelsea Clinton (emailing under her Diane Reynolds pseudonym), prefaced a complaint about the State Department's website with the salutation, "to my favorite secretary of state."

Clinton forwarded the email on to aide Philippe Reines, cc'ing Huma Abedin.

"Hillary would approve ... not too many swear words"

Film executive Harvey Weinstein recommended one of his studio's upcoming films to the secretary in an August 2010 email to State official Capricia Marshall.

"I have such fond memories of you guys watching SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE. I made another movie you might like about the ascendancy of King George after Edward abdicated, it's called KINGS SPEECH," Weinstein wrote, adding that "Hillary would approve because it's PG-13 with not too many swear words."

The film went on to earn an R rating in the United States, though, in large part thanks to a scene featuring a cascade of profanity from the main character as he tried to work through his stammering. Like the aforementioned "Shakespeare in Love," the Colin Firth vehicle would go on to win four Oscars the next year, including Best Picture.

"I love you. I respect you. I miss you."

Ad guru Roy Spence showered the secretary with praise for her work at the State Department in an April 2010 email. Spence, who has advised Clinton's 2008 campaign and is playing a role in her current one, has been a longtime family friend. Spence also created the "Don't Mess with Texas" slogan as well as Southwest Airlines' "You are now free to move about the country."

Writing Clinton directly, Spence remarked upon the "raw respect" she has earned and the "love and respect you give freely to all whom love life and liberty and opportunity for all."

"The struggle for an Iran that is more concerned about its people than false power. The relentless quest to stabilize the un-stable. The never give up journey to inspire and empower women and young girls to have a seat at the table of full opportunity. The pursuit for opening doors of happiness for those who struggle with the unimaginable. The steady. The Steadfast. The unwavering commitment to the dream — not the hope — but the dream of a better USA and world for all. The tough and uncompromising 'pretend leaders' whom you have [to] negotiate with. The opinion rich and caring poor arrogance of the mean spirited. The stuff that is on the news but is not really the real news," Spence added.

"Please please please * note there are *three pleases"

Longtime Clinton family friend Lanny Davis wrote Clinton to ask her if she would speak to a reporter about their working relationship for an article in which he anticipated that "cheap shots" would be taken at him. Or, if she could not speak to the journalist herself, he added, perhaps Reines or Mills could issue a statement on her behalf.

"Please please please * note there are *three pleases*: *Do not be bashful or concerned about saying no to my request," Davis entreated. "As you can see, I have a number of people who have talked to the reporter or, in the case of President Clinton and President Bush, who may be giving written statements. I was not even going to ask you for that reason since I didn*t want you to feel badly if you have to say no."

"The honest to goodness truth is ... aside from Carolyn, my four children, and my immediate family," Davis gushed, "I consider you to be the best friend and the best person I have met in my long life. You know that from the dedication and appreciation of you I have always felt and expressed to you over four decades. So that is why your comments would mean a lot to me, even if just a written statement."

Clinton passed along the email to Mills and to Reines, whose further guidance is redacted.

A longtime staffer's departure

David Helfenbein, who had worked for Clinton in various capacities since he was a teenager, wrote Clinton an email of more than 600 words to express his gratitude for everything she had meant to him over the preceding decade. Helfenbein, who founded "Kids 4 Hillary" in 2003, worked as a volunteer, an intern and a staffer on Clinton's Senate campaigns before working for her at Foggy Bottom.

Upon his departure from the Obama administration in June 2010, Helfenbein took care to emphasize his appreciation and that his leaving did not mean that he was leaving "you or your team."

"Sometimes people ask me why I have been dedicated to working for you for so many years. It is not for fame or glory. The truth is, I have worked for you because I have always believed in you," Helfenbein wrote. "You are one of a kind — there is no other one like you, and there never will be. I truly believe that the world needs you in whatever capacity that you are in. And more than anything, I am most appreciative and thankful for all that you have offered me: Not only the mentorship and guidance but the continuous opportunities to learn. On my own path of public service, I can truly say that I was able to learn time and time again from the very best. Parting from your team is thus not an easy task for me, especially leaving Philippe's direct team, where I really enjoy what I am doing.

"But I also feel that I want to take another next step forward/a different one in my own life. And I am hopeful that this is not a permanent goodbye in any way. I hope that you and I can remain in touch via email, and I promise not to email too often, as I know how busy you are. But I must reiterate one comment that I made: I have worked for you for so long for a reason: Not for my resume. Not for myself, But because of you. I am confident enough to say that I know you well enough to tell others that I have worked for the most brilliant mind and strongest leader I will ever see in my lifetime. And I am incredibly proud of that," he wrote.

"Let's hear it for the nuns"

Maryland Sen. Barbara Mikulski exalted in the House's passage of the Affordable Care Act in March 2010, praising the work of Roman Catholic nuns in pushing it across the finish line.

"Whew once again u are in the thick of thing--- but didn't it make your heart feel good about the passage of. Health.Care----and. The. Nuns pushed it over the finish line----as usual in the fcore front of. Social. Justice and a daringwillingness. To break with the. Boys if you need a tonic. Go to the. Nuns exhibit @ the. Smithsonian--- Ripley.Center. Gives the 250 year history of. Nuns in. Usa. And their role in shaping. Our country and producing 1000s ofwomen leaders with names like. Pelosi. Mikulski. Ferrar0. Sebilius.takes less than a hour. You are doing great," the senator wrote.

"Let's hear it for the nuns — I knew when they came out, the die was cast and Bart would get his knuckles rapped," Clinton wrote, referring to Michigan Democrat Bart Stupak's opposition to the bill unless it did not prohibit the federal funding of abortion. Stupak and President Barack Obama came to an agreement earlier in the month in which the president promised to sign an executive order that would ban the funding of abortions through the law now popularly known as Obamacare.

"Now, let's wrap this up in the Senate and go drink something unhealthy!" Clinton declared. "All your AIPAC friends told me you're doing well so take care and keep going — w the wind at you back and my fervent cheers — Hillary."