Marcelo Fernandez talks about his paintings at his new studio/gallery, Kay Carol Gallery & Priscila Working Studio, in downtown Longmont on . ( Quentin Young / Longmont Times-Call )

Arts activity in downtown Longmont is snowballing.

One new studio/gallery opened recently near Third and Main Streets and another is due to open Friday less than a block away. This is in addition to a third new gallery, Gallery aHa, which opened in December in the same area.

The owners of the venues say part of the reason they opened these studio/galleries is to be part of the growing activity in Longmont's downtown arts district.

"We started to pick up on the excitement of people on Main Street," John Taft, a landscape painter, said.

Taft recently opened John Taft Studio on the third floor of 525 Third Avenue, which has a Main Street entrance. He had outgrown his garage studio, and the new space offered him great natural light from a skylight as well as more room. It also put him in the heart of the Longmont arts scene. He talked with the owners of downtown's Muse Gallery, Rabid Rabits Galeria and Gallery aHa and decided he also wanted a central location. It gives him a "connection to the community," he said.

The space is mostly a studio where Taft can paint. But he offers regular public viewing hours -- 4-7 p.m. every Friday -- and expanded hours during Second Fridays, ArtWalk and other special events. He also welcomes appointments.

"It's like being on studio tour all year," he said.

Marcelo Fernandez, who until recently did marketing for the Longmont Downtown Development Authority, is opening Kay Carol Gallery & Priscila Working Art Studio at 364 Main St. The space is already operating as a studio, but a grand opening is planned for 6-9 p.m. Friday, Feb. 14.

The space features resident artists who create and show their work there. It's also meant to be a place where creative people of all sorts can come and feel comfortable about making and enjoying art.

John Taft works on a landscape Friday in his new studio/gallery at 525 Third Ave. in downtown Longmont. (Quentin Young/Times-Call / Times-Call)

"Basically we want to be a creative art house," Fernandez said.

The studio includes a music practice room, and Fernandez even DJs an online radio program from the studio.

Sarajane Helm, of Creative Connections and one of the resident artists at Kay Carol, said she sees the studio as helping to bring local creative people together.

"We want to be the bridge," she said.

Christina Cappelletti, of Soul Studio Arts and also a resident artist at Kay Carol, agreed.

"We see ourselves as a community hub," she said, adding that community members can come in and learn how to express their creativity — particularly those people who might be afraid of art.

"This is a perfect spot for it," she said. "We're all here to help each other.

Cappelletti moved to Longmont two years ago after living in Ohio and California, and she found Longmont to have an unexpectedly active arts scene.

"I was really surprised by the art community here," she said. "It is a thriving, outside-the-box, innovative art community."

The studio plans to display the work of a different featured artist every month. The first featured artist is Longmont photographer Tim Ellis.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Quentin Young at 303-684-5319 or qyoung@times-call.com