Buy Photo The Indian River Lagoon, pictured in 2015, has lost nearly 47,000 acres of seagrass in the past several years, according to Katie Tripp, director of science and conservation for Save the Manatee group. Drift algae can feed off nutrients from fertilizer runoff, septic tanks and other sources, clogging out seagrass, a vital component to the ecosystem. (Photo: CRAIG RUBADOUX/FLORIDA TODAY)Buy Photo

‘The river can come back’

Flush twice: It’s a long way to the river.

The disgusting condition of the Indian River didn’t happen overnight. And it will not be corrected overnight either. It will take a prolonged effort by everyone to curb our use of natural resources. If we do little to nothing, then I fear the river, not unlike many other bodies of water around the world and everything in it, will slowly die off — leaving us nothing but a smelly ugly mess. The river can come back, but it will take time. And the concerted effort by everyone to curb their use of resources in a prolonged, responsible manner.

Peter Remyn, Indian Harbour Beach

GOP pays for the programs

A citizen recently shared ideas of a government that represents people who care about people that has made America great. I can only infer from the writing that the Democrat party is the one that cares about people, as evidenced by actions taken over the past decades (labor unions, public education, the WPA, public colleges, public health nurses, highway system, disease eradication, environmental statutes, Social Security Act, Affordable Care Act (ACA), space program and national parks).

But before that people-caring halo gets too heavy, what the Republicans propose is that it is largely they who have produced the federal revenue to pay for all of those programs, who are doing so now, and who will continue to do so. The very top income-earners — 5 percent or less — have always contributed more than 50 percent of federal income, and most of those payers are Republicans. They don’t want to spend any more; central government is getting far too expensive. Republicans propose to reduce spending substantially because we are risking the financial downfall of the entire Great Experiment for us and our progeny.

It’s pretty hard to practice government caring without money.

Francis Clifford, Suntree

‘Angels do walk among us’

On my way home from work on I-95 north March 16, I heard a disturbing sound. I’d just hit something on the road, and suspected my tire had a blowout.

I was shaking. I was in the center lane and knew I’d better merge into the right lane onto a safe patch off the road to park my car – stat. I called my husband, and he contacted AAA for me. While I was on the phone with them, a man came up and offered to change the tire.

Brad, of Brad’s Auto Service in Palm Bay, went about his work as cars whizzed by just about 2 feet away. His presence was comforting. Within five to 10 minutes, my temporary tire was in place, and he suggested I go and get it replaced as soon as possible. I did.

Brad’s act of kindness reinforces my belief that angels do walk among us. Thank you, Brad, for your help.

Judy Berman, Viera

DST isn’t saving anything

Every six months we are advised to either “spring forward” one hour or “fall back” one hour. It is called daylight saving time. I see no reason or benefit to make this change. It is an inconvenience that your body clock has to adjust to. Most people I have talked to like the evening daylight with spring forward and prefer to leave it that way. They do not like the fall back in six months.

I am not aware of any reason to make this change. If you agree, contact your local Florida representative and express your concerns. If we can get enough people behind this, maybe we can get it changed. It is a Florida issue. Federal law allows states to opt out if desired.

Thomas Dillon, Jr., Indian Harbour Beach

Replace legislators to move ahead

I applaud the letter writer who stated all our problems with cyber-hacking utilities, Korea etc. The one flaw in my opinion is the “setting aside” of global warming. Never in 74 years have I seen such horrible destruction caused by worsening storms etc.

Thing is, we actually must address all of these concerns at the same time. We now operate on a global level and cannot afford to single out some battles and not others. They all can have radical effects on our way of life.

Also, he left out the most pressing and serious problem we face: that none of the candidates running for our highest office come even close to addressing these threats. Then, if one is elected, the balky Senate now refusing to confirm a needed justice just because, will continue to balk, as well as the now-infamous House. Likely this will happen if either Trump or Hillary are elected. Which means nothing will get done for another four years.

I am totally nonpartisan in this letter but think on that. Until we replace those members, we might as well kiss it all goodbye.

Sharon Adams, Titusville

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1pyz7om