Topics: 1960, Ann Coulter, Chris McDaniel, E.J. Dionne, Editor's Picks, George W. Bush, John F. Kennedy, lawrence o'donnell, MSNBC, Nixon good loser, Richard Nixon, Thad Cochran, News, Politics News

Last week, for one brief moment, Ann Coulter made a lick of sense, which is surely one of the signs of the apocalypse. She advised Mississippi Tea Party challenger Chris McDaniel and his supporters to give up their battle to overturn his runoff loss to incumbent Sen. Thad Cochran, because it would only sour his future prospects. “Hoping for yet a third primary vote, McDaniel’s crew is going to prevent him from having any political career, ever again,” she wrote, in a rare-as-hens-teeth moment of clarity and common sense.

Of course, as Brad Friedman pointed out, Coulter has her own personal history of possible fraudulent voting in two states, which can go a long ways toward explaining her distaste for looking into alleged voter fraud, which was the real main thrust of her argument. Even candidates who lose by fraud lose again by fighting, Coulter explained, but they triumph when they walk away. It’s a plausible argument in theory, perhaps. But given how rare actual voter fraud is, it’s more just-so story than theory.

Coulter predictably cited two elections Republicans lost because non-white voters turned out in unexpectedly high numbers — John Thune’s loss to Sen. Tim Johnson in South Dakota in 2002, and Bob Dornan’s loss of California’s 46th Congressional District to Loretta Sanchez in 1996. Ignored in her analysis were the actual demographics and other fundamentals in the two cases — strongly trending demographics that spelled doom for Dornan, while President Bush at the top of the ticket in 2004 gave Thune a significant boost in his solid red state.

But Coulter also cited Richard Nixon’s loss of the presidential election in 1960 as yet another stolen election — an equally unfounded right-wing myth that has remarkably been accepted by the mainstream for decades now. Commenting on Coulter’s column on July 10 on “The Last Word With Lawrence O’Donnell” (video/transcript), liberal columnist E.J. Dionne explicitly echoed Coulter’s Nixon-was-robbed claim, and O’Donnell himself at least tacitly agreed:

DIONNE: Her example number one was good old Richard Nixon. O’DONNELL: Yes. DIONNE: Who could have complained about stolen votes in Illinois and Texas. It`s still not clear to me he would have won, but — he had a case to make and he didn’t make it. And — O’DONNELL: And eight years later became president. DIONNE: Correct. O’DONNELL: Yes.

Of course, the story is preposterous. Richard Nixon, the high-minded gracious loser? Even Nixon’s mother wouldn’t believe that one.Yet, somehow it’s become part of the nation’s political lore — Richard Nixon’s most successful, most enduring lie.

The example of Nixon’s high-mindedness was prominently floated during the 2000 Florida election contest, as a way of slamming Al Gore, but it was all a myth, according to David Greenberg, an historian finishing his dissertation, which later became the book, “Nixon’s Shadow: The History Of An Image.” On Nov. 10, 2000, he wrote an op-ed for the LA Times, “It’s a Myth That Nixon Acquiesced in 1960,” in which he wrote:

It’s certainly true that Nixon claimed he spurned advice from President Eisenhower to dispute the election results in order to spare the country a constitutional crisis. (He was saving that for 1973.) And, indeed, Nixon’s version of events now borders on accepted fact. But it’s a myth and a false precedent…. [W]hile Nixon publicly pooh-poohed a challenge, his allies aggressively pursued one. Much of this history has, incredibly, been forgotten as biographers such as Stephen E. Ambrose have propounded Nixon’s line. But a glance at the 1960 newspapers shows that GOP leaders tried to undo the results. They knew it was a longshot, but the effort continued right up until the electoral college certified Kennedy’s win on Dec. 19.

Nixon himself struck a hands-off pose, but one word from him, and it’s hard to see how any challenges would have continued. It was typical Tricky Dick all the way: cover-up and conspiracy seamlessly combined.

I was blogging about the Florida election battle at the Los Angeles Indymedia site, and interviewed Greenberg one week later. He discussed the reasons why such myths persist, who was involved in pushing the recounts, and how they came up short, among other topics. At one point, I asked about Nixon’s role in casting himself as hero:

Question: You write that Eisenhower quickly soured on the idea [of contesting the election], but that Nixon claimed that he was the one advocating restraint. Tell us more about this. Greenberg: There have been a number of people who’ve written about this, but the one I’ve relied on for the Eisenhower role is Ralph de Toledano, a conservative journalist who wrote for Newsweek and then for National Review. He wrote a biography of Nixon, “One Man Alone,” which he updated in 1969. In the updated version he said that Eisenhower’s about-face wasn’t widely known until after his death. Apparently Attorney General Bill Rogers also didn’t want the challenge to go forward. So with Eisenhower and Rogers against it was difficult for Nixon to go ahead in public. Toledano later said that it was “The first time I ever caught Nixon in a lie.”

While most of the attention focused on Illinois (more on that below), some of the challenges seemed particularly far-fetched:

Question: You mentioned Pennsylvania was on their list, even though Kennedy’s margin was better than 130,000 votes. Any idea why they included it? Greenberg: Senator Henry Jackson accused the Republicans of trying to begin a fishing expedition. It seems that they were trying to generate uncertainty and concern, and maybe if they’d find some improprieties in a state like Pennsylvania, it would just strengthen their case that Kennedy was not legitimate as President. That’s the only inference I can draw in this case.

I also asked how long the challenges lasted:

Greenberg: Well into December and certainly up until the time that the Electoral College met. New Jersey [margin 22,000+ votes] stopped its recount on December 1 or 2. Hawaii didn’t name its electors until after the Electoral College met on the 19th of December. In other words, in Hawaii’s case, the recount Extended past the date the Electoral College met. Ironically, Hawaii went the opposite way–from Nixon to Kennedy. Pierre Salinger, who was Kennedy’s press secretary, is quoted in the New York Times on December 30, pointing out that Republicans asked for all these recounts and didn’t win anything as a result, while the Democrats asked for just one recount and won it.

And I asked Greenberg about the major players involved in the recount effort.

Greenberg: [T]here was Thurston Morton, chair of the RNC (Republican National Committee) and Senator from Kentucky. There was Meade Alcorn, lawyer for the RNC. Then there were three Nixon campaign advisors, Robert H. Finch, Leonard W. Hall and Fred Scribner…. Finch and Hall were Nixon intimates. Finch was quite close with Nixon and served in his cabinet when Nixon was President. Hall had been RNC Chairman. Scribner was another campaign aide. They were all involved in the campaign and they quickly got involved in the recount efforts. That’s the main reason to surmise that Nixon was involved too. And of course Finch and others, including Nixon, told the public that Nixon was not involved. It’s very hard to say what level of involvement Nixon had. It seems to me quite plausible that Nixon was remotely, or perhaps tacitly involved, even if he wasn’t directing the effort. But that’s impossible to determine at this point.

Plausible deniability. What more could a man like Nixon possibly want as his default, fall-back position? In “Nixon’s Shadow,” Greenberg would write:

He publicly distanced himself from the challenges, knowing, as he later wrote, that “charges of ‘sore loser’ would follow me through history and remove any possibility of a further political career.” Meanwhile, his aides Bob Finch and Len Hall, along with Republican National Committee chairman Thruston Morton and General Counsel Meade Alcorn, waged battle. They filed lawsuits, secured recounts, had the government empanel grand juries, formed a “Nixon Recount Committee” that raised at least $100,00, and stoked the fire with inflammatory comments to the press…. After stringing out the election through mid-December, however, they lost two critical court cases and had to close up shop.

Despite the failure to establish Kennedy’s victory as illegitimate, Nixon nursed a grudge. At a Christmas party that he and Pat threw, the outgoing vice president was heard to greet guests with, “We won, but they stole it from us.” … Nixon’s belief that Kennedy won the office illegally may also have emboldened him to view the Watergate tactics he sanctioned before the 1972 election as legitimate.