ATLANTA, Feb. 18, 2016 /PRNewswire/ --

WHO: Equifax Workforce Solutions, a leader in human resource, analytics and verification services



WHAT: Will present two educational webinars, "Understanding the New Federal Guidance on Internal I-9 Audits" and "The Affordable Care Act Employer Mandate in 2016: What's Next for Employers?" to help employers understand evolving HR legislative requirements



WHEN: "Understanding the New Federal Guidance on Internal I-9 Audits," is scheduled for Tuesday, Feb. 23, 2016 at 1:00 p.m. EST (12:00 p.m. CST / 11:00 a.m. MST / 10:00 a.m. PST).





"The Affordable Care Act Employer Mandate in 2016: What's Next for Employers?" is set for Thursday, Feb. 25, 2016 at 1:30 p.m. EST (12:30 p.m. CST / 11:30 a.m. MST / 10:30 a.m. PST).



WHERE: Details and registration for "Understanding the New Federal Guidance on Internal I-9 Audits" can be accessed here: http://workforce.equifax.com/auditregistration?source=news.





To learn more and register for "The Affordable Care Act Employer Mandate in 2016: What's Next for Employers?" please visit: http://www.bna.com/affordable-care-act-m57982066996.

DETAILS:

New updates and guidance issued by the federal government will impact HR operations throughout 2016. Accounting for all of these updates can be challenging and having the right resources in place, starting with an understanding of each change, is key. In its upcoming webinars, Equifax Workforce Solutions offers attendees the opportunity to become familiar with updates to the Form I-9 internal audit process and the Affordable Care Act (ACA) Employer Mandate.

Understanding the New Federal Guidance on Internal I-9 Audits

During this session, Chad Whittenberg, senior director of Product Management at Equifax Workforce Solutions, will join Montserrat Miller, partner at Arnall Golden Gregory LLP, to provide background on recently issued federal guidance for employers planning to conduct an internal audit of Forms I-9 on file at their companies. Miller will share best practices for avoiding potential pitfalls during the audit while Whittenberg will discuss tools that both aid in automating the audit process and assist with identifying and prioritizing any issues that may need remediation. In addition, attendees will hear about proposed changes to the Form I-9 and the potential implications for employers.

The Affordable Care Act Employer Mandate in 2016: What's Next for Employers?

In this timely session hosted by Bloomberg BNA, Kristin Lewis, senior director of ACA Product Management for Equifax Workforce Solutions, and Tom Dowling, partner, Employee Benefits Group, Stinson Leonard Street, will provide an overview of the lessons employers learned during the first year since the ACA Employer Mandate went into effect. Lewis and Dowling will share insights that organizations can apply moving forward and shed light on what's to come. Having helped employers of all sizes with healthcare reform implementation and compliance, Lewis and Dowling will offer attendees a closer look at the impact of the ACA on organizations and help them identify how they can avoid compliance pitfalls and manage ACA requirements.

Attendees: Business leaders, and HR and compliance professionals interested in learning more about the latest HR legislative updates and the ways Equifax Workforce Solutions can support their organization are encouraged to attend these educational presentations.

These sessions are part of a series of educational webinars presented by Equifax Workforce Solutions.

About Equifax

Equifax is a global leader in consumer, commercial and workforce information solutions that provide businesses of all sizes and consumers with insight and information they can trust. Equifax organizes and assimilates data on more than 600 million consumers and 81 million businesses worldwide. The company's significant investments in differentiated data, its expertise in advanced analytics to explore and develop new multi-source data solutions, and its leading-edge proprietary technology enable it to create and deliver unparalleled customized insights that enrich both the performance of businesses and the lives of consumers. Equifax Workforce Solutions, an Equifax business unit, is a leading provider of human resource, data, analytics and verification services.

Headquartered in Atlanta, Equifax operates or has investments in 19 countries and is a member of Standard & Poor's (S&P) 500® Index. Its common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) under the symbol EFX. In 2015, Forbes named Equifax one of the World's 100 Most Innovative companies; Bloomberg BusinessWeek nominated it as one of its Top 50 companies; its CIO was named one of the top 100 by CIO magazine; the company ranked 16th in the Fintech 100 list; and it was recognized as a top 20 company to work for by the Atlanta Journal-Constitution and was named a 2015 InformationWeek Elite 100 Winner. For more information, please visit www.equifax.com/business or www.equifax.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20060224/CLF037LOGO

SOURCE Equifax Inc.