HBO comic John Oliver attacked critics of Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion Sunday night, with help from Ohio Gov. John Kasich.

In the middle of a 14-minute screed against governors who have rejected Obamacare expansion, “Last Week Tonight with John Oliver” featured a clip of pro-expansion Kasich talking with CNN host Jake Tapper in May.

“I don’t support Obamacare, I want to repeal it, but I did expand Medicaid because I was able to bring Ohio money back home to treat the mentally ill, the drug-addicted, and to help the working poor get health care,” Kasich said.

“Because you oppose Obamacare doesn’t mean when you have an opportunity to bring these $14 billion of Ohio money back to Ohio — that’s not Obamacare, that’s Medicaid,” Kasich continued.

“Good for him! Good for him,” Oliver said, after describing Kasich and three other Obamacare expansion supporters as “fiscally conservative Republican governors” and “firm opponents of Obamacare.”

Shared by Time, The Washington Post, New York Magazine, The Week, Rolling Stone and a bevy of left-wing blogs, the YouTube video of Oliver’s “Medicaid Gap” segment had 1.8 million views within four days.

Contrary to what Kasich said in the clip promoted by Oliver, Obamacare expansion is paid for with new federal spending. Kasich’s Obamacare expansion is not paid for with “$14 billion of Ohio money.”

The Congressional Research Service has confirmed Obamacare expansion is paid for with money taken from federal taxpayers across the country, not some stockpile of state money governors can opt to “bring home.”

The Congressional Budget Office has repeatedly clarified Obamacare costs federal taxpayers more with every state that implements the law’s Medicaid expansion; there is no predefined pot of funding being divvied up.

None of this stopped Oliver and his writers from using presidential candidate and “fiscally conservative Republican governor” Kasich’s refuted rhetoric against Obamacare expansion opponents.

“The frequent argument for states refusing the expansion is that they couldn’t bear the increased costs,” Oliver said when introducing the Kasich clip Sunday night.

Kasich’s decision to put working-age adults with no kids and no disabilities on Medicaid under Obamacare has already cost federal taxpayers more than $5 billion. Ohio taxpayers will be on the hook for at least $20 million per month starting in 2017.

The governor’s complete May interview with Tapper is available on CNN’s website, posted under the headline, “Kasich says he’s not an Obamacare hypocrite.”

Tapper’s reaction, seen in the clip used for the “Last Week Tonight” segment, reflected his shock at Kasich insisting Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion is separate from Obamacare.

Since first telling state lawmakers Obamacare expansion would be paid for with “Ohioans’ federal tax dollars” in 2013, the Kasich administration has failed to respond to questions about the claim.

Before popping up Sunday on HBO, Kasich’s “$14 billion in Ohio money” talking point hadn’t appeared in the press for months. Kasich seems to have stopped repeating the line when asked about Obamacare on the campaign trail.

Stephen Colbert, who worked with Oliver on “The Daily Show” on Comedy Central, will interview Kasich later this week; Kasich is scheduled for an appearance with Colbert on CBS’s “The Late Show” Friday night.