Let me be the first liberal to say that Donald Trump isn't as bad as all that. He's much better on reproductive rights than any other Republican, saying he'd leave the law settled and that he supports most of Planned Parenthood's mission; he vociferously puts down the deeply flawed Iraq War; he says he'd try to get Israel and the Palestinians to the table to talk; and finally, he's standing his lone ground on gender identity and restrooms.

Yes, Trump may up-end our foreign policy, but Texas Sen. Ted Cruz would alienate our allies and fragile diplomatic deals by sundown on Jan. 20, 2017. Cuba first. Iran second. Don't ask what third.

Simply put, Trump is made of better presidential timbre than Cruz, the young rigid ideologue and hard-charger, his last standing primary opponent for the Republican party nomination. This point runs contrary to what you read in places like The Washington Post. where many, even neocons, are tearing out their hair at the hugely conceited New York real estate mogul. How could this be happening to me? You can hear hawks and doves cry.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Ted Cruz]

These are very bright people, polished by the best Ivy colleges. Like Yale. Even more went to Harvard. They like being clever and right. Trouble is, they've been wrong at every turn since Trump announced his candidacy. They never did get him as a political animal, so viewed him as a circus "clown car" persona. At least Cruz is a senator, so they can pigeonhole him as such. That counts for something familiar, even if only a small handful of colleagues have endorsed the sharp-tongued senator.

Yes, we are creatures of convention in the press section. Present company, me, not so much.

Some of my best friends and editors can't fathom Trump's populist appeal, especially to working class white men. White men who see Hillary Clinton in high negative numbers are a force against her, a wave soon to break big. That's what my friends and fellow pundits should be thinking about. Instead, they try to count the friends Cruz had at Princeton, where he was a champion debater. Answer: very few, just like in the Senate.

Cruz is a rare bird in politics; he likes to be hated. He insulted all of New York City before the New York primary. Just the way of his world.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

By trying to burnish the highly credentialed Cruz, a Harvard Law School graduate, journalists are showing their own class and college privilege. They don't realize what an unfair game of Monopoly we are playing, the whole economy eroding ever since the Sept. 11 attacks, the 2003 Iraq War and, of course, the great downturn of 2008. The tepid "recovery" since has looked nothing like the gay, giddy '90s of peace and prosperity.

Ironically, it took Trump, the richest and newest player on the political board, to reach out to people living in the worst times of their lives. He did us all a favor by pegging Jeb Bush as "low energy." More to the point at home and heart, Obamacare is far from the cure for what ails us in this Age of Anxiety. After nearly eight years with a cool president (in all ways), it's no accident that we (the American people) like to hear passion and vehemence in a candidate's voice. The American dream isn't working out as well for swaths of society since circa 2000. Millennials never had much of a chance to dream. That year, 2000, was a high water mark.

Trump is the only candidate to speak to that collective sense of loss viscerally. When he says the game is rigged, people figure he ought to know, since he made out like a bandit – with a gruff heart.

Don't get me wrong. I am no supporter of Trump. But he's more of a grown-up, more of a player who can change his game, with more milk of human kindness that Cruz. He wouldn't let people die on the streets.