From recent experience, Virginians know what a controversial and contentious General Assembly session looks like. The 2014 session and its subsequent special session were quintessential examples of what transpires when the wheels of government don’t turn smoothly.

A budget standoff — lasting more than 100 days and threatening a first-ever government shutdown — was the event for which the 2014 session will be remembered. That the standoff led to a special session — that did not end until this year’s regular session began — will be remembered, too.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe certainly remembers the 2014 session. He and the leaders of his party in the Senate are undoubtedly keenly aware that the budget standoff began when the Democrats were in the majority. They are equally cognizant that it ended when the Democrats relinquished that majority.

The budget standoff, two changes of partisan control in the Senate, and a special session that lasted until the next regular session made the 2014 session one of the most contentious — and extensively reported — in recent memory.

***

So, what does the opposite of a controversial and contentious session look like? Welcome to the 2015 session of the Virginia General Assembly, where substance has replaced rhetoric, and political posturing for the sake of posturing has fallen out of fashion.

Recently, for the first time since 2007, the Senate of Virginia unanimously voted to approve its version of amendments to the commonwealth’s 2014-2016 Biennial Budget.

The budget bill was unanimously approved even though it did not include Governor McAuliffe’s proposal to expand Medicaid under Obamacare, the same issue that derailed last year’s budget process. It won a unanimous vote despite not having the large fee increases that were featured in the budget plan Governor McAuliffe introduced this session.

How, then, could a budget that did not feature items that had led to last year’s impasse win widespread bipartisan support this year? The answer lies in the legislative process and the determination of Senate Republicans to abide by it.

The tactic of using the budget as a bargaining instrument to achieve a policy goal that would not pass using the regular legislative process became common last decade. In 2001, the battle was over car tax relief. In 2004, it was an effort to enact tax increases totaling more than $1 billion. In 2006, the budget was used in a failed effort to enact tax increases for transportation.

After a six-year absence, the tactic returned in 2012 when Senate Democrats, disgruntled about committee assignments, held the budget up for nearly 50 days. Last year’s impasse doubled that length.

In each of these cases, the budget was used to achieve a goal that failed to pass using the regular legislative process: The level of car-tax relief had already been set by former Gov. Jim Gilmore’s revenue estimates, more than a month before the General Assembly convened. The House rejected general tax increases in 2004 and 2006, although a version of the increases was ultimately approved in the former year, the sole occasion where the budget standoff succeeded for those who initiated it. Legislative committee assignments are not part of the budget, so the 2012 stalemate was really doomed from the start. And, the plan to expand Medicaid to fully implement Obamacare in Virginia could only command the support of about one-third of the House members (and a bare majority in the Senate), so the result of last year’s stalemate was probably pre-ordained.

***

When legislators adhere to the regular legislative process, things tend to run smoothly. That is the story of the 2015 session. Instead of insisting that Medicaid expansion schemes be included in the budget, legislators of both parties are focusing on measures that can command majority support in both chambers.

This does not mean that lawmakers in either party or in either chamber have abandoned their principles or foregone their desire to see measures they support enacted. Governor McAuliffe proposed expanding Medicaid, raising fees on businesses, increasing the tax bills of coal producers and new restrictions on Second Amendment rights. Most Democrats supported these proposals. But, all of them were ultimately rejected by the General Assembly.

Republican majorities have undoubtedly already approved measures Governor McAuliffe will amend, veto, or both. And while we will be disappointed that he does not concur with our judgment, we, too, must accept the limitations of the legislative process.

Virginia’s system of government, with an executive with veto authority and a bicameral legislature, is not designed to enact changes rapidly. What change does come must earn the support of majorities of both legislative chambers and the chief executive.

The 2015 session is evidence that system, despite some recent past challenges, is once again functioning as designed. That is great news for the commonwealth.