Let’s be clear: women’s prison isn’t a sorority and the abundant humor of “Orange Is the New Black” should not mask the pain that led the inmates to their current situation.

The laughs are all fraught. The dramedy, based on Piper Kerman’s memoir, will compete for Emmy notice in the comedy category but beautifully stradles that line.

No spoilers ahead, I promise.

Just know that Season 2 of “OITNB,” which drops Friday on Netflix, is indeed a darker, more probing exploration of incarcerated women, the prison system and society than the first season.

Creator Jenji Kohan (“Weeds”) nails the angst by delving deeper into the backstories of numerous characters, effectively laying out more storytelling track. Flashbacks can be a weak crutch in some TV efforts but here the added details and motivations enrich. She’s not only extended the route but enlarged the train, adding characters and increasing our understanding of circumstances and social structures.

If Season 1 dealt with the shock of a sheltered, white, upper-middle-class woman entering the system, Season 2 continues that journey and further examines the power politics of groups. It doesn’t spoil anything to note the season opens with a guest appearance by Laura Prepon as Alex Vause.

Judging by the first six episodes, this round is just as addicting as the first, the ensemble rising to the occasion of topping their first outting.

Suffice to say the sex is more graphic, the language coarser, the craziness more sociopathic. And that’s after the bloody finale to the initial season that introduced Piper’s (Taylor Schilling) first months in prison.

Kohan has found clever ways to take the characters outside their confinement — either into the pre-prison past, particularly in the case of Suzanne “Crazy Eyes” Warren (Uzo Aduba) or in the present, with Lorna Morello (Yael Stone), the Boston-accented van driver, on a mission.

Season 2 newcomer Yvonne “Vee” Parker (played by Lorraine Toussaint) is a strong addition, upsetting the balance of power and giving Red (Kate Mulgrew) a once and future rival.

Last year’s surprise hit is now established for a longer run. Here comes another binging pleasure. Clear the weekend.

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp