WASHINGTON — Ted Cruz may have few friends in Washington, but he got a home state boost last night from an unlikely source.

Leticia Van de Putte, a former state senator and Democratic lieutenant gubernatorial candidate, described the presidential hopeful as a “gentleman” Tuesday night despite their political differences and his fractious reputation in the Senate.

Van de Putte was in Washington with about 500 Latino officials, staffers and guests to honor former U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Henry Cisneros at a gala held by the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials. After praising Cisneros as a standard-bearer for Latino officials, Van de Putte also had kind words for Cruz.

“Brilliant,” she said of Cruz when asked about the presidential race, though she acknowledged his views “are just exceedingly different. Such a gentleman in every encounter we had, even if we were opposite in the courtroom.”

Van de Putte was quick to point out one of those conflicts: a redistricting plan that she and other Texas Democrats fought strongly in 2003. The case eventually went to the Supreme Court, where Cruz as Texas solicitor general helped score a 5-4 win largely in favor of the plan.

“Oh my God, he kicked our butt on that one,” she said. But “he was probably one of the best constitutional lawyers that the state has had.”

Van de Putte has not always spoken positively of Cruz. Before running for lieutenant governor, she criticized Cruz for talking for hours on the Senate floor against the Affordable Care Act and triggering a federal government shutdown.

“Senator Cruz filibustered against people having health care,” Van de Putte said at the time. She described Cruz as a “Wendy wannabe,” referencing former state senator Wendy Davis, who filibustered a 2013 abortion restrictions bill that is being debated by the U.S. Supreme Court.

After losing the lieutenant gubernatorial race to Dan Patrick, Van de Putte announced her resignation from the state Senate in 2014 to launch an ultimately unsuccessful run for San Antonio mayor. She has not sought public office since but endorsed former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton for president last year.

After complimenting Cruz, Van de Putte stressed that Hispanic Americans are diverse politically despite their common ethnicity.

“We’re strong Democrats, we’re very strong Republicans. Some are very liberal, some are very conservative,” she said. “We are from many different nationalities, but our commonality is the Spanish language. It’s the belief that education can empower our families.”