Just a week before Medicare’s annual enrollment period is set to begin, here’s something for married couples to consider: Just because you were on the same health insurance plan during your working years doesn’t mean you should opt for the same coverage in Medicare.

Shutterstock The best health plan for you may not fit your spouse.

In fact, spouses “may be better served by having different Medicare plans … because their healthcare needs – and costs – are going to be different,” says Mary Dale Walters, senior vice president at Allsup Medicare Advisor, a fee-based service that aims to help people pick from among Medicare Advantage, Medicare Supplement, and Medicare “Part D” prescription drug plans.

Medicare’s annual election period, which extends this year from Oct. 15 to Dec. 7, is when individuals already in the program can add, drop or switch prescription-drug plans and make a wide range of other changes to their coverage. (The rollout of new Affordable Care Act regulations in 2014 won’t directly affect the choices available to Medicare members.)

Within Medicare, individuals must choose one of two paths: the original fee-for-service Medicare plan, or a federally subsidized Medicare Advantage plan, which typically operates like a health-maintenance or preferred-provider organization. Many who opt for traditional Medicare also purchase a “Medigap” (also known as a “Medicare Supplement”) policy, as well as a separate “Part D” prescription-drug policy, to patch holes in their coverage. Those new to the program face the same choices upon qualifying, an event that, for most, occurs upon turning 65.

Spouses who have different medical conditions—who take different medicines and see different doctors—may be better off in different prescription drug or Medicare Advantage plans, says Walters. Moreover, she adds, some couples make the mistake of assuming that plans that charge the highest premiums deliver the most generous benefits; that’s not necessarily the case.

Given that women tend to live longer than men, it’s especially important for couples to plan so that the dollars available to the survivor stretch further. (Choosing the right Medicare plan is just one factor to consider; for others, see my article, “Plan Finances for Surviving Spouse.”)

“People don’t think of health-care costs as part of financial planning, but your planner needs to understand your decisions on Medicare to make sure he or she is allocating money from your portfolio to be able to cover future medical costs,” says Walters. According to Fidelity Investments, a 65-year-old couple retiring this year is estimated to need $220,000 to cover medical expenses throughout retirement.

According to a survey Allsup recently conducted among 1,000 individuals ages 65 and older, women are especially concerned about covering retiree medical expenses. Only 55% of women are confident that they have saved enough for health-care costs in retirement, vs. 70% of men. What’s more, only 26% of women and 30% of men have budgeted for health-care cost increases and very few of either sex have saved more than $200,000 for health care in retirement.