"We should be back to picking stocks in the expectation that they will go higher if the numbers are good and lower if the numbers are bad"

Monday: H&R Block

H&R Block: Cramer has championed this stock for ages because of its connection to the Affordable Care Act. For people who fear getting dinged by the IRS for not having insurance, H&R Block will help them understand the regulations. The company is also in good shape to buy back a ton of stock, and Cramer likes that.

Tuesday: AutoZone, Toll Brothers, Costco, Home Depot analyst meeting

AutoZone: This is a clockwork trade. The company always reports a number analysts don't like, and then it comes in and buys back its own stock a few days later. That prompts the stock to go higher than where it was before it reported. Cramer recommended picking some up on the dip.

Read more from Mad Money with Jim Cramer

Cramer Remix: Not worried about the jobs report

Cramer: Mass layoffs in manufacturing don't matter

Fitbit's 'Holy Grail' goal for insurance companies

Toll Brothers: Cramer worries most about the housing industry when he thinks about higher rates. Will it slow down? Toll Brothers will have that information.

Costco: Cramer absolutely loves this stock and says it is in the sweet spot with good same-store sales. He thinks it could come in after it reports because it had a large run off its upgrade this week.

Wednesday: Lululemon Athletica

Lululemon: Many investors want to own this stock because they think it could be taken over. But then, if the earnings are not good, investors sell the stock again. Going into the quarter on Wednesday, Cramer considers this stock guilty until proven innocent.

"My problem is that I can never recommend a stock on a takeover basis if the fundamentals are suspect, and I think they remain suspect at Lululemon," Cramer said.

Thursday: Adobe, YUM Brands & United Technologies analyst meeting

Adobe: Cramer expects the same clockwork trade with Adobe as he does with AutoZone. Typically, this company tells a story that people do not understand. Cramer suggested that if the company makes conservative commentary and the stock cracks, it is time to do some buying. Just do homework before the quarter and be ready if there is a pullback.

Friday: University of Michigan Sentiment Index

Cramer will be interested to hear if there has been more consumer spending. It seems to be a glum moment right now, despite all of the new jobs created and gasoline going under $2. The sentiment number will matter more than usual because consumer spending during the holiday season will have a large impact on retailers. He will be paying close attention to this index.

So, the tide has turned, and the market now likes what it once hated — accelerated job recovery. Investors have less fear that the Fed will hurt the economy when it raises rates.

"With that in mind, we should be back to picking stocks in the expectation that they will go higher if the numbers are good and lower if the numbers are bad," Cramer said.

Who knows, maybe then the market will finally leave crazy town.