NICHOLASVILLE, Ky. - A Republican debate in Jessamine County turned sour Saturday after one candidate criticized the administration of Gov. Ernie Fletcher and the fact that some members of the administration are now supporting former Louisville businessman Hal Heiner.

James Comer, lashed out at Heiner and those supporting him, during an answer to a question about the so-called "Greed Bill," which boosted legislative pensions and which Comer supported while a member of the state House of Representatives in 2005.

In explaining how to attack the pension bill, Comer said, "It's very difficult, as we learned in the last administration when a lot of people that are supporting your campaign, Hal, got indicted for tinkering with the merit system."

In fact, Fletcher and a number of members of his administration were indicted on misdemeanor charges for their actions in hiring, firing and transferring state workers that were protected by merit system laws.

The charges against Fletcher were ultimately dropped and Fletcher issued a blanket pardon for anyone indicted in the affair.

During the debate, the other candidates, Will T. Scott and Matt Bevin steered clear of the controversy.

In 2007, with Comer's backing, former U.S. Rep. Anne Northup challenged Fletcher in the GOP primary and lost. Fletcher then lost to Steve Beshear in the general election.

Fletcher hasn't endorsed anyone in the race but a number of people in his administration appeared at a fundraiser last week for Heiner. They include former chiefs of staff Daniel Groves and Stan Cave; Dr. James Holsinger, who was his secretary of Health and Family Services; Brian Crall, personnel secretary, and John Roach, who served as general counsel and was later promoted to the state Supreme Court.

Groves was one of those indicted but charges were dismissed pursuant to the pardon. Also Basil Turbyfill, a former administration official who was also indicted and pardoned, has contributed to Heiner's campaign.

"Governor Fletcher was a good man and surrounded himself with good people," Heiner said in defending the administration, before accusing House Speaker Greg Stumbo, who was attorney general at the time, of going too far in his pursuit of Fletcher.

"So don't use him for your own political benefit," Heiner lectured Comer.

Comer responded, "Hal, I've never said anything bad about Ernie Fletcher. I was in the General Assembly when Ernie Fletcher was governor and he was a good man but he had some bad people around him."

"He had some bad people who made some mistakes," said Comer, noting that they had a "hit list" of state workers to fire.

"I don't want those people back in Frankfort," he said. "If it weren't for some of those people who were at your fundraiser last week, we wouldn't have Steve Beshear as governor … so there's a big difference in who we're surrounding ourselves with in this campaign."

Comer acknowledged that he has had a number of former Fletcher appointees work in his agriculture commissioner's office but said they weren't to blame for Fletcher's problems.

After the debate, Heiner said he approached Comer and asked if they could turn down the heat in the future.

Comer said he told Heiner that he would scale back his attacks only if Heiner denounced claims made in a television ad and mailers made by a super PAC that is backing Heiner. Heiner has declined to do so, saying that they are not his ads and he has no control over the PAC.

"He said, 'Jamie, I don't have anything to do with it and gave me a creepy grin," said Comer, who said he voted for Fletcher in the 2007 election after he "weeded some of those people out … He brought Jim Deckard (who served as his general counsel) and some people like that."

Comers' blast brought a lengthy Facebook response from Wes Fugate, a former aide to Fletcher who was not implicated in the scandal. "Attacks like these suggest he is desperate and tell me that he is unfit to be Governor of the state I love so much," he wrote.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1z5OeZT