The baby bobcat was found dehydrated and near death. (Source: Facebook/Desert Design & Development)

A severely dehydrated baby bobcat is in good hands after a motorist rescued it from near death on the side of an Arizona roadway.

Michael Lamb of Desert Design & Development, a firearms and accessories retailer, was driving on Table Mesa Road west of Interstate 17 at around 1 a.m. Saturday when he saw the little animal in distress.

While it is suspected that the mother bobcat is dead, Lamb said he does not know for sure because she was never found.

In general, the Arizona Game & Fish Department suggests people not rescue baby wildlife because their mothers often are nearby.

"In most cases, the best thing a person can do for a wild animal is to leave it alone," reads an Arizona Game & Fish brochure specifically about baby animals.

Lamb, however, knew the little cat was in bad shape and in desperate need of help.

"It was so weak and lethargic," he said. "It didn't have anything in it. ... Anybody who had seen it would've known it wouldn't have made it through the night."

Lamb picked up the ailing bobcat kitten and took it home.

[STORY: Heat wave blasts Valley with record-breaking 115 degrees]

“From there he nourished it back with food, water and some cool air, and saved its life,” Desert Design & Development said in a Facebook post.

Lamb called Arizona Game & Fish for help and guidance. He ended up taking the bobcat to Southwest Wildlife Conservation Center, a place that could better meet the animal’s health needs.

Animal Care Supervisor Kim Carr said the bobcat kitten is weak but he is getting around OK and eating well.

She said no fractures showed up on the X-rays. Carr said if the kitten continues to improve, they'll move it to a rehab enclosure with foster bobcat parents and some step-siblings, with an eye to eventually releasing the animal back to the wild.

“I'm calling it ‘Bob,’ and we'll just refer to him our little mascot,” the company said.

According to Arizona Game & Fish, bobcat kittens generally stay with their mother for seven to 12 months.

Arizona's intense heat has set five records in three days for warmest low and hottest high temperatures..

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.