“Death panels” and ties to former President Bill Clinton have become issues in what has become one of the state’s most bitter Florida legislative races.

The topics are the subject of a pair of attack ads launched last week by political committees against the two GOP candidates battling in an Aug. 26 Republican primary race to replace term-limited state Rep. Doug Holder in the Florida House.

One ad by a group calling itself Seniors for Affordable Care rips Venice doctor Julio Gonzalez as “dangerously liberal” and alleging he supports death panels “worse than those in Obamacare.”

The other ad from the Better Florida Fund Corp. calls Venice attorney Richard DeNapoli a “Charlie Crist Republican” “who once worked for Bill Clinton.”

Both DeNapoli and Gonzalez call the ads targeting them unfair, saying they are misrepresentations.

The two are running to represent House District 74, which includes most of south Sarasota County, including all of Venice and North Port.

The Seniors for Affordable Care ad seizes on a book Gonzalez wrote in 2009 in which he calls for the creation of health index scores for patients who need medical care.

“Once the patient reaches that health index score, government and insurance funding designed to cure major illnesses such as cancer should be discontinued,” Gonzalez wrote in “Health Care Reform — The Truth.” “For the sake of the patient, his loved ones and our economy, efforts should be redirected from curative to supportive.”

Gonzalez said he was not proposing a “death panel,” a term conservatives used in critizing health care reform. He said he was only pointing out the problem that patients now can be put through prolonged, painful treatments when there is not chance of medicine helping them.

Who is funding the ads against Gonzalez is a mystery. Seniors for Affordable Care was created in August 2013 by Melbourne resident Carmela Falcone, according to the Florida Division of Elections. But the committee reports having raised no money or spending any money as of July 4.

The committee was created on Aug. 21, 2013, sixteen days after DeNapoli filed to run for the state Legislature.

Falcone has previously been part of other political committees that included Anthony Pedicini, who is a campaign consultant for DeNapoli.

DeNapoli is playing his own defense on the ads from the Better Florida Fund Corp., which started airing on Friday.

DeNapoli said the ad saying he worked for Bill Clinton is misleading. He said when he was 19 years old he was an unpaid intern for the White House General Counsel’s Office. On a past résumé, DeNapoli said the 1996 post was a “non-partisan” position.

DeNapoli said the ad also is misleading because it says he is a “Charlie Crist Republican.” He said he donated to Crist in October 2009 when Crist was still a Republican running for the U.S. Senate. That donation was about a month after Gonzalez also donated to Crist for his failed U.S. Senate campaign against eventual winner Marco Rubio.

DeNapoli said after Crist left the Republican Party in the spring of 2010, he stopped supporting Crist and backed Rubio.

“Like many other Sarasota County Republicans, including my opponent, I supported the Republican Governor at the time until he betrayed us,” DeNapoli said.

As he has done in past forums and debate, DeNapoli blasted Gonzalez for having given $500 to U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a Democrat, in 2008. Gonzalez said he gave the donation in a bid to help persuade Wasserman Schultz on health care issues, but it failed.

State campaign records show the The Better Florida Fund Corp., which is running the ad against DeNapoli, was created in February and has received almost all of its $1.2 million in funding from the Florida Medical Association. The phone number for the Better Florida Fund Corp is also the same as the Florida Medical Association’s headquarters in Tallahassee.

The latest attacks in the race follow past charges that DeNapoli is a carpetbagger because he moved to Sarasota County in 2013, and DeNapoli alleging someone has been peeping through his living room windows trying to dig up dirt on him.

DeNapoli and Gonzalez face each other in another campaign forum on Tuesday. Both are scheduled to speak to the Nokomis Area Civic Association at 7 p.m. at the Nokomis Community Center, 234 Nippino Trail, Nokomis.

Check out the ads here: