Joe Jordan | Nebraska Watchdog

In 2014 Nebraska Watchdog continued its commitment to original reporting

Included in our many exclusive reports are stories involving one strange death, two key Capitol Hill races, Nebraska’s role in the battle’s surrounding illegal immigration, Obamacare, “purple penguins,” frequent flyers and more.

We begin our look back at the top 10 stories of 2014—with an eye on 2015 as well—with numbers 10-9 and 8.

10: Potentially deadly oil trains find one NE town looking for help.

After first telling Nebraska Watchdog that rail shipments of Bakken oil rolling across Nebraska were a secret, in October state officials did an about face and disclosed which towns were on the route. And when one of those towns, Yutan—a 40 minute drive from downtown Omaha—realized it was on the list they immediately asked for help. Why? Because, as Nebraska Watchdog first reported, if one of those trains derailed Yutan wasn’t ready.

9: MECA mum when questioned on lack of public meetings.

Omaha’s powerful arena board spent a lot of 2014 flexing its muscles. But MECA’s call for a bigger board with longer terms only found sand kicked in its face. At one point the city’s attorney told MECA to drop the move for longer terms or face the consequences: MECA blinked. In addition after a Nebraska Watchdog investigation exposed years of spotty MECA meetings—half a dozen a year compared to monthly meetings by other city boards such as the little-known “Building Board of Review”—the arena board expanded it’s public get-togethers. At the same time though some critics argue MECA is still woefully short on sunshine.

8: State Auditor hopeful was a frequent flyer as senator.

Term limited out of the legislature at the end of 2014, Lincoln State Sen. Amanda McGill-D spent much of 2014 looking for a promotion. She wanted to be Nebraska’s next State Auditor, where she’d be responsible for keeping an eye on state spending. Nebraska Watchdog took a close look at some of McGill’s office expenses, specifically her travel expenses. Although she lost her bid for auditor to embattled Republican Charlie Janssen, McGill landed on her feet and goes into 2015 running Congressman-elect Brad Ashford’s (D) Omaha office.

Coming up Friday: 7-6 and 5.

Contact Joe Jordan at joe@nebraskawatchdog.org.

Joe can be heard on Omaha’s KFAB radio every Monday morning at 7:40, KLIN in Lincoln every Tuesday morning at 7:35 and KHAS-AM in Hastings every Wednesday at 7:30 a.m. and 12:45 p.m.

To subscribe to news updates from Nebraska Watchdog at no charge, click here