Cuomo's Wage Board hears testimony on fast food salaries Cuomo-created council can bypass Legislature to implement increase

The countdown to a probable pay hike for fast-food workers started Friday in Buffalo with the first of what will be four hearings about the proposal.

In May, Gov. Andrew Cuomo appointed a special "wage board'' to study and report to the state labor commissioner in July on whether fast-food workers should get an increase above New York's $8.75 minimum wage.

State law allows creation of such a board and allows the commissioner to order a higher salary floor for workers in certain industries if conditions warrant it.

Acting Commissioner Mario Musolino cited studies showing that 60 percent of fast food workers are part of families that draw public assistance. Musolino also noted 75 percent of fast-food workers earn $9.25 an hour or less.

More Information

Similar statistics came up during the four-hour hearing in Buffalo, with others set for Long Island, New York City and Albany.

Labor groups and activists have called for a $15-an-hour minimum for fast-food workers.

While there's been no opinion on the precise wage from the Cuomo administration, the makeup of the three-member board and the bulk of comments during Friday's event suggested that a noticeable wage hike is likely.

Those calling for increases included labor leaders such as Richard Lipsitz of the western New York AFL-CIO Labor Federation and Irene Tung of the National Employment Law Project, as well as economist James Parrott from the Fiscal Policy Institute.

Parrott cited studies showing that every $1 increase in wages would trim 40 cents from the cost of government assistance programs, while others spoke about how higher wages would recycle money back into the local communities because many low-paid workers spend their increases on needed purchases rather than putting the money in the bank.

"It's a win-win,'' said the Rev. Justo Gonzalez, pastor at the Western NY Peace Center.

Speakers related personal stories about the difficulty of getting by on a minimum wage.

Peter Russo, 40, is looking for a second job so he can take his 7-year-old daughter, for whom he pays child support, out for an occasional meal.

Dakota Rivera is diabetic but can't afford proper treatment (few fast-food jobs provide health insurance) and he's trying to save up for a car.

On the other side, Grant Loomis of the Buffalo-Niagara Partnership, a pro-business group, said a higher mandated wage would result in fewer jobs, and the costs would be passed along to consumers.

Howard Nielsen, who owns the Sticky Lips BBQ in Rochester, said margins in the restaurant business are low to begin with, and operating in New York state, known for its high taxes and heavy regulations, cuts even farther into a business budget.

He said he would rather see a graduated increase instead of a rapid move to $15.

He added that rising dairy prices, Obamacare and other costs have already cut into his margins.

Sticky Lips isn't actually a fast-food establishment, but he said the upward wage pressure would hit him nonetheless.

Restaurant industry groups have also said a pay hike would lead to fewer jobs and higher consumer prices.

Additionally, restaurants like Sticky Lips, starting next year will have to pay their waiters and waitresses, or tipped workers, a $7.50 minimum rather than the current $5.

That's because Cuomo late last year ordered a wage board for tipped workers.

The fast-food wage board is made up of three members who will make their recommendation to Musolino.

Mike Fishman, secretary-treasurer of the Service Employees International Union, represents labor while Buffalo Mayor Byron Brown, a former Democratic state senator, who is on the record as supporting a higher minimum wage, represents the public.

The business representative is Kevin Ryan, chairman and founder of Gilt, a web-based shopping program, and vice chairman of the Partnership for New York City. He also spoken in favor of a higher minimum wage.

The fast-food issue could pay some political dividends for Cuomo. Getting a pay increase for the roughly 180,000 fast-food workers, many of whom are in New York City, would solidify his ties to organized labor, which is looking to unionize many restaurant workers, as well as earning points with the state's political left.

The use of a wage board also bypasses the Legislature, where Senate majority Republicans have resisted calls for higher minimum wages without further study.

Lt. Gov Kathy Hochul, a Buffalo-area native, attended a rally before the hearings.

rkarlin@timesunion.com • 518-454-5758 • @RickKarlinTU