She'll be his opponent on the ballot Nov. 4, but U.S. Rep. Scott Perry says he doesn't see himself as "necessarily running against" Harrisburg's former mayor Linda Thompson.

Perry, R-York, said in his reelection bid for his seat in the 4th Congressional District that he's running "for the position" and on his record.

"We hope that voters will distinguish between both candidates and say: 'These are the issues. This is the record.' And both of us have a record," Perry said, concerning he and Democratic challenger Thompson, who was a city councilwoman for eight years before her term as mayor.

"I'm not out there trying to say what she did or didn't do," Perry said. "I'm saying: 'This is what I'm about. This is ... what's important to me and this is what I plan to do ... if you would privilege me with your vote in the future."

That tactic contrasts sharply with Thompson's. During an interview with PennLive, she claimed Perry was "for the super rich" — aiming to "keep their taxes low, while he increases the middle class tax" — and a supporter of privatizing Social Security, as well as Medicaid and Medicare.

In response, Perry, 52, of Carroll Township, repeatedly asked what the facts were to support those claims.

"I don't really know what her background is, but I don't know if you get much more middle class than me," Perry said, in response to the claim of being for the wealthy. "We used to have an outhouse and [I] took my baths in a steel tub on the back porch and our home didn't have any electricity. Maybe that's below middle class, you know. We didn't know it. We were doing just fine in my mind as a young person, but in retrospect, we didn't have a lot. So I advocate for people to do better in their lives ... from all stripes."

On Thompson's Social Security claim, Perry said he would ask any opponent or critic to "keep the facts straight and let me know when I ever voted for such a thing."

"I haven't voted for anything like that," Perry said.

When asked if he would vote for or support privatizing Social Security or privatize Medicaid and Medicare, Perry would not say one way or the other. In both cases, Perry said he was in favor of making the systems solvent, whatever those solutions might be.

"I'm concerned with any large government program whether it's the IRS or whether it's the Affordable Care Act with all the information and all the money and even social security — where the federal government continues to raid the interest and then makes the system ... insolvent," Perry said, when asked whether he'd vote to privatize Social Security. "So I can't answer that question until I see all the tenets of any such proposal. We haven't seen any. I haven't voted on any."

None of the above were among the three main issues Perry outlined as his core message to voters.

In summing up that message, Perry said the "economy is important, and we're still not where we could be and should be." He added that, "the federal government has a debt problem that they're not addressing" and "there's overregulation" by the federal government.

"There needs to be a voice to address those things in Washington D.C. — a strong and enthusiastic voice," Perry said. "If they are important to you, they are important to me, and ... I can articulate not only the situation but the solutions well."