COLLBRAN — A massive landslide is a powerful force, but, as one of the attendees jammed into the Plateau Valley High School gym for a memorial service Sunday noted, it is no match for the power of the deep ties in this grieving community.

Cars were backed up for 7 miles on Colorado 330 before the service for the three men who died a week ago in a landslide. More than 1,000 people overflowed the gym where a section designated for “immediate family” held more than 200 people. More than 50 search-and-rescue members and firefighters from the Plateau Valley and surrounding departments stood in the front of the gym in their yellow fireproof shirts. Two of the victims were volunteer firefighters.

Family members brought attendees to tears as they talked of their loss. Their passing was commemorated with one moment of silence. The packed gym went silent at 5:44 p.m. — one week, to the minute, from when Wesley Melvin Hawkins, Clarence Allen Nichols and Daniel Allen Nichols were buried in the monster slide that experts say bore down on them so quickly, there was no chance to escape.

“This tragedy has shocked all of us and shaken our beings,” Evonne Stites, a cousin of all of the victims, told the gathering.

PHOTOS: Memorial for Mudslide victims.

The three of them — better known as Wes, Clancy and Danny around here — shared many traits, according to family members who spoke of them. They were born in the Plateau Valley. They had lived most of their lives here. They loved the outdoors. They loved the mountain that buried them.

Wes, a district water manager, was a quiet, reserved man, except when he was cheering for his children at sports events. Clancy, who had worked for the Mesa County road and bridge department for 24 years, eschewed “city traits” and was not happy that his job required him to use a computer. His son, Danny, who was just beginning his career as a geologist, much preferred to be outdoors rather than in his office cubicle.

The three men knew the Plateau Valley that rolls in mostly gentle hills below the top of the Grand Mesa as well as anyone. But the nearly 4-mile-long slide that overtook them while they were checking on an earlier and much smaller slide that had interrupted irrigation water is unlike anything seen in this slide-prone area in eons.

Experts and local authorities have been studying the slide in every way possible. They now have satellites and cameras aimed at it. They have used drones, airplanes and helicopters to survey it from the air.

Sunday, they began two days of flights over a large area stretching from Collbran to Vega Reservoir using a technology called Lidar, short for Light Detection and Ranging. Lidar uses pulsed light to remap the topography of the slide in images that essentially X-ray the area. Lidar can show old faults and previous slides and can give a better indication of the potential for new problems with 30 million cubic meters of partially saturated material.

Another 50 million cubic meters of slidable material is still perched at the top of the slide with a lake filling behind it. That is what prompted Gov. John Hickenlooper to sign an executive order Friday that declared a state of disaster for the area affected by the landslide on the Grand Mesa.

The slide has been considered a threat to the 35 homes and structures below it along West Salt Creek Road, but that danger was being ratcheted down by authorities Sunday.

“What we are starting to feel is that a large movement is less likely than we initially thought,” said Bill Edwards, regional director of the Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre and Gunnison National Forest, where the slide originated.

He said that the slide is considered stable enough at this point to put geologists on the slide Monday to place monitors that will be able to detect any movement.

The governor last week earmarked $500,000 from the state’s Disaster Emergency Fund to help pay for the response and technical assessments of the slide.

The Western Slope chapter of the Colorado Oil and Gas Association has pitched in about $50,000 with the “Caring for Collbran” fund, which will go to help the families and the community.

Funds have been set up for the families of the three victims. Checks can be made out to the “Nichols Family” or the “Hawkins Family” and sent to the Grand Valley Bank, P.O. Box 130, Collbran, CO 81624. For more information, call the bank at 970-487-0202.