After an approximately three-year effort on the part of area medical officials, the federal government announced Thursday that funding has been awarded for a Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) in Yankton.

In a media release, U.S. Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said that $1.3 million made available by the Affordable Care Act will be granted to the Union County Health Foundation in Elk Point and Rural Health Care, Inc., in Fort Pierre for new health center sites.

A FQHC is a community-based organization that provides comprehensive primary care and preventive care on a sliding fee scale for qualified uninsured and underinsured patients. It operates under a consumer board-of-directors governance structure and functions under the supervision of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), which is part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

The Union County Health Foundation, which operates as allPOINTS Health Services and has FQHCs in Elk Point and Alcester, will expand into Yankton and was given $858,333 for the task. It will be called the allPOINTS: Yankton Clinic and will include a family medicine physician, a dentist and some mid-level nurses.

“This is going to double the size of our organization,” said Brad Bertrand, chief executive officer of allPOINTS Health Services. “What this funding is going to do is get the facility in Yankton up and running. It will allow us to buy equipment, hire people and get network infrastructure in place.”

Dr. Tom Stanage, executive director of Lewis and Clark Behavioral Health Services, along with other local medical officials, spearheaded the effort to get an FQHC in Yankton.

“We’re very excited,” he told the Press & Dakotan Thursday. “(Local entities) played the role of doing the planning grant and facilitating it. During that process, it was decided we’d have a much better chance of getting an FQHC if we worked with an existing provider. The closest one was in Elk Point. It turned out to be the right decision, because we got the grant. I couldn’t be more pleased.

“(The FQHC) will give primary health care to people who otherwise don’t have access. It will provide service regardless of a person’s ability to pay.”

The clinic will be located on the third floor of the Avera Sacred Heart Hospital (ASHH) Professional Office Pavilion and Education Center, and allPOINTS now has 120 days to open the facility.

“We have a design in place,” said Pam Rezac, ASHH president and CEO. “We knew that, if it was approved, we would have to move very quickly. We will now have to prepare the site.

“We also have to work on the coordination of care,” she added. “It will be very important that the services of ASHH are fully cooperative with the FQHC.”

Stanage said he also expects Lewis and Clark Behavioral Health to provide support services for the FQHC.

In 2011, Yankton County was designated as a medically underserved population by the HRSA. The designation was needed before the area would be eligible for a FQHC.

The Yankton City Commission, Yankton County Commission, Yankton Medical Clinic and Avera Sacred Heart Hospital wrote letters of support for the designation.

Subsequently, a needs assessment for a FQHC was done in 2012.

The people targeted for services in Yankton County have incomes below 200 percent of the federal poverty level. The assessment found that the county had 7,322 such individuals, 58 percent of whom either had no insurance or was on Medicaid.

According to Sibelius, the two new health centers will help care for approximately 7,682 additional South Dakotans. South Dakota health centers served 55,948 patients last year, 36 percent of them uninsured.

“We remain committed to providing more South Dakotans with the quality patient-centered care they deserve,” Sebelius said in a media release. “South Dakota health centers are key partners in the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, and new health center sites will increase access to those who need it most.”

Nationwide, 236 health center programs will receive approximately $150 million in grant awards to serve more than 1.25 million additional patients.

You can follow Nathan Johnson on Twitter at twitter.com/AnInlandVoyage. Discuss this story at www.yankton.net/.