TRENTON — Three former governors have signed an "open letter" to Gov. Chris Christie to ask he stop Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey from selling a new line of health plans that threaten "to erode the bedrock of New Jersey's healthcare marketplace."

The letter, signed by former Govs. Brendan Byrne, Jon Corzine and Richard Codey, also a state senator, was written at the request of Saint Peter's University Hospital in New Brunswick, one of nearly three dozen hospitals excluded from the top tier of Horizon's discount OMNIA plans, hospital's spokesman Phil Hartman said. Saint Peter's sued Horizon in November to demand its inclusion as a "Tier 1" hospital. Saint Peter's is not mentioned in the letter.

Submitted to The Star-Ledger's Editorial Board as an op-ed, the letter is a new front in the public battles waged over Horizon's OMNIA products, which promise consumers a 15 percent cut in premiums from its other insurance plans. The 36 hospitals selected by Horizon to be in the "Tier 1" category have agreed to accept discounted reimbursement rates with the promise of more patient volume.

With 3.8 million customers, Horizon wields considerable buying power.

The "Tier 2" hospitals — many of them Catholic, located in cities and serve a sizable number of uninsured and Medicaid clients — say OMNIA policy holders will be deterred from using them because they will have to pay higher premiums and out-of-pocket costs. These hospitals also argue Horizon harmed their reputations by relegating them to a lower status, which implies their quality isn't up to par.

"In one fell swoop New Jersey hospitals have been divided into the 'haves' and the 'have-nots,' " according to the letter. "The 'haves' are the state's largest healthcare systems and a small handful of independent hospitals chosen to fill in voids where those systems do not operate. The 'have-nots' are the segregated hospitals, many of whom rely on the reimbursement of private insurers like Horizon to offset the costs to treat our neediest patients, the indigent who rely on charity care or Medicaid."

"As a result, the viability of non-preferred hospitals is threatened and so, too, is consumer choice," according to the letter, which recommended Christie "take swift and strong executive action." That action could include the governor halting the plan, and signing pending legislation that more rigorously regulated tiered health plans.

Ruthi Byrne, a public relations professional and wife of former Gov. Byrne, confirmed she wrote the letter. She said asked Govs. Thomas H. Kean, Jim Florio, Christie Whitman, Donald DiFrancesco and Jim McGreevey to sign on, but they declined. The three governors who signed did so "enthusiastically," she said.

Horizon spokesman Tom Vincz thanked the governors who did not sign the letter.

"We appreciate the other governors who were all approached, but declined to sign this letter," Vincz said. "Tiered network plans have been an option for New Jersey consumers for the last five years with universal acceptance. Suspending the coverage of those who have chosen OMNIA, particularly the tens of thousands of previously uninsured who can now afford quality health coverage, is reckless and wrong. "

Vincz said consumer interest in OMNIA has been strong. "Although it will take several weeks before the open enrollment numbers are final, all indications are that consumers responded positively to the nine competitively priced Horizon plans."

Christie's spokesman Kevin Roberts declined to comment on the letter.

But the administration's Department of Banking and Insurance is already on record supporting OMNIA when it gave Horizon permission in September to begin selling the policies in the fall.

Seventeen Tier 2 hospitals appealed that decision and accused the state of not doing its job to verify whether there was a sufficient number of hospitals and medical providers in the Tier 1 network.

In November, Banking and Insurance officials its decision. An appeal is now pending in state court.

Seven of these 17 hospitals also sued Horizon in December for wrongly excluding them from the new line of discounted health plans and harming their reputations.

Byrne said she hopes the letter prompts Christie to "take a second look."

"it's about basic fairness," she said. "When you call something Tier 2 it automatically denotes a lesser status."

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.