In offering cash rewards for members who shop around for the best price for their health care services, Priority Health says it wants to see greater cost transparency and even alter the industry’s trajectory.

By financially rewarding members who opt to use providers that charge a “fair market price” for elective procedures, Priority Health seeks to get them more involved in their health care and offer benefits packages to drive consumerism into an industry where it’s historically been lacking.

“What we are trying to do is build products based on transparency that would encourage people to engage in their health care,” said Priority Health CEO Mike Freed. “That’s something we will try to do more expansively in the future.”

The first of those products, known as PriorityRewards, could come out later this year.

State regulators last month granted Priority Health approval to incorporate cash rewards into its fully-insured PPO policies that would pay members from $50 to $200 for using a care provider that charges a “fair market price” for a medical procedure and maintains high quality standards. The fair market price is determined by a range of charges within a market and is identified by a cost estimator linked from Priority Health’s website, according to documents the health plan filed with the Michigan Department of Insurance and Financial Services.

To earn the reward, members need to look up price data on a covered medical procedure or service and read the information, locate a fair market price facility, and then use that care provider. Members who follow the first two steps but seek care at a facility that’s not designated as offering a fair market price would receive a nominal “education” reward of $5.

Covered procedures include colonoscopies, sleep studies, MRI and CT scans, ear tubes, cataract surgeries, lithotripsy, knee and shoulder arthroscopy, total hysterectomy, and total knee and hip joint replacement.

Priority Health, which has about 620,000 members across all product lines, will look to extend PriorityRewards to other products beyond the PPO, Freed said.

Freed, who spoke recently at the Advantage Benefits Group annual benefits seminar, described Priority Health’s transparency push as part of a broader strategy to get people more involved in their own care.That effort involves working with parent Spectrum Health to attack high-cost chronic medical conditions and change how care is delivered.

DRIVING TRANSPARENCY

While many insurers and health plans — and even hospitals — now offer some form of online portal for consumers to look up pricing and quality data prior to accessing care, providing a cash reward adds an element that can raise the transparency movement to a new level, said Bob Hughes, president of Advantage Benefits Group. Hughes believes that employees at companies who use a high-deductible health plan and are paying more out of pocket for their coverage and care will embrace transparency tools.

“I just think employees are tired of being told their contributions are going up, their deductibles are going up, and it’s more for less,” said Hughes, a strong advocate for cost transparency whose firm works with two large employers on initiatives that use cash rewards.

The two employers, which have about 20,000 employees between them, are self-funded and began using Health Care Bluebook in 2014. Employees can receive cash rewards ranging from $25 to $100, depending on the cost of the procedure, for looking up prices and opting to use a provider that charges an acceptable price. Those providers can be identified on the website by looking for a green light by their names.

In an age where high-deductible health plans are becoming the norm, the “Go Green, Get Green” initiative has been “very well received” so far by employees at both employers, Hughes said.

As employees use Health Care Bluebook and earn the cash rewards, the two companies are beginning to see some impact on their medical claims because “there’s not as much overpaying going on” for care, Hughes said.

“It just changes the whole dynamics of the conversation where the employee gets engaged. ‘Dang, I need to treat this like the way I buy a wide-screen TV, a car or when I buy a plane ticket,’” he said. “It unleashes those market forces.”

Priority Health publicly rolled out its transparency movement in 2014 by offering members access to Health Care Bluebook, a website that allows people to look up and compare prices charged for elective procedures at care providers in the market and offers data on the quality of the care they provide. The health plan followed that up this year with the introduction of a cost estimator on its website for members to look up price and quality data for doctors and hospitals and to get an estimate of what they can expect to pay out of pocket for a procedure based on their policy and benefits package.

INCREASING CONSUMERISM

The practice has been quickly growing and is “making it possible for consumers to find the information they need to begin shopping for health care. Hopefully, with reliable price and quality information, consumers will be able to make better decisions and save money,” according to a recent report by the Health Care Cost Institute, a Washington, D.C.-based organization that researches health care spending.

In February, national commercial health insurers Aetna, Humana, UnitedHealthcare and Assurant Heath partnered with the nonprofit Health Care Cost Institute to launch the website guroo.com for consumers to look up national, state and local pricing information.

The Health Care Cost Institute launched the venture a month after publishing research that shows wide variations in prices for care across the country and within individual states.

Transparency has gained steam as employers increasingly adopt high-deductible health plans.

Employers today are “looking for everything they can” to mitigate the high cost of employee health coverage, said Mick Young, a principal and the Grand Rapids office leader for Mercer. A transparency program that rewards employees for looking up price and quality data can help to alter how people buy health care, Young said.

Nationwide, nearly half of large employers surveyed by Mercer offered lower-cost, high-deductible health plans in 2014, up from 20 percent five years earlier. Mercer projects that to grow to 66 percent by 2017.

As more employers offered them, employee enrollment in high-deductible plans nationwide increased to 23 percent from 8 percent during the same five-year period, according to Mercer.

“The days of high-deductible health plans are not over and won’t be over soon, so we have got to be better consumers of health care,” Young said. “Anything that passes along information is a high value for everybody.”

NOT A PANACEA

While advocates of cost and quality transparency tout its potential, author and journalist Steve Brill asserts that it is “not a cure-all” for the high cost of health care that he blames on the high prices charged by care providers and pharmaceutical companies. Brill is the author of the best-selling book “America’s Bitter Pill: Money, Politics, Back-Room Deals, and the Fight to Fix Our Broken Healthcare System” that chronicled the passage of the Affordable Care Act.

Brill, who also spoke last month at the Advantage Benefits Group seminar, contends that health care prices are simply too high and executives in the industry earn too much. Transparency merely shows people how much they are overcharged for their care by some providers, he said.

Controlling high health care costs needs to go much further than publicly listing prices, he said. Brill favors cost controls on drug prices and argues that “ridiculous profit margins” at pharmaceutical companies are too high.

“Transparency is a great thing and transparency can help,” Brill said. “But transparency is not a cure-all here. The only cure-all is pretty simple. The prices are too high and the people charging those prices are just making too much money.”

For transparency to work, Brill and others say consumers will also need to learn to couple pricing information with quality data to make decisions. They’ll also need to understand that the price a care provider charges does not necessarily correlate to higher quality.