Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. (AP) — Ryan Reed won for the first time in a NASCAR national series with an Xfinity Series victory Saturday at Daytona International Speedway, where Sprint Cup star Kyle Busch was injured in a late crash.

Reed, the 21-year-old driver for Roush Fenway Racing, passed Brad Keselowski for the lead on the last lap to grab the win in the debut race for new sponsor Xfinity.

The race ended minutes after Busch was transported to a hospital with what appeared to be an injury to his right leg or ankle. He hit head-first into an inside retaining wall with eight laps remaining, and was only able to climb halfway through his window.

Busch appeared to be pointing into the car as rescue workers arrived to help him to the ground. His leg was wrapped in a splint and he was on a stretcher as he was loaded into the ambulance.

His wife, Samantha, was crying as she left the infield care center with team owner Joe Gibbs and team president J.D. Gibbs. Samantha Busch is pregnant with the couple’s first child, a boy due in May.

As Kyle Busch was being evaluated at Halifax Health Medical Center, older brother Kurt was due at a final appeal of his indefinite NASCAR suspension.

Kurt Busch was suspended Friday by NASCAR because a Delaware judge ruled he choked and beat a former girlfriend last fall. He’s already been replaced in Sunday’s season-opening Daytona 500 by his race team; now Kyle Busch’s status for the biggest event of the season is in question.

The direct hit by Kyle Busch on an interior wall was in a spot that did not have SAFER barrier. His car had traveled through the grass and slammed hard into the wall, ricocheting off in a crumpled heap. Reaction was swift on social media from drivers calling on NASCAR to install the energy-absorbing material everywhere at race tracks.

“It’s beyond me why we don’t have soft walls everywhere,” tweeted six-time champion Jimmie Johnson.

Former driver Jeff Burton, now a television analyst, called on NASCAR to overcome costs, “It’s very expensive but we have to find a way.”