In 2010 the Lafayette Senior Services Department was placed under the auspices of our Recreation Department, run by Curt Cheesman.

In September of 2012 Mr. Cheesman hired a new manager for the senior center and lunch program, a hire that it seems was not endorsed by the Senior Advisory Board.

I have learned that by early 2013 problems with the senior programs began, and continued to get worse over the years. Where was upper management during this time? There is a difference between not micro-managing and proper oversight.

This newspaper reported it took Pat Vigil contacting the state Agency on Aging before action was taken. After talking with our seniors, the agency determined common themes of intimidation, hostility and disrespect, and a fear of retaliation.

These are serious charges. Imagine your parents, and grandparents, being subjected to this type of treatment; you would be outraged. At that time, Mr. Cheesman made changes to the lunch program. Later, the senior services manager resigned.

On Aug. 12, Mr. Cheesman held a senior services forum. I attended the forum for two reasons. I wanted to hear what the attendees had to say and I wanted to see how my city was going to handle this. Well, my city gets failing grades.

Lafayette's council talks a good game about inclusion. They talk about inclusion when they want to raise their pay, and to allow non-residents to serve on our boards.

Advertisement

And yet, after all the publicity about how our city has treated our seniors only one of them, Councilor Dowling, attended this first public meeting with those seniors. Is that a lack of inclusion? I know this, it sure looks like a lack of respect and interest.

The first question asked at the forum was if the city council was in attendance. The expectation was that they would be there.

Mr. Cheesman announced that since the baby boomers are active, their needs can be met by the recreation center. So in one, very easy solution to a difficult problem, all the boomers in Lafayette have been lumped into one "type," those who use the recreation center. Apparently they will not be included in any future plans for senior services. Interesting. Now the senior programs can be tailored to just one generation. Less work for staff anyway.

Other items of note: Mr. Cheesman calling the members of the forum "the masses" so many times I felt like yelling out, "Vive La Revolution!" and another gem, selecting a woman to ask a question "because she was cute."

When asked about the details of the Meals on Wheels contract to run the senior lunch program, he told us Roger, from the planning department, had handled that, but he was not in attendance due to illness. Why is the planning department handling senior services business? Instead, Mr. Cheesman called on the only city council member present to speak on that subject. While it was appreciated that Councilor Dowling was in attendance, he was unprepared, and underwhelming in his contribution. It appeared he had not read the contract and could offer nothing about its contents.

Perhaps at the next forum more councilors could come out and mingle with those Mr. Cheesman calls "the masses." They have been mistreated, and right now I don't see enough of a personal effort, on behalf of my city, to make amends for that mistreatment. I am saddened that I must point this out to our council. It is a very poor reflection on those who represent us that it wasn't the first thing on their minds when they learned of this. Mr. Cheesman told the seniors he was their advocate. That brings to mind the old saying, "With friends like that, who needs enemies?"

Karen Norback lives in Lafayette.