The subject of Medicaid expansion is an important financial issue for our state and for the people of South Carolina, and it is my opinion that is it good for both.

With the upcoming elections in November it has become a hot issue for debate which has left many South Carolinians wondering how this will affect their jobs. There is no doubt that the effect of Medicaid expansion will affect every hospital and healthcare worker within the state of South Carolina.

A component of the Affordable Care Act gave each state the opportunity to expand Medicaid coverage to those patients that are 138 percent above the poverty level. This adjusted level is approximately $15,000 for a single individual or $31,000 for a family of four. The issue is that each state has the option to expand coverage and the governor is the only elected person that can make this decision.

In South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley chose to reject this expansion, according to many, based on her future political ambitions rather than accepting the expansion which would help thousands of South Carolinians.

In 2014 the federal government allocated $700 million to the state of South Carolina so all hospitals can treat and heal this growing patient population.

In 2015 and 2016 the federal government will again appropriate annual payments of $700 million to our state. The funding for this three-year figure of $2.1 billion is paid in full by the federal government. In fact, a significant amount of the funding is driven by federal tax dollars that we are all currently paying.

Within the following three years (2017 through 2019) a federal match of 9:1 is formulated at which the state of South Carolina is reimbursed $9 dollars for each $1 dollar spent on treating this patient population.

• 2014-2016 — Federal government provides $700 million to the state of South Carolina.

• 2017-2019 — Federal government provides funds on a 9:1 match.

If I were elected Comptroller General, I would push to accept these federal dollars and use the money to help patients who need medical assistance. My opponent’s view has been to reject these much-needed funds.

If South Carolina were to accept Medicaid expansion approximately 200,000 people could enroll within this program. It is also estimated that 44,000 new healthcare jobs will be created to service this population. Our healthcare system is incurring a significant financial burden due to our state government rejecting federal assistance.

Regardless of these Medicaid dollars the federal government has already enacted Medicare reimbursement cuts which will affect all hospitals throughout the United States. Between 2014 and 2020 there is an expected $2.6 billion reduction in Medicare payments.

The effect of our state not implementing Medicaid expansion is that many small, rural hospitals will most likely close or be purchased by for-profit healthcare systems.

In addition, medium to large hospitals will look to decrease expenses by engaging in cost shifting or possibly reducing both clinical and non-clinical staff.

On Nov. 4, the voters of South Carolina have the ability to determine what the outcome for our state will be in the months and years ahead. The people of our state deserve better than we have been getting.

Kyle Herbert is the Democratic nominee for Comptroller General. He is a licensed CPA and CMA. He is an adjunct professor of accounting at USC and was named a Fulbright Scholar in 2013. For more information go to www.kyleherbert.com.

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/YHs7XT