Tuesday night, I sat in the Denver Post auditorium for a Senate debate and watched Rep. Cory Gardner’s Senate run exposed for what it is: A campaign about nothing.

Pressed repeatedly by Denver Post political editor Chuck Plunkett and reporter Lynn Bartels on what he believed and what he stood for, Gardner reverted to evasions and canned talking points that apparently pass muster on Fox News. But as swing state central for more than a decade, Colorado reporters have heard it all. Bartels and Plunkett weren’t buying it.

Asked by Plunkett to provide details of his pre-Obamacare health care plan that he claims motivated him to run and that he’s been waving as a bloody shirt, Gardner refused and filibustered. Plunkett asked him why he redacted the name of his family’s plan, the one he said was so cheap. Gardner dodged again. Finally, exasperated, Plunkett told Gardner to audience applause, “Sometimes if a candidate doesn't answer a question, that also tells you something about the candidate that voters can know.”

[GALLERY: Cartoons on the 2014 Congressional Elections]

You can see video of the exchange here. You can watch the Q&A from the debate here.

The problem for Gardner is not just that his non-answers tell voters something, but that Obamacare has become a non-issue for anyone besides the hardcore Republican base in a state with a lot of unaffiliated voters. Today’s Denver Post puts it bluntly: “While the [Affordable Care Act] has aided Gardner in some ways, such as fundraising, the issue has not fulfilled its potential as a knockout punch. … During the critical month of September, the last full month before ballots go out to Colorado voters, the Gardner campaign ran four television ads; not a single one focused on the ACA.”

With the central pretense of his campaign falling apart, Gardner finds himself constantly arguing that the policy he does support – the federal personhood bill that would ban all abortion and many forms of birth control – doesn’t exist and doesn’t matter. Gardner has denied the existence of the Life at Conception Act to (at last count): Fox31 Denver, KUSA/Channel 9 Denver, the Grand Junction Sentinel, Josh Green with Bloomberg News, MSNBC and at the Denver Post debate. Colorado’s BigMediaBlog tallied up the clips.

[SEE: Cartoons about the Republican Party]

Even primary bill sponsor Sen Rand Paul, R-Ky., states that the Life at Conception Act is designed to overturn Roe v Wade. But Gardner keeps insisting that the Life at Conception Act is just a “statement” that won’t actually do anything.

Which begs the question: If Gardner thinks his votes and policies don’t affect real peoples’ lives, why is he running?

The Cory Gardner for Senate Campaign: A campaign about nothing.