Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Video | Ali's 73rd birthday celebration

Buy Photo The sixth floor of The Ali Center was the site for the 73rd birthday of Muhammad Ali on Saturday night. A dinner in his honor attended by friends, family and other Louisville luminaries was followed by a play about the champ's life. 1/17/15 (Photo: Marty Pearl/Special to The C-J)Buy Photo

With the guest of honor at home recuperating from a recent hospitalization, more than 300 devotees of the three-time heavyweight boxing champion and humanitarian paid homage to Muhammad Ali Saturday evening in celebrating the Louisville icon's 73rd birthday.

They shared stories and tributes to the Champ at a reception and charity dinner at the Muhammad Ali Center. They then walked over to the nearby Kentucky Center for the Performing Arts to watch the world premier of the stage play, "And in This Corner.....Cassius Clay," a cooperative effort of StageOne Family Theatre, the Ali Center and the arts center.

Ali was released from the hospital Friday, after brief followup treatment for a urinary tract infection. He was at home, reported to be resting and celebrating his 73rd birthday. Ali was hospitalized briefly this week, after a previous 17-day hospital stay for the infection over the holidays.

The birthday event at the Ali Center was promoted under the banner "Play It Forward: Champions Night." The event had a slew of corporate sponsors.

The dinner was attended by Louisville's civic elite. Ali "is not only the Greatest, but he's the world's greatest humanitarian. And he put in the roadwork," said Mayor Greg Fischer upon arrival at the center.

Tori Murden McClure, the trans-Atlantic rower and Spalding University president, recalled that she was the first full-time employee of the Ali Center over a decade ago, when she had a chance to work with Ali. She called the chance to be around Ali "a life-altering experience," adding that he encouraged her to row across the ocean --- after an initial failed attempt.

"I admire his compassion for people, regardless of where they come from, or where they are going," said Fund for the Arts president Christen Boone. "He is able to bring people together."

Insurance company executive Nana Lampton said she admired Ali's tenacity, his wit and his willingness to encounter new adventures. "He has always been a very esteemed person in my life," she said.

Although he wasn't there, Ali's persona seemed to be pervasive in the crowded View Pointe Hall overlooking the Ohio River. The tables were decorated with centerpieces with boxing gloves.

The guests dined on all-natural chicken breast stuffed with roasted pears and could partake of white sheet birthday cake honoring Ali that had been prepared by Livvy and Gabe Feinn, young sibling bakers who were aided by Sullivan University's culinary staff.

The play about Ali is aimed at students in grades four through 12. Funds raised from the birthday-celebration event are to be used to build a scholarship program for low-income schoolchildren to attend a dual field trip to see the new stage play and to visit the Ali Center and see its exhibits.

Playwright Idris Goodwin was commissioned by StageOne to write the play. Peter Holloway, StageOne's producing artistic director, said it was his idea to ask Goodwin to take on the Ali project. "Most of us don't know much about his growing up as Cassius Clay. He has always been one of my heroes," Holloway said in an interview during the reception.

Goodwin is an award-winning playwright and essayist. His play, "How We Got On," premiered at Actors Theatre's 2012 Humana Festival. His book, "These Are the Breaks," was nominated for a Pushcart Prize, and he has appeared on HBO, the Discovery Channel and Sesame Street.

Goodwin's play traces the early life of Ali, who grew up as Cassius Clay on Grand Avenue in western Louisville and went on to dominate the boxing world through the 1970s, before he turned to social activism.

Donna Hargens, Jefferson County Public Schools superintendent, has set a goal for every local middle school student to see the "In This Corner" production.

THE GREATEST

See a video of the birthday celebration at www.courier-journal.com

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1CbojhI