Buy Photo Luke Durbin, left, Mary Anne Butters and Joe Pritchard prepare to break ground July 24 for the Recovery Works detoxification facility. (Photo: Mike Emery/Palladium-Item)Buy Photo Story Highlights Recovery Works will become Wayne County’s first detoxification program in 2016.

Detoxification adds another program to what is available to treat addiction in the county.

Other programs are being explored through the Heroin is Here group.

Everyone knows the discomfort caused by the flu.

Now, imagine a solid week of that. And it’s 20 times worse. Or, maybe, 30.

That’s what it feels like to be “dope sick.”

That’s the term used to describe the suffering of heroin withdrawal, and it’s an obstacle to those addicted to the drug who want to get treatment. Counseling programs require withdrawal be completed before counseling begins, and few are able — or willing — to navigate the effects of withdrawal alone.

For most, withdrawal requires medical supervision in a detoxification facility or with medication-assisted treatment from a facility such as Richmond Treatment Center.

Wayne County finally will have an in-patient detox facility when Recovery Works opens in 2016 at the intersection of Indiana 1 and Interstate 70 near Cambridge City. It will provide another facet to addiction treatment as the area fights the scourge of heroin.

“I’m very glad somebody else is jumping on the bandwagon,” said Whitney Mays, program director for Hope House, a residential treatment facility for men. “The bottom line is somebody’s getting help. People are being helped and nobody’s sons or daughters have to die.”

Still, some addiction treatment professionals want to take a wait-and-see attitude toward the impact Recovery Works’ 32-bed residential facility will have on the county. And, they say, more needs to be done in other areas such as after-hours and weekend emergency services, follow-up help after overdoses and transitional help for people released from jail.

Those areas are being addressed, at least preliminarily, through efforts of those involved with the Heroin is Here group started by Reid Health that has met seven times since its inception late in 2014.

Impact of Recovery Works uncertain

“We need a detox program,” said Lisa Suttle, director of psychiatric services at Reid and the facilitator for Heroin is Here. “We need more outpatient services and availability on nights and weekends. A person who’s struggling doesn’t have a lot of trouble from 8 to 5, but they’re struggling evenings and weekends.”

Recovery Works offers the needed detox program, but Joe Pritchard, chief executive officer of Pinnacle Treatment Centers, said the average stay is 21 to 28 days with a cost of $12,000. He also said the facility’s draw would be people within a one- to two-hour drive, so it would encompass Cincinnati, Dayton and Columbus in Ohio as well as Muncie, Ind., and Indianapolis.

“We’ll have to see how things go once it gets up and running,” said Suttle, who was one of the addiction treatment professionals to attend Recovery Works’ groundbreaking on July 24. “They are reaching out to agencies and the community finding out what’s needed and listening to our concerns. I’m hopeful.”

Pritchard said Recovery Works would refer its clients to already-existing programs for continued care after the detoxification is complete.

“Hopefully, we’re going to be just another extension of what’s already established here in providing a very good, comprehensive network of services for those suffering from addiction and those that are affected with it,” he said. “Our program here will only be one part of the full continuum of care.”

Rob Backmeyer, chief operating officer of Centerstone, wonders what impact Recovery Works will have locally.

“From my perspective, there’s always a need for more, but it takes two,” he said. “Availability doesn’t mean it gets used. The option existing is never a bad thing, but how it benefits the area, we’ll have to see.”

Continued care after detoxification remains critical because brains need to heal from alterations caused by addiction. During that process, the brain will crave the opiate.

“I’m excited about the residential facility coming in,” said Luke Mohr, executive director of Richmond Treatment Center. “As long as there’s good continued care with that, that’s a great thing. Unfortunately, as far as the impact on this community, I don’t feel like the residential center’s going to have much impact at all.

“If it helps some, then that’s great.”

Cost often creates a barrier for those suffering from addiction to seek treatment because they often don’t have the thousands of dollars or the insurance necessary. The Healthy Indiana Plan 2.0 program has increased access to addiction treatment for those signed up, and Pritchard noted the Affordable Care Act has increased the number of people in their early to mid-20s seeking help on their parents’ insurance.

Other treatment options being considered

While Recovery Works proceeds toward its opening, other treatment options continue to be explored.

Dave Eales addressed the most recent Heroin is Here meeting to discuss the planned fall opening of The Clint Belcher Recovery Outpatient Program that will be based at Rock Solid Ministries on East Main Street. It will be a religious-based program that takes six to eight weeks, with follow-up sessions.

Backmeyer is part of the Treatment Options Team within the Heroin is Here group. That group is exploring several ways to expand the kinds of treatment available in the area, including work with inmates upon their release from jail, follow-up help after people overdose and drop-in centers and after-hours locations.

Centerstone currently provides some addiction counseling for Wayne County Jail inmates, Backmeyer said, and a plan is being developed to pilot a program that follows inmates to release, providing support and helping them find places to go so they don’t return to their previous ways.

Statistics released in September 2014 by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration showed 53 percent of state and 45 percent of federal prisoners suffer from addiction, and 75 percent of prisoners returning to prison have addictions.

Overdoses continue to be a problem created by heroin, which suppresses the ability to breathe. Ed Seban, director of EMS for Richmond Fire Department, said narcan, the antidote to a heroin overdose, was administered by his department 79 times in a three-month span. Some of those instances, however, were times in which narcan was administered when the cause of breathing problems could not be diagnosed immediately but eventually was determined not to be an overdose.

Wayne Count’s number of deaths caused by a heroin overdose rose by one in July, bringing the 2015 total to 13, with 11 deaths awaiting official determination, according to the Wayne County Coroner’s Office.

The Heroin is Here group has discussed the need for follow-up services available for individuals who survive overdoses and plans further discussions.

A drop-in center would help support transitions because it would provide a place where people struggling to overcome their addictions would know they could go to receive assistance, Backmeyer said.

An after-hours program would provide crisis-assessment during non-business hours, Backmeyer said, and is something the group is interested in accomplishing. A Centerstone pilot program already offers Monday-Friday evening hours, but the hours could be expanded to offer a place for people with addictions to get help and for law enforcement to bring people for assistance.

“Not many problems occur, conveniently, during the 8 to 5 hours,” Backmeyer said.

Suttle hopes some Heroin is Here projects can be solidified within a couple of months. The group has brought together a variety of people, including representatives from different treatment facilities, to work on the heroin problem.

“It’s an opportunity for us to be talking and working together, and it helps build community resources,” Backmeyer said.

Heroin is Here

The Heroin is Here group has moved forward on several projects, said Lisa Suttle of Reid Health, facilitator of the group.

Public service announcements have been recorded and aired on local radio stations, and a billboard nearly is ready for its debut. It says, “Stop heroin in our backyard” and tells individuals to call 2-1-1 if they need immediate help.

The 2-1-1 call center has agreed to serve as a referral service, listening to callers’ problems and referring them to the proper Wayne County services. The call center also can contact emergency personnel if the seriousness of the call warrants it.

Suttle said Reid also is putting together tool kits on computer thumb drives that contain materials necessary for businesses, schools, groups or agencies to educate members about heroin and addiction. The thumb drives will be distributed free to anyone requesting them.

A program is up and running to train police, fire and other agencies in the use of narcan, an antidote used to reverse heroin overdoses. About eight agencies have received the training and narcan kits, which are provided by Reid, Suttle said.

Reid also is building a website that will contain information about meetings and resources related to heroin and addiction support.

Tracie Upchurch, Dave Strycker, Diana Pappin, Sharrie Morgan, Ryan Williams and Art VanVleet have provided help with some of the Heroin is Here projects, Suttle said.

Read or Share this story: http://pinews.co/1TGMJKY