The homeless man with high blood pressure, who had previously suffered a stroke, arrives at the East Los Angeles county health clinic at 9:50 a.m. When he registers at the front desk, he refuses to see one of the many physicians on duty. He insists on waiting for his favorite doctor. The nurse grabs a pink highlighter and scrawls at the bottom of the “encounter sheet”: “Will wait for Dr. Katz.”

The man lingers for more than four hours, despite a painful open sore on his buttocks, until Dr. Mitchell Katz begins his afternoon shift. Katz works out of a tiny, windowless office with scuffed linoleum floors, his bicycle propped against a wall, and a battered orange metal desk cluttered with his backpack, patient records, a half eaten sandwich, an apple and a few empty Diet Coke cans. His face specked with stubble and dressed in baggy khaki pants, a blue button-down shirt and worn sneakers, Katz appears to be a typical harried urgent care physician. He strides into the patient’s room, sets a hand on the man’s shoulder and asks, “Come se siente?” - How are you?

The homeless man has no idea that his favorite physician is also one of the most prominent public health officials in the nation. As director of the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services, Katz oversees more than 20,000 employees and a $4 billion budget. Despite his multitude of responsibilities as an administrator, every week Katz works a Thursday afternoon shift at the Edward Roybal Comprehensive Health Center.

“Seeing patients helps me learn about the system, so I can work on fixing problems,” Katz said.

Since Katz took over the county health department in 2010 after 13 years as director of San Francisco’s public health department, he has faced amassive task: an overburdened, underfunded public health system with onerous wait times at county hospitals and clinics; more than a million uninsured residents; and the challenge of implementing the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare, in the nation’s most populous county. But by all accounts, Katz has proved to be an able administrator, with the political smarts to negotiate the rocky shoals of county government while maintaining the compassion of a family doctor.

Those who have worked with Katz for many years say that despite the powerful positions he’s held, he has remained as down-to-earth and iconoclastic as when he was a young resident at UC San Francisco. Most days Katz, 54, who lives in the Larchmont neighborhood with his partner, artist Igael Gurin-Malous, and their two adopted children from Vietnam, rides his bicycle six miles to his downtown office. He then bicycles to Board of Supervisor meetings, or appointments at Los Angeles County-USC Medical Center, or his Thursday shift at the East L.A. clinic, and then back home. Occasionally, Katz says with a chuckle, he is mistaken for a bicycle messenger.

Advertisement

While most health care experts consider Katz’s tenure in Los Angeles successful, they emphasize that his greatest challenges lie ahead.

When Katz was hired, he drew on his experience in the Bay Area, where he was a driving force in creating Healthy San Francisco, the first city-run universal healthcare plan in the nation. More than 50,000 uninsured residents received medical access.

In 2010, Katz created a similar, but less comprehensive, program called Healthy Way L.A. and employed existing county clinics to provide low-cost primary care for uninsured patients, including undocumented immigrants.

Patients could now make appointments at clinics instead of waiting hours to see a physician.

Wait times have been reduced at county hospitals and clinics during the past few years, said Shana Alex Charles, a professor at UCLA’s Center for Health Policy Research. “Appointments certainly aren’t revolutionary in a private system, but they are in a public system,” she said.

If patients have access to primary care, where physicians can manage diseases and provide preventative care, instead of overwhelming emergency rooms, the county will save money, Katz said.

Because of the size and diverse population of Los Angeles County, the launch of the ACA here is being closely watched around the country, health care experts say. If Obamacare succeeds here, that bodes well for its future.

“Whether the ACA works or doesn’t work here will be a bellwether for the country,” said Louise McCarthy, president of the Community Clinic Association of L.A. County, whose members see more than a million patients a year. “People will be certainly looking to L.A. as a model...At this point, California has been the success story for the ACA, and L.A. County has really driven enrollment.”

The current challenge for Katz is to find a way to cover the approximately one million county residents, most of whom are undocumented – more than any other community in the nation – who don’t qualify for the Affordable Care Act. Katz plans to relaunch a version of Healthy Way L.A. in the fall to provide healthcare and medical homes to impoverished, uninsured people, regardless of documentation. The program – called My Health L.A. – will service about 100,000 initially, but his goal is to eventually increase the number.

Tom Holler, co-executive director of One L.A., an organization of churches, synagogues and nonprofits, considers the 100,000 figure “woefully inadequate.”

Holler, however, is hopeful that Katz will eventually fight for more funding so coverage to the uninsured can be expanded.

“I think Dr. Katz has done a very good job at creating a vision and a sense of direction for the department. He’s done a good job at being connected to the community and listening to what people are saying... I think he’s established himself here. He’s built credibility with the supervisors and the community at large. To do that in three or four years in a county as complicated in L.A. is no small feat.”

Charles of UCLA said that on a five-point scale, she’d give Katz a four.

“He’s certainly energized the public health system and moved towards a focus on quality that the system desperately needed. I think, absolutely, he’s the right and the best person for the job. But I also think the size of the problem is still a huge one.”

Katz grew up in Brooklyn and attended Yale University and Harvard Medical School. His brother and older sister, who was once was homeless and lived on the streets in New York City, are both developmentally disabled. This had a profound influence on Katz, who decided to devote his career to public health, to helping the disabled, the undocumented, the impoverished.

“I know I could have been developmentally disabled, too,” Katz said. “I realized how lucky I was, so the lesson to me has always been to do something useful with my abilities. I wanted to find a career where I could help people.”

His brother’s life was greatly enhanced when he moved into an assisted living facility, which has informed Katz’s approach to homelessness. In San Francisco, he was instrumental in creating 1,200 units of supportive housing.

In Los Angeles the number is only a few hundred, but the push for more “is snowballing,” Katz said, and his goal is 15,000.

Katz has spent his entire professional career working in public health. When he headed the San Francisco Health Department’s AIDs Office during the height of the pandemic, he created the first publicly-funded needle exchange program in the nation. These were harrowing years, both personally and professionally. He lost many friends and patients and every day he was confronted with a different crisis.

“I think that helped my training as an administrator,” Katz said. “You’re dealing with people who feel like administrative issues are a matter of life or death.

Well, I’ve actually faced many decisions that really are life or death – and they’re not about memos or emails.”

Katz’s signature achievement was Healthy San Francisco, said Dr. Kevin Grumbach, chair of Family and Community Medicine at UC San Francisco.

“He was able to see through the haze and clarify how to put it into action,” Grumbach said.

The key question, Grumbach said, is whether Katz can equal his success in Los Angeles, a county more than ten times larger than San Francisco.

The immense challenge is the reason he took the job, Katz said.

“Los Angeles is so big and complex people think if you can solve a problem here, you can solve it anywhere... This is my life — to provide quality medical care to poor people. I believe it can be done.”

The CHCF Center for Health Reporting (www.centerforhealthreporting.org) partners with news organizations to cover California health policy. Based at USC’s Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism, the Center is funded by the nonprofit California HealthCare Foundation.