What's Quickly? It's where readers sound off on the issues of the day. Have a quote, question or quip? Call Quickly at 312-222-2426 or email quickly@post-trib.com.

Hobart needs a streetlight at 14th Street and Ash Street. The intersection is very dark and dangerous for anyone going to or coming out of St. Mary Medical Center or the hospital's emergency department.

Don't mock the president for crying for every child that has been killed due to gunfire. Mock those who are so cold-hearted that they are unmoved by these events.

Let me answer this about common sense: Who do you think can put the heaven and the earth here, the stars in the sky, the wind to blow, the sun to shine? The list goes on and on. The list is infinity. Do you think Santa Claus and the Tooth Fairy did? It has to be somebody with much, much greater power than men, so you think about that.

I've often wondered what percent of the Quickly anti-gun contributors live in high-crime areas and what percent live in safe, regularly patrolled areas.

There is no pickup truck worth $50,000. People must have way too much money to pay current prices for new vehicles that will rust out in the same amount of time as they did 20 years ago when we could afford them.

I would think that every responsible, law-abiding gun owner is backing the president's new gun safety rules.

Clay Street between 15th Avenue in Gary and Central Avenue in Lake Station is a disgrace. It's a major artery and yet there is no attention to the mess that it has become. I don't know if Lake Station and Gary have to put their funds together or if Gov. Mike Pence can get some of that big surplus he's always touting, but Clay Street needs to be fixed.

Many people walk around with selective ignorance. Why would you want to act this way?

Low-information voters are scared voters. They can be brainwashed into thinking someone will storm into their homes and take away their cache of weapons.

I wish that Quickly had enough space to tell of some of the miracles that I've had from God. They're real miracles like times I should have been burned. I should have been killed by a horse and I felt a hand push me down to keep me from getting killed by this horse. God is more real to me than I am to myself.

The Republicans and Reaganomics have been responsible for the dismantling of our middle class for 30 years. Reality has to enter into it somewhere. Have a happy new year and read a book.

Greed is running our country. The issue of gun safety takes a back seat. Nothing will come before people making their millions or their billions, not even saving lives.

"Be the change that you want to see in the world." Don't stand by and watch others destroy it.

Quip: If there's no God, why is the year called 2015? Retort: If there's not a pantheon of gods, why are the days named after pagan iconography?

Gary's mayor traveled to Washington, D.C., for the president's news conference. I hope she paid for that herself and didn't use my tax dollars.

I have a son, almost 40 years old, with two kids. He makes approximately $28,000 a year and the Affordable Care Act says he must pay $528 per month for insurance and he is not eligible for any financial assistance. How is he supposed to afford that?

I don't think it matters what Mike Pence says about LGBT before election time. He has already made his opinion quite clear. If you disagree with his opinion, vote him out.

Read more at www.post-trib.com/quickly