When a relationship devolves into pleas to “not assume the worst” or complaints about unreturned phone calls and being made to feel unimportant, it’s often a sure sign something’s not right.

Such is the state of things between the city of Bend and the independently governed Bend Park & Recreation District. A batch of emails exchanged between the two organizations’ respective top administrators reveals disagreement over a number of issues, including the city’s efforts to regulate recreational marijuana, the future of the Mirror Pond dam and who’s responsible for costs associated with work beneath the Colorado Avenue bridge. The records include all emails sent between the city and park district this calendar year through October and were obtained by The Bulletin through a public records request,

In most Oregon cities, parks are a division of city government. However, in 1974, voters in Bend approved the creation of a stand-alone parks agency with its own director and budget.

Spinning the district off from the city also resulted in a property tax rate for the district of $1.65, a rate that is more than half of the city’s $2.80. The district’s robust funding has made parks a prominent feature across the city and earned the district national recognition for its work. However, the more it expands, the more the district and city have to coordinate on matters such as road closures, policing and urban planning.

While the emails reveal a number of disagreements, the two administrators, City Manager Eric King and park district Executive Director Don Horton, say there is no lingering animosity. Following one email flare-up in October, the pair say they met to hash out strategies for better coordination, agreeing to meet more often and include deputies whose work often overlaps.

The October exchange focused on an advisory group the city formed to develop policies governing the sale of recreational marijuana. Applications to participate in the group were open to the public, and the City Council appointed members representing a range of interests, including the marijuana industry and Bend-La Pine Schools.

In emails and public meetings, Horton accused the city of leaving the district out of the process by not directly notifying his agency that the committee was being formed. In particular, he was upset the district wasn’t able to earlier advocate for a requirement that recreational marijuana stores be set back 250 feet from parks, a policy the district’s governing board backs. The city has maintained the committee’s work was well advertised and the district would have been welcomed into the process at the beginning. A special meeting was eventually set up for the district to make its case in front of the committee, though the group voted against the 250-foot rule.

After a string of emails on the subject, Horton wrote to the city on Oct. 17, beginning with the sentence, “This happens a lot.”

“I know it’s not purposeful but when we set meetings with city staff and no one shows up, when staff won’t return phone calls or confirm meetings and discuss policy issues without our knowledge it makes us feel as though we are not important,” he continued. “And certainly not a partner. I’m trying to change that.”

In a response, King wrote to Horton, “Email is not a productive way to air your grievances.”

“I would suggest that if you truly want a partnership relationship you not assume the worst and find more constructive ways to communicate your frustrations,” King replied.

In an interview, Horton said he was referring to a meeting 11 months earlier the city had requested and then failed to show up for.

“The point I was trying to make was that we need to foster this relationship a little bit better,” Horton said of the exchange.

Since the subsequent meeting between the two administrators, Horton said, “There haven’t been any issues.”

Speaking about the exchange in a separate interview, King said, “I certainly don’t have any personal issues with (Horton).”

However, he did note he told Horton, “Gee, if that happens, please don’t wait 11 months to share it over an email.”

Water under the bridge?

While that exchange focused on the formation of city policy, others have concerned agency finances, including a tussle over differing interpretations of city agreements governing its relationship with utility companies. Under the agreements, the city is not responsible for the cost of relocating infrastructure when it conflicts with a city construction project. For example, if a road is being widened, the power company has to pay to relocate any utility poles.

The park district argues the city incorrectly applied one of its agreements to a park district project to install a tunnel under the Colorado Bridge, a move that cost the district $189,000, Horton said. The work required the relocation of a high-pressure pipe maintained by Cascade Natural Gas and electrical infrastructure overseen by Pacific Power. At the same time as the tunnel was being installed, the city was attaching a sewer line to the bottom of the bridge, though that work didn’t affect any of those utilities.

The city’s agreement with Cascade Natural Gas includes a clause that says the utility is liable to cover costs associated with a project that benefits the public good. Even though the tunnel is part of the district’s trail system and not maintained by city staff, the city was able to argue it benefited the public, and Cascade Natural Gas covered the tab.

There is no “public good” clause in the city’s agreement with Pacific Power. The park district, however, argued that the trail should be considered a city project as it’s noted in a citywide transportation plan, and therefore the cost should fall to Pacific Power.

In emails, King wrote the city reviewed its policy and felt it would be incorrect to call the trail a city project.

In a message to King on Aug. 27, Horton wrote, “Is there something else going on here that I should know about(?)”

“I’ve asked you if I can attend the meetings you have with PacifiCorp but haven’t been invited,” he continued. “You’ve met with them and drawn an opinion without talking to us. I thought we were in partnership to provide such things but it feels otherwise. It’s disappointing that we are leading Mirror Pond and trying to work with the city but you can’t find time to include us in decisions that have a huge impact on our projects.”

King clarified that he hadn’t met with Pacific Power, but instead received a call from the utility and ran into one of its representatives at a Rotary meeting. King emphasized that he considers the city partners not only with the park district, but also Deschutes County and Bend-La Pine Schools.

“As partners we need to adhere to the written agreements we have with each other,” King wrote.

In a response, Horton complained the district didn’t have the chance to make its case that the trail should be considered a city project, writing, “I believe you have an even greater responsibility to the safety of the public and in this case it’s been completely overlooked.”

He also threatened to abandon their collaboration over planning for the future of the Mirror Pond dam, writing, “If you truly believe that we are the same as the school district perhaps they can help you with Mirror Pond.”

In reply, King emphasized that “we cannot interpret documents incorrectly.”

“There was nothing subversive going on here,” he wrote. “I hope you wouldn’t think I would do something like that. I really hope we can all stop playing the blame game with this … it was no one individual’s fault … more of an awkward set of circumstances. It really is not productive to make assumptions based on ill intent. I would like to find a way to move beyond that.”

In an interview, Horton said what really bothered him was the city’s unwillingness to hear him out, saying, “We were having a hard time getting in there to make our case, and that was frustrating.”

King said it’s “not uncommon” for two agencies to disagree about the interpretation of an agreement. He also pointed out that the city waived development fees for the project to help out with the district’s unexpected $189,000 utility relocation costs.

Mirror Pond

One area both Horton and King said they have collaborated closely on is the Mirror Pond dam. The two agencies have formed a committee to develop plans to replace the aging dam, with staff members and elected officials from both sides participating. Pacific Power owns the dam but announced it would no longer use it to generate electricity after a hole was discovered in it in 2013. The committee is not only looking to acquire and replace the dam, but also to address the problem of upstream silt accumulation.

Horton threatened to pull out of the partnership after two city councilors, Barb Campbell and Nathan Boddie, said they oppose a plan that called for downtown redevelopment to help fund the construction of a new, natural-looking dam. The plan had earlier been supported by a majority of the council and park district board.

“Last night two City Council members held a meeting (with supporters) to derail the Mirror Pond project,” Horton wrote in July. “How do we handle this? Council voted 4-3 in favor of moving forward on this project. We are in partnership to get this project done, yet there are two members of council obstructing the direction that the two boards have chosen to go. I’m not sure how much longer we can stay in partnership when members of the governing body are actively leading an advancement against us.”

King said he intentionally did not respond to this email.

“I serve at the will of the majority of council, and sometimes council is very divided on issues,” King said. “All I do is count to four (votes) and move forward. I can inquire why there’s not support, but it’s not my job to coax or influence anyone.”

Horton said Campbell and Boddie were “voting against the community,” noting that outreach efforts had found support for the Mirror Pond plan. Horton said he intended for his email to encourage King to have “a more in-depth discussion with council so they could better understand what was put into the process.”

“As head of that organization, he ought to have a part of that,” Horton said. “I’m not saying he hasn’t attempted to do that, as head of his organization, he certainly, he needs to help foster it, foster support of that plan.”

In emails, Horton often invoked the district’s leadership on Mirror Pond, at one point saying in reference to the dam and other matters, “it’s the Park District doing the giving.”

King emphasized in an interview that costs associated with Mirror Pond are being split “50-50,” but Horton said “I’m personally taking the lead on this project.”

“Usually when we have a project, there’s a project manager,” Horton said in an interview. “Well, I’m the project manager, no doubt I’ve been taking the lead. The city has paid 50 percent of the bills … but they haven’t paid my costs and my staff have invested a lot of additional time into this.”

Different cultures

City Councilor Victor Chudowsky, who is heavily involved in the Mirror Pond issue and said he enjoys working with Horton, pins any disagreements between the two agencies on differing cultures. The key, he said, is that the city is constantly balancing, while the district has one focus.

“The district is all about parks, whereas the city has to deal with infrastructure, public safety, the municipal court and the urban growth boundary. It’s a much wider portfolio, and it’s a much more political process to get things done. We have to bargain and negotiate with different interests in our community because we have multiple, diverse goals. The parks don’t have to deal with this, and I think the two will always operate differently and have different cultures, because of that fundamental fact.”

Both Horton and King agreed with this assessment, and also agreed that the city’s many different jobs makes it tough to balance priorities, while the district’s singular focus is the reason Bend has great parks.

“Having a park district puts a bright spotlight on that service, and their governing board is very focused,” King said. “That focus can improve service levels.”

The downside for the management of the city, King noted, is that when city revenues fall, parks can’t be part of the balancing act. Funding for police or sewers can be cut to help with an emergency, but parks are not a chip the city has to work with.

“We don’t have as much ability to prioritize the services we provide as we would otherwise,” King said. “But, we are very lucky in Bend to have the quality parks we do have. Don does a great job managing, and the product shows that.”

If parks were to fall under the city’s auspices, Horton said, “We wouldn’t have the park system we have today,” while also agreeing that same separation results in the city’s job being tougher.

Getting along

Jim Johnson knows a thing or two about interagency relations, having been both the administrator of Lane County and the city manager of the county’s largest city, Eugene.

“It is not at all uncommon to have intergovernmental relationships that don’t go well,” said Johnson, who is now deputy director of Portland State University’s National Policy Consensus Center. “The local agencies are competing for the interests of citizens, competing for tax dollars and competing in all different types of ways. The best thing to do is to try to decrease the level of competition, as they are all serving the same people.”

The key, Johnson said, is “regular face-to-face meetings,” not only between administrators, but between elected officials.

“Email just doesn’t work,” he said. “You can’t interpret body language and unless you use all capital letters, you can’t get tone. Meeting in person is the way to go.”

While Horton and King have put a greater emphasis on staff meetings, they are also asking their respective elected bodies to consider hosting joint office hours along with members of the Bend-La Pine School Board. King said not only will it be a chance for citizens to meet with policymakers, but it also will give the different agencies’ policymakers an opportunity to become more familiar with one another.

“Relationships are always a work in process,” King said. “No relationship is perfect. It’s how you strengthen them that matters. Don was expressing his feelings in those emails, and I take that at face value. Now, ‘How do we put a structure in place that will address his concerns?’ is the question.”

Horton takes a similar view, saying, “I think it comes down to communication.”

“Communication seems to be the issue with most relationships,” he said. “It’s something people have to continue to work on. Whenever you see a series of emails over the course of a year or so, you’ll see frustrations. But there haven’t been any issues we are not able to work through.”

— Reporter: 541-633-2160, tleeds@bendbulletin.com