“Liberals, you were right.”

That’s the bold declaration Glenn Beck made on Tuesday that has outlets from the Huffington Post to ABC’s “The View” talking.

From the Huffington Post:

There are many things you’d never expect Glenn Beck to say: “Barack Obama is a great president,” “the Affordable Care Act was a huge success,” “amnesty for all undocumented immigrants!” But “liberals, you were right” tops them all.

On Wednesday’s episode of “The View,” which featured TheBlaze’s Will Cain as a guest host, Whoopi Goldberg led a segment by speaking about the “unlikely ally that some liberal folks found in Glenn Beck.”

Beck’s statement is also making news on MSNBC, Politico and Salon, among other sites.

Beck was speaking about the war in Iraq on his radio program Tuesday when he made the statement, saying liberals knew over a decade ago that “we shouldn’t nation-build, and there was no indication the people of Iraq had the will to be free.”

“I thought that was insulting at the time — everybody wants to be free,” Beck said. “Let me lead with my mistakes. You are right. Liberals, you were right.”

Beck said he now sees that “you cannot force democracy on the Iraqis or anybody else,” and it is time for the left and the right to unite on common values and principles.

“This is something I think that we can come together on, the right and the left,” Beck began. “Not one more life, not one more dollar, not one more airplane, not one more bullet, not one more Marine, not one more arm or leg or eye. Not one more.”

As the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria threatens to overtake Baghdad, Beck stood firmly against sending thousands of American troops back into the country.

“The only way to prevent Baghdad from being overrun is stay there and continue to fight this, militarily, in perpetuity,” Beck said. “Are you willing to do that?”

You can watch Beck’s complete comments around 8 minutes into the video below.

Your browser does not support iframes.

Beck addressed those who were against intervention in Iraq under President George W. Bush, but support whatever Barack Obama chooses to do.

“Liberals, you were against it in the first place. How could you be in favor of more intervention now?” he asked. “How could you possibly be for that, after everything you have said about ‘it’s going to fall apart in the end’ was right? Everything I said, that we could hold it together, was wrong!”

“Finally, there’s some things we can agree on,” Beck added. “Finally, there’s some things we can come together on, and clean up our own house.”

Beck cautioned Americans not to do what “liberals did to us and George W. Bush,” saying we can’t make the crisis “just about politics.”

“This cannot become about the president. It cannot become about the Democrats. This has to be about the principles, because in the principles we all agree,” Beck said. “Enough is enough. Bring them home, period.”

Beck has long spoken about how Americans need to hold principles above politics, and find common ground on which they can unite. On Monday, he laid out what he believes is next for the American people, and how faith, hope, and charity will play an enormous role if we hope to unite.

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live-streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Get it all with a FREE TRIAL.