One of the stranger arguments known to man has resulted in two men being hospitalized after one grabbed a sword to battle his girlfriend's estranged husband. As Click2Houston reported on March 2, 2014, the fight in Katy, Texas, actually had the man grab his Master Sword replica from the classic Nintendo game, "The Legend of Zelda."

Yes, this really happened.

"Swords and flower pots, it sounds nuts, he is psycho," said Eugene Thompson, the homeowner's boyfriend.

Reports state that Thompson lives in a home with his girlfriend, and they ended up getting into a verbal argument on Saturday evening. She called her estranged husband during the fuss and he arrived at their home around 10:00 p.m.

SEE: Man wakes up in body bag: Walter Williams wakes up at funeral home

Thompson's girlfriend, who was not identified, let her husband into the home so Thompson advised him to leave. The estranged husband charged at him, and that caused Thompson to grab his replica Master Sword to protect himself.

"I heard him heading to the bedroom where I was, so I jumped in the closet and I grabbed one of my replica swords, and I pulled it out and stood at the doorway, and he was coming down the hallway at me while I was yelling, 'Go away, you don't live here' and he just walked right into the point of the sword, I don't know if he thought it was a toy," said Thompson.

That's when the fight really got strange.

Thompson was able to get the husband out of the house and lock the door, but the man charged back through it and they fought. During the fight over the Master Sword, the estranged husband was stabbed once in the leg and once in the chest.

SEE: McDonald's napkin lawsuit: Man suing McDonald's for only giving one napkin

It was then that the man grabbed a flower pot and smashed it over the head of Thompson. For those not aware, the main character Link in "The Legend of Zelda" smashes flower pots in the game to find hidden items.

As Harris County Deputies arrived on the scene, the estranged husband was taken to the hospital in serious condition. Thompson was taken to another hospital to get a wound on his head stitched up. The girlfriend/wife was not injured in the fight.

Thompson, needless to say, is confused.

"I am just trying to figure out what to do from here, I have to find a new place to live," said Thompson.