Photo

To the Editor:

“Bottlenecks in Training Doctors” (editorial, July 20) highlights physician shortages and the lack of available medical residency slots in our country. The American Medical Association shares your deep concern that the cap on residency positions has created shortages in many regions and medical specialties.

The A.M.A. has fought diligently over the years to mitigate physician shortages on a number of fronts, including efforts to expand funding for graduate medical education and to advocate for more residency slots to train physicians in needed specialties and regions to improve access to care.

We have done this through our Save GME campaign and efforts to urge the federal and state governments, along with private payers, to fund graduate medical education adequately.

Just this week, we sent a letter to Congress urging support for the Creating Access to Residency Education Act of 2014 (CARE Act), which would authorize federal grants for new residency positions. The A.M.A. also recently adopted policy supporting state legislation to increase funding to train more physicians to meet local work force needs.

It is essential that the next generation of physicians be sufficiently trained. Increasing funding for graduate medical education, as well as our work with medical schools to expand the physician work force, will help us accomplish that.

ROBERT M. WAH

Chicago, July 22, 2014

The writer, a reproductive endocrinologist and obstetrician-gynecologist, is president of the American Medical Association.

To the Editor:

Your editorial summarized the work-force policy failures that limit equal access to health care but didn’t mention the inadequate funding for the major federal training programs that address the geographic and specialty maldistribution of physicians, nurses and other health professionals: Titles VII and VIII of the Public Health Service Act.

First passed in 1963, Titles VII (medicine, dentistry, and mental and public health professionals) and VIII (nursing) are grant and loan programs supporting work-force diversity; advanced-practice nursing; primary care medicine and dentistry; geriatric medicine and nursing; and allied, public and rural health.

Despite the demands generated by those newly insured under the Affordable Care Act, the president’s budget for fiscal year 2015 proposed less funding than a decade ago. The Senate proposal eliminates funding for Title VII diversity programs altogether.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Many peer-reviewed studies prove that these programs work and deserve bipartisan support. One example, the Residency Program in Social Medicine at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, where I teach, has trained 707 physicians in family medicine, internal medicine and pediatrics since 1970.

Aided by Title VII grants, two-thirds now practice in federally designated Health Professions Shortage Areas. Such strategic investments in the work force are needed to assure health care access for all Americans.

HAL STRELNICK

Bronx, July 20, 2014

The writer, a family doctor, is assistant dean for community engagement at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center.

To the Editor:

The bottlenecks in training doctors create a major problem not only for patients, but also for those who want to become physicians. I have already experienced firsthand how difficult it is for qualified applicants to get into an American medical school, and I am now pursuing my goal of becoming a doctor at an offshore medical school.

My peers and I in medical school, offshore and in the United States alike, face two unnerving truths. At graduation, some medical students will owe upward of $300,000 in student loans, and there are far more graduates than residency positions.

There is a distinct possibility that we will graduate from medical school with house-size loans, nowhere to complete our training and no job prospects. Furthermore, even though we may want to become primary care physicians, and the country needs students to take that path, the debt load pushes us into specialties, with their substantially higher incomes.

These problems must be addressed by the federal government, or fewer and fewer young people will see medicine as a financially viable career.

MARYA HICKS

Nevada City, Calif., July 21, 2014

To the Editor:

Regarding the shortage and maldistribution of health professionals, the fact that we train health workers almost exclusively in academic hospitals contributes to their future choices to practice in major metropolitan areas and to subspecialize as well as overtreat and provide potentially harmful unnecessary care.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

We need to find new ways to incentivize or require health facilities, particularly primary care centers and community hospitals, to participate in health worker education. We must recruit and train more people from underserved communities and create retention programs like Mississippi’s highly successful physician retention initiative, which gives priority admission to people raised and educated in the state.

We also need to introduce into the curriculum of all health workers content on how to keep costs down while providing the highest quality care. Only then will the United States have a work force willing to provide high-quality care to all without bankrupting the country.

KATE TULENKO

Washington, July 20, 2014

The writer, a pediatrician, is a health labor market expert and the author of “Insourced: How Importing Jobs Impacts the Healthcare Crisis Here and Abroad.”

To the Editor:

The doctor shortage is certainly serious, but the often-used bottleneck metaphor has helped perpetuate an undue focus on getting more new doctors into practice.

The real problem, from the standpoint of both quality of care and medical costs, is not the number of new doctors entering practice but the number practicing at any one time. That number could be substantially raised by lengthening medical careers.

We need to revisit the debate about making medicine an undergraduate degree, as it is in Europe. By my rough calculation, adding even two years to the length of an American medical career by credentialing doctors at a younger age would increase the cohort of doctors practicing at any one time by a number equivalent to more than 40 percent of the predicted shortage. At that rate, this reform would not entail additional residencies.

CHARLES KARELIS

Washington, July 20, 2014