Earlier this month, Congress passed a significant hurdle in pushing forward criminal justice reform. The Sentencing Reform and Corrections Act of 2015 has been years in the making. While there has been bipartisan support for overhaul, many of the “tough on crime” holdouts have been resistant to anything that would alter sentencing, particularly for drug-related crimes. Thanks to the push by two freshman senators, as well as the backing of Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley (R-IA), Congress may well be on its way to overhauling the criminal justice system. The House version is also backed by its judiciary committee chairs, but it’s the Senate version that has some unique approaches.

As the title notes, the legislation focuses largely on sentencing. The biggest change in the Senate version is to the federal Three Strikes Law, reducing the mandatory life sentence to a minimum of 25 years for certain drug offenses. The second drug offense has also been reduced to a minimum of 15 years, down from 20. Unlike normal mandatory sentences, judges will have some leeway to impose less than the minimum in cases where no firearm was involved, the offender has no history of violent crimes, and is not otherwise involved in any type of “criminal enterprise.”

The Senate version also tackles solitary confinement for juveniles. It all but eliminates its use except in severe cases in which the juvenile is a potential harm to themselves or others. Several steps must be taken before resorting to solitary confinement, including de-escalation and seeking help from a mental health professional. If these efforts fail, they are only to be placed in solitary confinement until they are able to regain control. However, even then, there is a maximum time limit; 30 minutes if they risk harm to themselves and up to three hours if there is a risk they will harm others. If de-escalation has not occurred after the maximum time, they are to be transferred to a facility where they can receive help from qualified mental health professionals. Officials are also prohibited from placing juveniles in solitary for consecutive periods of time.

Other positive aspects include making the sentencing guidelines retroactive, giving an unknown amount of currently incarcerated individuals the chance to have their sentences reduced or be released. This also fixes a gap in the 2011 Fair Sentencing Act which reduced sentences for certain crack cocaine convictions. That law failed to apply the revised sentencing to those convicted prior to 2011. The Sentencing Reform and Corrections Act will make it retroactive. Recidivism reduction programs, compassionate release for non-violent elderly, and re-entry programs that will allow a transitional custody period before being fully released from the system are geared towards changing how the correctional system works.

In spite of the huge step forward there is still cause for concern. Mandatory minimums are one of the key reasons the prison population has grown exponentially over the past 30 years. Federal prosecutors often use them to force offenders into plea deals. When they refuse, prosecutors can use previous infractions to put them in a situation where they face even more time if they go to trial, essentially creating a second or third strike situation. According to Human Rights Watch, 97 percent of federal drug offenders enter into plea deals that include jail time.

Even with the lowered mandatory minimums, prosecutor threats can make offenders wary of going to trial. Furthermore, mandatory minimums are increased for crimes involving firearm possession, as well as for domestic violence cases which result in disfigurement or permanent injury and death. While harsher sentences for violent crimes are understandable, more than half of the federal inmates are there for drug-related crimes. It is unclear how much this law will reduce those numbers.

Most importantly, the federal prison population is a small portion of the more than two million people currently under the supervision of the criminal justice system throughout the country. While the Senate and House versions have to be reconciled, should it make it to the president’s desk, most in the system will not benefit from the new reforms. Some states, like California, have taken proactive steps to dismantle the prison industrial complex, especially for low-level, non-violent crimes. At most, if the Sentencing Reform and Corrections Act of 2015 becomes law, it could be a model for states to enact similar reforms.

Photo credit: Thinkstock