Buy Photo Mark Larson, then commissioner of the Department of Vermont Health Access, speaks in Winooski in December 2013. (Photo: GLENN RUSSELL/FREE PRESS FILE)Buy Photo

Alan Lyle Howe says his opposition to abortion is more than just a moral belief — it's a religious conviction.

But Vermont's state-offered health plans force Howe to choose between his pro-life beliefs and insurance coverage, because all plans offered through Vermont Health Connect include a fee for elective abortion coverage, said his lawyer, Casey Mattox.

Howe declined to enroll and instead filed suit in federal court against the Department of Vermont Health Access, former commissioner Mark Larson and a host of federal officials.

"There are plenty of people who are pro-life, not for religious reasons," Mattox said. However, he said that Howe, a Protestant, considers the fee a violation of his religious beliefs.

Through his lawyers, Howe declined to be interviewed.

Howe is in his late 50s and has been living in Vermont for most of his life. Mattox said Howe lives by himself, works part-time and would have no reason to use the money set aside for elective abortions.

The Vermont Health Access Department's lawyer said much of Howe's allegations are directed at federal statutes rather than state law. Assistant Attorney General Bridget Asay declined to go further into how her clients would respond to the complaint.

"Beyond that, we're putting together legal arguments and we'll be filing, we expect, in a week," Asay said, adding that she and her clients were working "in good faith" with all other parties to work toward an outcome other than litigation.

Attorneys for federal defendants through the U.S. Department of Justice did not return requests for comment.

Among their settlement requests, Howe's lawyers are asking for a solution for Howe and others like him who would be abandoning their religious beliefs to procure health care. Mattox also said that insurers should be transparent about the abortion payment since transparency would better help customers evaluate which programs are right for them, the complaint states.

The payment breakdown

Howe had enrolled in health care during the first year the federal Affordable Care Act was in effect, choosing the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Vermont Blue Rewards Non-Standard Silver Plan, the complaint states.

Howe is active in his community and on social media in speaking out about his views. Paying the fee would "undermine his public opposition to abortion," states the lawsuit, which was filed on Jan. 14 in U.S. District Court.

"Mr. Howe holds a sincere religious belief that he should responsibly steward his resources to provide for his own healthcare," the lawsuit states. "Going without health insurance could have devastating consequences for his own physical and financial health. Thus, it is essential that he continue to have health insurance."

The Affordable Care Act prohibits an insurer from disclosing abortion coverage information to the consumer before enrollment, according to the lawsuit. After enrollment, this information can be disclosed as part of the summary of benefits and coverage explanation.

Mattox said the predetermined coverage amount is included in the premium that health care consumers pay. After the premium is paid, health insurance companies separate the abortion coverage from the rest of the premium and allocate the money into a separate account, he said.

Health insurance providers also are prohibited from breaking down the costs and instead must show only the total premium, the complaint states.

"There are, no doubt, plenty of other people in Vermont who would not want to have to pay the fee and don't even realize that they're paying it," Mattox said last week.

Lawyers for Vermont Health Connect and former Vermont Health Access Commissioner Mark Larson declined to answer specific questions about the case pending their filing a response.

No responses to the complaint have been filed by either state or federal lawyers as of Monday. Asay of the Vermont Attorney General's Office said she plans to file a response by Friday for the Department of Vermont Health Access and for Larson.

No choice

Vermont is one of a small group of states where this situation exists. Rhode Island, New Jersey and Hawaii also still "leave people with no choice," Mattox said.

In September 2014, 15 states offered some health insurance options without the elective abortion payment, and eight other states offer plans that do not cover elective abortions, according to a report by the U.S. Government Accountability Office.

The Affordable Care Act requires the director of the Office of Personnel Management to enter into contracts for placing at least two "multistate" health plans on each state's exchange by 2017. At least one of these plans must not include payment for elective abortion, Mattox said.

The requirement should allay the complaints of Howe and others like him within two years. However, Mattox said that Howe would have to forgo health coverage until then to remain loyal to his religious conscience.

"When government is imposing burdens like that on people ... that's a violation of free exercise, and that's essentially what's happening here," Mattox said.

Mattox said his legal organization, Alliance Defending Freedom, has in the past contacted potential clients in states where the situation exists. Howe got in touch with Mattox and the Washington, D.C.-based firm last year after a similar case was fought and won by the organization in Connecticut. Mattox is also representing a Rhode Island man in a similar situation to Howe's who filed suit around the same time.

Alliance Defending Freedom employs Christian attorneys and like-minded organizations that "work tirelessly to advocate for the right of people to freely live out their faith in America and around the world," the organization's website states.

Along with Vermont Health Connect and Larson, defendants in Howe's lawsuit include the U.S. Department of Labor and its secretary, Thomas Perez; the U.S. Department of the Treasury and its secretary, Jacob J. Lew; the Office of Personnel Management and its director, Katherine Archuleta; and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and its secretary, Sylvia Burwell.

Howe will be subject to a fine of at least 2 percent of his income in 2015 because he failed to enroll in a qualified health plan prior to Feb. 15. Certain religions are exempt from the Affordable Care Act, but they are principally Amish or denominations similar to the Amish, Mattox said.

"For those folks, they don't have to pay any penalty under the individual mandate, because they object to health insurance altogether," Mattox said. "Howe's objection is much more specific and much smaller."

As of Monday, Howe has not received an exemption from the fine, even though his lawyers asked the court in January for relief during the court proceedings. Lawyers for the defendants are expected to respond to this request by Friday.

Settlement talks

Howe alleges the defendants are violating the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, the Vermont Constitution, and the free exercise and free speech clauses of the First Amendment by requiring him to pay for elective abortions, court papers state.

Settlement talks have begun, though Mattox and lawyers for the defendants have declined to discuss details. Mattox said he hopes a settlement is reached soon, because Howe is without health insurance.

Howe and his lawyers are seeking relief for Howe from penalties for not enrolling in health care; requirements forbidding issuers and exchange employees from providing information about abortion coverage and money allocated to pay for abortions; attorney fees and expert costs; and other relief.

"In the long run, Vermont is going to be required to fix this problem," Mattox said. "What we're asking for is at least in the immediate term, they fix it for him, and frankly if they could go ahead and fix it for everyone so people aren't left in this position."

Read or Share this story: http://bfpne.ws/1Eq0Rii