At a time when the government is running trillion dollar deficits and the Army is cutting back on 40,000 soldiers, the federal government has devoted special time and resources to funding studies as to why lesbians are fat.

From the Washington Free Beacon:

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has now spent over $3.5 million to determine why the majority of lesbians are obese. The project, now entering its fifth year, received another grant worth $658,485 this summer. The total funding for the research is now $3,531,925. Funding has more than doubled since the study was first revealed in 2013. Since, the study that is examining why three-quarters of lesbians are obese, but gay men are not, has survived sequester cuts, and continues to produce results such as the discovery that gay men have a “greater desire for toned muscles” than straight men.

Apparently the administration is obsessed with obesity, especially given the rule last month to ban trans fats. But are Americans really that concerned with lesbians supposedly being fat that it requires government funding? Shouldn't somebody's weight be their choice but not the government's?

For what it's worth, on Reddit somebody posed the question as to why lesbians tend to be more obese, and here was the answer:

“I was at women’s weekend in ptown this weekend,” one user said. “We are fat, there’s no question. My unpopular opinion? We just let ourselves go easier when we get into relationships. My [significant other] SO and I struggle with our weight but we HATE being fat so we force ourselves to eat healthy and get out and be athletic.” “It’s tough though and many lesbians I know just don’t care, don’t want to put the work into it,” they said. “If you don’t care, who cares? If you’re happy that’s all that matters.”

Exactly. It's not the government's business to get involved with this stuff.

Of course, the reason why the government is getting involved is because the left has always wanted universal healthcare. Obama himself has even stated as such. Obamacare will eventually lead to a single-payer system. When the government runs healthcare, suddenly what you eat becomes everyone's business we are all paying for it. That's why the NIH is concerned.

The numerous amounts of GOP candidates running for president would be wise to use this as an example of low-hanging fruit that can be cut from the federal government's budget and ask Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders et al. if they are in favor of letting this kind of government waste go on unabated.