The St. Vrain Valley School District's adult education program was shelved back in 2013.

To learn more about adult education in Longmont Go to: svcae.org

But thanks in part to the efforts of El Comite, the program has been revived and grown into an award winner.

In 2013, St. Vrain Valley School District ended their adult education program. However, Kat Bradley-Bennett, current program coordinator for adult education, and others didn't want to see it disappear. Thanks to federal and state grants, donations and El Comite, the program, re-named St. Vrain Valley Community Adult Education, is now an award-winner.

Bradley-Bennett is the 2015 recipient of the Mountain and Plains Adult Education Association Award of Excellence. The Association, MPAEA, covers nine states in the Western-part of the United States, works to promote and support lifelong learning in the states they serve.

Bradley-Bennett said she is honored by the award, and couldn't imagine being in this position just two years after moving the adult education program to El Comite.

"The loss of that program had a huge impact in a community," she said. "We were all pretty bummed and freaked out. I'm still seeing previous students coming in here."

Advertisement

The program ended in 2013 after the St. Vrain Valley School District, which had funded and hosted the program for 45 years, declined to continue funding it due to financial constraints on the school district. However El Comite de Longmont, a program that advocates for Latinos in Longmont by providing various services, "put their neck out and become a fiscal host," as Bradley-Bennett put it, to continue certain adult education programming.

As of now, the adult education program serves 300-plus students with six levels of ESL (English as a second language) and citizenship classes for those that are not and want to become U.S citizens. While 300 seems high, before 2013, the program was serving upwards of 1,000 a year. So, there is still a long way to go.

"The gaping hole still exists right now with Adult Basic Education covering content up to grade eight or nine," Bradley-Bennett said. "Then you're ready for GED studies."

Right now the program can offer ESL and GED studies, but nothing in between, which many students desire. It is one thing to learn English, another to acquire enough knowledge in English in order to pass the GED.

Bradley-Bennett was presented the award of excellence at the annual MPAEA conference, which took place in Denver this year. She said that while it is certainly a success, adult education has to continue to grow and be a bigger part of the Longmont community, not "something separate."

"I would like the community to know adult education can take many forms," she said. "Adult education has many forms and places it occurs. In a community, especially one the size of longmont, we cannot be competitive in the workplace if we don't have a skilled workforce. Everyone needs access to education and training."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones