This slideshow requires JavaScript.

By Parrish Alford

Daily Journal

OXFORD – Laremy Tunsil was back, and what a difference he made.

The Rebels’ star left tackle made his 2015 debut after a seven-game NCAA suspension and responded by limiting SEC sack leader Myles Garrett and helping spark the Ole Miss run game in a 23-3 win over Texas A&M Saturday night at Vaught-Hemingway Stadium.

Garrett came into the game with 8.5 sacks, tops in the SEC and second in the nation with 1.42 per game.

He finished with seven tackles, two tackles for loss and an interception, but in the ends’ money stat – sacks – Garrett had none, and A&M had just one as a team.

Tunsil was not made available for interviews following the game.

“He looked awesome. He definitely proved why he should be one of the top ones picked, going against I think the best defensive end in our league he did a great job,” running back Jaylen Walton said.

Ole Miss rushed for 230 yards on 52 carries, and Walton finished just three yards shy of a hundred with 97 yards on 22 carries.

Tunsil was periodically pulled out to rest. Garrett was impressive – he had three tackles and a tipped-ball interception in the first half and once drew a holding call against Tunsil – but he wasn’t blowing up Ole Miss quarterback Chad Kelly every play.

Having Tunsil back also allowed Fahn Cooper to move back to his natural position at right tackle.

A healthier Justin Bell was able to play much of the game at center, something the Ole Miss coach Hugh Freeze and his staff experimented with in camp prior to an injury to guard Rod Taylor.

“They’re the most talented we’ve seen at defensive end, and Laremy gives you a much better chance to win that every snap. And Fahn’s much more comfortable at right. He’s different animal,” Freeze said.

The Rebels rushed for 141 yards in the first half alone.

The offensive line moves Freeze talked about during the week – Bell at center and Javon Patterson at guard – didn’t come about until late in the first quarter.

When they did the Rebels seemed to get better push in the middle, and a 29-yard run by Walton was the key play on a 79-yard drive.

Kelly passed 7 yards to tight end Evan Engram for a 7-0 lead with 2:33 left in the first.

Texas A&M began the night allowing 195.2 yards per game on the ground, 12th in the SEC and No. 97 nationally.

After a mistake-filled finish to the first half Ole Miss negated A&M’s 43-yard field goal with one of its own when Gary Wunderlich hit from 22 on the last play of the second quarter.

The Rebels led 16-3 at halftime but missed a massive play when a chop block penalty against Ben Still and Akeem Judd took a touchdown pass to Quincy Adeboyejo off the board.

Wunderlich had previously hit from 41 and 30 yards.

While Walton led the way, the Rebels showed balance in the run game with 68 yards on 13 carries from Akeem Judd and 42 yards on eight carries from Jordan Wilkins.

“Laremy’s so great in the pass game people don’t realize how great he is at run-blocking,” Engram said. “He’s so physical, so strong and so fast. It made a huge difference.”

parrish.alford@journalinc.com

Twitter: @parrishalford