Transcript for Ted Cruz 'Will Continue to Do Anything I Can to Stop Obamacare'

We return to washington now, where the government is up and running again. Both president obama and top republicans are vowing it won't shut down again. But at least one tea party favorite is promising to keep the fight going. Senator ted cruz sat down with our jonathan karl. And, jon, a lot of defiance there. Reporter: That's for sure, george. Ted cruz says the biggest problem in all this, is that republicans were divided and that they backed down too easily. So, you would do it again? I would do anything and i will continue to do anything i can, to stop the train wreck that is obama care. Reporter: Will you rule out pushing to the brink of another shutdown? Jon, I know -- Reporter: You say you're not going to -- I know you want to nail down future tactical decisions. What I intend to do is continue standing with the american people to stop obama care because it isn't working. It's costing people jobs. Reporter: People hated the shutdown. They hated this impasse. And this was seen as the ted cruz shutdown. You more than any single individual were seen as the one that triggered this crisis to begin with. I agree that a lot of d.C. Politicians tried to call it that. And a lot of the media did, too. Reporter: It took public opinion nationally. Let me be very clear, I said throughout this. I don't want a shutdown. I repeatedly voted to open the government. Reporter: There wouldn't have been a shutdown if you hadn't gone with the strategy that we're not going to fund the government for six weeks if without obama care. We will not negotiate. Shut the government down. Reporter: Now, democratic and republican leaders in congress, like the president, are saying emphatically, george, there will be not be another shutdown. That's what they're promising right now. There are some calmer voices starting to get together right away to see if they can put together some kind of small-scale budget deal before the end of the year. Reporter: Very important and very significant meeting over breakfast thursday between paul ryan, the top republican on budget matters and patty murray, the top democrat. They're trying to get together. This would not be a big deal. But something to ensure when the money runs out again on january 15th, THEY HAVE ANOTHER Agreement in place to fund the government for the rest of the year. Let's open that happens. Jon karl, thanks very much. A lot more from ted cruz, including interviews with jeb bush and nancy pelosi.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.