"So we were always behind the eight ball because private insurance was so expensive."

The percentage of New Jerseyans who still have no health insurance dropped significantly between 2013 and 2014, reflecting both the state's decision to expand Medicaid and the introduction of Obamacare, the federal law mandating coverage.

That percentage is down to 10.9, putting New Jersey in the middle of the list nationally, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.

While that's better than the national average of 11.7 percent for 2014, many Northeastern states have been able to push their number down into the single digits - including Pennsylvania, New York, Delaware and Connecticut.

In total, 965,000 New Jerseyans remain without health insurance - which means 195,000 residents acquired insurance in 2014, the first year the Affordable Care Act went into effect. A detailed look at who they are is expected to be released Thursday.

Nationally, two-thirds of Americans had private insurance, while 36.5 had some form of government insurance - whether Medicaid (19.5 percent) or Medicare (16 percent.)

The largest source of insurance, however, was employers, with 55.4 percent of Americans acquiring coverage through their jobs. Another 14.1 percent bought insurance themselves, directly through their carrier.

The report had some good news for the state, said Ray Castro, senior policy analyst for the New Jersey Policy Perspective.

"After more than a decade of businesses dropping health insurance for their workers, the number of New Jerseyans with employer-based coverage increased by 42,000 in 2014," he said. At least in New Jersey, fears that Obamacare would trigger a wave of employers ending coverage of their employees has not come to pass, he said.

So who are the New Jersey residents who remain without health insurance, despite the tax penalty for that approach?

Middle-class people who felt they couldn't afford health insurance before the ACA went into effect might have qualified for a federal subsidy to offset some of the cost, "But they'd still have to pay money for that," Castro said. "And from the beginning, that was never a priority on how to spend their money."

Latinos remain under-represented in their coverage. While some of this is because of their immigration status, some of it also reflects a fear that if a legal resident applies for Obamacare, it might draw attention to another household member who is here illegally, Castro said.

New Jersey's rate of uninsured may be still high compared to its neighbors because our rate here was higher even before the Affordable Care Act, Castro said.

"In New Jersey, people were dropping private insurance in droves for years," he said. "So we were always behind the eight ball because private insurance was so expensive."