Things that scare Americans the most are not very exciting. A survey showed that fear of robots, thought of going broke and zombies are among the biggest fears of US people.

Recently, Chapman University conducted a survey to find America's Top Fears 2015. The survey showed that there are some expected events, including bio warfare, terrorism, which make Americans feel unsafe. Adding to that, a fear of zombies and US healthcare reform law Obamacare was also reported in the survey.

More than 1,500 adult Americans were included in the survey in April this fear. During the survey, the participants were asked about their fears. The thing that scares Americans the most was corruption. According to the survey, more than half of the participants were scared of government corruption. Adding to that, people also feel afraid of cyber-terrorism, terrorist attacks and government tracking personal information.

To see those anxieties quantified, take a look at the top five scariest items in the Survey of American Fears, released earlier this week by researchers at Chapman University. Three of them—cyberterrorism, corporate tracking of personal information, and government tracking of personal information—were technology-related.

“Lower levels of fear can be beneficial, can make people make better choices,” Bader said. But, “higher levels of fear can be very detrimental.” Here’s the oddest thing about the data, though: Start at the top of the list of fears and scroll down, all the way past reptiles and robots replacing the workforce and overpopulation—and there at number 43, almost smack-dab in the middle of the list, is death (21.9 percent), sandwiched between loneliness and theft, said a report published in the Atlantic.

More than 30% participants feel Obamacare and gun control are their biggest fears. Global warming, which is a global issue, was also in the list with about 31%. It was not the end of the list as about 7% respondents fear clowns. More than 8% participants said that zombies make them feel insecure, while 9.7% said ghosts terrify them. Some people also said public speaking and death are their biggest fears.

In the survey, the fears were included in 10 subcategories. There subcategories were: technology, man-made disasters, government, personal future, crime, environment, natural disasters, daily life, personal anxieties and judgment of others. The highest-rated fear was man-made disasters.