Brenda Dharling performs at Boots & Saddle Tuesday. Keith Williams for The Wall Street Journal

For the second time, a legendary Greenwich Village establishment has been stymied in its hunt for a new home.

On Tuesday evening, a committee of Manhattan Community Board 2 recommended against allowing Boots & Saddle to transfer its liquor license to a vacant space at 47 Seventh Avenue South. The location was most recently a Chinese restaurant.

For 40 years, Boots & Saddle has been an institution, a gay bar in an area where “gay bar” was, for decades, a redundancy. Seven nights a week, locals and tourists alike revel in its drag show, a song-and-dance spectacle that has grown over the past few years thanks to positive word of mouth.

Despite the bar’s popularity, its owners say they can’t afford the latest rent increase on their Christopher Street home. An attempt to transfer its license to a new space on Barrow Street two blocks south had already failed at the hands of the Community Board’s liquor committee.

Dozens of concerned Village residents, hoping to see it fail again, packed Tuesday’s meeting; with more than 100 seats filled, a security guard had to turn some people away so as not to violate the fire code.

After intense questioning of bar owners from the committee, the floor opened to those assembled. One by one, they shared a litany of familiar fears: the bar would wake the elderly and scar the youths; vehicular traffic would increase and drunken hooligans would cause trouble on foot.

“They will be bringing back the mayhem we have worked so hard to eliminate,” said Dave Poster, founder of the Christopher Street Patrol, a volunteer watch group.

“I cannot imagine anything less appropriate for this part of our enclave than this particular application,” said Greg Jackson, president of another group. “Please do not accuse the Morton Street Block Association of homophobia,” he added, pointing to two previous presidents of the organization who were gay.

After nearly a dozen residents spoke against the application, John Philip, the bar’s lawyer, rose to allay their concerns. The bar, he said, could add soundproofing to address noise and tinted windows to address children’s prying eyes. “The very character of the Village was created by these cabaret spaces,” he said. “If you take that away, you’ll destroy something ineffable in the community.”

His paean to history was insufficient; the advisory vote was unanimous, and the owners plan to withdraw their application. On Wednesday, however, a lead for another space—one suggested in an off-hand comment by a committee member—had begun to show promise.

By midnight Tuesday evening, word of the rejection had made its way around the crowd inside Boots & Saddle—”You should move to Brooklyn!” one regular told a bartender—but the mood was still riotous. A performer named Brenda Dharling was working an extraordinarily diverse crowd with an extraordinarily diverse set.

A packed house watches as a committee of Manhattan Community Board 2 questions the owners of Boots & Saddle. Keith Williams for The Wall Street Journal

In between lip-synching to medleys featuring Judy Garland and Jessie J, Tina Turner and Adele, she toyed with the two recent college graduates from Dallas, a middle-aged regular from the Bronx and the fifty-something straight couple from Melbourne, who had, improbably, heard about Boots & Saddle all the way from Australia, and who had, even more improbably, resolved to pay a visit.

Patrons took advantage of the dollar shots—grapefruit juice and liquor, the identity of which was unclear—but at 12:30 a.m., when Brenda’s 90-minute, Jazzercise-fueled set concluded, the bar returned to a relative quiet.

Despite the unbridled glee from the drag queen’s performance, there was one awkward moment. Brenda had chosen to mime the scene from the 1981 film “Mommie Dearest” in which Faye Dunaway beats her daughter in a swimming race. Over the girl’s protests, Ms. Dunaway retorts: “Nobody ever said life was fair!”

An eerie silence fell over the bar. On the wall, a clock ticked, one second closer to homelessness. But before it could tick again, Brenda shifted into another song, and every worry in Boots & Saddle seemed to fade away.