Prescription contraceptives for women sit on the counter of a drug store in Los Angeles. (Photo: Photo Illustration by Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images )

From balancing the federal budget to improving the economy, politicians have no shortage of important issues to tackle. Yet some continue to fixate on uteruses. They never tire of talking about ways to limit access to abortion. Some don’t even want the procedure available to save a woman’s life.

On “Meet the Press” in August, Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida questioned whether there are “any instances in which only an abortion could save a mother’s life.” He’s obviously not familiar with preeclampsia, high blood pressure that can cause a stroke, septic pregnancies, or ectopic pregnancies where a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus and must be removed or the mother could die.

Then again, facts are not the forte with these guys. To hear them talk, one would think women are terminating pregnancies for fun and abortion rates are escalating. Then there’s reality.

Fewer and fewer women are undergoing abortions. Since 2010, the number nationwide has decreased about 12 percent. In Iowa, the abortion rate dropped nearly 9 percent from 2013 to 2014, according to figures released by the Iowa Department of Public Health this month. It represents a long-term trend: Last year 4,020 abortions were performed in Iowa, compared with 6,649 in 2007.

Interestingly, some anti-abortion extremists want to take credit for the decline. Jenifer Bowen, executive director of Iowa Right to Life, said she believes at least part of the reason is more Americans are deciding abortion is wrong.

Well, Iowa’s birth rate has remained fairly flat over the same period of time. Women are not getting pregnant, deciding abortion is wrong and then giving birth. And it’s difficult to believe the reduction is due to a lack of access to the procedure in Iowa. The numbers here decreased even as Planned Parenthood expanded access to drug-induced abortions at telemedicine clinics around the state.

The bottom line: Women are undergoing fewer abortions because they’re not getting pregnant in the first place. They are using birth control, including long-range contraception like intrauterine devices. They are receiving education and information about how to avoid unwanted pregnancies.

This important tidbit that should be recognized by anti-abortion zealots. Because Planned Parenthood, the very health provider they demonize and want defunded, is frequently the provider of this birth control and education. In fact, additional support and funding for its health clinics and programs could cut abortion rates even more.

Advocating that would be a legitimate and reasonable way to further their agenda. And they won’t have to give up their bizarre fascination with women’s reproductive organs.

"Life-saving" efforts of politicians and activists are misdirected

There is a smart, little observation circulating on the Internet that sums up the absurdity of political priorities in this country. The unidentified author suggests treating every young man who wants to buy a gun like every woman seeking an abortion.

“Mandatory 48-hour waiting period, parental permission, a note from his doctor proving he understands what he’s about to do, a video he has to watch about the effects of gun violence, an ultrasound wand up the — (just because). Let’s close down all but one gun shop in every state and make him travel hundreds of miles, take time off work, and stay overnight in a strange town to get a gun. Make him walk thorough a gauntlet of people holding photos of loved ones who were shot to death, people who call him a murder and beg him not to buy a gun….”

It makes more sense to expose gun buyers to such requirements and harassment than women seeking a legal health procedure, the author asserts. “No woman getting an abortion has killed a room full of people in seconds, right?”

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1LNtI3W