Topics: 9/11, Barack Obama, Bill Clinton, Bowe Bergdahl, Civil Liberties, CPAC, Dick Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld, Editor's Picks, George W. Bush, global war on terror, Guantanamo Bay, libertarian, National Security Agency, Nick Gillespie, Rand Paul, Reason, Reason magazine, Sen. Rand Paul, September 11, Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, War on Terror, Media News, News, Politics News

Although it feels like a memory from the distant past, it wasn’t so long ago that I was at CPAC, watching Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul thrill a rapt audience of conservative activists with a romantic speech extolling liberty and slamming President Obama for failing to dismantle the post-9/11 national security state. I remember how quiet and still the crowd was while Paul spoke, and I remember how that surface-level calm was periodically interrupted with wild cheers whenever Paul delivered an especially well-crafted applause line.

In reference to mass surveillance, indefinite detention and secretive drone strikes on American citizens, for example, Paul quoted William Lloyd Garrison, the famous abolitionist, and asked the congregation, “Will you, America’s next generation of liberty lovers, will you stand and be heard?” The answer was a resounding yes.

But as much as they loved imagining themselves as the modern heirs to a 19th century liberation movement that reached its apogee through the expansion of presidential and federal power, these assorted conservatives and libertarians were even more thrilled by the sections of Paul’s speech castigating President Obama for being insufficiently dedicated to protecting Americans’ civil liberties. “I don’t question President Obama’s motives,” Paul said, “but history will record his timid defense of liberty.”

A specific instance of timidity that Paul had in mind was Obama’s decision to sign the NDAA, despite his misgivings that it infringed on the right of habeas corpus. “When Congress passed legislation allowing for the indefinite detention of an American citizen without a trial,” Paul said, “[Obama] shamefully signed it while promising not to use such a power.” In Paul’s eyes, this was clearly not enough. “A great president,” he claimed, “would have risen to the occasion. Instead of merely suggesting that he wouldn’t use this dreaded power, a great president would have taken pen in hand and vetoed this abomination.”

CPAC agreed; a great president (maybe a President Paul?) would ignore the politics, brush off the fear-mongers and simply do what was right. “Some things are worth fighting for,” Paul said, before reminding the crowd that he had filibustered against targeting Americans with drones and sued the president over the excesses and usurpations of the National Security Agency. “It is decidedly not a time for the faint of heart,” he warned. “It is a time for boldness and action. The time is now. Stand with me. Let us stand for liberty.” Paul then left the stage, carried to the exit on a wave of applause emanating from the hundreds of conservative activists, all of whom were on their feet.

It was an inspiring moment. But as I watched the CPAC attendees talk amongst themselves about how wonderful Paul’s speech had been, I imagined how a candidate Chris Christie or Ted Cruz would savage Paul as soft on terror in a GOP presidential primary, and I was reminded, in a completely different context, of that infamous Bill Clinton quote: “This whole thing is the biggest fairy tale I’ve ever seen.”

Watching this week as the right worked itself into a jingoistic and vengeful fury over Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, I couldn’t stop turning back to that fairy tale — the belief that the hysteria, paranoia and fear that defined American politics in the immediate years after 9/11 was a thing of the past; the confidence that U.S. politics had mellowed and matured, that demagoguery over Islamic terrorism was no longer a central component of the GOP’s campaign playbook. Back when Benghazi was, nearly two years later, still dominating the news cycle, I thought this was fanciful. But today, in the wake of attempts to portray Bergdahl as a traitor-turned-jihadist, and in response to one breathless report after another parroting Taliban propaganda as if it were news, it seems to me to be downright absurd.