Ikea deliver David's new building project! Staff seen delivering flat-pack furniture into his West London home

Brand’s signature bright blue carrier bags carried in by delivery men

The Beckhams received two PAX wardrobe frames, which retail for £4

KOMPLEMENT wire baskets – shoe racks worth £12 each also delivered



For most people moving into a new home, flat pack furniture is the quick fix answer.

And it seems, despite their millions, the Beckhams are no different – after furniture from IKEA was seen being delivered to their current London town house.

Hauled in the brand’s signature bright blue carrier bags and on the shoulders of three of delivery men, neighbours watched as a set of built in wardrobes were deposited in the property.

For most people moving into a new home, flat pack furniture is the quick fix answer. And it seems, despite their millions, the Beckhams are no different - after furniture from IKEA was seen being delivered to their current London town house

The Beckhams –who left just before the home-delivery to take son Brooklyn to school –received two affordable PAX wardrobe frames, which retail for £45.



Bustled in closely behind the large cardboard boxes were bags containing KOMPLEMENT wire baskets –available as shoe racks for the small cost of £12 each.

Currently the celebrity family are believed to be renting this property while their nearby purchased home undergoes refurbishment.



However the affordable furniture is a far cry from a delivery to the house earlier this month, which saw the 7ft Damien Hirst heart shaped artwork, called Daddy’s Girl, moved into the property.

Believed now to be worth £600,000, the pink painting is said to be a present for daughter Harper’s nursery.



Chill out: The former England captain, pictured at the GQ Man of the Year Awards, also revealed recently that he likes building Lego

Brave: The £210 Tower Bridge kit is not for the faint-hearted, and recommended only for over-16s

The couple, who are estimated to earn around £100,000 a day, are said to have paid £31.5million for a Grade II-listed property –when they returned to the UK following David Beckham’s, 38, retirement from US football.

The budget IKEA delivery, on Monday, comes after the Beckhams submitted lavish plans to transform their 150-year-old West London home into the new ‘Beckingham Palace’.



The building currently holds seven bathrooms for its eight bedrooms and more than 9,000 sq ft of floor space, not including a 100ft Oriental garden.

Rumoured plans, which are said to be drafted by interior designer Lisa Hopkins, include a playroom for the children – Brooklyn, 14, Romeo, 11, and Cruz, eight, and daughter Harper, now two – who will also each have their own bedroom.



The budget IKEA delivery, on Monday, comes after the Beckhams submitted lavish plans to transform their 150-year-old West London home into the new 'Beckingham Palace'

The original plans included a roof terrace, nail bar, powder room, wine cellar, massage room and gym.

The purchase went through in September, but was officially recorded only last month.

Both David and Victoria are named as owners of the property, which is located in an exclusive part of West London, on official Land Registry documents.

The couple have a range of business ventures that have allowed them to buy their new home without the need for a loan.