Physicians say infants and children who have sufficient sleep are less likely to develop obesity as juveniles and thus may be spared the condition as adults.

A child is prepared for a sleep study. (Photo: Courtesy of Barnabas Health )

Tired and hungry. There is a reason why these two conditions seem to go together so easily.

Medical research suggests young children and infants who do not get enough sleep are likely to develop obesity — and a host of devastating related health conditions — before they enter their teen years.

And by then, reversing the obesity is almost impossible, health experts say.

A study published in May in the journal Pediatrics hypothesizes that children sleeping less in early childhood developed obesity by age 7.

But the findings from researchers at Massachusetts General Hospital for Children are hardly shocking, say local physicians.

The study's other conclusion confirms what doctors already know: that obese children who suffer from obstructive sleep apnea also experience a variety of health issues, according to Dr. Ignacio Tapia, a pediatric pulmonologist and sleep medicine specialist at the Sleep Center at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

Tapia said that youngsters of normal weight who experience deep sleep and REM (rapid eye movement) sleep find sleep restorative, benefitting everything from brain activity to hormone secretions.

But the obese often cannot attain deep sleep because of the apnea, a condition characterized by brief, numerous involuntary breathing pauses that prevent people from reaching restorative levels of slumber.

Sleep — and the ways genetic research, digital technology and a new generation of mattresses are coming to the rescue — is the theme of Sleep-Con 2014. The special event, presented by P.C. Richard & Son and the Asbury Park Press, will be held from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., Aug. 2 at the Monmouth University Multipurpose Activity Center.

Sleep-Con 2014 will feature sleep experts and sleep technology, plus entertainment and activities for the whole family.

Admission is $10 the day of the event and $5 in advance. For Asbury Park Press and Home News Tribune subscribers the event is free. To redeem this customer reward, enter the code APPSUB2014 when ordering tickets.

For full details and to register, visit www.Sleep-Con.com. Businesses interested in participating should call 732-643-3700.

When children do not get the sleep they need, they are at risk for health, performance and difficulties in school. Researchers find that sleep deficiencies in children can be misdiagnosed as attention-deficit or behavior disorders.

Young patients with sleep apnea can be treated effectively with surgery to remove their tonsils and adnoids but for obese children, such a procedure may not resolve the issue. Further treatment can involve wearing cumbersome masks that help regulate breathing.

"Remember when your grandparents told you you need to go to sleep to grow?" Tapia asked. "Well, that turned out to be true. Growth is associated with longer sleep. The people who sleep less (for example) may have less insulin secretion, which can be related to diabetes and pre-diabetes."

Since the 1800s, each generation has lived longer than the one that preceded it, said Tapia.

Now, this generation might be the one that loses ground because of the epidemic of obesity, which is a complex issue relating to social and cultural issues as well as income, physicians say. Those who earn less might not have ready access to healthy foods, while eating at fast-food chains has been made increasingly affordable, Tapia said. Portion size also is an issue in this country.

"We are seeing patients who are not a little big but really, really big," he said. "It is not rare to see patients who have doubled their ideal weight. They do not weigh 20 or 30 percent more but 100 percent more'' than growth charts indicate.

Obesity "definitely spans all ages," said Dr. Tina Rakitt, a pediatric gastroenterologist at the Unterberg Children's Hospital at Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch. But the study published in May "is unique enough to say the obesity and sleep link even exists in young children," she added. "There are many reasons for that link. People who don't sleep well tend to eat more and they tend to eat more of the wrong things."

The battle is lost once children are old enough to select their own snacks or meals, unless they are taught correctly. Physicians say healthy eating must be established when children are infants and must be carried on by the family. Obesity does not exist in a vacuum, the experts say.

"The obesity epidemic is not only an adult problem; it is a adult-pediatric problem," Rakitt said. "We are seeing more sleep apnea…That is a terrible one. Children are developing fatty liver disease. We are starting to see some kids with serious complications either in their childhood or young adult years."

As the obesity epidemic increases among the young, so do possible treatments. Bariatric surgery for teens and adolescents is gaining momentum, Tapia said, although CHOP is not performing such procedures, preferring educational and lifestyle programs to surgery. Bariatric surgery can be performed only when children stop growing in their later teens, he said.

"Childhood obesity is literally doubling in the last few decades," agreed Nader Nakhleh, pediatric pulmonologist with K. Hovnanian Children's Hospital in Neptune. "There is a link — a well established link — between sleep apnea and obesity. It is well established in adults but now it is in children" as well.

It is not easy to make the changes that could reverse childhood obesity. Mealtimes should be standardized, as should bedtimes. Children should not be consuming food or sugary beverages for at least two hours before bedtime and electronics — particularly those with blue-light effects that simulate daylight — should be shut down earlier, experts suggest. The process of bedtime should begin 45 minutes before lights out, to allow a winding-down period. Children can enjoy a bedtime story.

How much sleep is enough?

• 1- to 3-year-olds need 12 to 14 hours of sleep in a 24-hour period.

• 3- to 5-year-olds need 11 to 13 hours of sleep each night and most do not nap after age 5.

• Adults need about eight hours of sleep every night.

Source: National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1mioz2Q