A group that supports Common Core is launching a two-week television ad buy in Iowa, the state that hosts the first presidential nominating contests, in an effort to counter a backlash from conservative Republicans against the national academic standards.

The new television ad by the Collaborative for Student Success features Bill Bennett, U.S. education secretary under former President Ronald Reagan. “High standards are worth fighting for,” he says in the spot starting Monday. “That’s why so many conservatives are taking a fresh look at Common Core.”

The television spot differs from its radio and newspaper ads in March that promoted the standards but acknowledged criticism that the Obama administration intruded on local control of schools by offering financial incentives to states that adopt Common Core.

At a gathering of hundreds of Republican activists this past weekend in Nashua, N.H., several Republican presidential candidates and potential contenders assailed the standards. Rick Perry, who recently finished 14 years as governor of Texas, one of the few states that didn’t adopt Common Core, said “the whole concept of Common Core is just like Obamacare — a bureaucrat in Washington, D.C., to sit there and decide what is going to be the right curriculum.”

A still from the Collaborative for Student Success television ad on Common Core Collaborative for Student Success

Common Core proponents note that 46 states voluntarily adopted the grade-level benchmarks in math and English to help raise student achievement. They say curriculum is set by state and local school boards, not the federal government.

“There’s an enormous amount of confusion around Common Core,” said Karen Nussle, executive director of the Collaborative for Student Success, which didn’t disclose the cost of the ad campaign. “The fact is rigorous standards that are comparable across state lines, coupled with increased accountability, is a conservative reform with roots dating back to Ronald Reagan. It’s important that Republicans not allow this issue to be hijacked.”

The ad campaign could offer some political cover to former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, a likely presidential candidate who has backed the standards. He founded the Foundation for Excellence in Education, a think tank that receives funding from some of the same philanthropies that support the Collaborative for Student Success, including the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

In New Hampshire over the weekend, Mr. Bush said he’s “fine” if states don’t like Common Core as long as they adopt high standards. He also emphasized that the federal government should have no role in writing curriculum.

Related

Opinion: The Conservative Case for Common Core — By William J. Bennett