Michael Ramirez/Creators Syndicate

After having our third boy in two years (we had twins and one happy accident), my husband and I decided our family was complete.

My hubby – always looking to save a buck – bravely entered the so-called "wild west" of the individual insurance marketplace to negotiate us a better health care price, one that reflected our new family planning. And he did. CareFirst of Virginia was able to offer us a good policy, without maternity, for $500 less a month.

We were thrilled. We decided to take the new plan and use the extra cash to help fund our boys' college educations, something we can do without much change to our monthly budgeting. That is, until the Affordable Care Act goes into effect Jan. 1.

We, like millions of others in the U.S. who have individual health coverage, received a letter saying our plan would be cancelled at the end of the year because of Obamacare. We'll need a more robust policy, one with essential coverage items, like maternity, for well, about $500 more a month.

[See a collection of political cartoons on Obamacare.]

Thank you Mr. President. Thank you for thinking that we're either too dumb or cheap to know what our family needs – that our current plan is "cut-rate," from a "bad-apple insurer." We didn't realize we were doing something that wasn't good for us, and that we needed government protection.

The truth is, the president doesn't care about me or my family – he's just after our $500 a month. We're upper-middle class, employed, pay taxes and, like all socially responsible citizens, have always carried health insurance. In the president's opinion, our money is better off going to somebody who isn't any of those things – somebody in real need.

Simply put, Obamacare is a redistribution of wealth. The president's aim is to get individuals, like myself, to pay more for coverage we'll never use so the money can be spent on someone else. Period. Those who don't pay for health care still won't with government subsidies, but they'll have an insurance card just like mine. That should make everyone feel better.

[Check out our editorial cartoons on President Obama.]

This week, headlines have focused on the as many as 10 million consumers in the individual marketplace that will have to seek new insurance under Obamacare. This was after the president promised "If you like your health plan, you'll be able to keep your healthcare plan, period."

To think the individual marketplace only affects a small percentage of the population and the majority of people's plans won't change under the new healthcare law is nonsense. We're just the first causalities. One year from now, when the corporate mandate is implemented, small business plans will be under fire, and then later, larger corporate policies.

My father, a self-employed entrepreneur, purchased a health plan offered by his county Chamber of Commerce that groups together other small business owners to help them collectively drive down costs. He was notified by the Chamber that because of Obamacare, he and my mother will be dropped from the plan come 2014 because they need a larger payroll to qualify – but not to worry, they can seek care on the public exchange.

[See a collection of political cartoons on the Democratic Party.]

Employees with generous health benefits provided by their employer or union will see their coverage change when the so-called "Cadillac" tax goes into effect in 2018. The tax, another lesser reported element of Obamacare, charges a 40 percent levy on expansive health plans. As a way to avoid the charge, employers will look to cut costs by moving toward less expensive, high deductible, health plans. Just you wait.

The American public has allowed the president to get away with Benghazi, backtrack on drawing a "red-line" with Syria, and plead ignorance on the Internal Revenue Service scandal that targeted tea party groups and with the National Security Agency, which has been found out to be spying on just about everyone. Fine, the American public can be bamboozled with a good speech from a great orator with an even better PR machine.

What can't be masked, spun or covered up by the White House is the fact that individuals' insurance is going to change as a result of Obamacare – whether they want it to or not. The awakening has finally begun.

Read Carrie Wofford: Red Sox World Series Victory Brought Unity to Boston

Read Peter Roff: Sen. Mike Lee Points the Way to a Conservative Revival