A late push to beat the deadline for health coverage that starts Jan. 1 led to a surge of applicants Monday and Tuesday on HealthCare.gov, the government website, and at places like the Noya Bazaar in Paterson and a Westfield Garden State Plaza kiosk in Paramus, where counselors provided help with enrollment.

JIM ALCORN/SPECIAL TO THE RECORD Taisha Robles from Dumont, with her daughter Taina, talks with "In Person Assister" Elisa Carrero of SRA International at Garden State Plaza on Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015. She was interested in how the Affordable Care Act could help her father.

The Obama administration said consumers will have two more days to sign up. Kevin Counihan, CEO of HealthCare.gov, made the announcement Tuesday night, citing “unprecedented” consumer demand.

KEVIN R. WEXLER/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Enrollment Assistant Counselor Farhana Ahmed helps Apu Sen in Wayne on the health care website on Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015.

The new deadline is Friday at 3 a.m. The original deadline for coverage effective at the start of the year had been 3 a.m. today.

The number of users for the online federal marketplace hit an all-time high on Monday night, a government spokeswoman said. There were 185,000 simultaneous users on HealthCare.gov as of 9 p.m. Monday, while the call center received more than 1 million calls.

“We’re seeing the same thing,” as the record numbers nationwide, said Ruthy Rios, senior outreach coordinator for SRA International, the federal contractor that provides in-person enrollment assistance around New Jersey.

The walk-in center in Clifton scheduled more appointments in one day Monday than any day previously in New Jersey, she said, and additional consumers arrived without appointments.

This is the third year of open enrollment under the Affordable Care Act. Consumers have until Jan. 31 to sign up for coverage to avoid a tax penalty of $695 or 2.5 percent of income, whichever is higher.

“Consumers should not worry,” said Lori Lodes, a spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, which runs the website. “We will make sure that if you are trying to enroll by the deadline — either by contacting the call center or visiting HealthCare.gov — you will be able to get coverage that starts on January 1.”

As happened last year, she said, “some people will be asked to leave their contact information with the call center and we’ll reach back out starting on December 16 to complete their applications and plan selections for coverage starting on January 1.”

Due to episodic shutdowns Tuesday on the website, enrollments at a Paterson supermarket serving the city’s Bengali population were taking hours to complete.

Monsur Ahmed, co-owner of the Noya Bazaar, had set up tables in the store for enrollment counselors from SRA. More than 120 people, hearing of the service through word of mouth, have sought help there.

On Monday, Ahmed set up folding chairs throughout the front of the store for those waiting. On Tuesday, to avoid congestion, he took telephone numbers to call consumers back when a counselor was available.

“I’m trying to tell them how important health insurance is,” said Ahmed. Many local people lack transportation to get to the enrollment center in Clifton, he said, so he made the service available in his store. For those waiting, he offered water and snacks.

Tanvir Khan, 20, who arrived in the United States five months ago from Bangladesh with his mother and father, had heard about the health-insurance marketplace and enrollment help at the supermarket from Bengali neighbors. He and his parents tried to enroll with the assistance of Darlene Bryant, of SRA, as the website froze repeatedly and the calls to the call center were disconnected.

Legal immigrants who have been in the United States less than five years can purchase insurance through the marketplace, but are not eligible for Medicaid in New Jersey.

In Bergen County, a kiosk to help people with enrollment opened this week at the Garden State Plaza. It is staffed by trained counselors from SRA.

Five insurance companies offer Obamacare coverage in New Jersey: AmeriHealth of New Jersey, Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey, Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, Oscar Health Insurance and UnitedHealthcare.

As of Dec. 5, more than 80,150 people statewide had signed up or renewed their coverage on HealthCare.gov. It’s not yet known whether this week’s surge will bring the total higher than last year’s 105,000 sign-ups by Dec. 15.

Those who already have coverage through the Affordable Care Act and take no action will be automatically renewed for the same or similar policies. But the premiums, subsidies and details of coverage may change.

Email: washburn@northjersey.com