On song: Kris Lees (right) and Caulfield Cup favourite Lucia Valentina. Photo: Getty Images

Newcastle trainer Kris Lees could be forgiven for thinking it is Lucia Valentina against the rest of the world when he looks at the betting for Saturday's Caulfield Cup.

The four-year-old mare is still the favourite at $5.50, a spot she secured with her Turnbull Stakes win at the beginning of the month, but the next four in the market are raiders and it is the unknown factor that worries Lees.

"She is short enough before the barrier draw. We don't know much about these Japanese horses and the ones from Europe but they must be pretty good – they usually are," Lees said.

"She has done what she has had to here and winning the Turnbull she showed she is probably going as good as anything here [in Australia]."

Advertisement

Japan's Bande is the $7.50 second favourite, while Admire Rakti, another from the land of the rising sun, and English stayer Dandino, which was Caulfield Cup runner-up last year, are on the third line of the market at $11. Another import My Ambivalent and Who Shot Thebarman, from the all-conquering Chris Waller stable are $13 chances at Ladbrokes.

It could be Lees' biggest moment in racing on Saturday and it will come on the back of a perfect preparation. Lucia Valentina will get into the Caulfield Cup on the limit of 53kg, after the weights are raised, as a two-time group 1 winner. She won the Vinery Stud Stakes in the autumn before running third in the Australian Oaks to Rising Romance.

She has returned a strong mare as a four-year-old and scored dominating wins in the Tramway Stakes and the Turnbull Stakes this spring leaving Lees in no doubt she is getting better.

"The only time she has been to 2400m was in the Oaks and she got a mile back and charged home. I think she is stronger now and I think she won't have a problem with the trip," he said. "She just keeps on improving and everything is working out as we planned."

Lees was back in Newcastle on Sunday after leaving Caulfield delighted on two fronts on Saturday. Lucia Valentina worked against the fence on the course proper in the morning with jockey Kerrin McEvoy in the saddle.

"Kerrin came back very happy with the way she got around the track and looked great," Lees said. "We had that little issue with her heel before the Turnbull Stakes and it set us back 48 hours but then she came out and won.

"Everything has gone perfectly to plan since then and that work was just another thing to tick off. I'm pretty happy and relaxed about it at the moment."

Lucia Valentina was clocked running her last 400m in 22.5 seconds in a sharp piece of work. Lees "stuck around" for the races and got a look at Protectionist.

The German stayer, owned by Australian Bloodstock, ran into fourth in the Herbert Power Handicap on Saturday and into favouritism for the Melbourne Cup. He is set to join the Lees stable after the spring.

"I went around and saw him in the stall and he is a really nice horse," Lees said. "They are taking care of him for the spring, so I don't have to worry about him for now."

The placegetters behind Lucia Valentina in the Turnbull Stakes, Lidari and Brambles from Peter Moody, look likely to be the emergencies in the Caulfield Cup.

Lloyd Williams will have two runners, Green Moon, which was runner-up in 2011, and Sea Moon. The power Waller yard will have its charge lead by Who Shot Thebarman and he is joined by Metropolitan winner Junoob, Hawkspur and Moriarty.

While a couple of cup contenders dropped out after poor runs on Saturday, Dear Demi was confirmed as a starter despite her disappointing midfield finish in the Caulfield Stakes.

Clarry Conners could not find anything wrong with Dear Demi, which ran third in last year's Caulfield Cup, after the race and she was bucking at the beach on Sunday.