Just 42 percent approve of President Obama while a record high of 55 percent disapprove, according to a Washington Post/ABC News survey released Tuesday. (Olivier Douliery-Pool/Getty Images)

Approval for President Barack Obama continues to sink in the eyes of Americans, with another poll showing his popularity at an all-time low, following his administration's rocky rollout of the Affordable Care Act and overall disgust with government officials.

About 54 percent of Americans disapprove of Obama versus 39 percent who approve, according to a Quinnipiac University survey released Tuesday. That compares with a similar poll released Oct. 1 when 49 percent disapproved of Obama compared to 45 percent who approved.

"Like all new presidents, President Barack Obama had a honeymoon with American voters, with approval ratings in the high 50s. As the marriage wore on, he kept his job approval scores in the respectable, though not overwhelming, 40s. Today, for the first time it appears that 40 percent floor is cracking," said Tim Malloy, assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute in a memo accompanying the poll results.

[READ: Clinton Piles on Obamacare, Says Law Needs Tweak]

For the first time in a Quinnipiac poll, Obama is distrusted by the majority of Americans, with 52 percent saying he is not honest and trustworthy compared to 44 percent who say he is.

"Any Democrat with an 11-point approval deficit among women is in trouble and any elected official with an 8-point trust deficit [overall] is in serious trouble," he added.

The only issue on which a majority of Americans approve of Obama is terrorism at 52 percent approval and 42 percent disapproval. The president received less than 40 percent approval on his handling of the economy, health care, foreign policy, immigration and the budget.

The poll also showed the widespread public apprehension over the president's health care law. Just 19 percent of voters say they think their health care quality will improve next year as a result of Obamacare, while 43 percent say it will get worse. About 33 percent say they don't think it will affect their health care. Overall, 55 percent say they oppose the new law, compared to 39 percent who approve of it.

[READ: Obamacare Enrollment Misses Expectations]

"President Obama's misstatement, 'If you like your health plan, you can keep it,' left a bad taste with a lot of people," Malloy said. "Nearly half of the voters, 46 percent, think he knowingly deceived them."

Millions have seen their policies canceled by private health insurers who are cutting the plans because they don't meet the new national requirements, although the law allows for them to be grandfathered in.

While Republicans have long pilloried Obama and the health law, former President Bill Clinton jumped on the bandwagon Tuesday, saying Obama should do what he can to keep the promise he made to Americans about keeping their coverage.

The poll surveyed 2,545 registered voters nationwide from Nov. 6 - 11 and has a margin of error of plus or minus 1.9 percent.