Buy Photo The proposed deal would add $500 million to $600 million to Fiat Chrysler’s annual costs. (Photo: David Coates / The Detroit News)Buy Photo

The UAW and FCA US, or Fiat Chrysler, reached a new tentative agreement following their failed first contract voted down by about 65 percent of the membership several weeks ago.

But the elements of the new deal that might appeal to the UAW rank and file also make the contract dangerous for the future of Detroit’s automotive industry.

The UAW has pushed for higher wages, as well as equal pay regardless of worker seniority. It achieved both with the tentative contract. Senior workers would see their first pay increase in almost a decade, and second-tier, now called “in-progression” workers, would see a gradual pay increase of more than $10 an hour over eight years.

That’s quite a gain, especially considering what a fragile state the U.S. automotive industry was recently in. Taxpayers might rightly wonder if their bail out of Chrysler and General Motors just seven years ago was for naught if automakers are once again making larger-than-life promises.

It’s been a profitable year for Detroit’s Big Three, and pressure to compensate accordingly is likely driving Fiat Chrysler’s CEO Sergio Marchionne to offer such pay increases. But a contract negotiated during good times doesn’t take into account that in the auto industry, good times can wane quickly.

The proposed deal would add between $500 million and $600 million to FCA’s annual costs.

That’s quite a bit, however, some industry experts argue since labor costs are a small percentage of automakers’ overall operating costs, it won’t make much of a dent.

UAW labor accounts for 8 percent of Ford’s total costs, 6 to 7 percent at GM, and just 4 percent at FCA, according to the Center for Automotive Research in Ann Arbor.

But the auto industry typically competes over razor-thin profit margins, and in that light, Marchionne’s concessions seem reckless.

Given FCA’s precarious financial situation, it’s possible this is Marchionne’s way of pushing a merger with GM, which he has suggested several times this year.

Still, Chrysler’s relatively large number of formerly-so-called second-tier workers was its huge competitive advantage over GM and Ford, even over foreign automakers, and has kept the company alive.

That and consumers’ penchant for SUVs and other gas-guzzling vehicles, courtesy of this year’s anomalously low fuel prices. If FCA continues to rely on profits from its popular Jeep models — some of the only vehicles that will continue to be made in the U.S. — it could face huge problems when gas prices inevitably rise and demand slows.

Which brings to light another noticeable void in the proposed deal: new jobs. New employment opportunities at a few Chrysler plants are offset by potential reductions at others, and the company still plans to move small car production to Mexico.

Health care and other benefits remain untouched, and politically the UAW has covered itself by banking on substantial changes to the Affordable Care Act and the feared Cadillac tax on premium health care plans under a new administration in Washington.

Regardless, workers at GM and Ford shouldn’t necessarily expect such a generous pay structure, some industry insiders say. Of course, UAW Vice President Jimmy Settles has told workers to expect an even better deal from at least Ford.

The real question the UAW should be concerned with is whether their pay increases are going to force even more production — and therefore, jobs — out of the country. And what success means if they work for a company that is once again bankrupt in a few years.

Read or Share this story: http://detne.ws/1LuNlxE