The flag is made up of small needlepoint squares. Each one holds the name of a victim from the Oklahoma City Murrah bombing, the 9/11 attacks and other acts of terrorism.

The 63' x 25' flag is mounted to the ceiling of the old Journal Record building.

With Independence Day approaching, a lot of Oklahomans are putting up their American flags.

Although, there's one American flag in Oklahoma City, an extremely large one with even larger symbolism of American resilience, that is in danger of coming down.

David Cid is the Executive Director of the Oklahoma City National Memorial Institute for Prevention of Terrorism (MIPT).



"My concern began some time ago when we knew we were leaving the space," Cid said.

The agency moved out of the old Journal Record building this year. The move did not allow for the agency to take an important artifact, a 63' x 25' flag, mounted to the ceiling of the building.

"I think millions of people should see it, and that's what we are hoping to find, a home," Cid said.

For the last 10 years, the flag literally hung over his head as a reminder of why he went to work every day at MIPT. Now, it's hanging over his head in a very different way, as he looks for a new place to house the flag.

Memorial Institute for Prevention of Terrorism



"It's important where this flag goes," said Cid. "It cant just be anywhere."

The flag is made up of small needlepoint squares. Each one holds the name of a victim from the Oklahoma City Murrah bombing, the 9/11 attacks and other acts of terrorism.

An army of 1,300 volunteers began working on the project in the wake of 9/11. The flag was eventually donated and mounted to the ceiling in the library of the Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism.

Finding a new home for such an admired piece of work has been more difficult than Cid originally thought.

"We went through a series of folks who said they would take it and then change their minds," Cid said.

The staff with the 9/11 memorial in New York initially showed interest, but Cid said the group backed out after learning moving the flag would cost $15,000 to $20,000.

Luckily, the flag will be allowed to stay mounted in its current location until a new location is secured.

The Memorial Institute for Prevention of Terrorism is now located at Rose State in Midwest City.