The ANW Special Education Coop has a decision coming up about providing health insurance to their paraprofessionals.

A major concern was the possibility that, under the Affordable Care Act, ANW would have to provide health insurance to about 200 paraprofessionals that serve more than 1,000 special needs students in eight districts in Anderson, Allen, Neosho, Woodson and Wilson counties, including USD 413.

This insurance could cost about 1.5 million extra per year.

ANW Director Robert Coleman said that, at this time, it does not look like the coop will be required to provide insurance to its paraprofessionals.

According to his understanding of the regulations, they will only have to provide insurance to a few paraprofessionals, those who work an average of more than 130 hours a month, or 1300 hours over the year for 10 months.

Coleman said paraprofessionals average just under 1200 hours per month, and those numbers have been the same since he started as director.

“We haven’t reduced the number of hours,” he said.

Coleman said it is the desire of the ANW board to provide some level of insurance to paraprofessionals.

“That’s a significant amount of money,” he said. “The only place we have the ability to get additional money is from the school districts.”

One of the coop’s major sources of funding is through the local districts.

Coleman said that the recent Gannon decision may bring more money into the districts a few years down the road, but it is unlikely that the school districts will get more money for next year.

If the states do not increase funds to school districts, it is unlikely that the ANW budget will allow for funding insurance for paraprofessionals.

“We know a number of our staff likely would qualify for very low cost insurance by going through the exchange,” he said.

Coleman said one option that has been discussed by the board is having someone available during benefits signup to walk staff through applying for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act exchanges.

The coop is still required to and will continue to provide insurance to all of its licensed staff, Coleman said.