Mississippi Governor Phil Bryant, center right, inspects tornado damage Thursday, Dec. 24, 2015, in Ashland, Miss. At least 11 people were killed in as spring-like storms mixed with unseasonably warm weather and spawned rare Christmastime tornadoes in the U.S. South, officials said Thursday. Emergency officials blamed the severe weather for injuring scores of others and destroying dozens of cars, homes and businesses. (Stan Carroll/The Commercial Appeal via AP)

SHARE Diana Davis shows a photo she found in the rubble of her father-in-law's home after Wednesday's tornado in Lutts, Tenn., Thursday, Dec. 24, 2015. The photo shows what the house looked like before the tornado hit the area. (Larry McCormack/The Tennessean via AP) MANDATORY CREDIT A Christmas Tree stands among damage done to a home on Falcon Road in Selmer, Tenn., Thursday, Dec. 24, 2015, after a tornado passed through the area Wednesday evening. No deaths or injuries were reported. (Kenneth Cummings/The Jackson Sun via AP) Christmas gifts are stacked outside of a demolished home that was affected by a tornado that came through Selmer, Wednesday, Dec. 23, 2015. Residents and volunteers spent Thursday helping to cleanup and assess the damage done on Falcon Road. (Kenneth Cummings/The Jackson Sun via AP) Ladarren Phillips surveys tornado damage to a house on Rising Star Road in Holly Springs, Miss., Thursday, Dec. 24, 2015. At least 11 people were killed in as spring-like storms mixed with unseasonably warm weather and spawned rare Christmastime tornadoes in the U.S. South, officials said Thursday. Emergency officials blamed the severe weather for injuring scores of others and destroying dozens of cars, homes and businesses. (Stan Carroll/The Commercial Appeal via AP)

By Phillip Lucas And Erik Schelzig, The Associated Press

BIRMINGHAM, Ala. (AP) - A Christmastime wave of severe weather continued to make its way around the South as a tornado touched down in north-central Alabama, including part of Birmingham, the state's largest city.

Witnesses spotted the funnel outside the city about 5 p.m. on Friday. An hour later, the National Weather Service confirmed that first responders were on the scene along Jefferson Avenue in a working class neighborhood about eight miles from downtown Birmingham.

Lt. Sean Edwards, a Birmingham police spokesman, said trees are down and people were trapped inside damaged houses, adding that several people were taken to hospitals for treatment of minor injuries, but further details were not immediately available.

Alabama Power reported Friday night that 10,000 of its customers, mainly in the Birmingham area, are without power.

Unseasonably warm weather on Wednesday helped spawn torrential rain and tornadoes that left at least 14 people dead in Tennessee, Arkansas and Mississippi and left dozens of families homeless by Christmas Eve.

Mississippi Emergency Management Agency said in a statement Friday night that there were reports of another death and another person missing.

"This increases the number of deaths to eight, and the number of missing persons to two," according to the statement.

Ruthie Green went door-to-door in her Alabama neighborhood in a coat and a bicycle helmet to check on neighbors after the storm and swept debris from her front porch as more emergency responders arrived in the neighborhood.

"I been listening to the news all day so I was kind of preparing," Green said. When the tornado warning came up on her iPad, Green said she ran to a closet.

"Then I heard the big roaring, it didn't last more than three minutes," Green said. "I just laid down and just kept praying."

Green said she was unsure of whether any neighbors had been injured or killed down the block where several homes were destroyed.

"We probably won't know anything until daylight comes," she said. "I'm hoping that everybody got out all right."

"Details are still sketchy," said Jason Holmes, a National Weather Service meteorologist.

Weather radar Friday evening showed an intense system along the Interstate 20/59 corridor west of Birmingham, with the storm moving eastward. Flooding was reported in counties throughout the region, as heavy rain continued to fall.

Pastor Melvin Howard of the Mount Olive Full Gospel Church said he came rushing to the area of Jefferson Avenue and 50th Street in Birmingham when he heard the storm hit.

Howard said his church's building had collapsed but no one was inside at the time.

"We're just there to salvage what we can salvage," he said.

The Alabama tornado is the latest development in an ongoing series of storms that has hammered the South during Christmas week.

Elsewhere in the region, where the weather had calmed, dozens of people faced Christmas having lost their homes and possessions. But many they said they were thankful to see another Christmas.

Tony Goodwin ducked into a storm shelter with seven others as a storm pounded Tennessee and other states in the southeastern U.S. He emerged to find his house in Linden had been knocked off its foundation and hurled down a hill by high winds.

Goodwin's neighbors weren't so fortunate. Two people in one home were killed.

"It makes you thankful to be alive with your family," he said.

On Friday, parts of Mississippi remained under a flood warning. Weather forecasters from the National Weather Service warned that a strong storm crossing the central part of the state could produce hail and winds of more than 40 mph. The storm was bringing with it the risk of falling trees, downed power lines and flash flooding, officials said.

But that didn't stop some from spending their Christmas giving rather than receiving.

Nicholas Garbacz, disaster program manager for the American Red Cross of North Mississippi, said members of the Marine Corps brought donated toys to a center in Holly Springs for children whose families were hit hard by the storms. Two of the seven people killed in Mississippi were from the Holly Springs area.

Dozens of children and their families showed up Friday morning to pick up a toy or other items they might need to recover from the storm, Garbacz said.

More severe weather was also in store for parts of Alabama, Georgia and Tennessee that were again being pounded with rain. Residents were warned to brace for flash flooding and possible tornadoes.

Among the dead were seven people from Mississippi, including a 7-year-old boy who perished while riding in a car that was swept up and tossed by storm winds.

Six people were killed in Tennessee, including three who were found in a car submerged in a creek, according to the Columbia Police Department. The Tennessee Emergency Management Agency said the victims were a 19-year-old female and two 22-year-old males.

One person died in Arkansas, and dozens of homes were damaged or destroyed.

As the rain continued to fall, Alabama Gov. Robert Bentley on Friday issued an emergency declaration that covers any part of the state experiencing flash flooding. Officials in southeast Alabama are particularly concerned, as Pea River is approaching record-levels near the town of Elba, which has a history of severe flooding.

Dozens of people were injured in earlier storms, some seriously, said Greg Flynn, spokesman for the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency.

Search teams combed damaged homes and businesses for people still missing, a hunt made complicated because so many had left for the holidays.

"Until they know for sure where those folks are, they're going to keep looking, because we've had in some cases houses leveled, and they're just not there anymore," Flynn said.

In Benton County, Mississippi, relatives helped Daisy and Charles Johnson clean up after the storm flattened their house. They carried some of the couple's belongings past a Santa Claus figure on a table.

Daisy Johnson, 68, said she and her husband rushed along with other relatives to their storm shelter across the street after they heard a tornado was headed their way.

"We looked straight west of us, and there it was. It was yellow and it was roaring, lightning just continually, and it was making a terrible noise," she said. "I never want to hear that again for as long as I live."

Mona Ables, 43, was driving home when the storm hit. She abandoned her car, ran to a house and banged on a window, seeking shelter.

The startled man inside couldn't open the door, Ables said. She huddled next to the house as another stranger pulled up, also looking for shelter.

"He and I just huddled together and saw trees fly past us, and a shipping container flip over," Ables said. "And as the debris started hitting us, he just covered me, and within a minute it was all over and there was destruction all around us and we were fine."

Peak tornado season in the South is in the spring, but such storms can happen at any time. Exactly a year ago, tornadoes hit Mississippi, killing five people and injuring dozens.

Barbara Perkins was told Thursday by an insurance agent that her storm-damaged home in Falkner, Mississippi, was a complete loss. But Perkins - who survived the storm hunkered down inside a closet with her husband - said she was happy just to be alive. Two neighbors had died in the storm that swept across the southeastern U.S. earlier this week.

"You kind of stop and realize what Christmas is all about," Perkins said.

___

AP writers contributing to this report were Erik Schelzig from Linden, Tennessee; Phillip Lucas from Falkner, Mississippi; Jay Reeves in Atlanta; Lucas Johnson in Nashville; and Chevel Johnson in New Orleans.