Police have arrested two men suspected of killing two grandmothers during a home invasion at a Surprise retirement community earlier this month.

Andrew Lauro, 24, of Goodyear was apprehended Friday. His arrest led investigators to a second suspect, Montez Wright III, 23, who was taken into custody in Southfield, MI, according to Surprise Police Sgt. Norm Owens.

[RELATED: 2 women found dead in Surprise home]

Investigators believe the men are responsible for the deaths of Barbara Leslie, a 70-year-old resident of Surprise, and her 75-year-old friend Ruth Schwed, who was visiting from Albuquerque, NM. Both women were found shot to death Feb. 9 inside Leslie's home in the Sun City Grand retirement community.

Lauro has been booked into the Maricopa County Fourth Avenue Jail on two counts of first-degree murder, two counts of armed robbery and one count of first-degree burglary. Wright is currently in custody in Michigan and awaiting extradition back to Arizona, where he is facing the same charges.

"We applaud the work of the Surprise Police Department as they work to bring to justice those responsible for the murder of our mother and her friend," Schwed's family said in a statement. "The arrests announced today are due to the diligence of the Surprise Police Department and multiple law enforcement agencies and those working with them. Our family continues to grieve the loss of our mother, grandmother, and sister. Our goal is to ensure that those responsible for these murders will never be able to harm anyone again."

Officers responded to the home in the area of Goldwater Ridge Drive and Clearview Boulevard at 9:30 p.m. on Tuesday, Feb. 9

"When police arrived, they were able to look through a window and they saw what they believed were two subjects laying (sic) on the ground," said Sgt. Norm Owens of the Surprise Police Department during a Wednesday morning news conference. "They were able to make entry into the home at which time police discovered two female victims that had been shot."

[RELATED: Reward increased for info in Surprise double murder]

Police said there was no sign of forced entry. They later confirmed that Leslie's car had been stolen. Police recovered the vehicle, but they did not say if evidence from it led them to Lauro.

"This is an active ongoing investigation, but all the information we have at this time is that it appears to be a random act of violence," Owens said during a short news conference Sunday afternoon.

Surprise Police got help in the investigation from the FBI, the Arizona Department of Public Safety, the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office, the Bernalillo County Sheriff's Office in New Mexico, the Southfield Police Department in Michigan, and tips from the public.

Detectives will be working closely with the Maricopa County Attorney's Office as they continue to proceed through this investigation, Owens said.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.