Tweets from the presidential field

@lauraolson quotes U.S. Rep. Lou Barletta at Donald Trump's Harrisburg rally: "When Donald Trump becomes president, you can say Merry Christmas again."

@lauraolson wrote at Trump rally: "USA!" chant after U.S. Rep. Tom Marino says Trump will "kill every one of the terrorists that we have not been going after."

@sesack tweeted at Trump rally: "I've got to win Pennsylvania. Cruz doesn't know where Harrisburg is. He went to New York and they threw him around like a rag doll."

@sesack quotes U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz at Hershey rally: "If I am elected president, I will repeal every word of Obamacare ... And pass a simple flat tax."

@sesack tweets Former President Bill Clinton stumping for his wife Hillary in Harrisburg: Reason so much anger in election ... People not get pay raises since economic crash & college grads saddled w/ debt can't pay.

Governor's Allentown visit

When you're a lawmaker who has stood by the governor who is a member of the same party, you get treated special sometimes.

Thursday was one of those times for state Rep. Mike Schlossberg, D-Lehigh.

That's when Democratic Gov. Tom Wolf came to Allentown to sign into law legislation — House Bill 12 — that Schlossberg, as prime sponsor, was able to get passed in the Republican-controlled House and Senate.

The new law makes it easier for abused spouses to get a divorce. In a statement, Schlossberg said that before his bill was signed into law, an abuser could entrap his or her spouse in a marriage for two years by refusing to consent to a divorce, and the divorce would only be granted after the couple went through up to three counseling sessions.

"I am thankful to my colleagues in the General Assembly and Gov. Wolf for their support of this legislation," Schlossberg said in his statement. "This new law will help ensure that no one in this state is forced to remain legally attached to their abuser through marriage."

Schlossberg is unopposed in Tuesday's primary election. He faces Republican Ben Long in the November general election.

— Steve Esack

Budget season to start

The Legislature will begin voting on the 2016-17 fiscal year budget in two weeks, according to a letter sent Wednesday by state Rep. Bill Adolph, R-Delaware, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee.

Adolph's letter to the 203-member House says lawmakers have until 2 p.m. Monday to file amendments to the 2016-17 budget the chamber. The vote on the budget bill, House Bill 1999, is scheduled for May 2, the letter states.

The letter comes as the final piece of the 2015-16 state budget was finished Friday when Gov. Tom Wolf allowed the fiscal code to become law without a veto, as he had threatened. The code is a budget document that sets formulas and rules for how tax money is spent.

"We are thankful the governor will allow the fiscal code to become law, and we will now close out the 2015-16 budget year," said Jenn Kocher, spokeswoman for Senate Majority Leader Jake Corman, R-Centre.

It remains to be seen whether Wolf and the Legislature will get into a protracted battle over the 2016-17 budget.

Wolf wants an income or sales tax to help close the estimated $1.5 billion to $2 billion deficit and give more money to schools and other programs. No broad-based tax hikes have ever been passed in an election year, however.

"I am eager to get to work immediately with Republican and Democratic leaders to discuss a responsible 2016-2017 budget that is balanced, fixes the deficit, continues to make important investments in education and prevents Pennsylvania from going over a fiscal cliff that will have serious implications for our long-term future," Wolf said Friday in a statement.

John O'Brien, Adolph's spokesman, said it takes about three weeks for the House to move and vote on a budget. The letter was meant to set up a public timetable and was not an indication that the House planned to "pass our own budget."

The 2015-16 fiscal year ends June 30, and the 2016-17 fiscal year begins the next day.

So let the games begin.

— Steve Esack

Quote of the week

"This has been the worst presidential election campaign I've ever seen: the lack of respect, lack of compassion, lack of empathy. I think it's both parties; one is worse than the other."

—Rhonda Howard, a government worker from Harrisburg