SPRINGFIELD — With more provisions of the federal Affordable Care Act taking force Oct. 1, the Massachusetts Health Connector will have more to offer a greater number of state residents, but only if they take the time to explore an updated Connector when it goes online later this week.

"We are the storefront for health insurance providers," Jean Yang, executive director of the Health Connector, said Monday at a news conference at the Caring Health Center Wellness Clinic, 1145 Main St.

The Health Connector is available at www.mahealthconnector.org.

Yang made a special effort to warn that a number of people who get health insurance through the Health Connector now will not be transferred over to the new Affordable Care Act programs as a batch. They'll have to sign up for a new plan individually. Yang said it's best for folks to double check and make sure they'll be compliant under the new system and that they will keep their coverage.

Of the 250,000 people now getting insurance through the Connector, 100,000 will shift automatically to MassHealth, which pays for health care for certain low- and medium-income people living in Massachusetts. The remaining 150,000 people, generally people with slightly higher incomes, will have to sign up for a new plan once the system switches over Oct. 1.

The new Connector website will be up and running in a few days, Yang said.

"We need people to take affirmative action," she said. "Or otherwise we could lose them."

Caring Health received a $196,000 state grant to do community outreach touting the expanded Health Connector through its Navigator program. Caring Health President and CEO Tania M. Barber said the center already does a lot of Health Connector education within its walls, but workers will soon be getting out into the community at schools and community centers to let people know what's going on.

The state Commonwealth Health Insurance Connector Authority said there are 10 similar facilities in the Navigator program including Ecu-Health Care in North Adams and Hilltown Community Health Centers in Huntington and Worthington.

Much of federal health care reform was based on Massachusetts' model, and Massachusetts residents are used to living with an individual mandate to get insurance, which goes national as the new law – commonly referred to as Obamacare – is implemented.

But the federal law also changes Massachusetts rules. For example, individuals with incomes up to $45,960 a year or a family of four with an income up to $94,200 (up to 400 percent of the poverty level) may be eligible for federal tax credits to help cover the cost of health care insurance. Those cutoffs were lower in the past.

Also, help with out-of-pocket costs like copays and deductibles will be available under the new plan to those making from $34,476 for an individual or $70,656 for a family of four. That is 300 percent of the poverty line.

There are also employee programs for small businesses.

The basic cost of a health care plan for an individual or small business in Massachusetts will increase, on average, by a small amount in the beginning of 2014, according to rates recently approved by the state Division of Insurance.