<p>David Moon</p>

This past week, five global banks agreed to pay $5 billion in fines for manipulating worldwide interest and foreign exchange rates.

JPMorgan Chase, Barclays, Citigroup and the Royal Bank of Scotland will plead guilty to the criminal charge of conspiring to manipulate the price of dollars and euros.

After violating the terms of a 2012 limited prosecutorial immunity agreement, UBS will plead guilty to manipulating the benchmark London Interbank Offered Rate (Libor), the rate on which nearly every interest rate in the world is directly or indirectly based.

These organizations illegally manipulated the interest rates paid by practically every borrower in the world.

Yet no individuals have been criminally charged. Despite the corporate guilty pleas, I will be shocked if anyone goes to prison.

UBS is a poster-child for what occurs when no one is punished for breaking the law. In the past seven years, the firm has been found to have defrauded more than 100 cities and nonprofit organizations, tens of thousands of investors and the Internal Revenue Service.

UBS, however, is simply an example; this really isn’t about them. My friends who work there are good people with whom I would trust both my IRA and my life.

This is about a failure of law enforcement — a failure that will continue until, as Voltaire suggested, we shoot a few admirals to motivate the others.

Allowing miscreant executives to profit from their undiscovered misdeeds and use shareholder funds to pay fines if caught is not shooting an admiral.

Crony de-capitalism (my preferred term) will continue to cheat customers and taxpayers until those responsible are held swiftly and massively responsible for their actions.

The second failure is a widespread cultural problem and isn’t easily solvable. It is the selective nature of outrage.

We are appalled when a quarterback cheats by manipulating the equipment he uses, but every football coach teaches his linemen how to hold without getting caught. Steroids provide athletes an illegal competitive advantage, but narcotics are an accepted part of their daily lives.

When a truck stop operator overcharges its customers, its headquarters are raided by Kevlar-clad FBI agents.

But no one pays attention when Regions bank illegally assesses fees against hundreds of thousands of customers or intentionally inflates its earnings by lying about the accrual status of hundreds of millions of dollars in loans.

The Justice Department bases its corporate prosecutorial decisions on a company’s size, its importance to the economy and the number of innocent employees a prosecution might negatively affect. So said Lanny Breuer in 2012, the then-head of the DOJ Criminal Division.

No firm, however, is too big to jail.

These fines, when not accompanied by personal punishment, simply become a business tax. And just like any other cost of doing business, these fines are ultimately paid by the customer.

David Moon, founder and president of Moon Capital Management, may be reached at david@mooncap.com.