By Gretchen Reynolds, New York Times News Service

Using a standing desk at the office may adversely influence how much time you spend lounging in a chair at home, according to a new study of sedentary behavior. The findings subtly underscore that, when it comes to health habits and exercise, we humans have a surprising capacity to be our own worst enemies.

There is virtually unanimous scientific agreement that uninterrupted sitting is bad for us. Past studies of deskbound workers have shown that most of us sit for 10 hours or more every day, with the majority of that chair time at work.

In experiments, workers who receive sit-stand desks generally reduce the amount of time that they spend seated during office hours, at least in the short term, and often report feeling more energetic and productive.

But the human body and brain are funny. They often, insidiously, undermine our best efforts to be healthier, in an attempt to maintain our physiological status quo. When we slash calories to lose weight, for instance, our bodies often lower our metabolic rate, and our weight doesn’t budge much.

For the new study, published in Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, researchers from Loughborough University in England and Victoria University in Australia asked 40 healthy but sedentary university office workers to wear two types of activity monitors for 14 days. One monitor tracked changes in posture that revealed how much someone was sitting or standing. The other tracked steps and other physical activity.

Then the researchers provided all their volunteers with sit-stand workstations and asked them to don the monitors after a week of using the new desks, again after six weeks and then again after three months. In each instance, the volunteers wore the monitors for a week at a time.

People’s daily activity patterns did change after they began using the sit-stand desks. Before receiving the desks, most of the workers had spent about 10 hours each day in a chair, at the office or at home, and less than five hours standing.

After a week, they were standing for almost 6 1/2 hours each day — between work and home — and sitting for less than 8 1/2 hours.

That shift lingered throughout the three-month period, with some rebound. After six weeks, the workers were standing for about six hours a day. After three months, their daily standing time had fallen to about 5 1/2 hours and sitting time had climbed back to a little over nine hours.

What’s revelatory about those numbers, though, is where they were doing that sitting and standing.

“It appears that participants were compensating for sitting less at work by sitting more and moving less after work,” said Stacy Clemes, a professor of exercise science at Loughborough University.