By JAN HOFFMAN

The New York Times

Nausea, sensitivity to bright lights, headache: Chris Coyne knew right away that the helmet-to-helmet hit during football practice had given him a concussion. His fifth, in fact.

So he knew just what to do.

He reasoned that, since only 10 days remained in the season and he was both team captain and a senior at Staples High School in Westport, Conn., he would tough it out. He had played through worse concussions.

So he avoided the school’s athletic trainer and ducked direct looks from his coach, either of whom might have noticed that he was dazed.

“I put pressure on myself to do well and not to let my teammates down,” said Mr. Coyne, now a junior at Yale.

Mr. Coyne, a 6-foot-3 defensive end and tight end, was supposed to continue playing football in college. But during preseason practice freshman year, he got a sixth concussion. His symptoms were so severe and protracted that he had to rely on an independent note-taker and take Ritalin for wandering attention for three semesters. He was finished with football.

An extensive report about sports-related concussions in young people, released last week by the Institute of Medicine and the National Research Council, made recommendations that included bolstering research, collecting data, examining injury protocols and educating the public. But the report identified one particularly stubborn challenge: the “culture of resistance” among high school and college athletes, who may be inclined to shrug off the invisible injuries and return immediately to the field.

“There is still a culture among athletes,” the report said, “that resists both the self-reporting of concussions and compliance with appropriate concussion management plans.”

Dr. Frederick P. Rivara, a pediatrician at the University of Washington’s Seattle Children’s Hospital and a vice chairman of the committee that produced the report, said, “It’s a culture where the idea is to man up, to not let your teammates or coach down, and play with your symptoms.” Because concussions are not graphic, like a bloodied nose or a broken leg, players “hide their symptoms and continue to play.”

Even so, Dr. Rivara said, one of the report’s recommendations — to teach athletes, coaches, school districts and parents about the possibility of exacerbating the effects of a concussion if an athlete returns to the field hastily — “can start right now, before research.”

Concussions vary widely, and the prognosis depends on age and on the location and force of the injury, as well as on other, less quantifiable factors. Most concussions resolve within a few weeks, but more severe ones can have long-term complications, including problems with memory and concentration, particularly if subjected to continuing trauma. If an athlete incurs a second concussion before the first one has healed, the consequences may be compounded.

But educating athletes about concussions is one thing. Changing the convictions of a culture that values playing through pain is quite another.

One obstacle is the adolescent belief in invincibility. “We all knew concussions were bad,” said Mr. Coyne, who frequently speaks to athletic organizations and youth teams about his cautionary tale. “But we didn’t believe in the severity: ‘It won’t happen to me. I can play through one.’ ”

In May, a small study of 119 high school football players by doctors at the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center found that more than 75 percent could identify the symptoms of a concussion, including headaches, dizziness and sensitivity to light and sound. And 92 percent of the players knew they risked serious injury if they returned to the field too quickly after a concussion. Yet only 54 percent said they would report such symptoms to their coach, and 53 percent said that even if they had a headache from an injury, they would continue to play.

A recent study in The Journal of Pediatrics found that cheerleaders also under-reported concussion symptoms.

Awareness about the potential seriousness of concussions, particularly on developing brains, has increased markedly in the last few years. Most states have baseline legislation mandating concussion education for athletes and coaches. But at the same time, the allure of athletic success has grown among young people — not only because of the possibility of college scholarships, but because of the salaries and celebrity status conferred upon star professional athletes.

“There’s a machismo to sports, whether you’re male or female,” said Dustin J. Fink, an athletic trainer who supervises a dozen sports at Mt. Zion High School, in Illinois. “It’s most often seen in professional sports, where they are celebrated for being warriors and champions, for doing everything they can to stay on the field and play.”

That message trickles down to parents and children, said Mr. Fink, who writes a blog about concussion research. “My dad would say, ‘Play unless you can’t walk.’ And with some injuries, like broken fingers, you can play through the pain. But once your brain is hurt, it’s hurt. Yet what gets instilled in the child is, ‘You play no matter what.’ ”

As an athletic trainer at other junior high and high schools, “I’ve seen coaches who tried to be the decision-maker with injuries,” Mr. Fink said. “They need that win, so they will try to override the athletic trainer or manipulate the athlete to get back in the game.”

He added that Mt. Zion coaches did not behave in this manner.

Mr. Fink did say he had begun to see some change in the culture in recent years. When he pulled a student from a game because of a concussion, he said, parents and other coaches used to say, “What do you know? It’s no big deal!” Now, more often, he hears, “Thank you, we’ll get it checked out.”

Mr. Coyne, whose concussions came not just from football but from hitting his head on a pole standard during a high jump and from rough-housing in the locker room, said that this, his junior year, was the first in which he felt symptom-free and did not have to rely on extensive accommodations.

He is majoring in political science and economics, and longs to return to sports. But his football days are over, and he hasn’t been medically cleared for his next choice, volleyball.

Another possibility? “I love skiing,” he said. “I haven’t hit my head hard in skiing for years.”