"If we provide more effective care, the hospital beds will be available for those who are acutely ill and really need them,'' said Dr. Joseph Torchia

Joe Smith is in the hospital again with complications from chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder, or COPD.

When he went home last time, no one knew that he had no family close by willing to provide support and that getting to the pharmacy to pick up his prescriptions would be a hardship.

This time, Smith will leave with a plan of individualized care that will take into account not only his physical health but also other factors that could jeopardize his ability to heal well – things like his financial means, at-home support and access to care resources.

Smith is a fictitious composite of a patient with a chronic health problem for which hospitals are analyzing data to create personalized healthcare "roadmaps" in hopes of helping them manage their disease better and ultimately lessening the chance of hospital readmission.

"A lot of readmissions aren't for real obvious reasons. Maybe the patient doesn't have a social support system at home; maybe he has a cell phone but he doesn't know how to use it. We recognize that patients have individualized characteristics and now we have the technology that enables better personalized treatment for them," said Dr. George Beauregard, senior vice president and chief clinical officer for PinnacleHealth System in Harrisburg.

Harnessing data to predict future health

The health system is beginning a six-month pilot study with COPD patients, using a predictive analytics tool from IBM that defines variables and data points to generate a model that clinical teams will use to create individualized treatment plans for patients.

Based on past experiences and data, the "roadmap" will provide instructions on follow-up care, treatment, home care instructions and medication management – all with the goal of helping people manage their condition at home under the care of their primary care doctor.

"We are trying to predict who is at high risk of readmission to the hospital within 30 days and predict what will be the time interval until they have their next deterioration and what interventions can we do to help avoid this," Beauregard said. "Healthcare as a business is a little bit late in the game on using predictive analytics. Re-admittance avoidance is a fairly new phenomenon in healthcare."

"Roadmaps" lead patients home

Driving the interest in the issue now are stiffer readmissions penalties for hospitals under the Affordable Care Act – up from 1 percent of a hospital's previous year's Medicare reimbursement to as much as 2 percent.

"We have long understood that readmissions are not a good thing, but I think we were always reacting to it rather than taking the proactive approach," Beauregard said.

Population health management – looking at a selective health population in an effort to maximize their health and minimize unnecessary and avoidable healthcare expenditures – has been gaining attention over the past several years even before the government got involved, according to Dr. William Bird, associate chief medical officer for Penn State Hershey Medical Group – Primary Care.

"Employers want value for their money," he said. "And value equals quality divided by cost times patient experience."

While it seems like common sense to analyze patient populations and come up with predictive personalized roadmaps for better outcomes, that wasn't the way to do business in the "fee for service" world.

"What was the financial incentive before for healthcare providers – hospitals and physicians – to do this when most health care has been that you do something and you get paid; you do more and you get paid more," Bird said. "As providers assume more of the financial risk for outcomes, software data analytics can help predict which part of the population needs a specific type of intervention."

At Holy Spirit Health System in Camp Hill, a performance improvement team has been analyzing the current process and identifying areas for improvement over the past three and a half years, said Dr. Joseph Torchia, Holy Spirit's chief medical officer.

"The transition of a patient from hospital to home or an acute rehab facility or assisted living is complex for people in healthcare and for the patient who may have two or three chronic conditions and be on various medications," Torchia said.

"We started down this pathway because it's the right thing to do, but the Medicare penalties have ratcheted it up a bit," Torchia said.

While hospitals have always managed in-patient coordination of care, now they are looking at creating care management teams for the outpatient world, Bird said.

"We put in place a team of care managers that works with a certain segment of patients – those with heart failure, diabetes, recently hospitalized people – toward better outcomes; for troubleshooting and education," he said. "Five years later, we see that effort is working and cost data is encouraging."

Many factors influence health after discharge

Holy Spirit has identified three major issues that need attention when a patient is being released.

"Medication reconciliation is one – making sure that the patient understands what all the medicines are for when they leave, when to take them, potential side effects and making sure they have the ability to get prescriptions filled," Torchia said.

"Two other important factors are educating the patient about their disease process so they know what signs to look for that need immediate attention and ensuring there is follow-up with a provider within three to seven days after they leave the hospital," he said.

PinnacleHealth has added a systems engineer for performance improvement and decision support to its team of clinical experts that will be gathering data from across the hospital system to use in the predictive analysis.

Eventually, data will be gathered from doctor's offices, laboratories and home healthcare and the roadmap will be extended to other chronic health conditions such as heart disease, kidney disease and diabetes, Beauregard said.

Hospitals are addressing post-discharge issues in various ways, including programs that work with pharmacies in cases where patients have financial hardship and paramedicine programs that provide a brief assessment and disease education for patients who don't qualify for home healthcare visits.

Nationally, debate is ongoing as to how much hospitals should be held accountable for what patients do after discharge. Local hospital officials say patient engagement in their own care is essential no matter what drives it.

"Most people want to avoid coming back to the hospital. The majority who don't follow our recommendations need more education or supplemental services such as access to a patient navigator or doctor,'' Torchia said.

"The onus is on the health system to make sure patients get all they can get to be healthier," Torchia said. "If we provide more effective care, the hospital beds will be available for those who are acutely ill and really need them."

Though hospitals certainly want to avoid penalties, the main goal is improving health, Beauregard said.

"Hospitals are challenged with readmission penalties and are spending a lot of time trying to keep people from coming back," Beauregard said. "If we can keep people healthier out in the community, then it's mission accomplished."