By Marjorie Haun | Watchdog Arena

Thursday’s announcement of the country’s largest health insurer’s possible abandonment of state Affordable Care Act or “Obamacare” exchanges within two years could spell trouble for Colorado’s already embattled exchange.

USA Today reports the warning from UnitedHealthcare follows a projected decrease of $425 million in company revenues for the first quarter of FY 2016. UnitedHealthcare cites disappointing Obamacare enrollment numbers and flexibility within the ACA giving individuals the ability to easily switch insurers as factors contributing to its dismal financial projections. According to USA Today, the announced withdrawal of this large health insurer “dealt a major blow to the Affordable Care Act.”

UnitedHealthcare is a major broker in Colorado’s health insurance system, offering plans both in and out of the Obamacare exchange. But recent developments with the state’s biggest Obamacare provider, Colorado HealthOP, may force UnitedHealthcare to make an earlier-than-planned exit.

In October, state regulators shut down Colorado HealthOP due to cash shortfalls, but it was expected at that time that all claims would be paid through the end of 2015. The cooperative would reportedly continue to pay claims for 83,000 customers despite the failure of the federal government to reimburse them. Insurance brokers in Colorado, such as UnitedHealthcare, helped recruit many who signed up with HealthOP for their medical coverage.

“It is a key function of the Division of Insurance to make sure that insurance carriers are financially stable enough to pay the claims of their policyholders,” state Insurance Commissioner Marguerite Salazar said in a statement. “While Colorado HealthOP can continue to pay claims for the rest of 2015, we cannot allow it to sell or renew policies on the exchange for 2016.”

But approximately six weeks before year’s end, on the same day that UnitedHealthcare announced its potential pull-out, The Denver Post reported that brokers participating in HealthOP would not receive payments for the remainder of the year. The stoppage of payments through the end of the year may lead to a loss of $2 million, according to the Post— never to be recovered by the participating brokers. It appears that since the closure of HealthOP was divulged last month, many members simply stopped paying their premiums while others rushed to obtain medical treatment before their insurance expires at the end of the year.

Although Colorado’s umbrella Obamacare system, Connect for Health Colorado, has 10 other insurance providers which will remain in the marketplace during 2016, the number of failing Obamacare insurance plans is mounting. As of Oct. 16, one-third of co-ops and insurance plans created under the ACA plan to fold by the end of the year. 50 percent of Obamacare co-ops are suffering serious financial losses.

UnitedHealthcare’s announcement comes on the heels of President Obama’s latest attempt to boost ACA enrollments in 20 selective cities with high uninsured populations. One of those cities is Denver. The city with the highest number of enrollments by the Dec. 15 deadline will receive a visit from the president.

If UnitedHealth retreats from Obamacare’s state exchanges, 540,000 Americans will possibly be forced to find another ACA provider.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.