Harlem and Michele Walton never intended to turn their roadside barbecue stand into a downtown restaurant until the opportunity suddenly came open this summer.

Just as quickly, their partnership with a businessman ended in a feud and left them looking for a new place for Old Fashion BBQ.

Now they’re starting over, determined to make a barbecue restaurant and store succeed in an underserved North Waco neighborhood.

The Waltons recently moved Old Fashion BBQ from 416 Franklin Ave. to a defunct convenience store at 625 Colcord Ave., across the street from The Villages Apartments and next to the Barron’s Branch affordable housing complex, now under construction.

The couple have repainted and renovated the building themselves and are preparing to open an adjacent convenience store. Michele Walton said she hopes it will be a gathering place in the Brook Oaks neighborhood, where restaurants and retail are scarce.

“A lot of people here don’t have vehicles, and they need a place to eat,” Walton said. “We want to be a family store for the community and a restaurant for those who don’t have cars. It’s a community center.”

Harlem Walton, the pitmaster, smokes brisket, chicken and ribs in the style his grandfather taught him decades ago, with sweet barbecue sauce slathered on thick.

His barbecue stand at the corner of Ninth and Waco Drive next to his Old School Detail Shop won a following during the last decade.

But the family’s sudden move into the restaurant business this past summer ended in a dispute that left a bitter taste for both parties involved.

The Waltons and their former business partner, Amir Zakirali, are still pointing fingers at each other, with each side claiming to be swindled.

The Waltons say Zakirali lured them into doing business at the former Al Miraj restaurant space he was leasing but used the arrangement to try to steal their money.

Police have charged Zakirali with forgery, accusing him of using a fake document to route money from the barbecue business to his personal bank account, a charge Zakirali denies.

Zakirali says it’s the Waltons who took advantage of him, taking jointly owned restaurant supplies and furnishings with them when they relocated in November.

“They got me pretty good,” he said, adding that he plans to sue the Waltons to recover the property. The Waltons deny that they took anything improperly.

By all accounts, it was Zakirali who approached Harlem Walton in July to run a barbecue restaurant.

Zakirali had closed Al Miraj, his Mediterranean-Pakistani restaurant on Franklin Avenue, and he was looking for a way to continue to pay the lease.

“Friends said barbecue would be good for downtown, and I had heard about this barbecue place,” Zakirali said. “I bought a lunch there and it tasted pretty good.”

Zakirali offered to take Harlem Walton to see a place where he could open a restaurant.

“I thought he was kidding,” Walton said. “He said, ‘Come take a ride in my car and I’ll show you.’ ”

Walton said he felt “leery” of the offer, but the restaurant looked like a good opportunity.

He had his wife, who worked in a financial job, draw up a partnership agreement and found family to lend him money, including the $5,000 Zakirali sought as an upfront payment.

The July 10 agreement, which was never officially recorded, stated that the parties would share net profits and losses from the partnership and that Michele Walton would be a managing partner.

The Waltons brought a smoking pit to the restaurant and both sides brought furnishings.

Eviction notice

The day after the business opened July 31, landlord Tom Chase served an eviction notice to Zakirali, initially claiming that he had sublet the building without permission.

Eventually, he ended up evicting Zakirali effective Oct. 31 for failing to maintain liability insurance, Chase said.

On Sept. 10, the Waltons noticed that their deposits were not showing up, and they discovered that the local credit card company at Zakirali’s request had caused the deposits to be routed to Zakirali’s own bank account, according to a police affidavit.

The switch was based on a letter that appeared to be from Educators Credit Union, where Zakirali banked, but police say the letter was clearly a fake. They charged Zakirali with forgery, a state jail felony, but no indictment has yet been made.

Zakirali said he doesn’t know who forged the document, but he had no reason to do it. He said he had payments routed to his bank account legitimately in accordance with the partnership agreement to pay bills that the Waltons weren’t paying.

By that time, Zakirali was in financial straits, with the state comptroller moving to freeze the assets of his Al Miraj LLC for back taxes.

Zakirali also lost his home in a foreclosure sale in August, and he is facing legal action from local governments for unpaid property tax.

Zakirali, who formerly owned several other businesses in Greater Waco, said the Al Miraj restaurant drained him financially.

He had a 10-year lease on the building, starting in 2012, until Chase brought it to an end Oct. 31.

Zakirali claims that the Waltons took about $12,000 of equipment and tore up the place when they left.

Michele Walton said that equipment was theirs all along, and she claims Zakirali owes her $5,000 back.

Zakirali said he would be willing to sit down with mediators and negotiate with Walton about who owes what to whom “and see who comes out ahead.”

Chase is now leasing the building to Marcia Neal, who plans to open a restaurant there in February called Sacsee’s Southern-Style Eatery.

Neal, who has run a catering business, plans to offer a buffet with homecooked meats and vegetables. She plans to be open Wednesdays through Sundays, offering live jazz on weekends.

Meanwhile at Old Fashion BBQ, Michele Walton said she is committed to working at the restaurant full time to make it a success and brought in her sister to help.

“If it’s going to work, we have to put our all into it,” she said.