ST. PAUL, Minn.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Short Elliott Hendrickson Inc. (SEH®) – a 700-person engineering and architecture firm headquartered in St. Paul, Minnesota – named six new company Associates – Deric Deuschle, CWD; Aaron Ditzler, PE; Chuck Gustafson, PE; Scott Hotchkin, PE; Toby Muse, PE and Sandee Schultz. The SEH Board of Directors selected these individuals based on their accomplishments and proven value to our Company and the clients they serve.

Each of these new Associates brings a unique set of expertise and talents, which help to further the Company’s collective engineering and architecture efforts in Building a Better World for All of Us®. These individuals do this by providing engineering design improvements and safer infrastructure; cleaner air, lakes and rivers; renewable drinking water; improved economic vitality and quality of life; and by helping our professional staff grow and succeed in their careers.

Deric R. Deuschle, CWD is an aquatic ecologist and leader of the natural resources team in Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota and Iowa. He plays an instrumental role in helping our clients preserve wetlands, protect endangered species, and understand natural and aquatic environments, and how they impact wildlife and aquatic life. These are critical components of many infrastructure and transportation-related projects.

Aaron T. Ditzler, PE specializes in municipal infrastructure design projects including safe sanitary and sewer systems, water distribution systems, improved streets, and new roads and trails. In addition, he works directly with residents and businesses to help them understand the impacts and benefits of new projects in their communities and neighborhoods.

Charles R. Gustafson, PE leads our Company’s construction services in Colorado and Wyoming. His construction administration, management and observation work includes transportation projects, water and wastewater facilities, and drainage and stormwater infrastructure projects. In addition, Charles plays a key role managing environmental assessments, surveying and mapping, property acquisition and coordinating multiple stakeholders and contractors.

Scott Hotchkin, PE is a transportation engineer who specializes in roundabout design and the conceptual/preliminary design of complex transportation projects. Scott has designed more than 90 roundabouts in Minnesota, Wisconsin and Colorado. These projects include large roundabouts in urban cities that help manage congestion and improve traffic flow – to traffic calming roundabouts and roundabouts for smaller communities.

Toby Muse, PE is a civil engineer whose design expertise includes new roadways and trails, storm water detention and conveyance systems as well as sanitary sewer systems and water distribution systems. He also designs systems to keep traffic moving through a community with effective lighting and traffic signal systems. Toby works with several clients in the Twin Cities metropolitan area to create more efficient and effective communities.

Sandee Schultz leads the management of SEH human resources systems, benefits, and critical employee information for the 700 employees who make up our Company. She is responsible for federal and state regulatory compliance and is the resident expert on the Affordable Care Act (ACA). In addition, Sandee is instrumental in helping SEH to attract and retain our expert staff.

Short Elliott Hendrickson (SEH) is headquartered in St. Paul, Minn., and has more than 29 offices across the Midwest, and in Colorado and Wyoming, and the company’s work is evidenced in more than 42 states. With its core purpose of Building a Better World for All of Us® SEH specializes in civil engineering, transportation engineering and planning, environmental, energy services, structural engineering, water and wastewater engineering, surveying, planning and urban design, funding services, and architectural services. The company has been serving clients for more than 85 years.