It started with the biologist Richard Dawkins, who on Twitter last month suggested that women have a moral obligation to abort their fetuses after they get a Down syndrome diagnosis. Responding to a question from a pregnant woman, he wrote: “Abort it and try again. It would be immoral to bring it into the world if you have the choice,” he wrote on Twitter. He said that he based this on his belief that suffering should be reduced whenever possible.

Then came the rebuttal, on the Times’s Op-Ed page, from Jamie Edgin of the University of Arizona and Fabian Fernandez of Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, which made the opposite case, though not on moral grounds, which they said was a different discussion. They wrote: “Recent research indicates that individuals with Down syndrome can experience more happiness and potential for success than Mr. Dawkins seems to appreciate.” They cited various studies and other kinds of evidence.

Soon after, came the comments to that Op-Ed article, many of them very strongly felt. Some of them urged abortion and emphasized the social cost of caring for Down syndrome children.

One commenter, JohnB wrote this assessment of the parents of Down syndrome children:

They will never have an intelligent conversation with their child. They have no hope that their child will ever achieve anything of consequence in the world, and little hope that it will even rise to the level of mediocrity. Their child will never be able to care for them in their old age, and (hopefully!!!) will never give them grandchildren. You can rationalize all this after the fact, but this is NOT what any prospective parent wants! All rationalization aside, Down syndrome is an unmitigated tragedy, and abortion is the best choice.”

Kari Wagner-Peck, whose son has Down syndrome, thinks those comments constitute a form of hate speech and should not have been posted. On her blog, she wrote about the discussion in the comments:

“It was essentially an objectionable debate on whether people with Down syndrome should exist because they are such needy, worthless and pathetic creatures who suck up our social services. The comments were eventually closed but not before I wondered would any other group of individuals’ right to exist be up for public discussion on the pages of NYTimes? If one were to replace “Down syndrome” with “African-American,” or “Hispanic” the NYTimes would be indistinguishable from a white supremacist discussion board. Would it be acceptable to discuss the value of poor people or welfare recipients? What if we evaluated the right of LGBT communities to exist?”

I heard from many readers who echoed Ms. Wagner-Peck’s sentiments.

Bassey Etim, the Times’s community manager, told me that The Times was following its own commenting rules when moderators approved those comments.

“Readers are allowed to discuss all of the same things an article does,” he said in an email. He added that because the issue of abortion was expressly discussed in the article, “We really have no choice but to let readers take sides on that statement one way or another, even if the comments are ones we wouldn’t usually approve. The same thing goes for 9/11 conspiracy theory comments — if an article is trying to debunk a conspiracy theory, we still must allow conspiracy theorists to respond, even if we normally wouldn’t accept their comments.”

I understand Mr. Etim’s reasoning on this but I would have preferred to see more sensitive moderation of comments in this case. To me, some of them do seem offensive, if not outright hateful.

(By contrast, the letters that ran on the Times’s editorial page managed to express a variety of views without being at all insensitive. But, of course, there were only a few letters published.)

This is not the only subject, of course, in which people write to me complaining about what they see as offensive comments. For example, I heard from Deborah Schneierson of Long Beach who objected to what she called the bashing of Hurricane Sandy victims in a recent comments section.

She wrote, describing one posted comment that described some victims of Sandy as “stupid/idiot/morons,” and that continued with “I hope they continue to suffer.”

An even easier decision, in my view, is not rewarding offensive comments with the gold star of the commenting world: the “Times pick.” Ms. Wagner-Peck complains of this in the Down syndrome comments, where one comment explicitly urging abortion is recognized. (Times picks, as I’ve explained, are not meant to signal agreement; nevertheless, they certainly seem to do just that.)

In the Sandy article, one Times pick goes to a harsh comment that refers to the “stupidity” of people who built too close to the water. Why give special affirmation to that, given the suffering of so many?

The Times makes a big and expensive commitment to civil discourse by having its comments moderated by human beings. Usually, it works well; reader comments often add a great deal to the discussion, and no one wants to reduce them to the blandness of pablum. Provocative, edgy comments are important to include. But basic civility matters, too.

The Times’s comment policy describes the kinds of offensive comments that won’t be published. Decisions on how to interpret that, of course, are subjective ones, but I’d have to agree that some of the posted comments on both of these articles went over the line into unacceptability and added very little of value.