Before a rousing crowd of 2,300 at Miles College in Fairfield, 2016 Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton laid out her platform and urged attendees to get out the vote ahead of Tuesday's Alabama primary.

At Miles, a historically black college, Clinton highlighted proposals that would impact African Americans and the poor, including raising the minimum wage, a plan to support HBCUs, criminal justice reform and sticking up for voting rights.

Clinton, the former secretary of state, pointed to her experience in that post in the Obama administration as well as her roles as first lady and a U.S. senator from New York.

"There is something to be said for all the scar tissue I've developed over the last 25 years," she said before impromptu chants of "Hillary!"

As she's done throughout her campaign, Clinton portrayed her candidacy as an extension of President Barack Obama's legacy. She said that Obama has not nearly gotten enough credit that he deserves in sparking an economic recovery.

"There's a lot to fix because [the Republicans] broke it," she said.

On the economy, Clinton said as president she would change the tax code to incentivize businesses who bring manufacturing jobs to America. And she also advocated for improving the country's infrastructure.

"Those are jobs you can export," she said. "They have to be done right here in Alabama."

Turning to health care, Clinton referenced her work as first lady, where she made the issue the hallmark of her tenure.

"Before there was Obamacare, there was Hillarycare. I worked very hard to get us on the path to universal healthcare coverage," she said. She then hit Republicans for proposing gutting Obamacare without offering an alternative.

"They never tell you what they're going to put in its place, do they?" she said. "But I'm going to defend [Obamacare] and I'm going to make it better. There's been a concerted effort to try and demean and criticize in every way possible the Affordable Care Act."

Pivoting to education, Clinton said she has plans to allow students to attend college debt-free, and urged states to do their part to increase education funding.

"We have enough prisons. We need to be investing in higher education," she said.

Clinton's criticisms were mostly aimed at the Republican primary candidates, including a thinly veiled dig at GOP frontrunner Donald Trump, who she suggested doesn't have the temperament to be president.

"You have to be careful about what you say and how you say it," Clinton said, adding that a president's words an actions could move financial markets and impact relations between countries. She added that she did not expect to have to talk about kindness, love, fellowship in context of running for president."

Earlier in the day, Clinton visited downtown Birmingham for coffee at Urban Standard ("I needed to get my caffeine fix," she told the Miles College crowd) and fried chicken from Yo Mama's. Her stop kicked off a big campaign weekend for Alabama in the final days leading to up to the Super Tuesday primary.

The visit by the Democratic front-runner is one of five Alabama stops planned by primary candidates between today and Monday.

Ben Carson, Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and Donald Trump are also visiting Alabama between today and Monday, as is former President Bill Clinton.\

The campaign said Clinton "will lay out the case for why she is the best candidate to raise Alabamians' wages and incomes and break down the barriers that exist for too many families." She will presumably also mention Birmingham's decision to raise the minimum wage.

The visit in Clinton's third stop in Alabama since she became a Democratic candidate for president. She earlier stopped in Hoover and Montgomery.

Hillary Clinton's campaign stop at Miles College has a high school pep rally feel. #Election2016 #alpolitics pic.twitter.com/5zdfn8Mke7 — Howard Koplowitz (@HowardKoplowitz) February 27, 2016

Daniel Felder of Fairfield showing his support for Hillary before she speaks at Miles College. #election2016 pic.twitter.com/87hOUkBT3p — Howard Koplowitz (@HowardKoplowitz) February 27, 2016