The First Lady’s box at the State of the Union is the presidential version of Captain Planet: each guest reflects a different facet of the president’s policy goals for the coming year, and when they all join together, they represent an entire year’s worth of policy goals. With this being Barack Obama’s last State of the Union, the final list of V.I.P.’s set to sit with Michelle Obama on Tuesday night is naturally overflowing with meaning and compelling, if not politically expedient, stories.

As such, Obama has had to choose the most poignant people with the most tear-jerking tales. In anticipation of the C-SPAN cameras panning to them upon being mentioned in the address, it doesn’t hurt to be easy on the eyes, either.

Here, according to a list released by the White House, are some of the beautiful people chosen by the president to comprise his human platform:

An Empty Chair

This chair will remain empty to symbolize the lives lost to gun violence—accidents, murders, mass shootings, and suicides—which he hopes to end by enacting reform limiting gun purchases. (Expect Fox News commentators to crack jokes about how someone forgot to attend the State of the Union.)

Jim Obergefell

The plaintiff in the landmark case that legalized gay marriage, Obergefell became the face of the gay-rights movement after he filed a lawsuit to be listed on his husband’s death certificate as his husband.

Satya Nadella

Microsoft’s C.E.O. landed himself a spot in the First Lady’s box for his commitment to bringing technology and computer-science programs to American public schools. The White House also highlighted the tech giant’s new family-leave policies, which grants up to 20 weeks of paid leave to new parents.

Braeden Mannering

By tradition, a Very Adorable Child must be in the First Lady’s box during the State of the Union address. This year, the honor goes to the 12-year-old Mannering, who started his own nonprofit to address food insecurity in impoverished communities, a key part of the Obamas’ Let’s Move! program, embodied by a precious little boy.

Refaai Hamo

A former engineer, Hamo was one of millions of refugees who fled the violence in Syria. Hamo ended up, after years of turmoil and migration, in Troy, Michigan. His story landed him on the Humans of New York Facebook page, and Obama, whose administration approved 10,000 refugees to enter the United States, personally welcomed him to the country via a Facebook comment. (Several Republican governors and legislators fought against his order, saying that the State Department could not guarantee that these refugees were not secretly terrorists.)

Edith Childs

Back in 2008, a fresh-faced Obama would be greeted at campaigns with the chant “Fired up! Ready to go!” Edith Childs is the woman who invented that unofficial slogan, and her presence at Obama’s final State of the Union address brings the whole improbably journey full-circle.

Spencer Stone

The Air Force sergeant was one of three American men who prevented a mass shooting on a Paris train earlier in 2015, subduing a would-be terrorist armed with an assault rifle meaning to kill dozens of people. For his efforts, he received the Purple Heart and a personal commendation from the president.

Cedric Rowland

A navigator for a Chicago health-care service, Rowland was invited to the First Lady’s box for “helping Americans enroll in quality, affordable health care under the Affordable Care Act.” Yes, people are employed full-time to help other people choose the right health insurance. Health insurance is hard.

Despite all these compelling stories, Obama will have to struggle with a public more engrossed in the presidential-election psychodrama than they are with his swan song, as well as the fact that presidents don’t really see any increase in popularity due to the State of the Union address: