General Motors CEO says some GM cars will be able to communicate with each other in 2017, a prelude to cars that drive themselves. (Photo: Paul Sancya, AP)

General Motors plans to take a crucial first step toward autonomous vehicles within two years by introducing technology that will allow cars to wirelessly share information with each other and by introducing a new Cadillac that can steer itself on the freeway.

The company will deploy so-called vehicle-to-vehicle communication systems as standard on the 2017 Cadillac CTS sedan, and a brand new Cadillac will get "super cruise" technology controlling the vehicle's acceleration, braking and steering on the freeway.

GM declined to identify the Cadillac that will get the super-cruise system, but it's widely believed that the company is close to revealing a rear-wheel drive flagship sedan — possibly based on the popular Elmiraj concept shown in 2013.

GM discussed its plans at the 2014 Intelligent Transport Systems World Congress in Detroit, where several thousand industry leaders are gathering this week to discuss autonomous vehicle technologies.

GM CEO Mary Barra, delivering a keynote address, used the platform to exhort the industry to adopt autonomous vehicles.

"No other suite of technologies offers so much potential for good and it's time to turn potential into reality," Barra said, according to a copy of her prepared remarks.

To be sure, the industry remains a long way from fully driverless cars — despite Internet giant Google's development of a beta car that doesn't have a steering wheel. Barra said a fully autonomous car "may take until the next decade."

The 2017 CTS will get a radio transponder that can send safety messages to other vehicles equipped with the technology, including information about vehicle speed, distance and trajectory. The goal is to help avoid crashes and to communicate with traffic-owned infrastructure to reduce congestion.

The car won't take actions on its own based on the information it receives, but will instead alert the driver to pending threats. It will be the driver's decision whether to take action.

The vehicle-to-vehicle system-equipped CTS will be capable of collecting information from other similarly enabled vehicles within a 300-meter radius.

Auto industry leaders envision a day when all vehicles can communicate with each other — which would reduce crash frequency and traffic congestion while improving fuel economy.

GM's announcement comes a few weeks after the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration gave automakers advanced notice of its plans to establish federal regulations for vehicle-to-vehicle communication technology. The agency estimated that the systems could add about $300 to the cost of a car, though it's unclear how that would affect the price of the vehicle.

GM said it hopes that by integrating 5.6-gigahertz communication technology into the CTS, other automakers will follow. Without collaboration, the CTS will only be able to communicate with other CTSs. The company also hopes to entice smartphone makers to create systems that would communicate with vehicles in an effort to reduce pedestrian deaths.

"We're not going to wait until we perfect a driverless system," GM chief technology officer Jon Lauckner told reporters. "So we're going to take a leadership position on saying it's time to get going on the deployment of V-to-V technology."

Integrating the super-cruise system into the unidentified Cadillac within two years will help GM compete with the Mercedes S-class, which is already adopting a suite of early-stage autonnomous driving technologies.

Nissan's Infiniti luxury division, Hyundai's luxury models and others are offering sophisticated stop-and-guide technology, too, but GM is first to pledge vehicle-to-vehicle communication in the near future.

The super-cruise system, under development for several years, reflects a step ahead of adaptive cruise control, which accelerates and brakes on the highway but does not steer.

John Capp, GM's director of active safety electronics, said the super-cruise system will be able to navigate stop-and-go traffic jams. But it will still require drivers to pay attention to the road.

"The sensing technology is not yet to the point where the driver can check out," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1rSAoGa