FDA commissioner nominee should sail through Senate

CALIFF SHOULD FACE SMOOTH CONFIRMATION PROCESS — President Obama’s nominee to lead the FDA, Robert Califf is expected to sail through the Senate, avoid partisan bickering and easily take the reins as FDA commissioner. Following the nomination last week, HELP chair Lamar Alexander said Califf’s credentials are impressive and that the committee will “move promptly” to consider his nomination. In fact, Califf may “get more scrutiny from the President’s party, than the other side of the aisle,” said Nate Brown, a partner in Akin Gump’s health care and life science practice. He added patient groups were a little leery of Califf’s lack of public health experience when he joined FDA in February. But Brown said the most likely obstacle to his confirmation is the Senate’s jam-packed calendar.

Califf’s appointment was promptly cheered by the conservative Manhattan Institute, the branded drug industry lobby BIO, the generic drug lobby GPhA and advocacy groups such as the Friends of Cancer Research and Faster Cures. Public Citizen was a lonely detractor, citing Califf’s close financial relationships with the drug and device industries during his more than three decades at Duke University School of Medicine.

Story Continued Below

While Califf would have little time to leave his mark during Obama’s waning tenure, it’s a busy time for FDA, as the Senate works on its version of the House passed 21st Century Cures bill. He’d also have a key role in negotiating the next round of user fee agreements with industry, which are supposed to be approved by OMB next fall and ready for Congress in early 2017.

…It would be unusual for Califf to stay on as commissioner under a new president, even a Democrat, but sources indicated that if anyone has a shot it’s Califf. “The default is that regardless of which party wins [in 2016] he’s gone,” Steven Grossman, president of health policy and consulting firm HPS Group, said. Grossman pointed out that David Kessler is the only FDA commissioner to serve across two administrations. But Califf, Grossman said, “has the makings of someone that would at least be considered."

Happy Monday and welcome back to Prescription PULSE where we recall that on this week in 1982, CDC used the term "AIDS" for the first time and released the first case definition of AIDS: “a disease at least moderately predictive of a defect in cell-mediated immunity, occurring in a person with no known case for diminished resistance to that disease.” http://1.usa.gov/1DeO2qi

CAP: YOU DON’T NEED CONGRESS TO GET DRUG PRICES DOWN — The Center for American Progress argues that many of the proposals it released Friday to tamp down drug prices could be carried out by the private sector and would not require lawmakers to buck the entrenched pharma lobby on the Hill. The proposal depends heavily on an independent, third party organization — like the Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute or the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review — that would gauge the comparative effectiveness of a new drug and, based on that, recommend a price range. “A lot … can and should be done independently of government,” CAP’s VP for health policy Topher Spiro said on a call with reporters. ICER, Spiro pointed out, is already doing similar work. If payers and drugmakers negotiate a price that is “unreasonable” – more than 20 percent higher than the max recommendation — then CAP recommends that the government bust the patents on any drugs based on federally- funded research and let the generic companies make the meds. Even that would be within the government’s existing “march-in rights” in cases when the benefits of the federally-funded research are not “available to the public on reasonable terms,” according to CAP.

... But it would require a major change in the government’s use of those rights, which the George W. Bush administration threatened to invoke before it got a massive discount on Cipro in the wake of the 2001 anthrax attacks but has otherwise been extremely reluctant to use.

... The other big proposal which CAP likened to the medical loss ratio for insurers — that drug companies be required to spend a certain fraction of their revenue on R&D or else pay rebates to NIH — would require Congress to act. Details in the report: http://ampr.gs/1Mh6i5S

… PhRMA said the proposals would thwart innovation “by imposing arbitrary caps on pharmaceutical prices …, impede the development of new medicines for patients and cost countless jobs across the country.” The group also posted a new slide deck Friday highlighting progress made against deadly diseases and putting the cost of medicine in the context of overall health spending: http://onphr.ma/1NBmj8f

THIS WEEK: RETIREE GROUP STEPS UP FIGHT AGAINST PHARMA CARVEOUT — The Alliance for Retired Americans will launch a new grass-roots campaign to persuade lawmakers to reject pharma’s push for a carveout from a streamlined patent review process in patent reform legislation. The life sciences industry says the carve out is necessary to protect against abuse in the appeals process.

... The retiree group, which is allied with the AFL-CIO, will hold events in Illinois, Minnesota and Vermont to target those states' senators and mobilize members. "Hopefully the more sunlight we shine on it the more ability we'll have to stop it," the group's Executive Director Rich Fiesta told POLITICO.

… LIFE SCIENCES GROUPS UPSET WITH ISSA — Our Pro Tech colleague Adam Sneed reports that two California-based life sciences organizations took Rep. Darrell Issa to task over his claims earlier this month that the industry spread “misinformation” in the patent reform debate. He also said the industry won’t get the carve-out it wants, prompting Biocom and the California Life Sciences Association to write Issa voicing their “disappointment” over his comments.

“These remarks seem to suggest a lack of understanding of the extraordinary value and complexity of life sciences innovation,” the groups wrote, adding that the inter-partes review process “threaten[s] future investment in innovation and ultimately the ability of patients to have access to breakthrough medicines and technologies.” The letter: http://bit.ly/1OjNAxL

PRECISION MEDICINE MOVES FORWARD: A group of tech and science luminaries issued recommendations to NIH concerning the Precision Medicine Initiative on Thursday our eHealth colleagues report. Their report envisions recruiting a million participants over around four years, for starters. The authors hope the initiative can recruit a diverse set of individuals; it specifically mentions children, the elderly, and prisoners. The longitudinal studies, researchers said, could solve some major medical problems. "We still are fundamentally naïve," said Rick Lifton of Yale, "We lack knowledge about the environmental and demographic factors that contribute to disease." By following large cohorts over long periods of time, the research could do for some diseases — like diabetes — what the Framingham Heart Study has done for heart disease: identify interventions that diminish risk. The full report: http://1.usa.gov/1YgI7Lj

FDA WON’T GUARANTEE KEY BIOSIMILAR POLICIES COMING THIS YEAR — FDA drug center director Janet Woodcock told members of a Senate HELP subcommittee last Thursday that the agency is “working very hard” to get out guidance documents to lay out important parts of the biosimilars pathway. That will include how these near copycats of branded biologic medicines can achieve an interchangeable designation that will allow for automatic substitution for their more expensive counterparts. Guidance will also address biosimilar labeling. Woodcock, however, wouldn’t guarantee the agency would be able to get the policies out this year even though they are on its 2015 guidance agenda.

Senators on both sides of the aisle expressed disappointment and frustration with the agency’s pace on implementing the biosimilars pathway which was created by the 2010 Affordable Care Act in the hopes of spurring cheaper medicines and savings for the government and consumers.

… On another biosimilars topic, Woodstock during her testimony may have helped biosimilar companies in their pleas to get CMS to change a proposed rule that would give all biosimilars of the same branded drug the same billing code, thus reimbursing them at the same rate. Woodcock said unique billing codes would help the agency distinguish between different products to track safety.

MedPAC MULLING MORE SUNSHINE FOR INDUSTRY — At their September meeting, the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, which advises Congress, mulled potential next steps for CMS's Open Payments database, which provides data on payments and transfers of value from pharmaceutical and medical device companies to physicians. Improvements might include requiring public reporting of payments made to other health professionals or organizations besides doctors. Another suggestion was to conduct analyses to explore the relationship between physician prescribing behavior and the payments received from manufacturers. http://1.usa.gov/1W8VYkS

HHS TO LOOSEN RESTRICTIONS ON BUPRENORPHINE PRESCRIBING — The agency announced last week that it plans to revise regulations that currently restrict qualified doctors from prescribing the opioid replacement drug to 30 patients in the first year and 100 after that. It came during a conference Thursday and Friday convened by HHS focused on opioid prescribing practices, increasing access to naloxone, which can treat overdose victims, and expanding access to medication-assisted treatment, like buprenorphine. A recent HHS report found 2.5 million people need treatment for opioid abuse but fewer than 1 million are receiving it. The agency also announced $1.8 million in grants for rural communities to purchase naloxone supplies. The HHS release: http://1.usa.gov/1izyQ0S

SENATORS PRESS FDA ON OXYCONTIN FOR KIDS — Eight senators including Joe Manchin sent a letter on Friday to FDA Acting Commissioner Stephen Ostroff asking for the full backstory for the agency’s approval of OxyContin for use in children as young as 11. They want to see the studies the approval was based on and why the agency sidestepped a review by an independent advisory committee, among other things. The letter follows a written request to Senate HELP Committee leadership for an investigation of the approval. http://1.usa.gov/1iCqCVU

PATHOLOGISTS PITCH HYBRID CMS/FDA OVERSIGHT OF LDTs — The College of American Pathologists has proposed a split responsibility for laboratory developed tests — high risk LDTs would face premarket review by the FDA (which they don’t at present), moderate and low risk lab tests would remain under the purview of CMS and the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Framework of 1988. FDA issued guidance last year saying it would ultimately bring all LDTs under its review, sparking a backlash from some doctors and the lab test developers. The pathologists' proposal: http://capatholo.gy/1Y9nhxy

CATCHING OUR ATTENTION: NOT ALL FDA REVIEWRES SUPPORTED “FEMALE VIAGRA” — Bloomberg takes a look at new FDA documents on the agency’s review of Addyi (flibanserin), the controversial new drug for women with low sexual desire, which reveals internal disagreement among agency drug reviewers over whether to approve the drug. http://bloom.bg/1MdYB06

POLITICO’S WHAT WORKS D.C.: Join POLITICO Magazine for the next in their What Works series, focusing on the future of Washington, D.C. Featured speakers include: Nashville Mayor Karl Dean, Delegated Deputy Secretary John King, Department of Education; Karen Mills, former administrator of the U.S. Small Business Administration and senior fellow at Harvard University; and more. Find out more http://politi.co/1LgPvkI and RSVP here.



** A message from The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association: PBMs are projected to save employers, unions, government programs, and consumers $654 billion - up to 30 percent - on drug benefit costs over the next decade. PBMs reduce drug costs by: · Offering Amazon-style home delivery of medications and creating select networks of more affordable pharmacies; · Encouraging the use of generics and more affordable brand medications; · Negotiating rebates from drug manufacturers and discounts from drugstores; · Managing high-cost specialty medications; and · Reducing waste and improving adherence. Learn more at: http://thatswhatpbmsdo.com **