Executives from Abington Health and Jefferson Health celebrate at the official signing of a letter of intent announcing the planned merger of the two organizations Wednesday, Oct. 29, 2014. From left, Steve Crane, chairman, board of trustees, Abington; Larry Merlis, president and CEO, Abington; Steve Klasko, M.D., MBA, president and CEO, Jefferson University and Jefferson Health System; and Rich Hevner, chairman, board of trustees, Jefferson. Geoff Patton — MONTGOMERY MEDIA

Abington >> Abington Health and Jefferson Health signed a letter of intent Wednesday, Oct. 29, to merge the two major health systems, which officials from both hailed at a press conference as a model in the future of health care.

Over the last 30 days, leaders of the two have studied a model to join forces and the decision was made to move forward doing “due diligence” over the next three months, with an anticipated closing in 2015.

The merger would include Abington Memorial and Lansdale and Jefferson’s University, Neuroscience, Methodist, Navy Yard and Voorhees hospitals in addition to Jefferson’s Sidney Kimmel Medical College, schools of Health Professions, Nursing, Pharmacy and Population Health and its graduate school.

Dr. Stephen Klasko, CEO and president of Thomas Jefferson University and Jefferson Health, will serve as president and CEO of the merged health system, with a combined 18,000 employees and revenue of about $3.2 billion, making it the second largest in the Philadelphia region after Penn.

Advertisement

The role for Abington Health President and CEO Laurence Merlis was not specified.

“We need to think through what is the most important management structure,” Merlis said afterward. “We want it to be integrated.”

Health care is “being transformed from a value and sickness model to one based on value and wellness,” Merlis said, terming the proposed merger “proactive and bold.” The “collective strength” of the two organizations will allow them to focus on delivering “the right care at the right time and the right location at a most effective cost,” he said.

Terming Abington “an incredible partner with the right cultural fit,” Klasko said, “Health care is really being stressed and plans need to be different.” A “hub-to-hub” model will provide “increased patient access at reduced cost,” and “will draw others to the system.”

The hub-to-hub model “recognizes the strength of each system,” and will allow it to “diversify in a way no other [system] can,” he said.

Abington Health is “excited and thrilled to be part of this transformative merger,” board Chairman Steve Crane said, terming it a “precedent setter.” A “shared governance” model — there will be trustees from both systems with some independent trustees — “will allow all trustees to focus on community goals with the ability to enhance health care, improve outcomes in a cost efficient manner.”

“It’s a merging of two financially sound institutions … that share the same philosophy and culture of service,” Jefferson Health Board of Trustees Chairman Rich Hevner said. The goal is to create “a common culture toward a common mission — in this we have everything we need for success.”

The actual signing of the letter was done before a roomful of staff members from both health systems, who applauded the move.

Unlike Abington Health’s plan to merge with Holy Redeemer in 2012, several doctors at the event Wednesday said the staff was on board this time.

The joint venture with HRH was scuttled after a backlash by some physicians and the public against Abington Memorial’s plan to stop providing abortions. At the time, a number of AMH physicians were reportedly unhappy with the change in the abortion policy as well as the fact that they were not consulted prior to the tentative agreement being forged.

The staff is “very excited,” AMH Chief of Staff Dr. Jack Kelly said. “It’s clear” in the current health care environment that “there is a benefit and need to consolidate the scope and scape … to drive value through population health.”

“This time we increased inclusiveness … kept the physicians informed throughout, sought their guidance,” Kelly said.

“There was a tremendous effort to set up committees,” concurred Dr. Keith Sweigard, AMH chief of internal medicine and a member of the board of trustees. Department heads regularly contacted each other; “there are cultural fits, it seems right.”

“The sense was one of inclusion,” agreed Dr. Jonathan Sternlieb, AMH chief medical information officer.

Combining the talents at both systems will create a “wellness centered model,” to “coordinate care across the span of a life and the breadth of an illness,” Kelly said.

Asked whether the merger would lead to layoffs, Kelly said, “It’s fair to say whether we join with Jefferson or not, we have to look for economies. It’s an opportunity to grow and provide new opportunities,” he said, adding he did “not anticipate any change in the breadth of services we offer.”

The only thing Jefferson currently offers that Abington does not is transplants, he said.

“We know we will likely need to have some reorganization,” Sweigard said. “There will be enough positions for talented individuals to be reassigned.”

Abington will remain a teaching hospital with its current affiliations with Temple and Drexel, and over time, perhaps “increased opportunities” with Jefferson’s medical school, Kelly said.

It will provide “a more secure future to deliver our mission of patient care and education” and “set an example of how to bring partnerships together preserving the heritages of both,” he said.

“The doctors will figure it out,” Klasko said of management changes. “There will always be things unique to [each of] us.”

To be successful under the Affordable Care Act, “you need the flexibility to think differently,” Klasko said. “We wanted to create a new model.” It will be a “combined cross-pillar organization,” he said, naming the four pillars as: Jefferson’s academic institutions, clinical, innovation — a “telehealth” system and “virtual rounds” — and philanthropy.

The hub-to-hub model is not a takeover, Klasko said. “It’s not what’s good for Jefferson or Abington, it’s what good for patient care close to home at the lowest cost.”

Jefferson has a national reputation and Abington is a strong brand locally, Merlis said, so to come up with a new name “there will be a master branding strategy.”

“This was the right decision at the right time for Abington, and Jefferson was our No. 1 choice and Jefferson felt the same way about Abington,” Merlis said.

“The horizon is 10 years out, plus we will continue to grow,” he said. “We will see organizations … physicians that see this as different and want to be part of it.”