It’s Super Bowl weekend and what is dominating my thoughts instead is the Super Bowl of Bass Fishing.

One month from today, Sunday, March 6, will be the final day of the 2016 GEICO Bassmaster Classic at Grand Lake O’ The Cherokees and Tulsa.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

It was about a month before the event the first time it was in Tulsa – in 2013 – that people started calling me wanting to know about Tulsa and the Classic.

One guy called me from Naperville, Illinois asking about hotels in Tulsa and if there was “a bad side of town” he should avoid.

I had a hilarious conversation with an older woman from, I think, western Kansas somewhere whose husband was in the background asking her about the drive from Tulsa to Grand Lake. She was confused about it being so far away from Tulsa, he was busy with something and didn’t want to get on the phone to hear the directions himself. A comedic conversation characteristic of a long-married couple ensued.

I always wondered if those folks actually made it to the event, but I’m pretty sure they’re still married – pretty sure.

Longtime Tulsans don’t think about how confusing it can be to get around town or how odd it sounds to a visitor who asks about a restaurant to say, “that’s over in Blue Dome.”

Sounds like it’s in a football stadium instead of describing a Tulsa district.

The most-asked question is the easiest to answer: “Where do I get tickets?”

You don’t need tickets and everything is free.

It leads to the second-most asked question: “Really? Are you sure, for everything?”

Yes, I’m sure.

If you want a good seat or a good view, just get to where you’re going early.

To help with directions last time around we provided a Google Earth “flyover” of the area. It helped people from out-of-town to understand the lay of the land, and water. It had a lot of online views.