The Supreme Courts historic ruling in the Hobby Lobby case last week has caused public outcry from many people, including Jasmine Shea, who personally redecorated one of their stores.

The Supreme Courts historic ruling in the Hobby Lobby case last week has caused public outcry from many people, including Jasmine Shea, who personally redecorated one of their stores. Jasmine Shea, Twitter

Since 2012, Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. has been denying its employees access to contraception in order to “honor the lord… by operating the company in a manner consistent with Biblical principles,” they said in a statement at the time. All of that was without regard for a mandate in the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) requiring companies to cover contraception like birth control and the morning-after pill. Last week, and a year-and-a-half after they first started making waves, their protestations to the mandate received a Supreme Court ruling: The company would be allowed to deny its employees their right to four of 20 contraceptive devices, including two kinds of morning-after pills and intrauterine devices.

Since the ruling, women’s rights groups, LGBT rights groups, and politicians, among so many others, have come forth taking action to denounce the ruling. Not only does it imply that corporations are more human than women, and entitled to their religious freedom, but it’s also the first time that religion is used as an excuse to sidetrack public health. On Monday, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said that Democrats would seek legislation to respond to the ruling, which was made by a mostly conservative court. Meanwhile, LGBT rights groups withdrew their support for the Employment Non-Discrimination Act, which was passed last fall as a way to give the LGBT community more rights in the workplace.

“If a private company can take its own religious beliefs and say you can’t have access to certain health care, it’s a hop, skip, and a jump to an interpretation that a company could have religious beliefs that LGBT people are not equal or somehow go against their beliefs, and therefore fire them,” said Rea Carey, director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, according to The Washington Post.

Not all responses are completely serious, however. With Hobby Lobby being an arts-and-crafts store, one Twitter user, Jasmine Shea, stuck it to the man. She went inside and rearranged the artsy letters throughout to convey pro-choice messages. How’s that for some quality trolling.