The Dallas private investigator accused of eavesdropping on a café conversation between Jefferson Parish Sheriff Newell Normand and some friends taped the discussion using an audio recorder and a spy camera designed to look like a cell phone, Normand said Saturday (Oct. 24).

Sheriff's Office detectives have executed warrants to view the seven-minute video Robert Frenzel recorded on Friday morning at a Metairie coffee shop and to search his phones and cars as they piece together evidence to get a warrant for violation of the state's laws against intercepting communications, Normand said.

Frenzel, 30, who was working for a law firm used by U.S. Sen. David Vitter's campaign for governor, was booked with criminal mischief, a misdemeanor, after deputies found him hiding on private property, Normand said.

Normand said Frenzel dashed from the café after being confronted by the sheriff and his breakfast companions: attorney John Cummings, state Sen. Danny Martiny and private investigator Danny Denoux.

The bizarre series of events came just a day before voters went to the polls to cast ballots in the governor's race that includes Vitter, Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne and Public Service Commissioner Scott Angelle and state Rep. John Bel Edwards. All are Republicans except for Edwards, who is a Democrat.

Normand, a longtime political foe of Vitter, has endorsed Dardenne. Campaign finance records show Cummings has given money to Edwards.

Vitter's campaign issued the following statement Friday: "This person (Frenzel) works for a firm that we hired to do research, all within the bounds of the law. This includes John Bel Edwards' business associate and major donor, and his relationship with the John Bel Edwards campaign. It has nothing to do with Newell Normand."

Normand said Saturday he has not reached out to Vitter's camp to discuss the matter. The sheriff said he spoke with a principal of the Dallas investigative agency who confirmed Frenzel worked for them.

"Not that I have anything to hide, but it's uncalled for," Normand said. "I understand campaign and opposition research, but trying to tape people's conversations? Come on, we're going a little far."

Frenzel was sitting at a table behind Normand and his friends at The Royal Blend, 205 Metairie Road in Metairie, the group's weekly meeting spot, the sheriff said. Normand said he noticed the young man seemed to be recording them with a cell phone.

"I said, 'Are you videotaping us?'" Normand recalled.

Normand said Frenzel denied the claim and said he worked for a bank. When Normand asked to see the phone, Frenzel told him it was private property, and he had no right to see it. As Normand sat down, he said Frenzel pretended to talk on the phone.

But another of the sheriff's breakfast companions got up and snapped a photo of Frenzel, prompting the private investigator to leave quickly. "We wanted to find out who this guy was because he was acting so strange," Normand said.

One of the men in Norman's group followed Frenzel as he went west on Metairie Road and down Vincent Street. The man contacted Normand after seeing Frenzel sprint up the driveway of an abandoned house and into the backyard. Normand said deputies found Frenzel about 25 minutes later hiding in the side yard of a Stella Street residence.

Frenzel was booked at Jefferson Parish Correctional Center but bonded out Friday night.

Frenzel works for the J.W. Bearden and Associates, a Dallas investigative agency, Normand said. Vitter has paid more than $130,000 to the company this year, according to campaign finance records.

When deputies asked Frenzel if he knew he was taping the sheriff of Jefferson Parish, Frenzel said he was videoing the other guys at the table, according to Normand.

"I don't know who the actual target was," Normand said, "but I know I'm in the video."

Normand said the morning conversation is really just verbal jousting in which the friends make fun of one another.

Normand said detectives are piecing together a case against Frenzel for illegally intercepting private communications under Louisiana Revised Statute 15:303.

"You can't record the conversation unless you're a party to the conversation," Normand said. "If I'm on a stage talking to the public on a microphone, he can tape my conversation. But when there's a reasonable expectation of privacy, you can't tape somebody's conversation."

Normand said a search of the car Frenzel was driving turned up printouts of a Lexis-Nexis search on Jason Berry, the blogger who last week began posting videos of interviews with the woman who eight years ago said Vitter had paid her as a prostitute.