According to Investor’s Business Daily, over 300 businesses are cutting employee hours and jobs to avoid Obamacare. If employers restrict employee work hours to 30 per week, then they avoid Obamacare mandates for health insurance. Jed Graham of Investor’s Business Daily says, “Data also point to a record low workweek in low-wage industries.”

Casinos are one industry that exemply these cuts. In Grantville, Penn., the Hollywood Casino has told part-time workers they are now limited to no more than 30 hours a week. Gene Barr of the Pennsylvania Chamber of Business and Industry had this to say:

Government has decided that you as a business will pay this if you meet a certain size. They’ve put these conditions on and of course companies will have to work around and with those conditions in order to make sure they can stay as a successful business. Businesses have to take the steps they can to keep themselves profitable and keep the people that are now employed employed.



Nancy Pelosi, (D-CA) and House Minority Leader, remains optimistic, however. In a CNN interview, she says these changes will allow Americans to follow their passions as they are liberated from the 40 hour work week.

Try telling all this to Kelli Ramirez from Louisville, Ky.

In the waiting room of the Family Health Center on Portland Avenue, Kelli Ramirez, an uninsured restaurant server, appears to be a perfect example of someone ready to benefit from the Affordable Care Act. “I don’t have any (insurance). I can’t afford it. I come here,” Ramirez said. Yet, Ramirez, 35, is not embracing the ACA, even as it makes her eligible for free health insurance. “I don’t like it,” Ramirez said. “I don’t like it. I don’t like it at all,” because she is already paying a steep price for her free health insurance. “I got my hours cut in half because they put a new computer system in orders,” Ramirez explained… Ramirez said her hours have been cut from 32 per week to 16 per week, though a superior was working to add more to her schedule. “They only have so many people that can be full time because of the cost of health insurance,” Ramirez said, defending her employer. “And so now most of us that are working lower jobs are going to have to get a second job just to be able to make it.”

Here’s hoping that second job will help Ramirez follow her passion.