iStock

MARC AGRONIN: What advice would I give people who are retiring early—say before they are 55 or 60?

Don’t do it!

According to the Center for Retirement Research in 2012, only about 30% of households are able to afford retirement at age 62 (which is currently the average age of retirement).

Even for those early retirees with a solid nest egg and keen planning, the increasing lifespan and the likelihood of needing significant physical assistance and even long-term-care placement for many years prior to death may significantly undermine financial projections.

The few exceptions might be those fortunate individuals whose early retirement is facilitated by a major financial success such as selling a business, but even in those circumstances there are other nonfinancial pitfalls to consider.

For example, the best-laid postretirement plans to travel, relax or pursue a beloved hobby can go awry when interest wanes over time, illness intervenes, or resources wither. Relationships that once were on autopilot, nestled within the daily routine of work, may now take a lot more time and energy to sustain. And finally, it can be challenging to rechannel the purpose provided by one’s job or career into equally meaningful pursuits for the 30 to 40 post-early-retirement years, given current life-span projections.

If you are going to make the leap into early retirement, I would advise developing a unique document parallel to one’s financial portfolio called a “social portfolio.”

Noted geriatric psychiatrist Gene Cohen proposed the social portfolio as a well diversified tally of one’s personal assets such as interests, hobbies, relationships and personal resources, along with “insurance” in the form of a long-term plan to adapt or add to the list based on changing personal circumstances.

These assets can be organized according to whether they require a high or low energy level and whether they can be pursued individually or in a group. The newly retired individual who thrives on tennis and golf might want to consider developing several other interests that involve less energy and are not dependent on partners, both for the sake of diversification and to account for times when solitude and/or physical torpor are either desired or imposed by infirmity or illness.

With retirement approaching, retirees may find that a broad and sustainable mission for the next few decades of life emerges from the creative process of developing and sharing their social portfolio.

Marc Agronin (@MarcAgronin), is a geriatric psychiatrist and the author of “How We Age: A Doctor’s Journey Into the Heart of Growing Old.” He is the medical director for mental health and clinical research at Miami Jewish Health Systems and an affiliate associate professor of psychiatry and neurology at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.

Read the latest Encore Report.