State Views: Wisconsin health insurance costs should be at top of 2015 agenda

Notably absent from Gov. Walker's State of the State address was Wisconsin's health insurance cost crisis. Given its impact on consumers and business, ignoring this critical issue is political malpractice.

The Wisconsin Health Insurance Cost Ranking Report by Citizen Action of Wisconsin documents the scale of the problem. Since the year 2000, health insurance premiums for medium and large employers in Wisconsin have more than tripled, increasing by 211 percent statewide and 201 percent in Rock County.

The reason Wisconsin's health insurance cost crisis is being swept under the rug is the obsession of conservative politicians with sabotaging the national health care reform law. The Affordable Care Act was only a first step, focusing more on coverage than cost. It outlawed immoral insurance industry practices, such as denying coverage to cancer patients and millions of others with preexisting conditions, and guaranteed for the first time that every American citizen has somewhere to go to get quality, affordable health care, no matter what.

The health care law did begin the process of creating a health care system based on prevention. For example, the law incentivizes hospitals to provide higher-quality care and holds them accountable for life-threatening events, such as hospital-acquired infections. A federal report shows that this has already prevented 50,000 patient deaths and saved $12 billion.

We need to build on this early success to create a higher value health care system that improves quality and moderates costs. The major barrier to doing so is the insistence of conservative politicians that we repeat the debate on passage of health care reform over and over again rather than working together to improve the care system and moderate costs. Wisconsin is already falling behind neighboring states such as Minnesota, which is taking advantage of the tools offered by health reform and has substantially lower health insurance rates.

A report by Citizen Action of Wisconsin found that Wisconsin could reduce health insurance premiums by $998 a year on average if we took advantage of two key features of the health care law. First, accept enhanced federal dollars for BadgerCare, which, by covering more moderate income Wisconsinites, will lower hospital charity care and reduce cost-shifting onto private insurance. Second, follow Minnesota's lead by implementing a robust system of rate review that forces insurance companies to justify large rate increases.

Wisconsin could make even more progress in creating a health care system that focuses on prevention if Gov. Walker and the Legislature took the common-sense step of creating a Wisconsin health insurance marketplace rather than relying on the one-size-fits-all federal marketplace. This would also prevent more than 150,000 Wisconsinites from losing their health coverage in the event the Supreme Court pulls subsidies from the federal marketplace.

The people of Wisconsin do not want endless partisan warfare over the health care law. They want all sides to come together to use government policy to improve the system, guarantee access and begin to get skyrocketing health insurance costs under control.

Robert Kraig is executive director and Kevin Kane is lead organizer for Citizen Action of Wisconsin, a statewide membership organization that champions quality, affordable health care for everyone in Wisconsin. The 2015 Wisconsin Health Insurance Cost Ranking report can be accessed at www.citizenactionwi.org. Readers can contact Kraig at Citizen Action of Wisconsin, 221 S. 2nd St., Suite 300, Milwaukee, WI 53204; email robert.kraig@citizenactionwi.org.