Small-business owners are baffled by the Affordable Care Act. Turns out, for good reason.

Navigating health insurance can be mind-boggling for anyone. But with the launch of the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare, small-business owners have a special degree of annoyance.

That's because the ACA was supposed to usher in a new era of change for them. They were told they'd be able to buy health plans through an online exchange, where they'd have more choice for their businesses and their employees, and that options would be affordable.

That was the idea, anyway. But the debut of the small-biz exchange, known as SHOP, flopped last year. Now the second year of the exchange is launching this month under scrutiny from the Supreme Court.

Curious how small-business owners feel this time around, Crain's and Chicago nonprofit Health and Disability Advocates teamed up to commission an online survey about small-business and health care spending. More than 140 small-business decision-makers throughout Illinois responded.

Then we convened a four-person panel—a policy consultant, the head of the Small Business Advocacy Council, an insurance broker and a small-business owner—to talk frankly about the landscape. What follows is an edited and condensed version of the conversation, which was moderated by Kristen Schorsch, Crain's health care reporter. Edited and condensed by Fareeha Ali.

Crain's: We learned from the survey that offering health insurance is key to recruiting talent, but small-business owners told us they hate the Affordable Care Act, which is supposed to make providing health insurance more affordable. What's the situation from your point of view?

Barbara Otto, CEO, Health and Disability Advocates: Most businesses already provide some sort of health insurance to their employees (even though businesses that employ fewer than 50 people are not legally required to do so). The majority of businesses in Cook County and in Illinois have 10 employees or fewer and the majority of businesses are paying something toward their employees' health care. But there is a lack of information on the benefits of the small-business option program, or SHOP exchange.

The Consultant Barbara Otto, CEO, Health and Disability Advocates, a Chicago-based nonprofit and policy consultancy. Age: 48 Employees: Nine full time, eight part time Listen to the audio

Elliot Richardson, CEO, Small Business Advocacy Council: Health insurance rates have been going up for a long time—long before the Affordable Care Act. So there is this preconceived notion among small-business owners, who absolutely want to provide coverage to their employees, that it's going to be very difficult to be able to do so. It's going to be expensive. They recognize that there's a lack of competition in the market. If you only have one main player who is providing health care, then there's not going to be fair pricing. I'm hearing skepticism, but I'm also hearing hope from business owners that they will no longer spend 10 percent of their gross revenue on health insurance for their employees.

What is the process like when a new year rolls around? Do you shop for plans?

Mr. Richardson: First, we figure out what the pain is going to be. Then we go to our broker and say, "Please make it not as painful." When I had about 20 employees 10 years ago, it seemed like one night I went to bed and could afford full coverage, then I woke up the next morning and I couldn't anymore. And since that time it has been escalating every year. As a small-business owner, I will always provide health insurance to my employees, but every year I wonder, "Are escalating costs going to impact my ability to hire an employee?"

The Advocate Elliot Richardson, CEO, Small Business Advocacy Council, a Chicago-based nonprofit; partner at Korey Richardson LLC, a Chicago-based law firm Age: 42 Employees at SBAC: Four full time, one part time Employees at Korey Richardson: Nine full time, one part time Listen to the audio

Are year-to-year health insurance rate increases an incentive to go to the exchange?

Ms. Otto: It's an incentive for us to go to a broker. Many businesses think: To shop or not to shop? Is it better for my employees to get a path of coverage through the individual marketplace? Or is it better for me as an organization to continue contributing and take the tax break?

Mr. Richardson: As business owners, all we really want to do is run our businesses. And the fact that health insurance is so expensive and such a distraction—but we need it to compete for talent, and it's the right thing to do—it really creates a difficult situation for small-business owners. It should be simple. It should be affordable. And it should be leveled. That's what small-business owners are looking for.

The Small Biz Owner A.J. Melaragno, president, Singola Consulting, a Chicago-based health care consulting firm Age: 42 Employees: Five full time, three part time Listen to the audio

A.J. Melaragno, President, Singola Consulting: It's a game-changer for me. I'm actually considering during the interview process whether the candidate has health insurance through their spouse or COBRA. Instead of focusing on running my business, I'm now spending upward of a couple of days a month on working with my broker, looking at numbers and looking at forecasts. It forces owners to know the ins and outs of what this is all about. And before, you didn't really have to.

From your standpoint, did health care reform spur competition in the private insurance market for small businesses? Do you think that private insurers felt any pressure from health care reform to make their prices more affordable?

Ms. Otto: The fact that the state of Illinois didn't select employee choice for the small-business health options program really was a blow to better competition. Employees could have been looking at different carriers, which would create much more competition.

Mr. Richardson: If I were Blue Cross & Blue Shield (the largest insurer in Illinois), I couldn't have written a better script for 2014. They got 92 percent of the market. They were able to lock in lower rates. There was only one other competitor in the field, Land of Lincoln, who wasn't able to match those rates. If there is no competition, small businesses will not be able to get affordable health insurance. We sincerely hope that Land of Lincoln will be competitive this year. We believe that it will be and it will be innovative.

The Broker Paul Dark III, president, Benefit Management Associates Inc., a Chicago-based brokerage and consulting firm Age: 54 Employees: Four full time Listen to the audio

Paul Dark III, President, Benefit Management Associates Inc: A lot of insurance carriers underestimated how much of a need ACA was. More people signed up than any of us envisioned. When they saw that, everyone is thinking, "Hey, I want to be a player now" and "How do I get involved in this?"

With Bruce Rauner winning the governor's race, are you concerned that there will be any action taken toward the Affordable Care Act?

Mr. Richardson: Your health insurance rates will go up if you're a Republican. Your health insurance rates will go up if you're a Democrat. Your health insurance rates will go up if you're not political. If rates are going up, they're going up. The bottom line is that the health care system is broken as it pertains to small businesses. You can't point to a time before the ACA was passed when health care was affordable.

A quick primer on the issues What is the SHOP?

Tell me . . . HealthCare.gov, the government-run health exchange, received a lot of press for plans offered to individuals when it went online in 2013. But the program also included a group exchange intended for small businesses, called "SHOP." In the first year, SHOP was almost completely paper-driven, and very few businesses signed up. This year, a revamped online portal (at press time, it was supposed to go online Nov. 15) offers Illinois businesses three insurers to choose from. To use SHOP, employers must have at least one employee and plan to offer coverage to all of their full-time workers. What role do insurance brokers play in securing health care coverage for small businesses?

Tell me . . . Most small businesses hire health insurance agents, or brokers, to help navigate options for employees, whether they want to use SHOP or a private provider. Insurance agents/brokers are licensed by the state and have expertise in helping individuals and businesses through the process of identifying and purchasing health insurance. They are paid on commission from private health insurance companies and are paid the same commission whether they sell plans from the private marketplace, HealthCare.gov or SHOP. What is employee choice and why is it important?

Tell me . . . Originally, the point of the SHOP exchange was to give small businesses more choice: Instead of an employer offering workers only one plan, they could use the exchange to let their employees pick from a plethora of companies and options. But during the initial rollout, the so-called "employee choice" aspect wasn't available, prompting many small business owners to buy plans the traditional way—through a broker. This time around, the decision was left up to the states. Illinois decided not to include "employee choice" for the coming year. Help! I'm a business owner. How can I find out more information?

Tell me . . . For more info about: SHOP: HealthCare.gov/small-businesses/employers Brokers: Insurance.Illinois.gov or ISAHU.com Get Covered Illinois: GetCoveredIllinois.gov Health care reform in general: IllinoisHealthMatters.org/small-business-health-insurance

Ms. Otto: If we are going to crack that number of the uninsured in the state, we really need to have all hands on deck. I don't care what political party is in charge.

How do you get small businesses involved? How do you get their employees to care about their health care?

Ms. Otto: A lot of what we have been doing with engagement is health insurance literacy and health care literacy. That has to be the beginning point.

Mr. Melaragno: Can you think of another industry where you purchase something and you have no idea what it costs? And when you get the invoice, you don't even understand it? Why can't I schedule an appointment? Why can't I pay my bill and have a clear understanding of what I'm paying, and why is it different across the street?

Mr. Richardson: It's counterintuitive. You want the owners to go to their employees and ask them to get healthy or tell them to go to the urgent care clinic instead of the hospital because it will lower our rates as a collective group. But when the owner doesn't understand why his very healthy workforce has just sustained a 20 percent increase on their health insurance, then the owner doesn't think there's any benefit to taking the time to have these conversations with his employees. If there's no cause and effect, then you're never going to change behavior.

A lot of small businesses said they get their health plans through their brokers, but they also said they don't understand health care reform or hated it. Why is there an information gap?

Mr. Richardson: We're giving our brokers a knife and asking them to win a gunfight. There's no competition out there. As a small-business owner, I don't want to spend a lot of time understanding health care. What I want to do is tell my broker to find me affordable, accessible and reasonably priced health care. Small-business owners like their brokers but don't like their products because they're not able to help them. They're not able to come back with lower or stabilized health care because the options aren't out there.





SURVEY RESPONSES: Small-business owners have polarized reactions to the Affordable Care Act.

SURVEY RESPONSES: Have you benefited from the affordable care act?

SURVEY RESPONSES: Who were the survey respondents?



What advice would you give to somebody who is trying to start a business today in relation to health care?

Mr. Richardson: Wait till the rates come out for 2015 and talk to a broker. If your broker comes back and says you only have one choice, then challenge your broker. Make your broker shop for you.

Mr. Melaragno: Don't try to do it alone. You need to leverage the relationship you have with your broker, and if you don't have one, you need to get one. It is becoming part of your regular business strategy.

Ms. Otto: If you want to attract the best talent, you have to make it easy for your employees.

Crain's and Health and Disability Advocates conducted an anonymous online survey in October that targeted small-business decision-makers in Illinois; there were 141 respondents.