Phil Cox (Photo: Visalia Times-Delta)

On July 2 in “Other Views,” I read Bill Sternberg’s article regarding youth workers and summer employment opportunities with pleasure. Like Bill, I grew up in a time when it was common for teenagers to work during the summer months or after-school hours.

My first job was throwing papers for the Visalia Times-Delta when I was 12 years old (I was really only 10). At 14, I was hired by Best Buy Market on Walnut and Giddings to stack returned soda bottles and pack groceries for customers. Every day, I would finish my paper route and then start work at the market for a few hours. Also, my parents owned an air conditioning business, so I was blessed to work for them each summer. My parents taught me to work for what you have and want in this life. That valuable lesson has kept me in the workforce for 46 years.

Working as a teenager taught me a few things — first, was to be on time. Second, was to give 100 percent to every task I was assigned, and, most important, third was to appreciate what it takes to earn a dollar. As a teen, my paycheck was split 50/50, half to savings and half to playing. The savings part was my mother’s rule.

During this time, I had the honor to work side-by-side with men trying to support their families. I watched as these hard-working men struggled to make ends meet, while working in construction.

Now, fast-forward to present day and take a look at Tulare County’s statistics. There are more than 30,000 youths between the ages of 16 and 19 living in our county; 5,692 of them are employed. According to our Workforce Investment Department, only 9,271 out of our 30,000 teens have entered the job market. Now, why is that number so small? How many teenagers do you know who want or need a job? How many do you know who don’t want to work at all?

As a business owner, I always made it a point to hire young people during the summer. I hoped to give them the same experience I had as a teen. I wanted them to learn that it’s important to be on time, work hard, appreciate what their parents did for them, and get an education. The Tulare County Board of Supervisors has made a commitment to our local youth to provide work experiences that will give them the opportunity to learn the same lessons I did. Each year, we provide $100,000 in funding to a summer youth jobs program. This year, 30 teens are employed, many in county departments, who will have a summer-long job experience. This is only a small dent in the large number of teens who would like to work this summer, but it’s a start.

I am aware that it’s almost impossible to hire teenagers for certain jobs due to workers’ compensation insurance regulations, CAL/OSHA rules, and a litany of other health and safety regulations imposed by government agencies. With unemployment rates in our county being what they are, can you blame an employer for hiring an older candidate with some experience over a 16-year-old with no experience applying for the same job? Of course not.

There are two points I hope to make here. First, we need to give our teenagers opportunities to work. If we own a business, we should try to make openings available for them. Second, we need to get our youth to stay in school. It doesn’t matter if it’s a trade school or traditional college, teens need to get more education. The payoff in potential earnings for a person with a degree is huge. For me, all it took was one day spent picking peaches at Linda Loma Ranch to teach me that I didn’t want to work as a laborer my whole life.

Many of us grew up working during the summer months at jobs that required backbreaking strength. Past generations learned the value of hard work early in life and I feel that we have robbed our current generation of this important lesson.

Encourage your teens to get out there and work this summer. If they can’t find a job in the traditional market, put them to work in your home. Young people learn the value of a dollar when it takes their hard work to earn it. Starting at age 12, I had to buy my own school clothes with the money I earned from my paper route. To this day, I appreciate the clothes I have because I’ve bought them for 46 years with my hard-earned money. Let’s teach our youth the same lesson.

Phil Cox represents District 3 and is chairman of the Tulare County Board of Supervisors

Read or Share this story: http://vtd-tar.co/1MlO3v2