Photo

WEST MONROE, La. — As she handed out garbage bags on Saturday as part of an anti-litter drive, Patsy Edmondson drew a parallel to Louisiana’s history of tawdry politics.

“If we grow up in litter, we accept it,” she said. “If we grow up with this kind of politician, we accept it.” Rolling her eyes, she said both were learned behaviors. “We’re trying to teach our children it costs us money to be dirty.”

Ms. Edmondson’s congressman, Representative Vance McAllister, is the latest Louisiana official facing demands for his resignation, after a leaked video last week showed him passionately kissing a woman who was not his wife.

After winning an election pledging to “defend our Christian way of life,” Mr. McAllister now faces accusations of hypocrisy as thick as spring mosquitoes on the bayou. Gov. Bobby Jindal, a fellow Republican, has called on him to step down, and the state Republican chairman labeled him “an example of why ordinary people are fed up with politics.”

As Mr. McAllister, an outsider in his first term, dropped from sight and hunkered down, presumably in his home near here in northeast Louisiana, he has resisted the calls to quit and told a local newspaper that he would let voters decide his fate in November.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Even as it is unclear if he can survive so long, the texture of Mr. McAllister’s unusual political story has grown more piquant, revealing an estrangement from the Republican establishment, the racial politics of a poor district and voters who feel caught between deep disappointment and an impulse to forgive.

A number of voters here identified a double standard in the Republican state leadership for denouncing Mr. McAllister but issuing no such rebuke to Senator David Vitter during a 2007 prostitution scandal. Mr. Vitter apologized for “a very serious sin in my past” and said he had asked for and received forgiveness from his wife and from God. He was re-elected to the Senate in 2010 and is considered as a favorite to succeed Mr. Jindal in the 2015 governor’s race.

Ms. Edmondson said the place to judge Mr. McAllister would be at the ballot box. “If Jindal is going to ask him to resign, why is it not right for David Vitter to resign?” she said.

In his only statement since the scandal broke last Monday, Mr. McAllister, 40, said he was seeking the forgiveness of his wife, Kelly, and their five children, who were featured in a campaign ad last year that showed the family around the breakfast table before a Sunday church service.

Mr. McAllister was exposed by a surveillance video from his district office in Monroe that appeared on the website of The Ouachita Citizen, a weekly newspaper. In the grainy scene, he embraces a woman — identified as Melissa Peacock, an aide on his staff and the wife of a political supporter and longtime friend. Ms. Peacock left the congressman’s staff the weekend before the video surfaced.

Her husband told CNN he was “devastated by the whole deal.”

In his one interview since the scandal, Mr. McAllister told The News-Star of Monroe that Ms. Peacock was his first infidelity in 16 years of marriage and that he had confessed to his wife in January or February, about a month after the video was recorded.

Photo

Political circles in Louisiana are rife with speculation over who leaked the video, with theories swirling around those loyal to the Republican establishment. Mr. McAllister won his seat in a 20-point landslide, defeating the handpicked candidate of party leaders in a special election. He succeeded Rodney Alexander, who stepped down with a year left in office to become secretary of veterans affairs in the Jindal administration.

“It reeks of old-time back-room Louisiana political high jinks,” said Bob Mann, a professor at Louisiana State University and former senior aide to Democratic senators and a governor. He added he had no evidence Republican enemies were behind the leak.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A self-made businessman with no political experience, Mr. McAllister won his rural district, one of the largest and poorest in the state, by forming an unusual coalition of socially conservative Republicans, blacks — and fans of “Duck Dynasty.” Phil Robertson of the reality show, which is set in and around West Monroe, recorded ads supporting “my good friend Vance McAllister.”

The endorsement “validated him culturally” as an unknown in a region where gun rights and evangelical Christianity are the bedrock, said Karen Haymon, an aide to a Republican rival in a 13-way open primary.

In defiance of Governor Jindal, Mr. McAllister supported an expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, calling it justified by the high poverty rate in northeast Louisiana. In a district that is 34 percent African-American, Mr. McAllister, who is white, won four out of five black votes, said Mayor Jamie Mayo of Monroe, who supported him.

Many black voters are still behind him, including Lawrence Atkins, a retired engineer. “People make mistakes, but at the end of day, I support his political agenda,” he said. “At the end of the day, I want people to get the job done.”

Mayor Mayo said, “The African-American community knows that people deserve more chances.”

“Not that you condone what he did,” he added. “None of us condone it. But I don’t hear strong thoughts in the African-American community against the congressman.”

Louisiana voters have a long history of overlooking politicians with elastic morals, re-electing Edwin Edwards four times as governor, despite repeated investigations and longstanding allegations of dubious ethics, before he went to prison for eight years on corruption charges.

In Washington, Mr. McAllister remains unknown and with few allies. He has worn his outsider status proudly, telling a Louisiana chamber of commerce he hopes to never get comfortable. House Speaker John A. Boehner said last week Mr. McAllister “has decisions he has to make.”

It is clear he has lost much support at home. On a sunny Saturday, shoppers in downtown Monroe and West Monroe, which face each other across the Ouachita River, expressed anger and disappointment.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Our community is known for Christian values,” said Failine Waggoner, the mother of a 2-year-old. “We were so proud to be sending to Washington someone representing us in that way. He let us down.”

Pete Toms, a construction supervisor, said he voted for Mr. McAllister because of the “Duck Dynasty” endorsement, and feels betrayed. “It feels like he took my vote and wasted it,” he said.

Bob Dziadaszek, strolling the RiverMarket in Monroe, had blunt advice for Mr. McAllister: “I think he should man up and step down.”