Facebook conducted two experiments with Democratic Senate campaigns this year to see if advertisements on its site encouraged people to make political contributions.

The company says the results show it did. But because some of the processes the company used are opaque and because online fund-raising can be influenced by offline factors, a number of questions remain unanswered.

The campaigns of Michelle Nunn, who ran for an open seat in Georgia, and Mark Udall, an incumbent from Colorado, both report success (although both candidates lost their races). They found that sending Facebook advertisements to people who had already given the campaigns their email addresses resulted in more money when the campaigns later asked them via email to donate.

“The key finding here is that, though Facebook ads don’t directly generate a lot of revenue, they can have a spillover effect in other fund-raising channels,” said David Karpf, an assistant professor of media and public affairs at George Washington University who studies Internet campaigns.

Photo

In both cases, the advertising campaign was credited with providing at least a 200 percent return on the cost of the ads. Also, in Mr. Udall’s campaign, people who saw the ads gave $47.87 on average, compared with $42.70 for people who did not see them, according to details provided by Facebook and confirmed with the campaigns.

“I think it was very clear that there was something to this,” said Brian Krebs, digital director for Mr. Udall’s campaign, although he cautioned that other aspects of the campaign’s fund-raising operation could have had an impact as well.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Results for Ms. Nunn’s campaign were similar, said Brian O’Grady, who works at Trilogy Interactive, a digital consulting firm that worked for the Nunn campaign. In that race, the campaign bought Facebook ads before July 23, when Ms. Nunn’s Republican opponent was identified, and then had more than 20 Democratic senators send fund-raising emails to the campaign’s potential contributor list, said Catherine Algeri, the campaign’s digital director.

The results are potentially good news for online political fund-raising — and for Facebook’s advertising revenue, not incidentally — but there are questions about how much credit the social media platform should get for the money being raised. If the results can be replicated, it’s also likely that campaigns will introduce similar efforts on other platforms that combine ads with web content like videos and audio. Google, which offers both advertising and email services, is one logical candidate. A spokeswoman for Google declined to comment.

Here’s how the experiments worked: The campaigns asked Facebook to assemble two audiences from email lists the campaigns supplied. One audience, the control group, was not shown any Facebook ads about the campaign. The other audience got at least one advertisement asking them to pledge to financially support the campaign. Members of both groups were then asked to donate by the campaign via email. Facebook was able to match which of its users from both groups had made contributions via a special pixel it had placed in the advertisements.

Photo

Most sites track referrals based on the previous website or link a visitor originated from; this is called “last-click attribution.” In the experiment involving Mr. Udall’s campaign, Facebook found a small amount of donations (about $2,500) that resulted from a user clicking on the ad itself. But it saw a greater impact on online donations after the ads were shown.

The impact of digital advertising in political campaigns can be tough to gauge. There’s little consensus on the value of a digital ad impression, for example. So it’s difficult to say just how much influence the ads had. Were the people who gave to a candidate after being served a Facebook ad about the campaign likely to give anyway? Or was the change in behavior that they donated online rather than by mailing a check? Were there other, offline factors at work? Because the experiments were conducted by Facebook, specific details about the audiences were not shared with the campaigns to preserve user privacy.

One of the goals of the experiments is to see whether ads on Facebook could drive donations incrementally over several days rather than all at once. Because Facebook conducted the analysis for the experiment, it’s not clear exactly how they weighed the different factors involved, but the company said that it was able to both add to the number of people who donated and increase the size of the donations over time.

Digital spending still occupies something of a niche in many campaigns, but online fund-raising is one thing that nearly every campaign agrees is useful. Demonstrating that advertisements on one platform could improve donations on another could help strengthen the case that digital consultants have been making to put online spending at the center of campaign strategy. Still, this is a relatively new area of digital campaigning. Uncertainty over the effectiveness of the tactic led the Nunn campaign to negotiate that it could pull the plug on the experiment, although it wound up being successful, partly because of the timing, said Ms. Algeri.

Facebook users should expect to encounter more political advertisements and more fund-raising emails in their inbox. Politicians risk overdoing it.

“We’re recommending that people do this on big asks, not on a continual basis,” said Mr. O’Grady, the digital consultant.