Chattanooga Sports Institute founder Dr. Danielle Mitchell might be taking a risk with her new approach to her medical practice, but she's doing what she believes is best for her patients.

"If I fail ... at least I know I tried to do the right thing," she said.

She wants to change how doctors deal with patients and how patients pay for services. So she has created a payment system that she thinks will enable her patients to pay less for their care and, at the same time, have access to more of her time.

Background Click here for a January 2014 article on Mitchell.

Her new three-tiered payment model minimizes the use of traditional insurance.

The first option is a membership that allows patients to pay $50 per month for a year, which entitles them to four 30-minute office visits and access to reduced-cost ancillary services, such as X-rays, labs and urgent care services.

The second option is a pay-as-you-go plan, which costs $60 for a 15-minute block of time. This type of plan is ideal for a patient who only goes to the doctor once or twice a year, she said.

For both of these options, patients will have to keep medical insurance, as mandated by the Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare. But they can use plans that are less expensive and primarily cover catastrophic events.

"Your deductible will likely go up," Mitchell said. "But you will likely save a lot of money on your monthly premiums, and what you pay out of pocket ... goes toward your deductible."

The third option is for patients to keep their current insurance plans, and if Mitchell still accepts that insurance, patients will have access to her in 15-minute appointments.

Mitchell—who is double-board certified in family practice and nonoperative sports medicine—has changed her own life in recent years, losing almost 100 pounds and going from morbidly obese to an Ironman competitor.

She believes in focusing on nutrition, physical activity and emotional well-being. She believes spending time with patients is the best way to accurately diagnose problems and to create the best overall health for her clients.

"Right now, most doctors are being scheduled for as many as 30 to 40 patients per day and only spending less than five minutes per patient," she said. "One patient told me their doctor spent two minutes and 14 seconds with them. They may have up to 2,000 patients in their practice, all of whom are vying for time with that physician."

All her fees are posted online because she wants to be transparent and make it easy for patients to plan.

She hopes this helps fix a system that she said is broken.

Doctors are overwhelmed. They've spent years in school and are overburdened with too many patients and dealings with insurance companies. And they often can't provide optimum service because they are in a system that requires them to focus on things other than the health of their patients, Mitchell said.

Doctors can't focus on preventive, holistic care and are burdened by the process of dealing with insurance companies, she said.

"I love taking care of people," she said. "I hate dealing with insurance companies."

Ultimately, she wants to help patients stop relying on insurance companies.

"Over a period of a couple of years, I'm going to be phasing out insurance companies," she said. "I can't do it all at once because it would be business suicide."

By going around insurance companies, she hopes to provide better care for her patients.

"I think it would be a wonderful thing if more practices that were based in primary care went to this model," she said. "It makes people provide better health care outcomes."