Don had a problem.

The Longmont resident was a drinker, a serious problem drinker. He had tried alcohol rehab programs, including an inpatient 30-day treatment, out patient treatment, and many AA meetings and one-on-one counseling. Nothing seemed to work. Then he found the Go Sober program.

"I actually read about Go Sober in the Daily Camera a year before I called them," Don said. "I was going through a bad bout of drinking and actually my wife searched the Camera archives and found their number."

Learn more learn more about the Go Sober program on the web at www.gosober.org.

"The program for me started last September, and after the second week of taking the medications I felt like a switch had been turned off regarding feeling like I might need to drink. It was like a feeling of being set free," said Don,who would not use his last name for this article.

Go Sober is a for-profit business based in Longmont, founded and directed by Greg Hoffman, a one-time alcoholic with a background in high-tech manufacturing and marketing for startup companies.

"I've been working on this for about four and a half years," Hoffman said. "I've been drawing on what's current in the medications, the neuroscience arena, the pharmacology arena and the behavioral science arena."

"Alcohol dependence is a condition, not a disease," he explained. "It's a neurophysiologic condition developed over time in response to consuming alcohol. Real simple."

In October, Hoffman opened his office at the corner of Coffman Street and Fifth Avenue. It is usually here where an individual begins his or her treatment. It's a treatment that is unlike Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), or a 12-Step program, or counseling and therapy. The Go Sober program is based on science and chemistry.

"The traditional treatments tend to fall into two categories," Hoffman said. "There is the controlled environment like the rehab or the sober living environment or jail, the theory being that if enough time passes suddenly you're not going to want to drink anymore. The other one is what we call 'talk about change' and that's AA and 12 Step, cognitive behavior therapy, there is a variety of them. Essentially you are talking with people, reliving past bad experiences. Talking about how you want to change. There's no real treatment there."

For people struggling like Don, the science seems to be working.

"With Go Sober I learned, then experienced, that the signal for craving is a by-product of damage to neurons in the part of the brain that has to do with pleasure fulfillment," Don said. "The craving for the right chemical (alcohol) is like Chinese water torture, it's silent, slowly working on your sub-conscience, creating anxiety to where one finally (in my case) feels like maybe a drink will calm this feeling. Then it starts all over again. Go Sober's education on this is a highly validating piece of their program."

Costly treatment

The program isn't cheap. It runs almost $10,000 for the six weeks, and currently isn't covered by most insurance companies.

After the initial intake meeting and physical exam, the client begins treatment with a series of intravenous and oral medications.

It includes proprietary cocktail of medications using Gabapentin, Topiramate, acomprosate, a gaba antagonist and amino acid supplements.

Gabapentin, which is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration for alcohol treatment, is used to restore the brain's ability to produce dopamine naturally.

The drug blocks the receptors in the part of the brain that controls addiction, removing the client's dependence on alcohol, Hoffman said.

Gabapentin, an anti-epileptic medication that has not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for alcohol treatment, is used to restore the brain's ability to produce dopamine naturally.

The drug blocks the receptors in the part of the brain that controls addiction, removing the client's dependence on alcohol, Hoffman said.

Topiramate is used to treat seizures, and acomprosate is used to decrease the desire to drink. Gaba antagonists are stimulants.

Following a week of medications, the program moves into several weeks of lifestyle coaching, counseling, nutrition instruction and stress management. After six week, the client is finished. There are no follow-up visits.

"I have been impressed with the success rate which appears to be 90 percent at the time of completion of the program," said Dr. Steve Zakany, Go Sober's medical director.

Current client Rick, a Boulder County resident, just started the program a few weeks ago, and so far for him it is working.

"AA just wasn't for me. Go Sober isn't a magic bullet but is a fresh start that erases the craving and gives you a head start and a good kick in the butt in the right direction," Rick said, "I still have a lot of work to do, but now I have a light and training wheels to help navigate what was previously a really daunting dark and scary path towards health."

Nonprofit?

The cost factor is limiting those able to use the program, and limited Hoffman's business model. That's why he is considering a change to nonprofit status.

"A lot of the people who call are in situations where they just can't write that check," Hoffman said. "With a nonprofit structure, it enables us to potentially solicit donations to help finance people so they can get through the treatment."

Hoffman admits there is another factor limiting growth, and that's validation.

"We want third-party, independent validation of this model. We know its effective, but unfortunately today most of the published studies to date are kind of single component drug studies and there are a lot of problems with that," he explained.

"They look at the single drug, whereas we're using a variety of drugs in a specific protocol. So the studies that are out there aren't really representative of what we're doing and we'd like some validation of this model."

On Wednesday, Hoffman met for the first time with representatives of the University of Colorado's Department of Psychology & Neuroscience. He plans to meet with other accredited research institutions in Colorado to discuss potential studies that could be done of the Go Sober program to put a stamp of validation on what he and his team are doing.

"We want to make this available to people who are really ready to be done with this and get on with their lives," Hoffman said. "This could be a real game changer, and cause a real paradigm shift in the whole treatment community."

For the health care professionals working with Hoffman, there is little doubt the approach is working.

"The program is successful for a lot of reasons. Most importantly we treat the condition of alcoholism. We don't want repeat customers," said client care coordinator Cathy Carter, a certified lifestyle coach with a background in the neurology, physiology and psychology of autism; obsessive compulsive disorders; and addiction. "We want to change lives. We de-mystify alcoholism. We give people control over their outcome."

But only if those people want to and are willing to change.

"There is no single cure or approach for addiction," said Matthew C. Holloran, JD, LPC, CACII, the program's mental health counselor. "And this treatment is not a panacea, nor do I think it will help someone who lacks sincere motivation and a willingness to work the program."

To date, 38 people have gone through the Go Sober program. Hoffman says to grow he needs to expand his staff, all of whom are contractors and work part-time. More importantly he needs that validation, to be recognized as a serious cure for alcoholism. Having a stamp of approval from the FDA wouldn't hurt either, and that's a challenge.

"At the present time, the medication protocol, although it shows great promise for treatment of alcohol addiction, it is far away from receiving FDA approval," said Dr. Zakany. "Unless that were to happen, medical insurance will not consider covering the costs, which can be quite expensive. So in my opinion, cost may be the only factor that may keep the Go Sober program from becoming a national model."

Zakany added that FDA approval isn't cheap.

"For a drug company to get FDA approval for a specific indication such as 'treatment of alcoholism,' it would first require a clinical trial or study be performed. The study would involve probably comparing hundreds of alcoholics using the drug-seeking approval versus using standard protocol or placebo. The cost to the drug company could easily top $1 million, and it still may not be approved. Making matters worse is the Go Sober protocol involves several drugs used in tandem, making approval of all extremely unlikely."

That would be unfortunate, said Don, who has no doubt of the program's effectiveness.

"Go Sober ends this vicious cycle and gives a person a chance at exercising their own free will. I finished the program last November and have not had a drink since then," he said. "Even more importantly, my attitude about alcohol has become operationally neutral. Seeing people drink at parties or other events does not cause any discomfort or envious thinking on my part. Alcohol carries no emotional or mental meaning like it once did. When you look at their website and see the comment about 're-setting' your brain, know that it's true, that's what it does."

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel