Rob Brown

Is Cañon City closing up shop? Not even close.

A recent KOAA television news report on the economic condition of Cañon City painted a dismal picture.

Despite the fact that Allan Tormohlen of the Cañon City Chamber of Commerce, Mayor Tony Greer and I were interviewed and all made positive statements about the city's economic condition and future, the television report was given the title "Closing Up Shop" and dwelled heavily on negative images and facts.

As those same reporters drove through Cañon City intent on filming a few vacant store fronts, they must have been blinded to the brand new Big 5 Sporting Goods Store that just had its grand opening. They also must not have seen the Tractor Supply and Bealls stores that both opened within the past year.

How could they not have seen the shine from the newly renovated Lindner Chevrolet, Chili's and newly constructed and enlarged McDonalds? What about Bunk House Burgers or the Credit Union of Colorado next door that began new construction just up the street on Fremont Drive?

When they were searching for something to film downtown, how could they have missed the brand new Tailored West manufacturing and retail facility? Did they somehow fail to notice the marque proudly displaying the current movie showing at the newly upgraded Skyline Movie Theater?

In spite of the economic adversity in 2013, Fremont County government registered an estimated 55 new businesses representing a wide variety of business types and sizes. Any one of those could potentially be the next Merlino's or Emmerson's.

Advertisement

I would be remiss to ignore or make light of the harsh economic impact the Royal Gorge fires made on Fremont County, yet the business community is determined not only to overcome the disaster's effects, but to make the economy better than ever. Losing long-standing businesses is always disturbing but the community cannot allow natural attrition to be perceived, by those outside of the area, as an economic death sentence.

According to a report by Ray Williams in Psychology Today, embracing negative thoughts is human nature.

"Many studies have shown that we care more about the threat of bad things than we do about the prospect of good things," he said. "Our negative brain tripwires are far more sensitive than our positive triggers. We tend to get more fearful than happy."

So, how do we combat those natural tendencies to be negative? The time has come for Fremont County residents and community leaders to control their own destiny.

•Brag to people outside of the area about your favorite local restaurants and stores.

•Give potential visitors a reason to take advantage of what our community has to offer.

•Remind people at every opportunity that Fremont County is a great place to live and to work.

•Tweet, Tweet, Tweet! Use social media to show off your favorite local world-class outdoor recreational activities, special events and festivals.

•Counter negative comments by providing positive comments about Fremont County every single time.

Those negative thought wires cannot be tripped if they are lying under a mountain of positive thoughts.

Rob Brown is the executive director of Fremont Economic Development Corp. Email brown@fedc.co