FARGO – A lawsuit accusing Sanford Health of "grossly excessive" charges for emergency room services is part of a litigation boom by trial lawyers whose cases are overwhelmingly thrown out by judges, Sanford executives said.

A lawsuit seeking class-action status filed earlier this month in Cass County District Court is almost identical to lawsuits filed in 2006 against three of South Dakota's largest hospitals, said Cindy Morrison, a Sanford vice president for marketing and public policy.

In all three cases—including one against Sioux Valley Hospital in Sioux Falls, now Sanford Health—judges dismissed the lawsuits, saying they failed to make a valid legal claim, and the dismissals were unanimously upheld by the South Dakota Supreme Court, she told The Forum Editorial Board.

Sanford has yet to file an answer to the Fargo lawsuit, but Morrison and Paul Richard, president of Sanford Medical Center in Fargo and the health system's former chief counsel, said the hospital's billing and charging practices are consistent and follow both the law and federal regulations.

The South Dakota lawsuits were part of a pattern that first surfaced after large class-action settlements with the tobacco industry, Morrison said, and some lawyers thought hospitals made a ripe target for similar payouts.

"They are almost a mirror image of what happened a decade ago," she said of the South Dakota cases. "I think the court has spoken on this. I think this is a reiteration of something that happened 10 years ago."

Lawyers who look for plaintiffs in cases they seek to have certified as class actions often rely on news reports, which can attract potential clients. "I hate to say it," Morrison said, "but that's a way to troll."

Barry L. Kramer, a lawyer formerly from California and now in Las Vegas, drafted the lawsuit against Sanford. He said he was motivated to take such cases after a client walked into his office with a $15,000 bill for an overnight hospital stay.

A solo practitioner, Kramer's office maintains a website announcing that he is "investigating excessive hospital fees," and providing a way for people to contact him if they have visited a hospital or emergency room while uninsured.

Kramer's website invites people to submit information under the heading "Hospital Overcharges Class Actions" and says that about 1 million patients have received refunds or adjustments to their hospital bills as a result of class-action settlements that have resulted in payments totaling almost $1 billion from hospitals to patients who he said were overcharged.

Class-action lawsuits alleging hospital overcharges are pending in at least four states, including California, New Jersey, West Virginia and Washington.

"Just because you get class certification doesn't mean you're going to win the case on the merits of the law or facts," Richard said, adding that there are "lots of hoops" to be granted class-action status.

The lawsuit against Sanford was brought on behalf of Dustin Limberg of Fargo. His complaint said he went in January to the emergency room at Sanford, where he signed a contract agreeing he was responsible for all charges for services provided by the hospital.

Those charges, Limberg's lawsuit said, are based on "chargemaster" rates, a list of costs for services the hospital maintains to negotiate with public and private health insurers for all services provided.

But patients without insurance don't benefit from negotiated rates. In Limberg's case, he received a $2,062 bill for his ER visit, an amount the lawsuit contends is "grossly excessive, unfair and unconscionable for the services provided."

Hospital emergency rooms are barred by federal law from discussing their charges or asking patients about their ability to pay, Richard said. Charges are universal, but rates are negotiated, he said.

Patients, even those with insurance, can apply for financial assistance. If they are able to demonstrate financial need, they can have part or all of their bill waived.

Last year, Sanford provided $323 million in charity care, including $83 million in Fargo, Richard said. "So it's a big number."

The issue isn't whether the charges are unfair, Richard said, it's whether they're illegal. The Affordable Care Act is allowing more people to obtain health insurance.

"You're asking judges and juries to decide a charge for each and every patient," Morrison said, referring to the wave of class-action lawsuits against hospitals. "That doesn't make sense."

Hospitals usually settle cases like those brought by Limberg, said his attorney, Kramer.

"The hospitals don't want to take these losing cases to trial they're certain to lose," he said, adding that he has been successful in overcoming motions to dismiss cases. He did not say how much money he has recovered for his clients.

For the past six or seven years, Kramer said, "I've worked on nothing but these cases."