Stock market update:

The U.S. stock market, which took it on the chin last week amid a massive sell-off in once high-flying tech and biotech stocks, rallied today and closed higher after a strong reading on March retail sales. The Dow Jones industrial gained 146.49 points to 16,173.24, the Standard & Poor's 500 rose 14.92 points to 1,830.61 and the Nasdaq composite rose 22.96 points to 4,022.69. (USA Today)

European stocks pared earlier losses and rebounded from their worst week in a month, led by a rally in miners, while investors weighed violence in Ukraine. (Bloomberg News)

Brent crude surged today as Western powers considered tougher sanctions against Russia over its actions in Ukraine, while U.S. crude rose modestly after positive retail sales data signaled a rebound in the American economy. (Reuters)

Business news:

U.S. retail sales recorded their largest gain in 1-1/2 years in March in a decisive sign the economy is bouncing back from its weather-induced slumber. ( Reuters

The Affordable Care Act's health insurance subsidies will cost a little less than previously thought, according to a new report released today. (Associated Press)

TIAA-CREF, one of the largest money managers in the country, today said it had agreed to acquire Nuveen Investments in a deal valuing Nuveen at $6.25 billion. (Los Angeles Times)

General Motors announced today its heads of human resources and communications are leaving the company "to pursue other interests." (Reuters)

Southwest Airlines employees will get a hefty $228 million payday as the Dallas-based airline doles out a record profit sharing allocation. (Dallas Business Journal)

Taxpayers are about to give the federal government a big, fat Easter egg -- more than three-quarters of a billion dollars in tax revenue the government technically doesn't deserve. (Fox News)

Google has acquired New Mexico-based drone maker Titan Aerospace. (Los Angeles Times)

Microsoft released Windows Phone 8.1 today, and contrary to its label of "Windows Phone Preview for Developers," anyone can upgrade their current Windows Phone 8-powered handset. (Computerworld)



T-Mobile US CEO John Legere today said that data overage fees are greedy and predatory and the company plans to stop charging them. (Ars Technica)

Twitter's co-founders, chief executive officer and largest investor have no immediate plans to sell shares, as the company seeks to temper concern that its stock will soon flood the market. (Bloomberg Businessweek)

World business news:

Turkey urged executives from Twitter to open an office and start paying Turkish tax today in the first direct talks since a two-week ban imposed on the site as the government battled a corruption scandal. ( Hurriyet Daily News

In a bid to gain further traction in emerging markets, Facebook is reportedly planning to jump into the money transfer business by servicing remittances and electronic money. (Fox Business News)

The World Trade Organization has raised its forecast for growth in global trade this year to 4.7 percent, while warning that risks such as the slowdown in developing economies and increasing geopolitical tensions, including in Ukraine, threaten to undermine its recovery. (Financial Times)

Glencore Xstrata has offered $1.35 billion to buy Caracal Energy, a Chad-focused exploration company, in a deal that underscores its ambitions to build a sizable oil and gas business. (Financial Times)