Highmark's health insurance business lost $83 million in the fiscal year that ended in 2014.

But much of the loss, Highmark said, resulted from a "one-time accounting action" related to risks associated with Affordable Care Act plans. Highmark had lost $132 million last year.

Highmark called its accounting action "conservative" and said the actual end result could be better. It noted the company has $6.5 billion in cash and investments, and $5.4 billion in surplus.

Highmark also said it's overall revenues, which includes those from assorted non-health insurance products, rose about six percent to $16.8 billion.

Highmark CEO David Holmberg in a news release said the health insurer "had a solid 2014, with our business poised for growth." He also said, "The breadth of our diversified business is what sets us apart from our competitors, and it's important to understand that one-third of our revenue came from businesses other than our health plan."

Highmark, which is based in Pittsburgh but which employs about 4,000 in the Harrisburg region, faces assorted challenges. These include its split with UPMC, and its purchase of struggling West Penn Allegheny Health System two years ago.

As a result of the split with UPMC, Highmark members are considered out-of-network for most services at UPMC, the largest health care provider in western Pennsylvania.

However, Highmark says its membership of 5.3 million health insurance customers in Pennsylvania, West Virginia and Delaware is holding steady, and it is retaining an average of about 90 percent of members in its various markets.

Highmark said Allegheny Health Network -- the former West Penn Allegheny system -- lost $37 million, after losing $402 million the previous year.

Highmark said it spent 90 percent of every health insurance premium dollar on health care in 2014. It said it spent $28 million on charitable causes through entities including the Highmark Foundation.

Note: this article was revised to correct the amont of West Penn Allegheny's loss in fiscal 2013. The correct amount is $402 million, not $402 billion.