U.S. Sen. James Lankford is one of four Congressional leaders behind a friend of the court brief filed Monday that urges the U.S. Supreme Court to respect the First Amendment and 1993 Religious Freedom Restoration Act when it decides if religion-based nonprofits must file paperwork to officially opt out of Affordable Care Act requirements.

The Supreme Court is expected to decide Zubik v. Burwell this year. The case consolidates seven cases that ask if the Obama administration’s plan for accommodating religious objections to the Affordable Care Act’s contraceptive mandate is a violation of religious liberty.

The Department of Health and Human Services requires religion-based nonprofits to file paperwork to claim their exemptions to the ACA’s contraceptive coverage provision. The plaintiffs claim signing the one-page opt-out form makes them complicit in an immoral act — supporting birth control, violates their rights under the religious freedom law and sets in motion a process that allows their employees to get contraception coverage from a third party client.

Oklahoma Wesleyan University in Bartlesville and three other Oklahoma universities — Southern Nazarene University, Oklahoma Baptist University and Mid-American Christian University — are involved in the challenge.

The Oklahoma Republican, as well as Sen. Orin Hatch, R-Utah, and U.S. Reps. Mike Kelley, R-Penn., and Diane Black, R-Tenn., led the Congressional effort, which was signed by 207 members of Congress.

“This bipartisan amicus brief articulates the great concern that many Americans have about our First Amendment right of the free exercise of religion,” Lankford said. “The case exposes the Obama administrations focus on freedom of worship as our primary religious right, instead of our freedom of religion, which includes our everyday lives.”

Colleges, universities and nonprofits shouldn’t put their faith in jeopardy to please the government, he said.

“The question before the Supreme Court should never have reached this level, but it is important for the future of our liberty that the court now rule in favor of religious freedom,” Lankford said.

Some are calling Zubik v. Burwell “Hobby Lobby II.” In June 2014, the Supreme Court ruled that Hobby Lobby, an Oklahoma-based arts and craft chain, and another company didn’t have to provide a full range of contraceptives to their employees because the contraception mandate violated the Religious Freedom Restoration Act and violated their sincerely held religious beliefs.

Hatch was the lead sponsor GOP sponsor of the 1993 Religious Freedom Restoration Act when it pass Congress in 1993 and was signed into law by President Bill Clinton.

“Religious freedom is a fundamental right that government must respect and accommodate,” Hatch said. “Threatening draconian fines if religious organizations are unwilling to violate their faith clearly violates federal law.”