While plenty in the restaurant industry are bemoaning the tough economy and warning of extended penny-pinching among low and middle-income consumers, those who are targeting a slightly more affluent crowd of eaters are looking much more confident.

Take Chipotle, a favorite of the office lunch crowd. As McDonald's and Burger King worked hard to expand their dollar menus and develop newer, cheaper snacks, Chipotle has moved in the other direction, incurring higher costs as it shifts to more expensive ingredients like cooking oils made from non-genetically-modified seeds.

The move away from genetically-modified ingredients is in line with the chain’s general product focus. It likes to promote its more selective choice of ingredients — hormone-free meat, organic vegetables, local suppliers — as a way to convince customers to pay often north of $6 for a burrito.

The latest move to shift away from genetically-modified ingredients means costs will keep going up — the company is starting with oil but says it wants to eventually move all its produce in that direction. And it plans to pass on the higher costs to consumers via a price rise some time around mid-2014, potentially in tandem with a promotional campaign announcing it is the first big restaurant chain to drop all genetically-modified ingredients from its menu.

Here’s Chipotle’s Chief Financial Officer John Hartung, answering a question about the planned price rise on an earnings call yesterday:

We’re not going to make a decision today on pricing, but I think that it’s probably in kind of a mid-single-digit range, whether that’s 3, 4, 5 kind of percent. What it will depend on is what happens with general ingredient inflation between now and then, and then what it costs us to remove GMOs from the rest of our ingredients. So once we have all that information at hand, we’ll be able to do a better job of figuring out what that price increase might be.

The company might also time the price rise to happen alongside a promotional push, Mr. Hartung said:

And in terms of timing, it’s really hinging more on removing GMOs. We’d really like to make more progress, understand what that’s going to cost, how much time that’s going to take, all that kind of stuff. And then we’ll feel better about coordinating a price increase around the time that we’re removing GMOs. And we think that there might be a PR opportunity as well. We think it will be a pretty exciting time for us when we can announce that. We’re not aware of any other restaurant company anywhere near our size that’s even attempting to do this. And so to actually accomplish it will be pretty exciting, and we’d like to time — tie that excitement around with the price increase.

Will rising prices dent the company’s growth trajectory? Chipotle has long targeted eaters willing to pay a premium for food they consider to be a cut above regular fast food, and despite many restaurant operators warning of tough economic conditions in recent quarters, its sales have been rising. Same-store sales increased 6.2% in the most recent quarter compared to the year prior, with company-wide revenue up 18%. Profit was up 15%.

Investors certainly liked what the company had to say in its earnings announced after the market closed on Thursday: Chipotle stock is up 16% so far on Friday.

See also:

Chipotle Profit Jumps 15% as Restaurant Traffic Rises – WSJ