If Democratic state Rep. John Bel Edwards is to become the next governor of Louisiana, he'll do so with the vote of moderate Republicans who, for whatever reason, just can't bring themselves to push the ballot button for Sen. David Vitter, one of their own.

Getting those of the GOP persuasion to actually cross the party line for the Nov. 21 runoff, however, is easier said than done. No question, Vitter has remarkably high negatives among those who share his party affiliation, but the source of such angst tends to be tied to personal issues, not policy ones. And if the lessons of elections past have taught us anything, it's that, in the end, people -- and especially Republican people -- make their wallet priority one.

Which is important in a state where politicians and those who elect them cling to Louisiana's populist legacy while also preaching fiscal conservatism and eschewing taxes. In other words, we want and expect state government to do a lot of stuff, but without the nasty business of taxes to pay the tab.

So, for example, Edwards saying he'll expand Louisiana's participation in Medicaid "on day one" isn't necessarily a deal killer for moderate Republicans. But doing so without requesting some type of waiver or explaining how the state will cover its portion of the Obamacare expansion might. Especially if the solution -- which voters should demand to learn prior to the Nov. 21 runoff -- involves higher taxes or cutting something Republicans support. Simply saying the money is out there somewhere in the vast expanse of a roughly $25 billion budget isn't going to cut it, especially when that $25 billion budget, just four months into it, is already facing a $500 million -- and climbing -- shortfall.

Of course, the more basic problem for Edwards is that supporting unfettered Medicaid expansion, in the eyes of many Republicans, is by extension, embracing all things Barack Obama.

The good news for Edwards and his quest for Republican love is that he's a pro-military West Point graduate, a strong gun rights advocate and pro-life. He was also an early adopter of the anti-Bobby Jindal movement, which could help him with non-Democrats disillusioned with the man they once believed would produce a Louisiana miracle.

Regardless, for Edwards to win, absent a surge of African-American voters, he must find a way to get 40 percent of the white vote, and to do that he'll have to convince three of every 10 people who backed Republicans Scott Angelle or Jay Dardenne in the primary to cross over to the "D" side.

So here's who we know Edwards can't get: Those who 1) support Vitter; 2) supported Angelle or Dardenne but think state government is out-of-control big or have a deep distrust of government; 3) really don't care what positions Edwards has staked out -- either through his legislative record or campaign rhetoric -- but simply believe the only good Democrat is an out-of-office Democrat; and 4) pay little attention to politics and elections and simply vote for the last "R" standing.

Uncertain is the impact of so few people actually paying attention or caring about the race. Some 38 percent of registered voters bothered to cast a ballot in the primary, but I'm guessing the number of those paying even a modicum of attention to the actual beliefs and political records of the candidates is closer to 20 percent -- and that might be optimistic. That hurts Edwards with those who vote Republican as a Pavlovian response, but it helps him with those willing to do anything -- even vote Democrat -- to keep Vitter out of the Governor's Mansion. Moreover, with Edwards decisively winning the open primary with 40 percent of the vote, a stay-at-home Republican is the next best thing to one actually showing up to vote for him.

Also unclear is the residue from the barrage of Republican-on-Republican attacks launched at Vitter by Angelle and Dardenne during the primary campaign. Clearly Edwards, or his support groups, will pound voters with reminders of those words of GOP disdain. Then again, most of the hammering was about Vitter's off-the-field character issues, and I suspect most voters -- especially Republican voters -- long ago made up their minds on that issue. Still look for Edwards to cloak himself in the flag of character, integrity and service to his country.

Simply playing the anti-Vitter card might gin up interest with moderates, but Edwards has some explaining to do if he wants enough Republican votes to become governor. The man is pledging to do a lot of things if elected: restore higher education funding, keep TOPS and every other state-backed scholarship program intact, solve the state's budget problems, fix Louisiana's underlying fiscal issues, eliminate unnecessary corporate welfare, expand health care, fully fund K-12 education and attack our dismal poverty problem.

The response of every tax-hating Republican is this: "Sounds great, how are you going to pay for all that?"

Granted, Vitter is making some of those same promises and he, too, is light on specifics. But, as a Republican, he gets the benefit of the doubt when it comes to government's hand in taxpayer wallets; Edwards, as a Democrat, does not.

*****

JR Ball is a columnist with NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune in Baton Rouge. Email him at jrball@nola.com. You can also keep up with his local updates on Twitter (@jrball35), Facebook (jrball) and Google+ (+JRBall).