Jenny Wanasek portrays Emily Dickinson in Renaissance Theaterworks’ “The Belle of Amherst.” Credit: Ross Zentner

By ,

Walt Whitman may have rightly claimed that his poetry contains multitudes, but Emily Dickinson can stake an equally valid claim to being America's greatest poet.

She is also the hardest one to know. Harold Bloom once wrote that no poet "seems so separate from us as Dickinson," adding that "we have no accurate approaches to her."

Bloom's sound observation illuminates both the attraction and the inherent limitation of playwright William Luce's "The Belle of Amherst," a one-actor account of Dickinson's life that once won Julie Harris a Tony and is now being revived here by Renaissance Theaterworks, in a production directed by Suzan Fete and starring Jenny Wanasek.

First, what's attractive about this play.

Easy as it is to caricature Dickinson as a cloistered and neurasthenic ninny, her letters and poems actually suggest a passionately engaged, witty and intensely theatrical soul — one who adopted the numerous personae in her work as a means of expressing her deep-seated and often ungovernable emotion. Her writings tell us the truth about her life, even if she tells it slant.

That's also what actors do every time they dramatize a life, and the parallel surely isn't lost on a seasoned hand like Wanasek.

When this Dickinson confides that dressing in white and playing the recluse is all part of a game she relishes, there's a glint in Wanasek's eye — presaging the many sideways glances and sly, wry smiles to come. As she impersonates and interacts with 14 other never-seen characters, this Dickinson could be playing a comfy parlor game of charades.

A gifted comedic actor, Wanasek honors a script that plays up this down-home side of Dickinson, further reinforced here by the warm and vibrant hues in Lisa Schlenker's scenic design, which is dominated by huge, upstage paintings of brightly colored flowers. Wanasek never lets us forget that this genius poet was also a real and very appealing person.

All the same, the domesticated Dickinson who emerges is less about New England than England, right down to the richly appointed rooms, delicate china teacups and sometimes overly twee anecdotes featuring life in a country town — all of it reinforced by Wanasek's busy hands: fluttering, clasping, reaching and crossing but rarely still, any more than Wanasek herself is.

All that moving around gives the game away: It's too busy, suggesting a fear, in both Luce's script and this production, that what's being presented isn't sufficiently dramatic. And this fear, in turn, reflects our ongoing discomfort with what's silent, still and strange in Dickinson's poetry — where every dash and gap carries meaning, none of it easily parsed and much of it terrifying.

When Luce tries to translate this darker and much more interesting side of Dickinson, too much gets lost; in Wanasek's performance as in his script, it frequently comes across as fraught.

Except, that is, when the poems are allowed to speak for themselves.

Wanasek is an exceptional medium; attuned to Dickinson's strangely rhymed music, she makes the poems sing. Hearing her moving rendition of a poem like "Because I could not stop for death," one realizes that Emily Dickinson's story doesn't require tricky staging. The riveting drama of her life is already baked into the poems themselves.

"The Belle of Amherst" continues through Nov. 10 at the Broadway Theatre Center, 158 N. Broadway. For tickets, call (414) 291-7800 or go to www.r-t-w.com.