Friday, December 18, 2015

Senators Bob Corker and Lamar Alexander, as well as Reps. Chuck Fleischmann and Chuck Graves, voted for the fiscal year 2016 Omnibus Appropriations bill. The Senate passed it by a vote of 65 to 33. The House passed the bill by a vote of 316 to 113.

Senator Corker said,

"Left to my own accord this bill would look much different, but it does put to bed a number of issues that have been left unaddressed for a number of years and provides permanent tax relief to American families and businesses,”

Rep. Fleischmann said, "Today we passed a bill that in addition to keeping our government open and functioning will properly fund our military, rein in the IRS and lift the ban on American oil exports. This bill is good for our economy and good for East Tennessee. The Chickamauga Lock will move forward and the vital national security work done in Oak Ridge will continue. As we move into a new year, with new House leadership, I am hopeful that we will continue to advance strong conservative principles.”

Rep. Graves said, “The number one issue for Georgia in this legislation was stopping an assault by other states on our water rights. These other states were trying to use a government funding bill to circumvent the legal process and restrict Georgia’s access to its own water. I’m grateful to every member of the Georgia congressional delegation, Republicans and Democrats, for working around the clock to secure this major victory for our state.



“This legislation delivers more hard fought victories for conservatives as we go into the final year of the Obama administration. The bill lifts the 40-year-old ban on U.S. crude oil exports, which will help lock in lower gas prices, create an estimated one million American jobs and grow our economy by $170 billion annually. It tightens security of the Visa Waiver Program so terrorists cannot use our nation’s generosity to sneak in and attack our communities. This legislation also protects hard-working Georgians from tax increases sought by liberal Democrats and the Obama administration. Importantly, we didn’t lose any ground on the major victories we won last year, such as holding EPA funding to its lowest levels since 2008, freezing the budget for most IRS operations and continuing to prohibit new funding for Obamacare, including its program for taxpayer funded bailouts of insurance companies.



“Finally, this legislation provides our military with the critical resources it needs to defend our nation and destroy terrorist groups like the Islamic State,” Rep. Graves continued. “It ensures our soldiers are properly equipped and trained today, while investing in new and better technologies to stay ahead of our enemies.”

He said highlights in the Fiscal Year 2016 funding bill include:



Repeals the antiquated oil export ban. This provision would end the 1975 ban on the export of American oil. Domestic energy production is booming in the United States, and lifting the ban will help create jobs, grow our economy, and promote greater exploration of our natural resources.



Increases resources for our military. The arbitrary spending cuts in the sequester have depleted the resources our armed forces need to carry out their mission. This bill restores funding for our military to ensure our troops can confront today’s challenges and defeat the Islamic State.



Strengthens the Visa Waiver Program to protect the homeland. The Visa Waiver Program presents one of the most urgent threats to our homeland from radical Islamic terrorism. This agreement includes the House-passed bill to tighten the security requirements under the program. It would also deny visa waiver status to any individual who has traveled to certain terrorist hotspots, including Syria and Iraq, in the last five years.

Prohibits new funding for Obamacare. The bill contains no new funding for Obamacare and continues to prevent a taxpayer bailout of Obamacare’s risk corridor program.



Prevents the transfer of Guantanamo detainees to American soil. The bill prohibits funds from being used to transfer terrorist detainees from Guantanamo Bay to the United States, and prohibits the construction or acquisition of a facility in the U.S. to house detainees.



Blocks EPA overreach. The bill contains no funding for new or expanded EPA programs, holding the agency to its lowest funding levels since 2008 and its lowest staffing levels since 1989.



Reins in the IRS. The IRS continues to act with impunity against the interests of hardworking taxpayers. This bill freezes most IRS operations and maintains budget cuts necessary to ensure this agency roots out wasteful spending and redirects resources to serving the American people. In addition, the tax extenders package also includes a measure to prohibit the IRS from unfairly imposing the gift tax on contributions to non-profit groups, which have historically been exempt, to encourage donations to these important organizations.



Increases protections for life. The bill includes a new prohibition on genetic modification of human embryos, and cuts funding for a program involved in abortion-related activities, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), by 7 percent. This bill maintains important pro-life provisions, including the Hyde Amendment, and prohibits taxpayer funding for abortion.



Honors our commitment to our veterans. This bill ensures our veterans receive their much-deserved health benefits, speeds up VA claims processing, prioritizes modernizing the VA’s electronic health care record system, and tightens oversight of construction projects.



Provides critical healthcare benefits for 9/11 first responders. More than 30,000 first responders continue to suffer from injuries or illnesses sustained during the 9/11 attacks. The bill contains a bipartisan measure to permanently reauthorize critical health care benefits for these brave men and women—and it does so in a fiscally responsible way.

Repeals harmful labeling requirements on American meat. The bill repeals mandatory country-of-origin labeling (COOL) requirements, ensuring that our economy does not suffer more than $1 billion in trade penalties.

Enhances privacy protections. The bill addressed privacy concerns about the Cyber Information Sharing Act by removing Section 407, which would have increased the federal government’s role in creating “cybersecurity strategies” for the private sector.

Includes conservative victories from last year’s funding bill. The Fiscal Year 2016 appropriations bill also includes the following conservative wins from last year’s funding bill:



· The EPA funding cut of $60 million was continued, making it a 21% budget cut since Fiscal Year 2010. The EPA’s staffing level is at its lowest level since 1989.

· The EPA is prohibited from regulating the lead content in ammunition or fishing tackle.

Livestock producers are exempt from EPA greenhouse gas regulations, thwarting the agency’s effort to regulate livestock flatulence.

· The Army Corps of Engineers is prohibited from regulating farm ponds and irrigation ditches.





· Aid to Libya is prohibited until the U.S. Secretary of State confirms that the Libyans are cooperating in the Benghazi investigation.





· Funding for any future "Fast and Furious" type activity is prohibited.





· The UN Arms Trade Treaty cannot be funded or implemented.

Senator Alexander said, “For those concerned about the federal debt, which includes me, this is not the part of the budget driving the federal debt. This one-third of the budget is rising at about the rate of inflation. It’s the other roughly two-thirds—mandatory entitlement spending—that’s sky-rocketing out of control. Sen. Corker and I have proposed legislation that would reduce the growth of mandatory entitlement spending.”

“This appropriations bill includes new funding for several national priorities in Tennessee: rebuilding the Chickamauga Lock; $430 million for the $6.5 billion Uranium Processing Facility at the Y-12 National Security Complex; research and development at Oak Ridge National Laboratory; infrastructure at Ft. Campbell; construction of a new federal courthouse in Nashville which is the federal judiciary’s No.1 national courthouse construction priority; as well as increased funding for dredging the Mississippi River in Memphis.

“For the first time in six years, the Republican Senate majority moved all 12 appropriations bills to the Senate floor – all within the spending limits set by the Budget Control Act and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015– after careful consideration by the subcommittees and the full appropriations committee. Unfortunately, the Democratic leaders blocked bringing 10 of those bills to the Senate floor, which effectively left 70 other senators out of the deliberation process. This should never happen again.”

The 2016 Omnibus Appropriations bill includes all 12 appropriations bills, including the Senate Energy and Water Development Appropriations bill, which Senator Alexander drafted.

He said the bill includes funding for the following national spending priorities in Tennessee:

Sufficient funding for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to continue construction of Chickamauga Lock in fiscal year 2016. Based on current estimates for the first three Inland Waterways Trust Fund priorities, there should be up to $29 million available to continue construction on Chickamauga Lock, which is the fourth priority in the list of projects Congress agreed upon. This builds on the $3 million used to restart construction on Chickamauga Lock last year.

An additional $430 million for the $6.5 billion Uranium Processing Facility at the Y-12 National Security Complex, which will continue to keep this project on time and on budget.

$2.1 million to operate and maintain the Memphis Harbor, McKellar Lake project through the Mississippi River and Tributaries funding.

$2.8 million of construction funding in the Mississippi River and Tributaries construction funding to continue building flood control levees in West Tennessee along the Mississippi River.

$1.24 billion for advanced computing, including both the Office of Science and the National Nuclear Security Administration. The Office of Science’s Advanced Scientific Computing Research Program, which supports the new Summit supercomputer at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, is funded at $621 million. “Once again, the world’s fastest supercomputer will be at Oak Ridge National Laboratory,” Alexander said.

Funding for nuclear infrastructure at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, including hot cells and isotope production facilities. Many of the isotopes produced at Oak Ridge National Laboratory are not available anywhere else, and are necessary to support medical treatments, oil and gas exploration, and deep-space satellites, among other priorities.

Funding for a new mercury treatment facility in Oak Ridge, and for cleanup of nuclear facilities that are no longer in service.

$12.553 million is included in the bill to construct the U.S. Special Operations Forces Company Headquarters and new classrooms at Ft. Campbell.

$188.4 million to fund the construction of the new federal courthouse in Nashville. The Nashville federal courthouse has been on the Administrative Office of the Courts’ Five-Year Plan for 18 years and ranks No. 1 on the federal judiciary’s nationwide priority list.

$70 million to operate and maintain the following navigation projects: Wolf River Harbor, the Tennessee River, and the seven locks and dams located in Tennessee.