The next house sits on a large country lot surrounded by a five-foot-high chain-link fence. The son was laid off from Fort Bragg with the latest cutbacks, so he busies himself keeping up his mother's yard. "Lookin' good," Aiken says as he strolls past, surveying the precise trim of the lawn. Inside the cluttered kitchen, Aiken asks what church the family attends, and when they say Lewis Chapel, he names their pastor and talks about hearing him preach a time or two.

The meal deliveries continue, each stop bringing a refreshed gratitude to both Aiken and Miss Carmen, who reminisces about how the streets they're on used to be soybean crops and rows of corn and how "don't nothing stay the same."

Most Popular

Miss Carmen turns onto Pine Tree Lane, navigating the van down a rutted dirt road past a collection of rusted-out caravans propped against pine trunks, some with plastic canopies haphazardly strung over the top. She tells Aiken the people living there work bundling up pine straw to sell for landscaping. Just as she eases to a stop, two women approach. "Mr. Willy done beat his girlfriend with a baseball bat last night," announces the one in the front as she flips her short hair back, dragging a fingernail across her pale neck. "The police come, but he'd taken off into the woods. He don't want to go to jail at his age."

Aiken sits in the passenger seat, uncertain if he should exit the vehicle, a Styrofoam lunch container steaming in his lap. He leans toward the women, asks if their friend is okay, if they should call a doctor. The older of the two recognizes him from television, even if she can't exactly remember from what. The younger one cocks her hip, "You famous?"

She's dressed in tight pale-blue bell-bottom jeans, a child's T-shirt that rides just above her navel, and an incongruous bright-yellow fisherman's hat. She takes a sharp draw from a hand-rolled cigarette.

"Did you watch American Idol?" (He knows she didn't.)

"Can I have your autograph?" she asks, sidling closer. Aiken grabs a business card with his campaign logo on the front and starts to sign the back.

"Who should I make this out to?"

"Woman."

"Your name is Woman?"

"That's what I am, isn't I?"

Aiken does what he's told, passes her the card, which she slides into the V-neck of her shirt, right over her left nipple, pushing her lips forward as she does.

Aiken passes both women a boxed meal, then smiles, says it was nice to meet them, that he hopes their friend will be okay.

As they back down the lane, Miss Carmen talks about how "people get so hard down in situations." But that doesn't mean they "don't need folks to take care of them."

Aiken is quiet, his face a rictus of shock.

"Was she smoking a twig? I swear that wasn't even a cigarette."

Deliveries complete, Miss Carmen drops Aiken back at his car. He hugs and thanks her, then climbs inside and starts the engine. He doesn't move. He takes a deep breath, then another.

"Pine Tree Lane is what happens when you don't raise minimum wage," he says bitterly. "When people can't find work. I have been to Uganda, Afghanistan. I've seen poverty. But I never thought this could happen in my district. Fuck. This. It's a disgrace. We need to get a busload of people and drive them down that lane so they can see what is happening in our backyard and that we need to do something to help these people. I mean how are they earning enough to live?"

"I don't think it's from bundling pine straw," I offer.

Aiken stiffens, releases a long whistle through his teeth.

"Lord have mercy," he says. And then "Jesus be a damn raindrop."

It's a drizzly Friday, and after an exhausting week Aiken is enjoying dinner at one of his favorite spots, the Brownie Lu in Siler City, a working-class Republican stronghold. He's gotten a slew of encouraging news. The Victory Fund has finally endorsed his candidacy. Several big-ticket fundraisers are in the works. His internal polls are showing his gayness is a nonissue and that he is more likable than even his team predicted. During a recent stop in Dunn, he met Ellmers's next-door neighbor, a former supporter, who said she's been trying to rip her Renee bumper sticker off her car for a year.

"Even her hometown newspaper dislikes her," Aiken says, widening his eyes.

He orders fried chicken, black-eyed peas, hush puppies, sweet tea. Before he takes his first bite, a woman named Christine waddles over, her right foot in a cast.

"Claaaaay," she squawks, hugging him like a stuffed animal. "I'll make you a deal. I'll vote for you if you sing at my funeral."

"Now, you know that's not going to happen for a very long time, Christine," he chides. Christine giggles and lingers, talking about her cortisone shots, how she hurt herself "kicking her husband." She keeps her hand on Aiken's shoulder the whole time, fingers dug deep. "Oh, I loved you on American Idol. I was so hoping you'd win."

Aiken signs an autograph for Christine, signs more autographs on the way out, and asks the cashier if she'll hang a "Republaiken" campaign poster behind the grill.

"Sure thing, hon."

Walking behind the restaurant to the toilet out back, he worries that maybe he's better at making friends than securing votes. "Am I in the bubble?" he asks himself, then shrugs it off.

"We're all just waiting for obscurity," he muses. "I came about because so many people from this area put me here. They voted for me once. Maybe they'll do it again."

On the way home, we drive past campaign headquarters, where, just around the corner, on Chatham Street, there is a Guffmanesque "Cary Now and Then" mural painted on the side of a former grocery store. On the front half, together with a ball-capped golfer and an old-fashioned street clock, a rendering of Aiken serenades a restaurant dining room, microphone in hand, eyes closed in intense emotive rapture. A closer look reveals his left incisor has been blacked out with a marker.

Later that night, Aiken will watch a Jason Bateman movie at home. He will order pizza with extra sauce, and he will eat it on his massive couch, wearing his slippers and his Dr. Pepper pajama bottoms. He will think about who he was and who he's becoming and the sad women on Pine Tree Lane and motherfucking Renee Ellmers, and he will murmur under his breath to no one in particular, "It will damn near kill me if I don't win."