With twin boys ready for school, Jason and Jessica Pollard braced for paperwork, parent-teacher meetings and shopping trips for supplies. But they were not prepared for the reception their son, Owen, then 5, received from school administrators.

Officials at their neighborhood kindergarten and a nearby private academy said he would not be allowed to attend because he has Type 1 diabetes. The Pollards, doctors in Seattle, were flabbergasted.

The Pollards are hardly the first family to face this kind of discrimination. Too many schools are failing to provide the growing number of students who have Type 1 diabetes with the routine care they need. And often, parents do not know they have the legal right to insist on it.

The incidence of Type 1 diabetes among children has increased by 21 percent in recent years. In nearly 400 cases since 2011, parents have brought complaints to federal authorities about schools that decline to care for these students.

Experts say the number vastly understates the problem in public and private education.

Many children have been barred from attending their zoned schools or abruptly transferred after diagnosis to schools with nurses, even when their doctors say nursing care is not warranted. Others are not allowed to participate in sports or extracurricular activities.

Parents have been told no school employee is willing to inject lifesaving glucagon even if their child falls unconscious.

“We have principals who tell mothers, ‘Sorry, but you’ll have to home-school your kid,’” said Crystal C. Jackson, the director of the American Diabetes Association’s Safe at School program. “It’s outrageous.”

These practices may be ingrained, but they are also largely illegal.

Unlike Type 2 diabetes, which is linked to obesity and inactivity, Type 1 is an autoimmune condition that leads to destruction of cells in the pancreas. Blood sugar levels must be monitored in these students, and insulin administered via injections or a pump before meals. When blood sugar levels go very low, children with Type 1 diabetes may have seizures or die.

Public and private schools are required by federal law to accommodate students with disabilities, including diabetes. Only those run by religious institutions without federal funding are exempt.

The Pollards were thrilled when University Child Development School, a private school, accepted him and his twin, Miles. Just days before the beginning of school, however, UCDS told the Pollards that no staff member would help Owen.

Exasperated, the couple uprooted to Falmouth, Maine. A nurse now monitors Owen at a public school, and thus far, there have been no administrative hiccups.

“It’s awesome,” Jason Pollard said. “It’s 180 degrees the opposite of what we had in Seattle.”