SAGINAW, MI — Each of the 11 members of the Saginaw County Board of Commissioners has formally pledged they would work no more than 29 hours per week.

The resolution, approved by the board at its meeting Tuesday, April 21, was brought to the table by Controller Robert Belleman.

Belleman explained that the resolution is necessary to ensure that the county government is completely in compliance with requirements in the Affordable Care Act.

The federal legislation, known commonly as "Obamacare," requires employers to provide healthcare to all full-time employees, defined as anyone working 29 hours or more each week, on average.

"As such, you would be eligible for healthcare," Belleman said. "Unless you agree to work less than 29 hours per week, 519 hours in a 90-consecutive-day period or 1,559 hours in any one-year period."

The resolution promises board members will not engage in more than 29 hours of "service in their official capacity" in any given week, no more than 519 hours of service in any 90-day period and no more than 1,559 hours in any one-year period.

The controller said the language of the resolution was drawn from a similar one recently approved in a neighboring county.

"This is a resolution that was adopted by the Tuscola County Board of Commissioners," Belleman said. "So we are modeling ours after theirs."

Before the vote was taken on the resolution, Commissioner Jim Theisen jokingly asked how the new requirement would impact their work as commissioners.

"So how are we going to get all that work done if we don't work more than 29 hours?" Theisen asked.

Chairman Michael Hanley responded merely by encouraging commissioners to "volunteer," a statement that was meant with laughter among the county leaders.

Commissioner Katie Albosta Kelly asked what would happen if they had to work more hours in a single one-week or 90-day period.

"It's on average," Belleman said.

All 11 members of the Board of Commissioners voted in favor of adopting the resolution, which ensures the members are not eligible to participate in the health insurance plan extended to full-time county employees.

Mark Tower covers local government for MLive/The Saginaw News. Contact him at 989-284-4807, by email at mtower@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.