William Rodriguez (Photo: COURTESY OCEAN COUNTY JAIL )

It wasn’t enough that William Rodriguez tore up the front screen door of a house on Breton Harbor Drive then ran off, police said. Rodriguez’s beef with the homeowner was so strong, he pulled up in his car a short time after to taunt the homeowner into a fight by waving a knife in the air, but, was unaware that a police officer, called by the homeowner, was watching Rodriguez’s theatrics from behind.

Rodriguez’s attack on the screen door was reported to police about 12:30 a.m. Monday and Patrolman Michael Macdonald responded immediately. The officer spoke with the victim then went to search nearby homes, said Ralph Stocco, spokesman for the Toms River Police.

Ultimately, Rodriguez, 19, of First Bayway Avenue was charged Monday with criminal mischief, unlawful possession of a weapon and making terroristic threats. He was placed in the Ocean County Jail in lieu of $30,000 bail, and bailed out Monday.

Macdonald was one house away in his investigation and he saw Rodriguez pull up at 1:10 a.m., Stocco said. Unaware of the officer’s presence behind him, Rodriguez got out of his car and started waiving his arms over his head toward the house. As Macdonald approached him, the officer could see Rodriguez had a knife in one hand and a sheath in the other, he said. Macdonald told him to drop his weapon.

“Mr. Rodriguez turned and faced the officer and tried to conceal the knife,” Stocco said. “He refused to obey the officer’s commands to drop it.”

Instead, Rodriguez threw the sheath on the ground, Stocco said. He was told again to drop the knife. Then Rodriguez approached Macdonald “brandishing the knife” and when he was told for the third time, to drop the knife as well as to halt his approach, he complied and was taken into custody, Stocco said.

During his investigation, Macdonald determined that Rodriguez “was returning with the knife to engage in a fight with the homeowner, who he knew, and was having an ongoing dispute with,” Stocco said.

Margaret F. Bonafide: Bonafide@app.com; 732-557-5734

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1u9AAyh