We took a dive into what TrumpCare would look like. Donald Trump Donald TrumpSanders laughs off Trump's third-party question Sanders: Clinton showing 'tinge of arrogance' Trump and Sanders whip up debate buzz MORE says he will repeal ObamaCare and replace it with "something terrific," but what does that mean?

Trump has not provided details on what he is proposing. His campaign website's "issues" page does not have a healthcare section.

Trump campaign spokeswoman Hope Hicks wrote in an email that a healthcare plan is "forthcoming," but did not respond when asked when it will be released.

ADVERTISEMENT

There have been some clues in Trump's public statements about what DonaldTrumpCare might look like.

Trump's focus on allowing insurance to be sold across state lines is not satisfying experts.

"Selling insurance nationwide may be modestly helpful," James Capretta, a healthcare expert at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, wrote in a blog post. "It does not come close to constituting a plan for fixing health care in the United States."

Trump has also come under fire for embracing ObamaCare's mandate that everyone have health insurance at the CNN town hall this month, saying "I like the mandate."

He later walked back the comment, saying that he meant to say he favors keeping ObamaCare's ban on insurers discriminating against people with preexisting health conditions. Read more here. http://bit.ly/21xjNcv

DEA TALKS DRUG ABUSE WITH PHARMA The head of the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) met with several pharmaceutical company executives on Monday to talk about the industry's "vital role on the front lines of preventing drug misuse and abuse across America," according to a read-out of the meeting.

PhRMA, Generic Pharmaceutical Association and National Association Chain Drug Stores were all among the groups that were represented, the groups confirmed to The Hill.

"The main point of the meeting was to discuss the importance of working with stakeholders and having a dialogue about reducing and preventing prescription drug abuse," a spokeswoman for PhRMA said.

"We appreciate the chance to continue to urge a collaborative approach among enforcement and health authorities alike to address prescription drug abuse while maintaining legitimate access," a spokesman for NACDS wrote in an email.

DRUG INDUSTRY ON EDGE FOR OBAMA PRICING ACTIONS The pharmaceutical industry is anxiously awaiting a series of regulatory actions from the Obama administration aimed at combating high drug prices.

The administration has made it clear it intends to take action this year on the issue.

"We are continuing to try and pursue every administrative option," Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell Sylvia Mathews BurwellHHS launches contest to make bills simpler Obama administration takes step to reform Medicare payments Rubio breaks with GOP, backs Obama Zika request MORE said during a congressional hearing earlier this month.

"I know they're worried about it," said Joel White, the president of Horizon Government Affairs, who lobbies for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA). "There's not a lot of threat on the legislative side. There's a major threat on the regulatory side." Read more here. http://bit.ly/1RBnhCo

SOUTH DAKOTA MEDICAID EXPANSION TO WAIT South Dakota Gov. Dennis Daugaard (R) said Monday that he will not seek Medicaid expansion under ObamaCare during the current state legislative session.

South Dakota is considered to be perhaps the most likely next state to accept the expansion, with Daugaard pushing for it for months, but his announcement Monday indicates that expansion is not right around the corner.

The governor said there is not enough time for the state legislature to take up the proposal, with two weeks remaining in the session, according to the Argus Leader. The governor said a special session could be called to consider the proposal, or it could be taken up in 2017. Read more here. http://bit.ly/21EyfMl

WHAT WE'RE READING:

Arguments in Supreme Court abortion case pitched to audience of one (Washington Post)

Eyes on Kennedy, women explain choices to Supreme Court on abortion (New York Times)

Valeant is under investigation by SEC, shares plunge (Bloomberg)

IN THE STATES:

Louisiana abortion clinics ask high court help to stay open (Associated Press)

Proposed Medicaid plan turns Arkansas GOP against itself (Associated Press)

Utah lawmakers to debate pared down Medicaid plan (Associated Press)

ICYMI FROM THE HILL:

Poll: Only 15 percent say they have benefited from ObamaCare

Send tips and comments to Sarah Ferris, sferris@thehill.com, and Peter Sullivan, psullivan@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @thehill, @sarahnferris, @PeterSullivan4