Construction for the Honolulu rail project is in full swing and should be completed in the next few years.

So what will that mean for communities around the rail stations?

“We’re gonna see change occurring within a quarter and a half-mile around these stations where we’re going to incentivize the private sector to build more true, affordable housing for our residents connected by bike paths, connected by good walking paths,” said Honolulu Mayor Kirk Caldwell.

With this type of living, residents could see more money in their wallets.

“Rail is a key component and it helps people not have to have that second car or maybe not even to have any car and save that money for a down payment or put your kids through college. So rail is a key, is like the spine or the backbone of the system,” said Harrison Rue, Community Builder and Transit-Oriented Development Administrator.

It’s no doubt that many residents rely on their cars to get around. So how do you get them to change their habits? Experts say public transportation needs to become the better option.

“It has to be either faster or cheaper or more convenient, or all of the above. And a combination of making walking, cycling, and transit best friends, then we’re going to be able to solve issues of mobility,” said Guillermo Penalosa, executive director at 8-80 Cities in Toronto.

Officials say in order for people to understand transit-oriented development (TOD), they need to see it in action first.

“As we start seeing projects coming in, I think people will see it. Once rail is up and going, people will try to ride and see this kind of makes sense. But don’t take our word for it. Try it. See if you like it,” said Rue.

“I think people in the long-run are gonna live better. We’re building a city for all ages and we’re building a city that’s really is taking us into the 21st century,” said Mayor Caldwell.

Bike paths are part of the overall plan. On Dec. 6, the city will open the new bike lane on King Street. It runs from Downtown to University Avenue.

For more information on Transit-Oriented Development, visit this website.