WORCESTER – As the rest of the country adapts to the provisions of the national Affordable Care Act, Massachusetts, the state that served as a model for what is commonly referred to as Obamacare, is on to the next stage, making universal health care sustainable.

Massachusetts passed health care reform in 2006, as it sought to insure Bay State residents who had no insurance at the time. But the law exacerbated national trends of rising health care costs and double digit increases in the state led to a series of later laws seeking to control that growth.

In 2012, an omnibus law was written that also created the independent state Health Policy Commission, which has a mission of finding ways to control costs, while improving the services provided to patients.

What the 2012 law did not do was cut services, according to the man who heads up the Health Policy Commission, David Seltz, who spoke before business and health care leaders at a Worcester Regional Chamber of Commerce roundtable on Tuesday.

Instead, the state set a goal of sustainable growth, which is roughly 3.6 percent and, in Seltz's words, "pretty ambitious" for a $60 billion per annum industry that has averaged growth of around 7 percent.

He called the challenge greater today than it was in 2006, when the goal was to insure the states 500,000 uninsured citizens. Today, he said his agency is looking to improve efficiency. Poor efficiency, he noted, adds up to about 30 percent of that $60 billion, or roughly $25 billion in lost opportunities per year.

"We could have said cut, but chose not to," he said. "We believe there are ways to improve efficiencies without cutting the services patients need."

And that is of particular importance for business. According to the chamber's General Counsel and Director of Government Affairs and Public Policy W. Stuart Loosemore, when asked to rank the top costs of doing business, business leaders almost always rank the cost of healthcare in the top five, and usually on the upper end of that.

Seltz spoke about two areas that, from his perspective are driving the costs increases today: The cost of pharmaceuticals and widespread cost variations for the same type and quality of services.



Cost differentials have already been cited in a 2010 report by the Massachusetts attorney general's office. That report noted higher costs associated with medical treatment are often the result of market placement, not quality. The problem is exacerbated, Seltz said, because people are, by nature, attracted to the higher-costing services.

That means more people are heading to Boston to receive routine treatments that they could receive in their own region of the state, with the same end results.

But, applying normal market logic does apply to the world of medicine, he added. Data shows that the success rates for medical procedures done in local hospitals are as a successful as those done in Boston.

"Many equate price with quality, saying 'it costs more, it must be better.' But that is not the case in healthcare," he said.

Seltz said he does not know of a solution to that problem, but he is advocating for a return of the coalition of government, health care providers, insurers and employers that helped write the 2006 law to delve into the matter.

A second driver of costs is the cost of medications. Seltz admitted he has taken criticism for focusing on massive increases in the cost of medicine in 2013 and 2014 instead of looking at longer trends, but he also differentiated between the cost of innovation and pure profit.

New medicines now being developed, especially those that are bringing humanity closer to curing diseases, need to be supported, he said. As such, the high cost of research and development must be acknowledged. But, he added, there must also be a balance.

"But, a generic drug, that has been on the market, increasing in cost 10 times (what it previously cost), that is not paying for research. That is not paying for breakthroughs, that is paying for profit," he said.

Within innovation is where Seltz said Massachusetts will find the path to sustainability. New ways of doing business, new ways of treating patients and creating a whole system with the patient at the center of decision-making, will prove to be more efficient and ultimately, lead to sustainable growth.

He gave one example of a patient who had visited an emergency room 80 times. The patient received treatment each time, but the patient's underlying problems were not addressed, Seltz said. Lower costs mental health treatments, discussions with a social worker and follow-up calls have all but eliminated those ER visits for the patient, he noted.

Addressing patients' mental health, addictions, loneliness, and other whole body issues will have a cost, but ultimately reduce the need to treat acute issues later, he said. Included in that food availability and nutrition, and access to housing, because data shows nutrition and a place to live lead to healthier lives, he said.

"Access to great health care is necessary, but it is not sufficient," he said. "We have to have a conversation on the social determinants of health."

Likewise, more communication between agencies and doctors who are treating patients will reduce unnecessary and sometime duplicate treatments, he noted.

The Health Policy Commission recently made $5 million in innovation grant money available for agencies that have an idea for bettering treatment, while reducing costs.

While he expected about 40 groups to apply for the grants, more than 100 have sent letters of interest, and 400 unique, non-health care providing partner-applicants have been identified. They include law enforcement agencies, specialty courts, housing agencies and employers, among others, he said.