It's a really sad world when Chicago's mayor lets some bullies who are protesting Laquan McDonald's shooting force them into firing police Supt. Garry McCarthy, a very good man. Mayor Rahm Emanuel, I'm disappointed in you. McCarthy was wonderful. You caved in to political pressure and fired him. I've lost a lot of respect for you. Don't worry. Voters will do the same to you in the next election.

Cindy, Chicago

If you saw the photo in the Southtown with the story on Christ Medical Center's East Tower, you can't help but wonder what was the architect thinking. I guess if you decided to make absolutely no attempt blend your vision into the aesthetics of the buildings already present, you'd design something like the East Tower.

Evergreen Park

Chicago and Cook County residents should ask for the resignation of Mayor Rahm Emanuel and also County Board President Toni Preckwinkle for giving us one of the heaviest tax burdens in America. They should both resign. How money hungry can you be? People are disgusted with politicians throughout the United States and Illinois. It's a disgrace.

Why is there no outrage from pro-life groups when we have a mass shooting? These folks are quite bellicose when it comes to defunding Planned Parenthood or closing an abortion clinic. But when it comes to standing up to the National Rifle Association, their silence is deafening. I guess only fetal life really matters to pro-lifers.

Dave, Oak Lawn

About the Chicago Cubs raising their ticket prices for the 2016 season: Cubs fans are loyal fans, and they will pay the price to see good baseball. Also, to George from Planet Earth: We will be seeing who's wearing championship rings during the next eight years and how many. We live in the present, not in the past.

Matthew, Chicago Heights

To the commenter about the "Maury" show on Channel 9 at 1 p.m. weekdays. That garbage they call TV is not what they show on the satellite channel, WGN America. I guess they're ashamed for the rest of the country to see what they show in Chicago.

Pete, Chicago

People should take responsibility for their actions. If the policeman says stop, you stop. If he tells you to put down your gun, you put down your gun. If he tells you to put down the knife, you put down your knife. If you don't do that, you're responsible for the consequences. It's not the policeman's fault. It's yours. Start learning to listen to the police when they tell you to do something.

Lemont

To Tom from Tinley Park: I read your comments that if former President George W. Bush and former Vice President Dick Cheney didn't attack Iraq, this mess wouldn't be happening now with the Islamic State. You've got to be kidding me. You need to do your research about ISIS and its religion and the prophecies that they follow. This has nothing to do with Bush and Cheney. It has all to do with the philosophies hat these people are following.

Orland Park

To all the people who think Obamacare is so wonderful: Your Medicare payments are going up sharply. You're not going to get a pay raise in Social Security in 2016. With generic medication, I was paying $2 for 30 pills. Now it's $20 for generics. You can thank President Obama. That's right. Obamacare stinks, and people are going to be screaming on the first of the year because prices at the pharmacy are going to go up, up, up.

The Southtown's article Dec. 11 dealt with the pros and cons of the new PARCC testing, which can be easily explained. The Chicago Teachers Union favors the previous ISAT because it made the kids and teachers look better than they were. But PARCC demands more from the kids and teachers. The federal and state governments have spent a trillion dollars or more to try to improve students' test scores and grade-point averages. Did it help? We could've saved all this wasted money. Quite simply, it boils down to parents demanding and expecting their kids to do their best in school.

Bob, Oak Forest

Speak Out allows readers to comment on the issues of the day. Email Speak Out at speakout@southtownstar.com or call 312-222-2427. Please limit comments to 30 seconds or about 120 words and give your first name and your hometown.