CHESAPEAKE, Va. — Dollar Tree's yearlong takeover saga, in which the retailer's offer to buy Family Dollar prompted a separate buyout attempt from Dollar General, is finally over.



Dollar Tree Inc. announced that it has completed its $8.5 billion acquisition of Family Dollar Stores Inc. Dollar Tree also named a new president and COO of Family Dollar. The combined company will operate about 13,000 stores, making it the largest dollar store chain in the United States by store count.



“We are pleased to announce we have completed our acquisition of Family Dollar and we formally welcome the Family Dollar team to the Dollar Tree organization,” stated Bob Sasser, Chief Executive Officer. “This is a transformational opportunity for our business to offer broader, more compelling merchandise assortments, with greater values, to a wider array of customers. This acquisition will extend our reach to low-income customers, while strengthening and diversifying our footprint. We plan to leverage best practices across both organizations to deliver significant cost synergies. Combined, our growth potential is enhanced with improved opportunities to increase store productivity and to open more stores across multiple banners.”



Under the terms of the merger agreement first announced and unanimously approved by each company’s Board of Directors in July 2014, Family Dollar shareholders are entitled to receive $59.60 in cash and 0.2484 of a share of Dollar Tree common stock for each share of Family Dollar common stock.



The company also announced that Gary Philbin, age 58, has been named president and COO of Family Dollar, effective immediately. In his new role, Philbin will continue to report to Bob Sasser.



Philbin joined Dollar Tree as SVP of stores in December 2001, and was later promoted to COO in March 2007 and to President in June 2013. Prior to joining Dollar Tree, Philbin held senior-level positions in both merchandising and operations during his thirty years in the retail grocery industry.



“I am very proud to announce that Gary will be taking on his new leadership role of Family Dollar Stores,” Sasser said. “Gary has played an integral role in the success of Dollar Tree over the past fourteen years. Notably, Gary was instrumental in improving the Dollar Tree customer shopping experience and the related customer satisfaction, as well as leading the integration following our Canadian acquisition in 2010.”



Philbin said: “I am very pleased to have the opportunity to lead the Family Dollar team. Throughout the due diligence and integration planning processes, I have been impressed with the experience, talent and dedication of the Family Dollar team members. Our focus as an organization will be on the customer - by consistently providing great values, affordable prices, and relevant items in a store environment that is convenient, clean, reliable and efficient. We are well-prepared for the integration process, which is now under way.”



Additionally, the company announced that Howard R. Levine, CEO of Family Dollar, has been appointed to Dollar Tree’s board of directors, effective immediately.



Sasser concluded, “We appreciate the efforts, dedication and teamwork displayed by both Dollar Tree and Family Dollar associates throughout our integration planning processes. We are well-prepared to integrate our two companies.”



The combined organization will operate more than 13,000 stores in 48 states and five Canadian provinces, with sales exceeding $19 billion annually and over 145,000 associates.