The popular Game of Thrones slogan was recently used to warn US residents about the dangers associated with extremely cold weather.

To help spread the word about the hazards of living with snow and ice, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued an eCard on its Twitter account with the popular slogan “Winter is coming.” Officials are hoping that folks will feel inspired to share helpful tips with friends and family about the hazards of chilly weather.

“Share our ‘Game Of Thrones’ eCards to help protect the realm from winter weather,” the CDC wrote on its emergency Twitter account. Check out the agency’s tweet in all its wintry glory below.

The card in question offers up some useful information to those who may have trouble dealing with this winter’s potentially dangerous weather. In addition to asking people to limit travel during periods of heavy snowfall, the CDC reminds folks to keep their cars filled with gas over the next few months.

The Game of Thrones eCard also advises folks to put together a “Family Communication Plan” should things get crazy this winter. The CDC also suggests keeping a stockpile of food, water, and blankets in case heavy snowfall prevents people from venturing outdoors. Snow shovels and properly maintained heating equipment are also recommended.

If blankets of ice and mountains of snow prevent people from heading outside this winter, the folks over at HBO are probably hoping they don’t spend their free time downloading countless Game of Thrones episodes from torrent sites. The series was once again the most popular TV show with pirates over the course of 2013.

According to TorrentFreak, the Game of Thrones season three finale was reportedly snatched around 5.9 million times since arriving online. However, Time Warner CEO Jeff Bewkes seems to think all of these downloads are more of a compliment than anything else.

“We’ve been dealing with this for 20, 30 years—people sharing subs, running wires down the backs of apartment buildings. Our experience is that it leads to more paying subs. I think you’re right that Game of Thrones is the most pirated show in the world,” he said. “That’s better than an Emmy,” Bewkes explained.

Check out the CDC’s recent eCard tweet below.



Share our @GameOfThrones eCards to help protect the realm from #winter weather. English http://t.co/Lr2mKWydRu; Spanish… — CDC Emergency (@CDCemergency) December 31, 2013

Once the ice and snow has come and gone, new episodes of Game of Thrones are expected to return. The season premiere is presently set for this spring.