'So satisfying to see people change their behavior'

Rowan Hussein, Net Zero Co-President and and Fairview High School Senior, describes the 5 new water bottle refilling fountains at the high school in Boulder during a ceremony and tour held Wednesday. ( Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer )

Students in Fairview High School's environmental club, Net Zero, are well versed in the environmental problems caused by plastics after successfully lobbying the Boulder City Council to pass a plastic bag fee.

Looking at other ways to make a difference, they landed on bottled water in disposable plastic bottles that students drink. To encourage students to switch to reusable water bottles, they campaigned to replace some of the school's oldest drinking fountains with new water bottle refilling stations.

Five refilling stations were installed at the school over winter break, using money from a grant and a contribution from the Fairview Parent Organization.

"It's so satisfying to see people change their behavior," said junior Abby Bloomfield and Net Zero's co-president.

Five other district schools also received grants to add refilling stations this year — Heatherwood Elementary, Ryan Elementary, Broomfield Heights Middle School, Broomfield High and Centaurus High. The grants were funded by Boulder Valley's Office of Sustainability, the Boulder Rotary Club, Eco-Cycle and the city of Boulder.

The stations cost about $900 each, while installation averages $500 to $700, depending on the location.

At Fairview, Net Zero members conducted a survey of more than 250 students about the installation of the refilling stations, scheduled and ran meetings with the administration, wrote three grant proposals, and scouted the school with maintenance staff to find good locations.

Once the stations were installed, students also led an educational campaign about plastics, contacted more than 1,000 kids through social media, put up posters, made announcements and participated in other outreach activities.

Net Zero members said that, with many students spending much of their day at the school because of sports and activities, making it easy for students to refill reusable bottles instead of buying bottled water was key.

Compared to water fountains, they said, the refill stations are faster, easier to use and cleaner.

Plastic bottles, club co-president Abby added, promote a "use-once-and-dispose mentality, which is incredibly dangerous in a world where resources are limited, and there is no planet B."

Junior Nancy Stone said more students have joined Net Zero after the club's successful filling station installation.

"Kids can write grants, manage projects, make an impact," she said. "And we can change the world."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa