--Text: Richard M.Hollingshead Jr., who opened the World's first Drive-in theater on the Admiral Wilson Blvd. in 1933. Photo by Al Schell/Gannett New Jersey (Photo: Digital Collections/IPTC)

Who doesn’t remember hiding under blankets in the back seat of the car or in the trunk in order to get into the drive-in for free? Or gazing at the stars while watching a movie on the big screen, double and triple features, and those goofy commercials advertising popcorn and candy? ★ People often wax poetic about their favorite drive-in theater, which happened to be the brainchild of Richard Hollingshead, a movie fan and sales manager at his father’s company, Whiz Auto Products in Camden.

Seventy-one years ago, on June 6, 1933, the first drive-in movie theater opened on Crescent Boulevard in Camden. Called the Park-In Theater, Hollingshead’s inspiration reportedly came from his mother’s inability to sit comfortably in traditional movie theater seats.

He experimented in the driveway of his home and mounted a 1928 Kodak projector on the hood of his car, pinning a screen to trees, and placing a radio behind the screen for sound. In May 1933 he received a patent for the concept and with an initial investment of $30,000, opened the first drive-in, or park-in, a month later.

The admission fee: 25 cents per car and 25 cents per person, with no group paying more than $1. Drive-ins popped up all over the country when his patent was overturned in 1949.

Sources:http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/first- drive-in-movie-theater-opens http://www.driveintheater.com/drivlist.htm

the number of drive-ins throughout the country in the late 1950s and 1960s.

the number of cars that could park at the now-defunct All-Weather Drive-In, Copiague, N.Y., which featured a kid’s playground and full-service restaurant on a 28-acre lot.

the number of drive-ins that still exist in the country today.

the number of drive-ins in New Jersey in 1967, the most in the state’s history.

the number of airplanes that could park in the last row of Ed Brown Jr.’s Fly-in and Drive-in in Wall. There was also room for 500 cars. He also operated the Fly-in and Drive-in #2 off Route 72 in Stafford Township.

the number of drive-ins in New Jersey in 1982.

the number of drive-ins in New Jersey today — the Delsea Drive-in located in Vineland, where admission is $10 for ages 12 and up and $5 for ages three to 11 for a double feature.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/SYFGPN