Doctor shortages strain patients' patience Pay incentives, demographic trends mean some medical specialists are in short supply





Photo: Kurhan - Fotolia Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Illustration by Fotolia; Times Union Illustration by Fotolia; Times Union Photo: Kurhan - Fotolia Image 2 of 2 Survey on needs for doctors. Survey on needs for doctors. Doctor shortages strain patients' patience 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

Sick of long wait times to see your doctor?

To get appointments with certain types of physicians, there's likely no relief coming. Just patience, patients.

Doctors who treat diabetes, neurologists and urologists are in short supply in the Capital Region, local physician recruiters said. Ditto for almost any specialist who treats children exclusively.

Primary care doctors are increasingly becoming scarce, at a time when health reforms demand their increased participation to coordinate medical services and rein in costs.

And it's no different here than anywhere else in the country, local experts said.

The Healthcare Association of New York State found a critical shortage of doctors in hospitals statewide in 2012. A survey of hospitals and health systems statewide, excluding New York City, showed more than 1,200 physicians are needed, with almost a third of them being primary care doctors, according to HANYS, a Rensselaer-based trade association.

Local hospital recruiters would not go so far as to say that their organizations are lacking certain types of medical providers. In fact, the state has an ample supply of physicians overall, said Jean Moore, director of the Center for Health Workforce Studies at the School of Public Health at the University at Albany. But there are areas of "maldistribution," Moore and local hospital recruiters said — places where supply (doctors) and demand (patients) don't match up.

More Information Who's missing? A 2012 survey of hospitals and health systems statewide, excluding New York City, found a need for the following number of doctors in these specialty fields (Capital Region physician recruiters reported somewhat different challenges): Primary care 374 Other 243 Internal medicine sub-specialists 133 Hospitalists 122 Emergency 94 OB/GYN 74 Surgical sub specialists 71 Psychiatry 62 Orthopedics 50 Source: Healthcare Association of New York State; also above

The shortage of primary care doctors has been recognized for years. Only about one-third of American doctors are primary care physicians, compared to two-thirds in many European countries. Health-care observers around the nation have a simple explanation for that: specialists in the United States get paid a lot more than primary care providers.

But current health reforms, including parts of the federal Affordable Care Act, are meant to change the way medical services are paid for. Under the current system, patients are charged a fee for each service. That means while a surgeon will get paid to amputate a diabetic's foot, a primary care doctor often gets little to help a patient prevent diabetes, Moore said. Evolving payment arrangements seek to change that.

"We're trying to move toward a system that rewards good-quality care," Moore said.

Where doctors are scarce, medical practices are increasingly using physician assistants and nurse practitioners to provide primary care, under the supervision of a doctor.

Get used to seeing more of these providers when you go for a checkup or minor complaint, local experts said. About a quarter of the nearly 400 providers in St. Peter's Health Partners Medical Associates are PAs or NPs, said Don Martin, chief executive of the group practice.

"I would be shocked if five years from now, it's not 50 percent," Martin said.

Demographic trends are in part responsible for the shortage of specialists, local experts said. As the population ages, specialists like urologists and neurologists are in higher demand. In addition, many of the doctors are baby boomers themselves, and close to retirement age.

"It's a double whammy of demographics," said Richard P. Falivena, Saratoga Hospital's chief medical and physician integration officer.

In addition to growing demand among patients, neurologists are also increasingly needed by other specialists, as treatments require a team approach. Neurological complaints can be complex to sort out, taking other doctors "out of their comfort zones real quick," said Dr. Ferdinand Venditti, head of the Albany Medical Center Faculty Physicians group.

Also difficult to come by are specialists in children's conditions. They often don't earn much more than regular pediatricians, though their training takes longer and costs considerably more, local experts said.

At CapitalCare Medical Group's Latham office, it's a particular challenge to recruit developmental pediatricians, who treat premature babies and children with autism spectrum disorders, said Louis Snitkoff, CapitalCare's medical director.

"There are sometimes very long delays in our ability to accommodate patients," Snitkoff said.

Physician recruiters said the need for endocrinologists is due to one key factor: the soaring increase in diabetes around the country.

Because there is no national public health planning to push medical students into areas of need, local recruiters say they rely on aggressive salesmanship. As Martin noted, they compete for doctors against everyone in the nation.

"One thing that's always advantageous is when someone has a link to our area: They've gone to school here, they've had a family member," Venditti said. "We've worked that kind of angle very hard."

chughes@timesunion.com • 518-454-5417 • @hughesclaire