ALBANY — New Yorkers are givers, not takers.

The state gets only 91 cents in federal funding for every dollar it sends to Washington — one of just 11 states that give more than they get, state Controller Thomas DiNapoli said in a report released Tuesday.

That’s far less than the average $1.22 that the 50 states combined got back in 2013 for every $1 they sent to the feds, the report found.

New York ranked 46th overall in the federal taxes it generated compared to the amount of funding it received from Washington, the reports shows.

All told, New York provided $19.9 billion more in tax revenue than it received back, the report found.

REPUBLICAN LEADERS DRAW CRITICISM FOR REACHING LAST-MINUTE BUDGET DEAL WITH BARACK OBAMA

“A high-income state like New York generates more in federal taxes than other states, but we also have significant costs, and the continuing imbalance raises questions about equity for New Yorkers,” DiNapoli said.

Federal spending covers everything from Social Security income and veterans’ benefits to Medicare and Medicaid health coverage and food assistance.

The feds also provide $53.1 billion in grants to New York and its local governments, the report, which is fourth highest on a per capita basis among all states. Federal aid makes up about a third of the total state budget.

“The budget of the United States government plays a considerable role in the finances of New York State and its local governments, as well as in the daily live of New Yorkers,” the report says.

The $214 billion in taxes the state sent in 2013 to the federal government ranked third, behind California and Texas.

New York contributed $10,896 per capita in tax revenue to the federal budget — nearly a third more than the $8,319 national average. The state received about $9,885 per capita back.

It generated almost $120 billion in individual income taxes alone, which was 9.2% of the total for that tax collected by the federal government.

New York’s per capita individual income taxes of $6,099 were 47% higher than the national average of $4,139, ranking New York sixth in the nation. Connecticut was first at $8,479.

There is some good news. The state will benefit from some changes, notably a larger federal Medicaid reimbursement because of Obamacare, DiNapoli said.