Photo

Two reports published this month provide fresh evidence of the hard-to-justify high prices that many hospitals charge for common procedures. The prices drive up premiums for many privately insured patients and can be ruinously expensive for those who are uninsured or inadequately insured or who go to a hospital or doctor outside their insurance network.

A study published in the June issue of Health Affairs, a policy journal, found that the 50 hospitals with the highest prices in 2012, the latest data available, charged an average of 10 times what is allowed by Medicare, which was used as a baseline for cost. Although hospitals routinely complain that Medicare pays too little, the allowable charges under Medicare are what the government, after extensive analysis, considers the cost of the procedure plus a reasonable amount to invest in hospital improvements and keep up with medical inflation.

Of the 50 highest-charging hospitals, 49 were for-profit institutions, most of them operated by big chains like Community Health Systems and Hospital Corporation of America. Under the Affordable Care Act, nonprofit hospitals are required to provide charity care or discounts to low-income people but that mandate does not apply to for-profit hospitals.

Some for-profit hospitals offer discounts voluntarily, and several states have laws or regulations requiring all hospitals, including for-profit hospitals, to offer price discounts to eligible uninsured patients. No federal law regulates what hospitals can charge; only two states, Maryland and West Virginia, have such laws. The highest-charging hospitals were in 13 states, mostly in the south. Prices varied greatly depending on the specialty. Anesthesiology and diagnostic radiology had very high markups, nursery services were much lower.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The typical response from the hospitals is that their list prices are not relevant to most patients because they don’t pay the full price. The two big government insurance programs, Medicare and Medicaid, pay far less than the list prices; private insurers typically bargain for discounts. Even so, high list prices raise the ceiling from which discounts are negotiated and thus drive up premiums for many privately insured patients.

High prices will hit millions of people who will remain uninsured in coming years for one reason or another despite passage of the Affordable Care Act, according to the Health Affairs study. Patients with private insurance who receive care out-of-network don’t generally benefit from their insurer’s negotiated discounts may have to pay a high proportion of the full charges.

A second report, released on June 1 by the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, showed a similar pattern. For a major joint replacement, the most common reason for hospitalization, the average hospital charged more than $54,000 in 2013 while Medicare on average paid less than $15,000. In addition, the list prices that hospitals asked traditional Medicare patients to pay rose by more than 10 percent between 2011 and 2013, more than double the rate of inflation.

Market forces are often not powerful enough to restrain very high prices in areas where dominant hospitals and chains can pretty much charge what they please. The best remedy might be legislation, at the federal and state levels, to limit hospital prices that have no connection to the cost of delivering the services.