Councilors, staff review various structures to bring fast broadband internet to city for business and education

City Council Study Session The Loveland City Council will meet at 6:30 p.m. Tuesday at the Council Chambers, 501 E. Third St., to hear presentation from Colorado Department of Transportation on an interregional bus service or "Bustang" and to discuss the remodel of the fire and administration building to create a development center.

City officials discussed the possibility of bringing municipal broadband service, or citywide high speed internet to Loveland, at the City Council and staff retreat Saturday.

The structure of how the service would operate as well as whether it would be a city-owned and operated service or one developed by a public-private partnership, among other factors, will be part of future discussions on the topic.

Different types of broadband options include DSL (Digital Subscriber Line), cable modem, fiber, wireless and satellite, but the city is looking at a fiber platform to increase connectivity, which exceeds cable or DSL speeds.

Councilor Ralph Trenary said he has attended several state-wide meetings in the past four months where discussions took place about how important reliable and affordable broadband is to communities. Increasing community-owned broadband networks has also become a national focus of the federal government this year.

So Trenary and councilors John Fogle and Phil Farley set out to find out more, and with staff help, compiled information on what other communities have done and what different options exist.

Advertisement

Trenary said he was shocked when he found out this movement has been growing since 2009.

"It is important for us to not delay any more," he said.

Trenary said there is a wide spectrum of possibilities for the structure of the project, so he wants to explore them further and see what fits best for Loveland. These include the city encouraging the private sector to take on the role and serving as a "catalyst," providing some resources to the private sector without being in charge of the service as an "enabler," installing the infrastructure for government and schools as the private sector serves other customers, or becoming a retail service provider.

The last two options would require the city to put up the question of the city's involvement in Internet and telecommunication services up to a vote, as required by Colorado law.

If that were to happen, Fogle reminded councilors that providers would put up a fight as Comcast and other companies did in Longmont when they put it up for a vote, contributing thousands of dollars to campaign against its passing.

Although the city of Longmont began its work to provide a fiber optic network and advanced broadband since 1997, the law requiring a voter referendum was passed in 2005. The initiative failed the first time the city asked for voter approval in 2009 but passed in 2011.Voters also approved a more than $45 million bond in 2013 for the city to install infrastructure and service to residences and other buildings within city limits.

Fogle said it's not just large cities taking advantage of this idea but smaller ones as well because it's about being a catalyst for business and for education.

"There really is an untapped economic development benefit for the broadband. ... If we don't do something here ... our neighbors are going to leapfrog in front of us," he said.

A business developer at the retreat affirmed Fogle's comment, stating there's a possibility of a company looking to locate the manufacture of helicopters in Loveland at the airport next year and because the headquarters are in Switzerland, having a fiber optic line would be very beneficial.

Trenary said his vision and goal for Loveland is to provide data transmission speeds of 1 gigabit for everyone in Loveland — something he said is necessary for the school district, residents and to attract businesses to the city.

City Manager Bill Cahill said next steps include gathering more information for a study session, creating a work plan and if councilors decide to move the process along, putting up the initiative for a vote — even if the plan is not yet complete — to verify residents will allow the city to take a role in telecommunications and internet.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.