Radio station KMOK is far from OK. Of the three radios stations serving the Tulsa area in 1949, it ranks fourth in popularity.

Shows such as the “Cowpoke Comedy Cavalcade” and “The Tulsa Shadow” aren’t able to compete with this new-fangled invention called television that just started broadcasting in town.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

And now comes word that the station’s major sponsor is planning to move all its business to the new TV station.

That’s the set up for “ Tulsa! A Radio Christmas Spectacular,” being presented at the Tulsa PAC this weekend by Playhouse Tulsa.

As there were concerns that the show’s opening performance might be cancelled because of the weather (which it was), I attended the Wednesday night dress rehearsal.

There were still a few things about the show that needed tightening Wednesday. Some of the lighting cues that are meant to direct attention to different areas of the stage weren’t in sync, and the show’s pacing was uneven, almost sluggish in much of the first act. (problems that I have been told were addressed and corrected by Friday’s performance).

The script –– an original by Cody Daigle, the company’s writer in residence and author of the Shakespearean fantasia “William and Judith” and the adaptation of “Little Women” –– is resolutely old-fashioned, and in a good way.

It evokes the atmosphere of the 1940s neatly, and it shows that it is indeed possible to craft a comedy without digging into the gutter for material.

Instead, you have Kate, a starry-eyed intern (Grace Stump), who insists that the station can be saved with an over-the-top Christmas show, complete with a big-name guest star.

However, Kate's idea of a big name is Edith Montclair (Rebecca Ungerman), known as "Tulsa's Almost Famous Broadway Star" –– she's been cast in a lot of great shows, but never managed to make on to the stage.

And it doesn't help that Edith has a not-too-pleasant history with Barbara Tate (Janet Rutland), KMOK's leading actress.

The show's writer George (Denny Meredith-Orr) is routinely late turning in his scripts, such as "The Road to Okmulgee," a serial in which a family has taken more than two years to travel from Tulsa to the titular city.

So, when the day of the station-saving Christmas show arrives, nothing goes as it should.

Ungerman is excellent as the outsized persona of Edith Montclair, whether proclaiming the highlights of her alleged career or wallowing in the throes of stage fright. Ungerman also wrote the three songs in the show, the ballad "God, Please," the tongue-in-cheek "We're Not Friends" and the jaunty "When You Come Around Christmas Time."

Tony Schneider does a great job as Benny James, the over-worked actor at the station, who often find himself supplying the voices for an entire cast of characters. Samuel J. Hunt is appealingly geeky as the sound effects man Freddy, and Jennifer Lynn is may be a bit anachronistically sassy as the receptionist Carol, but she does it well.

Stump conveys Kate's wide-eyed optimism with enthusiasm and Rutland manages to maintain a knowing serenity, even when she has to give voice to some sort of sea monster.

Amy Neerman as the house musician Louanne nicely mimics the music performed by Suzy Meredith-Orr, while Allie Ray Righthouse's exaggerated nasal voice as the sponsor Vanette WoodWood is more annoying than comic.