Forward played in 67 games for CU the last two seasons

Former Colorado forward Dustin Thomas, left, announced Sunday on Twitter that he is transferring to Arkansas. Thomas has two seasons of eligibility remaining. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

Former Colorado basketball player Dustin Thomas announced Sunday on Twitter that he is transferring to Arkansas.

"Proud to announce that I'll be joining the Arkansas Razorbacks for the remainder of my college career! #GrindMode #Hogs," Thomas tweeted.

Thomas reportedly made an official visit to Arkansas this past weekend. Arkansas has yet to announce that Thomas is joining the team.

Last month, Thomas made the decision to leave CU after two seasons. The 6-foot-7 forward from Texarkana, Texas, appeared in 67 games over the past two seasons at CU, with 17 starts, averaging 4.0 points and 2.5 rebounds.

Thomas showed slight improvement as a sophomore, posting 4.4 points and 2.5 rebounds per game. He made 11 starts, most of those when junior Josh Scott was out with a back injury.

Thomas' field-goal, 3-point and free throw shooting percentages all improved this past year. He also made a dramatic improvement in his assist-to-turnover ratio, going from 0.39 assists per turnover as a freshman to 0.85 as a sophomore.

When CU announced Thomas' departure in March, head coach Tad Boyle said he believed the main reason was for more playing time and a position change.

"I think he wants to play a little bit more on the perimeter than we were willing to play him," Boyle said.

Boyle added: "He doesn't leave here with any ill will towards us, and we certainly have no ill will towards him. He feels like he's better suited to move on and we support him in that decision."

Advertisement

It's likely that Thomas will sit out the 2015-16 season per the NCAA transfer rule and then have two seasons of eligibility remaining. He should have a great opportunity to play in 2016-17, though.

Arkansas (27-9 this past season) lost four players off this past season's team and is slated to lose four seniors in 2016.

Thomas also reportedly visited Wyoming and Central Michigan.

Contact staff writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/BrianHowell33.