When Oak Lawn-based Heritage Auctions put the license plates from John Kennedy’s Dealey Plaza limousine on the auction blocks weeks ago, the bidding opened at $40,000. And for weeks, the number remained stuck there, right up until Saturday’s auction, suggesting, perhaps, that after years on a book shelf and in a drawer, the District of Columbia plates — yellow, with “GG-300″ stamped in black on each — weren’t as valuable as their owner imagined.

Related A grim keepsake: Heritage puts license plates from JFK's Dallas limousine on auction block

But then came Saturday and the first round of bidding, via the Internet. The price rose quickly, to $75,000. Then came the live round, at Heritage’s home office, where, historically, the crowds are small. And, again, the price tag skyrocketed until, finally, they were going, going, gone for $100,000 to a bidder who was in attendance and raised the winning paddle. (The plates actually went for around $80,000, but the auction house’s cut of give-or-take $20,000 is included in the final price.)

Heritage says the winner wishes to remain anonymous; Heritage spokesman Noah Fleisher will only identify their new owner as a “ardent Kennedy collector.” (Which means he’s not sure if it was Gordon Keith, though The Ticket co-host and Dallas Morning News columnist prefers his Kennedy keepsakes a bit larger.) Which means it’s now unclear what will happen to the plates, which had been returned to Dallas for the first time since the president was assassinated in Dealey Plaza on Nov. 22, 1963.

Before the auction they’d been in the trash, tossed by Secret Service agents following the Lincoln Continental’s return to the same Cincinnati, Ohio, coach-maker factory where the car received its presidential makeover in 1961. They were retrieved by Hess & Eisenhardt co-founder Willard C. Hess, who put them on a shelf between some books for decades.

After his death his daughter Jane Walker inherited license plates and put them in a drawer. If someone wanted to see them, she’d pull them out for a brief show and tell. She told The Dallas Morning News in October she decided to sell them only because “I woke up one morning and thought, ‘It’s time to get rid of these.’ People need to know they’re available and around. They’ll be lost to history if they’re not gotten rid of soon.”

And now they’re in the hands of a collector who paid a fortune for the plates.

The plates were sold on Nov. 7. Today, Nov. 8, marks the 55th anniversary of Kennedy’s election as president.