Colorado recently escaped legislation that would have cost thousands of jobs and struck a crippling blow to the energy industry in Colorado and nationwide.

Rep. Jared Polis — who represents four cities that declared moratoriums on fracking — originally backed two statewide anti-fracking ballot measures. I respect Polis’ decision to stand with his constituents.

The measures that Polis backed, however, would have been detrimental to Colorado.

One proposed measure would have required a 2,000-foot setback from occupied structures. That doesn’t sound like a huge increase to the 500-foot buffer already in place. However, increasing the radius to 2,000 feet would have increased the undrillable acreage around buildings from 18 acres to 288 acres.

As Protecting Colorado’s Environment, Economy and Energy Independence Spokeswoman Karen Crummy told the Los Angeles Times, if we were to pass the ballots, “There won’t be any place to really drill.”

My company directly employs more than 100 men and women in the state and indirectly employs approximately 500 more. We are one of thousands of services companies that would have been greatly affected, if not bankrupted, by the proposed regulations.

The energy revolution in Colorado — and the U.S. — happened seemingly overnight. The success of hydraulic fracturing has opened floodgates of previously unattainable oil and gas. This has also heralded big economic benefits for our state. For example, in 2012, the oil and gas industry contributed $29.6 billion into the state’s economy and supported more than 110,000 high-paying jobs. In 2013, Colorado’s unemployment rate fell to 6.1 percent, the lowest since December 2008.

Consider the microcosm of economics that Canary supports: In Sterling, Colorado, we purchased an otherwise abandoned bank building and transformed it into our accounting office. All of our truck maintenance is done in Colorado, meaning that we hire mechanics and purchase parts locally.

Our employees depend on the money generated by oil and gas. Their schools are substantially funded by oil and gas tax revenue. Our employees’ income allows them to support local businesses and pay their children’s Little League fees. They’re able to support charities and nonprofits, following the example of Canary and many of the other oil and gas businesses in this state.

Our workers, like those who supported the proposed ballot measures, live in Colorado, breathe the Coloradan air, enjoy the Coloradan scenery, and drink the Coloradan water. I can assure you, they have no desire to see the stunning beauty of Colorado destroyed.

They cannot and should not have to vote on all-or-none measures that would force them to choose their jobs over their environment. Thankfully, now that Polis has reached an agreement with his primary opponent on fracking legislation, they won’t have to.

The compromise reached by Polis, Gov. John Hickenlooper and industry leaders will enable our state to take a more thoughtful, less reactive, collaborative approach to concerns over fracking. The task force will bring all parties together to develop recommendations that ensure we can continue to provide energy for our state and nation responsibly and with care for our environment.

I applaud the recent actions of Polis and Hickenlooper, which will preserve our company’s ability to maintain operations in Colorado, protect jobs and enable us to continue giving back to the community where we live.

Dan K. Eberhart is chief executive officer of Canary, LLC, a national comprehensive drilling and production services provider based in Denver.