Walmart’s steely-cold decision to cut off health benefits for 30,000 part-time employees puts the megaretailer on the cutting edge of an ugly phenomenon in the American economy:

Major corporations are driving so hard to cut costs for competitive advantage that they’re offering bottom-of-the-barrel pay and benefits — then relying on taxpayers to pick up the slack.

It’s a race to the bottom that cries out for government intervention — starting with a substantial increase in the minimum wage.

Walmart had been in the practice of offering health coverage to part-timers working as few as 24 hours a week — knowing many would take a pass rather than chip in for the premium out of their near-minimum-wage paychecks.

But when larger-than-expected numbers started signing up — possibly driven by the individual mandate in President Obama’s health reforms — the company decided its package was too generous and cut off workers below 30 hours a week.

In making that choice, Walmart was fully aware that many of those workers will now seek coverage via Obamacare. Some, in fact, might save money thanks to the generous tax credits the law provides for lower-income families.

In effect, Walmart is using government anti-poverty programs to subsidize its stinginess and boost its bottom line. And it’s hardly alone.

A study by the University of California at Berkeley’s Labor Center found that 52% of the families of fast-food workers are receiving some form of public benefit — ranging from food stamps to Medicaid. The estimated price tag: $7 billion.

McDonald’s formerly offered a “McResource” service that, among other things, helped employees apply for food stamps.

An analysis by Florida Rep. Alan Grayson found that, in many states, the largest group of Medicaid recipients are Walmart employees — who draw public benefits averaging $1,000 per worker.

These numbers prompted Bloomberg View columnist Barry Ritholtz to dub Walmart and McDonald’s “the two biggest welfare queens in America today.”

What enables this behavior are minimum wages that bear zero relation to what it costs to live in the 21st century.

New York’s current rate of $8 an hour — even if earned full time, year-round — equates to less than the poverty level for a family of three. The federal minimum of $7.25 is that much worse.

It would be one thing if such rates were paid primarily to teenagers in summer jobs. But in today’s economy, more and more adults are trying to support families with jobs in retail, fast food and other fields where keeping compensation as a low as possible has become a business model.

That being the sad reality, government must treat the minimum wage for what it really is — the income millions of Americans depend upon to live.

Lifting the floor to $10.10 an hour, as President Obama proposes, would be a start toward lifting those Americans out of poverty — and easing corporate America off the dole.