Topics: Bill O'Reilly, black lives matter, Editor's Picks, Fox News, Lena Dunham, Police, Race, Tarantino, Media News, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

As my colleague Andrew O’Hehir notes in his analysis of Quentin Tarantino’s movies in light of his avid support of the Black Lives Matter movement, Tarantino seems genuinely baffled at how police organizations have made him a focal point in their attempts to paint BLM as somehow pro-crime or anti-police.

Tarantino is a middle-aged white man. Reactionary forces seeking to stoke conservative resentment usually pick young women or people of color as targets, individuals to symbolize Everything Wrong With America Today. Take Bill O’Reilly’s constant hammering of Jay-Z and Beyoncé, for instance, or the right-wing obsession with Lena Dunham. Or, as NPR notes, the OG of celebrities that reactionaries love to tell to sit down and shut up: Jane Fonda. So yeah, it’s a little weird they’re going after a white man.

Why break form? Partially it’s because the movement Tarantino is promoting is aligned with people of color and, as O’Hehir notes, Tarantino himself shows a real fascination with black culture in his movies. Part of it is base opportunism—Tarantino labeled the killing of unarmed black people “murder,” giving pro-police forces a chance to argue that it should be taboo to call this particular destruction of life “murder.” (Good people really should shudder at how dehumanizing it is to black victims of police violence to deny that their deaths rise to the level of murder. Tarantino is 100 percent in the right here to use language that demands we treat black lives like they matter.) Because Tarantino is a known loudmouth, it’s easy to falsely claim he called all cops murderers and have thoughtless people believe your lies.

But I think it runs deeper than that. The police are going after Tarantino, even though he’s a white man, because they know he’s a perfect piñata for the Fox News crowd. No, he doesn’t provoke sexual anxieties like Lena Dunham or Jane Fonda, or racial anxieties, like the long string of rappers that O’Reilly likes to abuse do. But his movies, especially after Pulp Fiction, are post-modern, clever, and deeply, deeply anti-authoritarian. They are packed full of esoteric references and swift-moving action, but always feature people who reject oppression, usually violently, as the heroes.

In other words, if you’re a fan of Bill O’Reilly or Rush Limbaugh, Tarantino movies can simultaneously make you feel stupid while still conveying the sense of an anarchic opposition to oppressive authority. You can see how that might feel threatening to conservatives.

One of the most telling quotes from the police attacks on Tarantino comes from the president of the Philadelphia police union, John McNesby. “Mr. Tarantino has made a good living through his films, projecting into society at large violence and respect for criminals,” he whined. It’s a perfect culture war attack, implying that authority figures are being oppressed by effete, wealthy liberals while simultaneously fear-mongering about the supposed pro-crime messages in that scary pop culture kids these days (read: people who were teenagers in the ’90s) are into.

But do Tarantino’s movies glamorize crime? After Pulp Fiction, which portrays crime as a ridiculous endeavor full of ridiculous people, his movies did start to use violence to convey themes and ideas. His movies are very, very violent, no doubt, and both good guys and bad guys use a lot of violence. But if you actually bother to watch them, the idea that they movies are somehow glamorizing crime doesn’t make sense—unless you are a rigid authoritarian who flinches at any portrayal of oppressed people rising up against their oppressor.

Because if there is one theme to every single Tarantino movie post-Pulp Fiction, it is of the oppressed rising up against their oppressor. Jackie Brown escapes the misogynist gangsters who have her in their thrall. The Kill Bill movies, as blood-soaked as they are, are fundamentally a tale of a woman who will do anything to escape an abusive man who thinks he owns her. Inglourious Basterds is a movie about a French Jewish woman and a bunch of American Jewish soldiers deciding to kill Hitler. Django Unchained is basically the same story, but about slaves killing slave masters. Even Deathproof, a short film he did as part of the double-header Grindhouse, is about a bunch of women revolting against a sexually-inspired serial killer.