Greensburg clinic to open, offer free health care to Westmoreland residents

Income limits To be eligible for care at the Majesty Care Clinic, families must meet the following annual income guidelines: 1 person — $22,980 2 people — $31, 020 3 people — $39,060 4 people — $47,100 Source: Majesty Care Clinic Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

After two years of planning, a clinic that will offer free health care to about 25,000 Westmoreland County residents who can't afford medical insurance will open next week.

The Majesty Care Clinic will hold its grand opening Oct. 6 at 116 E. Pittsburgh St., Greensburg, to serve a segment of the population that is often overlooked, administrators said.

“They're making their rent, utilities and food,” said George Vollrath, the clinic's executive director. “There's no money left over to see a doctor.”

That can mean chronic diseases such as diabetes and hypertension go untreated, said Vollrath, 64, of Hempfield, a former principal at Hempfield Area High School and Wendover Middle School.

The clinic will offer family practice and chronic disease control to county residents ages 19 to 65 who don't have medical insurance and fall below 200 percent of the federal poverty level.

It will be a “real blessing” for people like Carol Smolka, who said she was laid off in November and can't afford to pay $100 for the blood testing strips she needs.

“I'm just treading water ... keeping the bills paid,” said Smolka, 55, of Greensburg. “I have no idea where my blood sugar is.”

“It's perfect timing with the economy the way it is,” said the Rev. Henry Taliercio, associate pastor at Word of Life Ministries in Hempfield and the clinic's founder.

Officials at other clinics said they've experienced no decrease in need, even with the advent next year of a federal health care program created by the Affordable Care Act. Under the controversial program, most people who can must obtain health coverage by 2014 or pay a fee.

“We've seen nothing but increases in need over the years,” said Marilyn Weaver, a retired NASA employee who serves as the volunteer executive director of the Wesley Church Health Center Inc. in Connellsville as her way of giving back.

“Obamacare will have no impact that we can see,” she said. “Our patients don't make enough to afford even that.”

The clinic has been serving Fayette and Westmoreland counties for 20 years.

In Pennsylvania, about 30,000 patients made 100,000 visits to the state's 50 free clinics last year, said Peggy Dator, executive director of the Free Clinic Association of Pennsylvania. That number isn't expected to decline next year.

“Our feeling now is there is still going to be uninsured ... a lot of people don't know (the Affordable Care Act program) is coming,” said Dator, who ran a free clinic in Doylestown for 17 years. “There will still be plenty of people who are going to need our help.”

Nationally, about 2 million people, most of them uninsured, visit the nation's 1,200 free clinics each year, according to the National Association of Free and Charitable Clinics, based in Alexandria, Va.

“It's a reflection that the economy is providing jobs but the quality of those jobs is lower,” said Barney Oursler, director of the Mon Valley Unemployed Committee. “The pay is lower and the benefits aren't there.”

That is fueling an increasing need for primary health care, he said.

The Majesty Care Clinic has enlisted 70 volunteers, including 25 physicians, through a largely word-of-mouth effort.

“People would call me and say, ‘I want to be part of this,' ” Vollrath said.

Most of its medical equipment was donated by Excela Health and came from Jeannette District Memorial Hospital, which closed in 2011. A few doctors also donated medical equipment.

“People really do care,” Taliercio said.

The clinic, funded through donations, might one day offer dental, vision and chiropractic care, Vollrath said.

Patients will be seen by appointment only, and no drugs will be kept on site.

A bike ride fundraiser begins at the clinic at noon Oct.6. An open house will run from 2 to 4 p.m.

For more information, email majestycareclinic@gmail.com.

Craig Smith is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-380-5646 or csmith@tribweb.com.