In the past several months, officials in Maricopa County’s correctional-health, detention and probation fields have capitalized on the broader eligibility standards to introduce health-care coverage to a community that often goes without. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

Gov. Jan Brewer's hallmark legislation, an expansion of the state's Medicaid program, has provided health-care coverage to thousands more Arizonans, many who are young, poor and childless.

The effects of the program have extended to the state's criminal-justice system, too.

In the past several months, officials in Maricopa County's correctional-health, detention and probation fields have capitalized on the broader eligibility standards to introduce health-care coverage to a community that often goes without.

"We knew it was a game-changer for our population," said Therese Wagner, deputy chief of assessment and development for the Adult Probation Department at Superior Court in Maricopa County. "Our average age of probationers is 32, and we have a lot of young males. The childless adults that couldn't get health-care coverage before, that's a huge chunk of our population."

Since January, when the expansion took effect, more than 200,000 residents have signed up for the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, the state's Medicaid program, according to data provided by AHCCCS.

The expanded program, enabled by the Affordable Care Act, now applies to people who earn up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level rather than the previous standard of 100 percent.

Adult Probation has partnered with Enroll America, and since February has been reaching out to clients in hopes of getting the uninsured into the Affordable Care Act's marketplace or enrolled in Medicaid.

Wagner said it's unclear how many probationers have actually signed up, but nearly 4,200 people have signed commitment cards to do so.

The initial effects of the Affordable Care Act and the Medicaid expansion are promising, she said.

Prior to the law taking effect on Jan. 1, only about 1 in 10 of the people who entered probation services reported that they had any form of health insurance.

The problem is aggravated by more troubling statistics, she said. About one-third of this population has a mental-health issue that needs to be addressed, more than half have a drug dependency and one in three are alcoholics.

The number of people self-reporting health insurance has been slowly increasing since the beginning of the year, Wagner said.

"We're getting better," she said. "The ACA is a huge piece, and the expansion of Medicaid in Arizona is a huge step in a positive direction."

For a populace disproportionately saddled with mental health, substance abuse and trauma-related issues, Wagner said, enlisting those within the criminal-justice system in a comprehensive health plan will not only enhance the lives of former inmates but could curb the cycle of incarceration.

Jails and prisons are legally obligated to foot the medical bill for their inmates. But for many of them, correctional health care was the only coverage to which they were entitled prior to the Medicaid expansion.

A vast majority of those booked into Maricopa County's jails aren't in great financial situations and come in without their own health insurance, said Deputy Chief Brian Lee of the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office.

"Certainly we provide a level of care — we get them on their medication, we're taking their vitals on a regular basis, they withdraw from drugs and alcohol," he said. "But a lot of times when they are released from our custody, that care stops."

Bad habits are prone to resurface during this interruption in coverage, Lee said. Off their medication, those with mental-health issues commit nuisance crimes, he said, and substance abusers may turn back to drugs and alcohol without access to continuous treatment.

Criminal-justice officials are hoping to close this gap. With the new laws in mind, a number of outreach initiatives are under way that aim to get ex-convicts and probationers enrolled in health care and out of the revolving door.

Inmates in the recent installment of Maricopa County jails' ALPHA re-entry program are meeting with representatives from Enroll America, who help inmates find services upon release, said Jennifer Hawkins, health-care integration administrator for Maricopa County. Informational brochures are also available in Tent City's medical clinic, she said, as well as Enroll America commitment cards.

Lee said the Sheriff's Office hopes to expand the educational services to Lower Buckeye and Fourth Avenue jails, the county's two release points.

"There are efforts under way to actually make physical contact as they're walking out the door," he said. "That's probably going to be our most effective push."

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1qku8mc