A Wichita mother is making one final push for an alternative treatment for her daughter who suffers from epileptic seizures.

Tracy Robles has been pleading with Kansas lawmakers for years to allow those with cancer or rare illnesses like her daughter to have medicine that's currently illegal in the state.

Sofie, 7, has a rare form of epilepsy called Dravet Syndrome. She often sleeps throughout the day after nights of violent seizures and other symptoms of her illness.

"She also does not speak, she has problems using her hands correctly, sleep problems, she's heat sensitive," Robles said.

It's been a painful journey for Robles, who watches her daughter struggle every day.

"It's hard, because I know that if I drive several hours to the west we could, I could get her the medicine that she needs, the strain that she needs and it would be in a medically supervised situation where I would have a doctor telling me to raise this and lower that," she said.

Robles has been one of the biggest cannabis oil advocates in Kansas after taking a trip to Colorado to see if it would help Sofie's condition.

"She was smiling, it was a huge difference," Robles said.

Robles is making one last effort to plead with Kansas lawmakers to change state law before packing their bags and moving west.

"If they would pass something that would allow her to use broad spectrum, varying levels of THC, it would make a huge difference for her," she said.

Robles says the problem is the Kansas House of Representatives recently passed a bill that would allow hemp oil for those with cancer, MS and other rare illnesses, but wouldn't provide the necessary amount of THC levels needed to make a difference for patients like Sofie.

"If they pass it, it be passing what we can already receive federally here," she said.

Robles hopes lawmakers hear Sofie's story and have a change of heart when it comes to providing her with the medicine that could change her life.

"My ultimate hope for her, is for her to live a comfortable life with as little seizures as possible so she can develop as much as possible," she said.

Robles says even though this cannabis oil doesn't produce a high, a vast majority of Kansas lawmakers are reluctant about her push. She says they are worried this would eventually lead to broader marijuana legalization.