New Creepy Uncle Sam video says young Americans are opting-out of Obamcare because they haven’t lost their “f**king minds”

Everyone’s favorite big government mascot is back.

In a new Creepy Uncle Sam ad, Generation Opportunity proudly points out that their successful campaign to get young Americans to “Opt-Out” of Obamacare is proof that young people haven’t lost their “f**king minds.”

“Was it the botched roll out, or was it because the website kept crashing?” the female narrator asks.”Why did our generation decide to opt-out of Obamcacare? Because we haven’t lost our f**king minds.”

Meanwhile, Creepy Uncle Sam can be seen hacking up Sam from the board game “Operation” in the background.

“Sorry, politicians, our healthcare is not a game,” the narrator concludes.

The new video comes on the heels of a Harvard Institute for Politics report Wednesday that showed the vast majority of young Americans without healthcare insurance don’t plan to sign up for Obamacare. Worse, just 18 percent of respondents think their healthcare options will get better in 2014 when Obamacare kicks in.

“We found that Millennials are unlikely to buy something, invest in something, to vote for something from people and from things they don’t necessarily trust and that’s a serious concern today,” Harvard Institute of Politics Polling Director John Della Volpe told reporters Wednesday morning.

The success of Generation Opportunity’s Opt-Out program, which boasts more than 14,000 promises from Millenials to ‘opt-out’ of Obamacare, in addition to the slow rate of youth enrollment in Obamacare put President Obama on the attack Wednesday afternoon.

At the administration’s first-ever White House Youth Summit, President Obama criticized Generation Opportunity’s campaign to undercut his signature law.

“Believe it or not, there are actually organizations that are out there working to convince young people not to get insurance,” President Obama told attendees. “Now think about that. That’s a really bizarre way to spend your money, to try to convince people not to get health insurance, not to get free preventive care, not to make sure that they’re able to survive an accident or an illness.”

In response, Generation Opportunity President Evan Feinburg invited Obama to attend one of its events.

“We’re happy to have that conversation so we can ask him why he wants Millennials to pay three times more for healthcare when there are better options available outside his expensive and creepy Obamacare exchanges,” Feinberg told Red Alert Politics.

Watch Generation Opportunity’s new video below: