CNN's Alisyn Camerota forwarded a liberal talking point about same-sex "marriage" on Monday's New Day as she interview former Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee. Camerota spotlighted polls trending towards support of the left-wing cause over recent years, and wondered, "So, in terms of your stance on gay marriage, do you feel as though you're on the wrong side of history?" [video below]

The anchor brought up Huckabee's new book, "God, Guns, Grits, and Gravy," and noted that the Republican indicates that "the Bible doesn't condone homosexuality, so neither do you. Is that accurate?" Huckabee pointed out that President Obama shared his view on marriage just over six years ago:

FMR. GOV. MIKE HUCKABEE, (R), ARKANSAS: Well, look, you know, here's the thing: my position on same-sex marriage is the same that the President had in 2008, when he said that he was a Christian and he believed that God was in the mix. Now, he changed his position three years later, and one has to ask, did he do it because it was politically expedient, or did he do it because the Bible had changed since his biblical view of 2008?

The guest continued by underlining the issue of the threat to Christians' religious liberty in the United States from the federal government: "There a lot of people who feel that they are under assault because of their Christian beliefs – whether it's the Little Sisters of the Poor, who are being challenged by the ObamaCare initiatives; whether it's Hobby Lobby...[which is] under threat to be shut down and fined millions of dollars a day because they don't want to provide all twenty of the various birth control pill s even though they provide sixteen. That's the bigger issue, I think, that's facing America today."

Camerota followed up with her poll figures and her slanted "wrong side of history" question:

ALISYN CAMEROTA: Well – well, I mean – but Governor, let me show you some of the recent polls in terms of gay marriage, because so many people are interested in your take on this and what you would do as president. So, it shows that the country's feeling about it has morphed. From 2001, the people who opposed gay marriage was 57 percent of the country, versus 40 percent who – now, it's 40 percent. And people who support it in 2001 were 35 [percent]; and now, it's a majority, at 52 percent. So, in terms of your stance on gay marriage, do you feel as though you're on the wrong side of history? HUCKABEE: Well, when you say the wrong side of history, I mean, let's just be reminded that there's been a relatively – and I mean a very relative, brief history of same-sex marriage. The overwhelming history is the natural law marriage – biblical marriage. So, I don't think there's a side of history that's overwhelming at this point. People have their opinions- CAMEROTA: Well, it's a the trend line. I mean- HUCKABEE: I think the next presidential election- CAMEROTA: Yeah- HUCKABEE: Well – but let me just say, Alisyn: I think the next presidential election is not going to center on a view of same-sex marriage. It's going to come down to who has a plan to make sure that the stagnant wages for the bottom 90 percent of America – for the past 40 years – will be reversed, and we'll start seeing families earning money again. I don't care whether people are straight or gay. They want to be able to know that they have a real chance to live the American dream, which they can't as long as the economy (sic) keeps its boot on their face.

This isn't the first time that the liberal network has used the "wrong side of history" phrase. Back in March 2013, anchor Carol Costello asked Austin Nimocks of the conservative Alliance Defense Fund the same question that Camerota asked Huckabee during a segment on California's Proposition 8.