Grassroots Commentary Obama: The Impossible Imposter

Amidst Obama’s dismal poll numbers some in the media had an epiphany: it’s impossible to be a successful modern president. They’re right!

It’s impossible to impeach yourself, but Obama has employed contorted sophistry to appear imperiled and gin up his base. Indeed, Democrats talk about impeachment 20 times – twenty – more often than Republicans.

It’s impossible to be the most transparent presidency in history when 47 inspectors general sign a letter to congressional oversight leaders saying the Justice Department, the Peace Corps and the Chemical Safety Board have withheld information on the basis that it was privileged.

No one begrudges our president a vacation, but it’s impossible to play so many rounds of golf, as the world is alight in conflict, without slip sliding away. Sure, Eisenhower, as Supreme Commander allied forces, played a bit of golf in WWII, but did anyone doubt his tenacity to stomp the Nazis into oblivion? Obama revels in the perks of office, exclaiming, “That’s the good thing about being president, I can do whatever I want,” but does not embrace the work. That’s partly why even his liberal media allies are starting to wonder if he has checked out altogether.

Consider that within an hour of condemning ISIS for beheading an American Journalist, Obama was teeing it up with NBA player Alonzo Mourning. Contrast that to the chiseled determination of the British PM who abruptly ended his vacation to deal with the implications of the evil ISIS perpetrator being British. I stand corrected – he wasn’t truly pip-pip British, though he had the accent.

Doctrinaire liberals were eager to consign George W. Bush to the lair of worst presidents ever. But Obama may be the most impossible president; incorrigibly aloof even from traditional allies, he’s the impossible imposter.

Every major piece of social legislation, including the Social Security Act of 1935, has had some bi-partisan support – until the impossible imposter forced through Obamacare. Obama may whine about duly elected representatives of “the people’s House,” but it’s impossible to engender engagement when foisting impossible legislation upon a body he publicly derides. I guess community organizers can squeak loudly, speak pretty, but are bleak. They’re prone to provocation and agitation, which may be why the White House values Al Sharpton’s counsel.

Government by executive action is nigh on impossible in our political system. Even the politically demarcated SCOTUS unanimously ruled that Obama’s shenanigans, such as recess appointments to the NLRB, are unconstitutional. Go figure, Ginsburg and Alito on the same side – 9-0! While SCOTUS remains an independent, co-equal branch of gov’t, it will be impossible for imposters to subvert our Constitution without being laid bare.

It’s inconceivable for a Democrat administration to spurn the unrequited support of Labor unions. Their agendas are entangled in a self-perpetuating cycle – union fees go to support pandering Democrat candidates who then push legislation to proliferate unions. But just a few days ago the head of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (ILEW) said that the EPA’s plan to reduce carbon dioxide emissions will “have a dramatic impact on the American economy but only a minimal effect on global carbon emissions.”

Unions are also distraught over Obama’s acquiescence to extreme environmentalists who oppose job creating projects like Keystone XL pipeline; and they’re disquieted by Obamacare, from which they are seeking exemptions, especially from taxes on Cadillac plans. It seemed impossible given big labor’s unerring efforts to help Democrats jam Obamacare through, but now their slobbering adoration rescinds.

Foreign policy that “leads from behind” is oxymoronic, and impossibly pathetic in a world where power vacuums are a voracious vortex sucking in vicious tyrants and terrorists. Security threats require consistent policy and rapid response plans; they are not manageable from behind irresolute allies. But we shouldn’t be surprised, the imposter who grew up on the periphery of America instinctively bows to dubious characters abroad while downplaying our salubrious ideals. For the sake of humanity, for all the souls yearning to breathe free, now is the time to project American exceptionalism.

For Obama and his media minions, success is often rooted in egalitarianism. Perhaps a noble value in theory, but consigning everyone to mediocrity in reality. Their world view skews from good ol' fashioned American optimism. Their bias is contrary to the zeitgeist of an exceptional America, where traits like hard work, courage and perseverance are riveting. Where inspiration is welcome, for sure, but trumped by perspiration in the expectation that you, not the grim tax reaper, will reap most of the benefits of your labor.

Even with a complicit media, it’s simply impossible to persuade dynamic, innovative, risk-taking Americans that they didn’t build their businesses, to invoke a revealing Obama attitude. It’s impossible to ensure equality of outcomes when Americans still value equality of opportunity based on meritocracy. We appreciate a helping hand, occasionally, but most of us are too proud and hard-working to succumb to a culture of stupefying dependency. And most of us favor a work requirement as a condition for receiving welfare.

In a vast bureaucracy it may be impossible to control every overzealous bureaucrat with a wayward agenda, but it is possible to convey respect for the rule of law. Curiously, Obama has repeatedly claimed that he first learned about various scandals in the media, yet he hinted hypocritical hubris when dissing the media at a recent fundraiser: “Whatever they’re reporting on I usually know about." Except the scandals, that is.

With so many smidgens of evidence congealing into a preponderance of impropriety, it’s impossible to claim that every single scandal is conjured by political foes. Over 2 dozen and counting … in a corrupt, ideological administration. They’re all phony? That’s phooey. For example, the odds of 7 hard drives failing at the IRS within one month are about 1 in over 78 billion. There’s a prevailing sense of corruption not seen since the Nixon administration; that’s a big reason that trust in Federal government is so fragile.

It’s well documented that under Obama’s policies we’ve had the slowest economic recovery since… well, ever. That’s because it’s impossible to rapidly grow the economy when government pursues bizarre efforts to actually increase energy prices; when it favors central-style planning with burdensome regulations and red tape; when it chooses winners that the marketplace deems losers; when it punitively sues banks; and when it takes a health-care system admired around the world and puts the government in charge of an ill-fated overhaul, rather than actually tweak improvements.

Yes, I guess Obama’s remaining apologists in the media get the gist – it’s impossible to be a successful modern day president when the incumbent is a community-organizing imposter.