Stumbling onto a much-needed app

One day last December, the snow had melted and Violet Alexandre, new to Boulder from Philadelphia, decided to go on a run. With her then-11-month-old son in his running stroller, she started along the Boulder Creek Path when what she calls a pivotal moment occurred: she slipped on black ice and fell, and her son almost fell in the creek.

When Violet and their son arrived at home and she explained what happened, one of husband Sharif Alexandre's first thoughts was, there must be an app for situations like these.

Upon searching, the app that they were looking for didn't exist. The running apps did not offer panic alerts and the apps with alerts did not amount to much more than "glorified panic buttons," Sharif Alexandre said. With his background in software development, they decided to build their own.

RunSafe offers standard fitness tracking and panic button app functions as well as a community watch feature that allows users to alert future runners of possible dangers on a path, and a premium virtual buddy feature that notifies select contacts when users start and finish a run, as well as when a runner is gone longer than expected and allows them to track the run in real time.

While the app is named RunSafe and was developed after a running accident, it can be used for other activities, including hiking, cycling and rowing.

The app was intended only for Violet's use but members of her running club started asking about it and the duo realized people were interested in their app. Violet had left a job in marketing to raise their son and the response to RunSafe sent her back into marketing mode, leading to a current partnership with businesses across the country.

Customers at the natural nail bar and spa jlounge at 3003 Walnut St., and any of the four Boulder Running Company locations can receive a free lifetime subscription to the app, valued at $50/year, throughout the end of the year.

Customers can sign up through the stores' personalized URLs or by picking up a gift card at locations that has the link as well as a QR code and an option to get a download by texting a store-specific number printed on the cards.

"We try to partner with local businesses and women-owned businesses," said jlounge co-founder Julie Perington. "It's always good to support clients that have been good customers and have businesses and charitable organizations."

Running Specialty Group, which owns Boulder Running Company, declined to comment for this story.

RunSafe has also partnered with 70 running specialty stores nationwide that are members of The Independent Running Retailers Association with the same promotion to celebrate November's National Running Safety Month.

The app launched on Apple's App Store and Google's Play Store in mid-October and has already amassed almost 7,500 users, Sharif Alexandre said. A Windows Phone app will be rolled out in a future update.

The success of the IRRA and local business partnerships combined with the positive feedback — the app currently has a five-star rating on the App Store — have forced the pair to think about where the project is headed.

"We are looking at what direction to take it," Violet Alexandre said. "Maybe enter an accelerator or look for an angel investor; we can't bootstrap forever on our own. Between an unpaid intern and the two of us, it's more than full-time for that much."

Whatever they decide to do, Violet says their next steps are clear: growing the user base, improving the app and finding investment dollars.

Stephen Autar: 303-473-1109, autars@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/stephenautar