.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

The Human Services Division and New Mexico legislators are cutting reimbursement to Medicaid doctors and hospitals for the third time in a row, citing decreased revenue from our weakened economy and increased Medicaid costs (our Medicaid enrollment has doubled due to the Affordable Care Act).

But across the board fee cuts for Medicaid will cause irreparable harm and is the wrong solution to help balance our budget.

I’m not going to argue with the fact that Medicaid costs are rising quickly. But there is an incredible amount of waste in the system.

As a pediatric ophthalmologist, I see children every day who were prescribed glasses, paid for by Medicaid, that are barely stronger than a car’s windshield.

Numerous studies have shown that childhood vision screening is much cheaper and just as effective as routine annual eye exams (mandated by New Mexico Medicaid).

And I’m just one specialty – if you add up the waste across other specialties the dollar amount is staggering!

But the waste does not stop with our medical system: New Mexico taxpayers must foot the bill for our Rail Runner train that loses $18 million every year.

So why is it so important to fund Medicaid?

The majority of New Mexican children are insured by Medicaid, supporting up to 90 percent of the children and families in some areas. Many medical practices, especially those in rural areas, rely heavily on Medicaid funding to stay afloat; as expenses rise practices will close and more doctors will leave the state.

Since health care is one of the largest industries in our state, this will have a big ripple effect – more unemployment, less gross-receipts tax collected and less people will want to move to our state.

In a nutshell, the short-term cuts will actually cost the state more in the long-term.

According to KidsCount, New Mexico is the second worst state in the nation for a child to live based on economic well-being, education, health and family. Medicaid cuts will create even more misery.

We already have a severe doctor shortage in nearly every specialty – currently there are no pediatric rheumatologists in New Mexico, so families must travel to Denver or Phoenix for care.

Doctor recruitment to New Mexico has always been challenging; now it will be even harder. What good is Medicaid insurance if there are no doctors to take care of our children?

The ones who will suffer the most are the ones who can’t vote – our children. New Mexico children have a tough life already, and these cuts send a clear message to New Mexico families: “Your children do not matter.”

The only way this will change is if a large number of citizens contact the N.M. Human Services Division, state legislators and Gov. Susana Martinez to tell them to fully fund Medicaid.