Eight hospitals from Roanoke to Tazewell County will see their Medicare payments docked this fiscal year under a federal program that penalizes hospitals for having too many readmissions of certain patients.

Although the penalties are relatively small — ranging from 0.26 percent of Medicare reimbursements at Carilion Franklin Memorial Hospital to 2.85 percent at LewisGale Hospital Alleghany — they have been increasing steadily over the past three years.

The cuts are part of a program, launched in 2012 as part of the Affordable Care Act, that prods health care systems to do a better job of ensuring that the patients they admit for certain kinds of ailments don’t wind up back in the hospital within 30 days.

How a hospital compares to the national readmission rate, once risk factors are taken into account, determines whether it will face a reduction in payments from Medicare, the government insurance program that covers senior citizens.

For Carilion Clinic, the reductions will add up to about $650,000 this fiscal year, spokesman Eric Earnhart said. That’s on top of an estimated $446,000 the Roanoke-based health care system lost during the first two years of the program.

When the program began, the maximum penalty was 1 percent of federal funding that hospitals receive for all Medicare patients. Starting with the current fiscal year that began Oct. 1, and continuing in the years after that, the maximum penalty will be 3 percent.

Other changes to the program are tightening the financial squeeze on hospitals.

Previously, the government tracked Medicare patients with heart failure, heart attacks and pneumonia in calculating the penalties. This year, patients getting hip and knee replacements and those with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease have been added to the mix.

Other measures will likely be included in the future, according to the American Hospital Association, which calls the program “deeply flawed.”

At Carilion, the larger penalty this year was the result of the higher maximum percentage cut of Medicare payments, combined with a slight increase in readmission rates from July 2010 to June 2013, the time period used in calculating the cuts.

“Currently, the readmission numbers for the hospitals are decreasing,” Earnhart wrote in an email.

The payment reductions at Carilion hospitals this year were all less than 1 percent of their Medicare funding, while those at four hospitals run by LewisGale Regional Health System ranged from 1.34 percent to 2.85 percent, according to an analysis of U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services data by Kaiser Health News, an affiliate of the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation.

Carilion hospitals in Lexington and Giles County are not subject to the penalties because they fall under a different Medicare reimbursement system as critical access hospitals, a designation that includes smaller and rural hospitals. Numbers for Carilion Roanoke Community Hospital are included with those from Carilion Roanoke Memorial Hospital.

At LewisGale, officials attributed a number of factors to an across-the-board increase in penalties from the year before.

The new maximum penalty of 3 percent and additional categories of health conditions measured were part of the reason, Dr. Richard Embrey, chief medical officer at LewisGale, said in a written statement. In addition, he said, “collectively our health system had a very slight increase in a readmission category at select hospitals.”

Readmissions were down among pneumonia patients at LewisGale Medical Center and those treated for heart attacks at the system’s Blacksburg and Pulaski hospitals. In other areas, “we are continuing to make progress by implementing new strategies and programs,” Embrey said.

New programs include adding nurse navigators to identify high-risk patients and improving the way patients are informed of what they need to do for a quick recovery once they leave the hospital.

LewisGale did not release dollar figures on the amount of penalties at its four hospitals.

At Carilion, officials say they are taking a number of steps to reduce readmissions. Among them: morning “huddles” held by both inpatient and outpatient treatment providers to discuss at-risk patients, flagging those patients in the health system’s electronic medical record system, and intense efforts after patients are released to have them follow up with their primary care physician or other providers.

At many hospitals, previous post-release efforts were limited to a few pages of written instructions that patients took home with them.

Substantial losses

Nationally, about one in five Medicare patients were readmitted to a hospital within 30 days of their initial stay in 2010, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. That cost the program $17.5 billion — a sum the government hopes to trim by making it financially advantageous for hospitals to find ways to prevent readmissions.

About 2,600 hospitals across the country are being penalized this fiscal year, for a total payment reduction of approximately $428 million, CMS spokesman Alper Ozinal said.

That’s about 400 more hospitals than were penalized last year, and the total dollar amount has nearly doubled.

Even as the penalties have increased, readmissions have actually gone down about 1 percentage point for Medicare patients treated for heart failure, heart attacks and pneumonia, according to Nancy Foster, vice president of quality and patient safety policy for the American Hospital Association.

Tougher penalties, more health conditions added to the formula and increasing multipliers used to calculate the payment reductions are all part of the reason for the increase.

While a 1 percent or

2 percent cut in Medicare payments may not sound like a lot for health care systems that reap billions in revenue, the loss is substantial when viewed in a larger context, Foster

said.

“Many hospitals are operating on razor-thin margins, or even operating on a deficit,” she said. Medicare is one of the largest sources of funds for hospitals, and the total reductions they face are closer to 10 percent when other quality-enhancement programs are taken into account, the hospital association contends.

And in Virginia, which has opted not to expand its Medicaid program as called for by the Affordable Care Act, there are even more cuts for hospitals to absorb.

Carilion, for example, is likely to get about

$20 million less in other forms of Medicare funding next year — a loss that was expected to be largely offset by more Medicaid payments for indigent patients the health care system has been treating for free or at discounted rates through its charity care program.

When Virginia decided not to expand Medicaid, as it was allowed to do by a U.S. Supreme Court ruling that came down after the Affordable Care Act was passed, hospitals were left in a pinch.

In the view of the American Hospital Association, Medicare’s program to reduce readmissions is “deeply flawed.”

For one thing, the association says, patients readmitted within 30 days for reasons unrelated to their first hospital stay — a pneumonia patient who goes back to the hospital with a broken hip, for example — are counted against the hospital.

Another concern is that the program unfairly punishes hospitals that treat the largest number of low-income patients. Those patients are more likely to be readmitted because they often live in communities where there’s less access to pharmacies, transportation and other services needed for a speedy recovery.

“We are gravely concerned that the program has a disproportionate effect on the hospitals seeing the most vulnerable patients in the country,” Foster said.

But not everyone is convinced that all hospitals are in dire financial straits.

A recent study by the Thomas Jefferson Institute for Public Policy, an organization that backs free markets and limited government, found that the finances of Virginia hospitals “are in pretty good shape overall.”

“The hospitals may ‘want’ to have more Medicaid dollars roll in, but do they really ‘need’ those taxpayer funds?” Institute President Michael Thompson wrote in an email.

“The figures in this new report certainly question the hospitals’ call for financial help.”