Maybe the people of the world are on to something when it comes to the bogus man-caused climate change meme pushed by the United Nations. And maybe the UN, which says it represents the voice of the world, should take notice. After all, the UN’s own poll shows that the people don’t care about “climate change,” and for good reasons that don’t comport with the UN’s aims.

Via a Watts Up With That post by Willis Eschenbach comes word of a recent poll released by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) gauging what the people of the world are most concerned about.

The poll — answered by millions — asked the world about its most vital concerns. Among the choices were “a good eduction,” “better healthcare,” “access to clean water,” and “protection against crime and violence.” The survey’s 16 questions even asked how important “freedom from discrimination and persecution” was to their lives, as well as “political freedoms.” Those last two are pretty vital to anyone in the world who yearns for a tolerable quality of life.

The survey also asked how important “action taken on climate change” was to their lives and outlook on the world. That last bit came in dead last.

As Willis writes at WUWT:

The revealed truth is that of the sixteen choices given to people regarding what they think are the important issues in their lives, climate change is dead last. Not only that, but in every sub-category, by age, by sex, by education, by country grouping, it’s right down at the bottom of the list. NOBODY thinks it’s important. Now, people are always saying how the US is some kind of outlier in this regard, because polls in the US always put climate change down at the bottom, whereas polls in Europe generally rate it somewhat higher. But this is a global poll, with people chiming in from all over the planet. The top fifteen countries, in order of the number of people voting, were Mexico, Nigeria, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Yemen, Philippines, Thailand, Cameroon, United States, Ghana, Rwanda, Brazil, Jordan, and Morocco … so this appears to be truly representative of the world, which is mostly non-industrialized nations. So the next time someone tries to claim that climate change is “the most important challenge facing the world” … point them to the website of the study, and gently inform them that the rest of the world doesn’t buy that kind of alarmist hogwash for one minute. People are not as stupid as their leaders think, folks know what’s important and what’s trivial in their lives, and trying to control the climate is definitely in the latter group.

This raises the question of “why”? Why, if global warming is the least-important factor in the lives of the people of the world, do the leaders of the world put curing “climate change” at the top of their priority list? Maybe it’s because the United Nations has proven it can’t organize the world to competently address healthcare, or equality between men and women, or better transport and roads, or better job opportunities. You know, the kind of stuff that industrialized societies handle pretty well.

Here’s the truth: The reason why the United Nations and the world’s governments focus on fighting climate change is because that mission gives them license to control everything about the economy of every state in the world. When you control the economy of a state, you better control its people — and state control is the inverse of individual liberty. In short, the world’s leaders focus on what no actual people care about — climate change — as a pretense to usurp your freedom.

Everyone who cherishes his or her liberty cannot continue to be passive about the question of “man-caused climate change.” That notion is a myth, and you must say so a publicly and often as possible. Humans are not causing a climate crisis that warrants our economy and our lives managed by our “betters.”

Share with your friends the videos from The Heartland Institute’s nine International Conferences on Climate Change. Share the work of the Nongovernmental International Panel on Climate Change. Or, as an introduction, share the video below.