Topics: AlterNet, Donald Trump, Florida, Hillary Clinton, Ronald Reagan

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

President Obama repeatedly has said there’s no way Americans would elect Donald Trump as president. But Democrats don’t have to think back very far to dismaying GOP victories where they were left asking, ‘What happened?” There was George W. Bush in Ohio in 2004, in Florida in 2000 and Ronald Reagan in 1980.

Trump’s continuing path toward the 2016 GOP nomination has already confounded the pundits, political junkies and oft-quoted scholars. Before this last week where he won big in Florida, Illinois and North Carolina, The Nation’s William Greider wrote, “The Democratic Party could find itself obliterated by this election” and offered “a sequence of events I find plausible.” He started with Trump getting the nomination, Bernie Sanders retiring “gracefully so he will not be labeled a spoiler,” and then Trump doing something not seen in a long time: taking hard-right and hard-left positions.

“Then, in the fall campaign, Trump changes his style and launches a ferocious and substantive assault on [Hillary] Clinton, with devastating effect. He does this essentially by taking over Sanders economic agenda. He denounces HRC as a tool of wealthy plutocrats and speaks for working-class discontents, much as he has done in the primary season,” wrote Grieder. “Imagine a campaign that merges Bernie’s straight-talk values with traditional Republican values.”

Trump is already doing this. As he said after winning the Florida primary, his campaign started with two issues—trade and borders. The first, bad trade deals, is near and dear to progressives and labor activists—even if his statements aredated or incorrect; the second plays to the least tolerant right-wingers, xenophobes and white supremacists. But the larger point is there are many issues where Trump can posture and run to the left of Clinton or neutralize her—and Clinton, the likely nominee, is running a traditional campaign and can be blindsided.

To be sure, it’s not clear what Trump would do if elected, because so many of his “positions” are little more than sound bites. Still, here are six issues where he is mixing progressive or liberal Republican stances amid his authoritarian outbursts. That strange brew means that for the first time in decades Americans could be facing two candidates with progressive planks on many issues.

1. The Anti-Free Trader. On no other issue is Trump as closely paralleling Sanders as he is when slamming trade deals, and bragging that he, the great negotiator, would push American CEOs into keeping jobs here or bring them back. Last week, he singled out Carrier Air Conditioning, Ford and Eaton Corp. for moving manufacturing abroad. A week before, he boasted, “I’m going to get Apple to start making their computers and their iPhones on our land, not in China. How does it help us when they make it in China?” Suffice it to say that Trump is to the left of Clinton on trade deals, at least when it comes to sound bites.

2. Cutting America’s Military Budget. That sounds out of synch coming from Trump, who repeatedly has said that he wants to rebuild the military and never misses a chance to threaten ISIS. But according to reporters who have trailed him since last year, he has repeatedly called for cutting military spending by closing America’s overseas military bases. “Donald Trump could be the only presidential candidate talking sense about for the American military’s budget. That should scare everyone,” wrote Matthew Gault in a detailed piece for Reuters. “As Trump has pointed out many times, Washington can build and maintain an amazing military arsenal for a fraction of what it’s paying now. He’s also right about one of the causes of the bloated budget: expensive prestige weapons systems.”

It’s hard to imagine that Trump will be the “peace candidate” in the campaign, as a liberal strategist told The Nation’s Greider. But closing overseas bases would be a hard break from both Republican and Democratic Party orthodoxy, including under Obama, where the Pentagon budget keeps rising and temporary cuts—like sequestration—are seen as creating unnecessary crises. Here, too, Trump’s positioning could track to the left of Clinton.

And unlike Sanders, whose state has a F-35 fighter plane base, Trump has explicitly said that plane was a waste of money. “Like so many Trump plans, the specifics are hazy. But on this issue, he’s got the right idea,” wrote Gault for Reuters.

3. Rejecting Big Money Political Corruption. You can expect Trump will go after Clinton as a corrupt insider cashing in on her connections—no matter how many millions he, as the nominee, would end up raising for Republicans for the fall, or take from party’s coffers because presidential campaigns cost upwards of $1 billion. Trump has the higher moral ground, compared to Clinton—who hasn’t even had the guts to release the texts of speeches to Wall St. banks or return the speaking fees—because, as Trump touts, he’s been on the check-writing side of America’s corrupt but legal system of financing candidates for decades.

Trump’s stance here echoes Sanders. It barely matters that Clinton has said she would want to appoint Supreme Court justices who would overturn decisions like Citizens United, which created giant new legal loopholes for wealthy interests and individuals. Being the rich outsider forced to play along, not the political insider taking the checks, is in his favor—pushing Trump to the left of Clinton.