Topics: aol_on, Editor's Picks, isis, Islamic State, Terrorism, United States is scarier than Islamic State, Innovation News, News

Two years ago, Gen. Martin Dempsey said before a Senate committee, “I will personally attest to the fact that [the world is] more dangerous than it has ever been.” While there’s good reason to doubt that this claim is accurate, as Steven Pinker masterfully details in his “The Better Angels of Our Nature,” the fact is that there are many dark forces lingering in the world today, and modern technologies — from Twitter and YouTube to nuclear bombs and bioweapons —are empowering malicious actors like never before.

When I ponder the greatest threats to the United States, the first thing that comes to mind is Islamic terrorism. No doubt this is the case for most Americans. Since the early 1990s, religious terrorism, most notably driven by Muslim fanatics overseas, has emerged as a major source of violence. According to the Global Terrorism Index, religious terrorism is now the “main driver” of terrorism in the world. This is disconcerting because religiously motivated acts of violence tend to be both more lethal and indiscriminate than past forms of terrorism perpetrated by nationalists, anarchists and Marxists. In this sense, Dempsey is absolutely correct that our situation is more dangerous, even if statistics suggest an overall decline in violence.

This being said, when I consider the greatest threats to human civilization, it’s the United States that stands out above other potential risks. And I’m not the only one: According to a 2014 global survey, the world as a whole voted the United States to be the No. 1 threat to world peace “by a large margin.” Even some of our closest allies identified America as the most significant menace. This is an astonishing result that suggests that a reinterpretation of American exceptionalism may be in order: Perhaps we are exceptional after all, but not in the ways we’d like to think. The world is scared of us.

But why? Why does the world fear the United States more than countries like North Korea and Iran? The answer is that, as critics of the U.S. are quick to point out, many of the most significant conflicts of our age have been nontrivially caused, or exacerbated, by our own foolish actions. To justify this claim, we could go back decades to single out foreign policy blunders like overthrowing a democratic government in Iran in 1953, supporting Saddam during his worst WMD atrocities, and shooting down Iran Air flight 655 while it was in Iranian airspace — and then refusing to apologize.

But let’s start more recently with the 2003 U.S.-led preemptive invasion of Iraq, which resulted in at least 30,000 civilians deaths in the first two years, according to George W. Bush himself, because of an attack on the U.S. that killed slightly under 3,000 people. It’s virtually indisputable that this war seriously worsened the growing problem of Islamic terrorism by destabilizing the Middle East and convincing a whole generation of moderate Muslims to pick up a Kalashnikov and join the holy fight against the “Crusaders.” As the former deputy director of the CIA Michael Morell observes in his book “The Great War of Our Time,” the Iraq conflict only confirmed the very message that Osama bin Laden was pushing. In Morell’s words, “there is also no doubt that the Iraq War supported the al Qa’ida narrative and helped spread the group’s ideology.”

In addition, the Iraq War convinced a whole generation of Muslims — both Sunni and Shi’ite — that the end of the world is imminent, leading to a rise of apocalyptic fervor in the Middle East. As the Islamic scholar David Cook notes, it was “widely accepted” that the U.S.-led war fulfilled certain Islamic prophecies, and in fact a leading Shia militia in Iraq whose explicit aim was to expel the foreign invaders named itself the Mahdi Army after Islam’s end-of-days messianic figure, the Mahdi. A 2014 Reuters article even cites a Shi’ite fighter as saying that he became convinced that the end was nigh after the U.S. and Britain invaded Iraq. “That was the first sign,” he said, “and then everything else followed.”

The same cause-and-effect relationship between the Iraq debacle and the apocalyptic zeitgeist of the region can be found among the Sunnis. The early progenitor of the Islamic State, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, fomented apocalyptic anticipation by citing a grand battle — essentially Armageddon — prophesied to take place in the small Syrian town of Dabiq. In fact, each issue of the Islamic State’s online propaganda magazine, noncoincidentally named Dabiq, opens with the following declaration from al-Zarqawi: “The spark has been lit here in Iraq, and its heat will continue to intensify… until it burns the crusader armies in Dabiq.”

After al-Zarqawi’s death, the emphasis on eschatological activism was passed along to subsequent leaders, including Abu Ayyub al-Masri and Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the current caliph of the Islamic State. As Graeme Wood notes in his 2015 article “What ISIS Really Wants,” “During the last years of the U.S. occupation of Iraq, the Islamic State’s immediate founding fathers … saw signs of the end times everywhere. They were anticipating, within a year, the arrival of the Mahdi.” Today, the Islamic State still fantasizes aloud about the impending war in Dabiq, as well as numerous other prophesies that appear, in their eyes, to be coming true, such as 80 different nations teaming up to confront the Muslim forces. At present, the U.S.-led coalition against ISIS includes slightly more than 60 nations. So, do the math.

The unfortunate fact is that extremism breeds extremism, meaning that the de novo problem of terrorism created by the Iraq War is feeding-back to further strengthen and consolidate the political right’s power and appeal to voters in the U.S. This has manifested itself in proposals like killing the family members of ISIS and “bomb[ing] the sh*t out of them,” as Donald Trump so eloquently put it. Even more alarming, Trump recently suggested that we should ban all Muslims from entering the United States — an idea that even Dick Cheney said “goes against everything we stand for and believe in.” If such policies were to be enacted, they would, of course, only further empower the terrorists. As one of the leading experts on suicide terrorism, Robert Pape, observes, terrorist suicide attacks are largely a demand-driven rather than supply-limited phenomenon. Thus, unless we were to destroy the entire “hornet’s nest” with a flurry of nuclear weapons — an obviously immoral strategy (but see below!) — poking the “nest” would only agitate the “hornets” even more. Eliminate the demand and you mitigate terrorism.