Buy Photo Rep. Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin, is planning to run for re-election. (Photo: File / Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Embattled Tennessee lawmaker Jeremy Durham formally announced his intention to run for re-election on Friday.

Durham, R-Franklin, along with his wife, Jessica, filed his paperwork with the Williamson County Election Commission.

While making his announcement Durham stated his objective to make pushing back against the Affordable Care Act, fighting for the enforcement of the nation's immigration laws and "fiscal responsibility" keys to his campaign.

"Williamson County citizens realize they can count on me to uphold their constitutional conservative values each and every time on each and every issue regardless of outside pressure from establishment politicians or special interest groups," he said in the news release.

Durham added: “I will spend the next four months meeting with residents of District 65 to earn their votes and discuss ideas on how to best take their conservative voices to Nashville.”

The Franklin Republican's bid for re-election comes as Attorney General Herbert Slatery continues investigating Durham after House Speaker Beth Harwell formed a special legislative committee in light of a Tennessean investigation.

The investigation found three women who said they had received inappropriate text messages sent from Durham's cellphone. Durham has told The Tennessean he can't remember sending any such messages, and denies sexually harassing anyone.

Durham, who was first elected to the statehouse in 2012, resigned from his leadership position in the Tennessee House Republican Caucus hours after the investigation was published in January.

While several top Republicans, including Harwell and Tennessee Republican Party Chairman Ryan Haynes called for Durham to resign, he took a two-week hiatus from the statehouse and remained separated from the Republican caucus.

Gov. Bill Haslam has questioned Durham's ability to effectively represent his constituents.

Durham currently has $201,000 in his personal campaign committee fund and $2,000 in a political action committee that he can use for his re-election.

He is expected to face significant opposition. Aside from Durham, four Republicans and one Democrat have picked up nominating petitions to run for the seat to represent District 65. Republicans include former Franklin Mayor Tom Miller, Spring Hill attorney Shane K. McNeill, Franklin resident and retired Army Colonel Sam Whitson and Fairview farmer Stacey Givens. Communications specialist Holly McCall is the only Democrat to file so far.

Candidates have until next Thursday to return their qualifying papers. The election is in August.

Reach Melanie Balakit at 615-926-1638 and on Twitter @MelanieBalakit. Reach Joel Ebert at 615-772-1681 and on Twitter @joelebert29.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MIgdVU