Magazines in Jackson Heights, Queens. Sonja Sharp for The Wall Street Journal

Killol Butala can’t read the Telugu-language magazine sitting in front of him on the counter of Butala Emporium, and he can’t decipher most of the dozen other South Asian scripts gracing his newsstand in Queens.

But for the first time since he began following Indian politics more than 20 years ago, the Jackson Heights shopkeeper is confident they all say the same thing.

“People are very enthusiastic about it,” Mr. Butala, who came to America about 17 years ago, said of this weekend’s victory for the country’s longtime opposition, the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party and its popular leader Narendra Modi. “In my lifetime, I haven’t seen something like this.“

The staff at Patel Brothers Grocery just up the block on 74th Street were even more emphatic. The moment they read the election results, they hung a bright green sign over the outdoor produce section congratulating India’s next prime minister.

“This is a big victory of Indian democracy,” said manager Nikita Desai, 35. “People have a lot of hope in him.”

That hope is strongly tied to promises of economic reform and infrastructure improvements along the lines of what Akta Patel, 31, said she saw in her home state of Gujarat while Mr. Modi was chief minister there.

Magazines in Jackson Heights, Queens. Sonja Sharp for The Wall Street Journal

“I just came here two years ago so I’ve experienced it. The transportation, the roads, the highways—because of him there is good progress in Gujarat,” said Ms. Patel, who works at a clothing shop. “My friends, my family, everybody gave their votes to him.”

Others said they believe the Bharatiya Janata Party will act more aggressively than its predecessor, the Congress party, when it comes to relations with Pakistan and China.

But not everyone was celebrating in Queens. Nanik Pamnani, 72, an employee at clothing store India Sari Palace, said he was concerned about the Hindu nationalist party’s ability to work with India’s religious minorities, and practice diplomacy on increasingly complex world stage.

“The Congress was soft, they believed in dialogue,” he said. “These people, there’s no history about them, so it’s hard to say. I’m watching cautiously.”

What do you think of the election results? Tell The Wall Street Journal here.