It stands to reason that if Colorado’s legislature meant to include avalanches as an inherent skiing risk as part of the Colorado Ski Safety Act, it would have added it.

But lawmakers didn’t, although other risks are specified in detail, including weather, snow conditions, ice, hard-pack powder, corn snow, bare spots, forest growth, rocks, catwalks, snow-making or grooming equipment and a host of other potential problems skiers could encounter on the slopes.

But no avalanche.

The safety act was written to protect Colorado ski areas from excessive litigation, allowing them to operate without onerous liability insurance premiums.

It has been amended twice since 1979, but avalanches were never included in the act.

The Colorado Supreme Court is now looking closely at the statute, trying to discern the legislature’s intent, and held a hearing recently.

Ski operators argue that avalanches are implied in the statute because wording includes a description of the elements that make up an avalanche, specifically the phrase “snow conditions as they exist or may change,” “changing weather conditions,” and “variation in steepness in terrain.”

“An avalanche is precisely that — a changing snow condition (snow sliding downhill) that naturally occurs in Colorado’s mountains,” according to a brief filed by Colorado Ski Country USA.

The case involves a lawsuit filed by the widow of a 28-year-old man who died while skiing through the trees in Winter Park in 2012 when he was hit by an avalanche.

The widow believes the resort should have closed the run or at least warned skiers of the high probability of an avalanche in the area.

Ski resorts say that should be common knowledge and an inherent risk of skiing.

We disagree.

Resorts should have to inform skiers when avalanche risk is high, signs should be posted on problematic areas and, in extreme cases, runs should be closed.

Skiers can anticipate the other events listed in the law as inherent dangers, such as ice, rocks and changing conditions. But as Justice Nancy Rice asked, “Isn’t it qualitatively different when one goes to ski, you don’t expect to be caught in an avalanche?”

By all means, skiers should understand that hurtling down a snowy hill on waxed boards through icy, forested land will never be a safe activity.

But until the legislature says otherwise, those skiers should have some expectation that when they launch themselves onto a ski resort run — even in the trees — they won’t be unsuspectingly wiped out by an avalanche.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.