As of noon Wednesday, one year remains in President Barack Obama’s tenure in office. One year in which Americans will decide if it really happened.

Obama’s own place in history was assured the moment he was elected the first black president of this slavery-scarred nation. Lately he has been talking up the changes his administration wrought as historic and lastingly beneficial. To which voters’ response should be: We’ll be the judge of that.

Is the nation’s lurch to the left on many policies permanent or temporary?

Are achievements that Obama might see as worthy of being inscribed on Mount Rushmore really written in sand?

Will the 44th president’s victory on health care, his actions to combat climate change, his small advances on immigration and gun policy — even the Supreme Court’s legalization of gay marriage during Obama’s time in office — be leveled by the next political wave?

As Americans continue to argue loudly about the virtue of what Obama has done and tried to do, one fact is beyond debate: No president in memory has entered his eighth year in office with his legacy so in doubt.

The reason has less to do with Obama’s policies themselves than with the way they have been pushed through.

• With purely partisan assistance from a Congress then dominated by Obama’s fellow Democrats. Neither the administration’s major domestic victory, the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), nor its biggest foreign-policy triumph, the Iran nuclear accord, received a single Republican vote on Capitol Hill.

The now Republican-led Congress has voted to overturn Obamacare but can’t get it past the president’s veto. That could change if a Republican is elected president in November. GOP candidates also have threatened to cancel the Iran deal if elected.

• With executive orders that bypass Congress. The latest instance is Obama’s order this month to expand the number of gun sales subject to background checks. The bigger example is Obama’s 2014 executive action protecting from deportation millions of undocumented immigrants, mostly parents of U.S.-born children.

Both could be overturned by the next president. The immigration order already hangs in the balance, having been stalled by a Texas judge siding with a coalition of Republican governors. The U.S. Supreme Court said today it would take up the case.

Advertisement

• With head-spinning speed. Fundamental changes like those in laws governing health insurance and marriage didn’t come gradually, at the end of long, persuasive campaigns. Although their proponents see these shifts as overdue, the aggregated change came so fast that conservatives see them as artificial.

The result: Conservatives are fired up for the 2016 election as perhaps never before. They know electing a Republican president, with the chance for conservative appointments to the Supreme Court, could turn back the clock.

Obama knows this. His State of the Union address was a plea for voters to ratify his achievements by electing a Democrat in November.

Every election is in some ways a referendum on the last president. But rarely like this.

Obama’s 2008 campaign theme of “Hope and Change” has led to a presidency of change and hope — Obama’s hope that the change he has won isn’t undone a year from now.