Ochsner Health System is expanding its reach westward, entering into a partnership with Lafayette General Health, a system that includes six hospitals serving 10 parishes.

Ochsner's board on Monday morning (April 27) approved a 10-year partnership agreement with Lafayette General that will bring the Ochsner brand to a region of the state where it does not have a clinical presence. Lafayette General's board ratified the plan a week earlier, its president said.

Like similar arrangements between Ochsner and Slidell Memorial Hospital and St. Tammany Parish Hospital, the Lafayette partnership is not an acquisition or sale, the hospital leaders say. Though the terms of the agreement have not been made public by either entity, they say the arrangement is not financial in nature and will not change the leadership structure of either health system.





David Callecod, president of Lafayette General Health, said the system's leaders spent the past several months working toward the arrangement in an effort to increase patient access while also meeting the requirements of federal law that call for increased attention to hospital quality measures.

Lafayette General's hospitals will soon have access to neonatal and stroke specialists through Ochsner's telemedicine program, Callecod said. It will enable patients to consult with physicians remotely using technology.

Right now, Ochsner offers telemedicine services to patients in 41 locations and, according to Ochsner CEO and President Warner Thomas, last year provided 35,000 consults.

Lafayette General's hospitals will also be able to tap into the purchasing power available through Ochsner's larger system in a few select areas.

As part of the agreement, Lafayette General Health hospitals will join the Ochsner Health Network, which Thomas described as "an evolving multi-state network that will be made up of the highest quality organizations in each market."

"I think the most important thing here is the creation of a statewide network of like-minded hospitals that are focused on delivering the highest quality care at the lowest cost," Callecod said.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was designed to reward hospitals that meet certain standards on quality and safety measures as measured by Medicare data. Those measures include an evaluation of patient experience, an area where its flagship, Lafayette General Medical Center, has scored particularly well. It recently was one of only a handful of traditional acute care facilities to earn five out of five stars based on patient surveys.





Thomas said the partnership will enable his larger system will draw on Lafayette General's experience earning high patient satisfaction ratings. Callecod said his system will draw on Ochsner's knowledge base and track record achieving high marks on safety and quality standards.

"We know that in order to do well, we're going to have to be the highest quality with the highest patient satisfaction facility and you're going to have to do that at a lower cost than other facilities and other providers in your market," Callecod said. "We believe the best practice sharing, the access to certainly the knowledge base there, the fact that they've been in value-based payments for the last 27 years, that it will help Lafayette General Health rapidly move into the value arena."

Asked whether the arrangement could result in any staffing cuts, Thomas and Callecod said no.

Lafayette Health employes 3,500 people and manages hospitals serving 10 parishes, including Lafayette General Medical Center, Lafayette General Surgical Hospital, St. Martin Hospital, University Hospital & Clinics, Acadia General Hospital and Abrom Kaplan Memorial Hospital.

Ochsner has more than 15,000 employees, including 900 physicians.

At the end of the 10 year agreement, Callecod said, the two entities have the option of extending the relationship for another decade.

Thomas said Ochsner is working toward even more hospital partnerships that should be announced in coming months.

Rebecca Catalanello can be reached at rcatalanello@nola.com or 504.717.7701.