Topics: aol_on, Labor, tech, The Labor Movement, The Sharing Economy, uber, News, Politics News

The New York Times performed a public service over the weekend with the first two installments of a three-part series on the shady clauses in consumer and employment contracts that enable corporations to divert legal disputes into secret, extra-judicial arbitration panels. The corporation pays the arbitrators hearing the case, and the rulings, from what we can tell about this opaque process, favor the corporation, if only because an arbitrator siding with the people who do the hiring ensures them more work in the future.

It’s amazing that we’ve allowed corporations to build their own parallel legal system, rupturing the fundamental right of access to courts. “It’s in two amendments of the Bill of Rights,” said Sen. Al Franken, one of Congress’ leading critics of mandatory arbitration, on a conference call reacting to the Times series. “The Second Amendment is supposed to be important, but that’s one amendment. [Trial by jury] is really important, that’s in two amendments.” (It’s the Sixth and the Seventh, incidentally.)

Two partisan Supreme Court rulings, 2011’s AT&T Mobility v. Concepcion and 2013’s American Express v. Italian Colors, entrenched arbitration in the law, preventing even criminal lawsuits from proceeding and significantly limiting class action cases. As the Times points out, Chief Justice John Roberts, who participated in the majority in both cases, unsuccessfully tried to limit class actions as a private lawyer for Discover Bank. When in a position to make the decision by himself, Roberts capitalized, and consumers and workers have suffered ever since.

But a case out of California could upend this blockade of the justice system, and it’s perhaps fitting that the company involved routinely breaks the law as part of its business strategy. Uber, the ride-sharing app, not only may have gone too far in the way it treats its drivers; it could bring down the arbitration house of cards in the process.

Uber treats its 300,000 drivers as independent contractors, allowing it to avoid granting worker’s compensation, overtime pay and other relevant labor benefits. Low labor costs enable the company to undercut competitors and win business. If forced to actually follow the law, Uber is just another car service.

A non-trivial number of drivers are not happy with being the low-paid cog in the Uber business model, and have sued the company over misclassifying their employment status. The California Labor Commission awarded $4,152.20 in business expenses and back wages to driver Barbara Berwick in June. But Uber can handle one driver at a time; a class action incorporating all its drivers would be a fatal blow. And this September, U.S. District Court Judge Edward Chen ruled that drivers could form a class to litigate employee misclassification.

The critical question is how big that class will be. Like so many other companies, Uber included a clause in its standard employment contract, binding driver disputes to an arbitration process. However, its initial language was faulty. One part of the contract says a private arbitrator gets to rule on whether a particular case goes to arbitration, but another part gives that choice to a judge. Also, an opt-out clause allowed drivers to retain their right to sue, but it was hidden on the second-to-last page of the contract, and required drivers to hand-deliver a letter to Uber’s headquarters in San Francisco, or mail it overnight through a “nationally recognized overnight delivery service.”