Photo

Listening to the jazz singer Gabrielle Stravelli is like imbibing a potent cocktail whose flavor changes as you drain the glass. In the first couple of sips, the predominant taste is the sparkling wine that has drifted to the top, for Ms. Stravelli’s bright, rippling voice exudes a natural effervescence. Before long, it darkens, and the heady liquor underneath kicks in.

The first two songs — “While We’re Young” and “Happy Talk” — at Thursday’s opening night show at the Metropolitan Room conveyed an undiluted joy. The upbeat mood continued in a more romantic vein, with a “dream” medley (“Dream Dancing,” “I Had the Craziest Dream,” “I Can Dream, Can’t I?”) that evoked the dark ages of modesty, longing and sublimation in the dating arena.

Then the texture changed, as Ms. Stravelli, accompanied by an excellent trio — Joshua Richman on piano, Pat O’Leary on bass and Eric Halvorson on drums — unfurled new layers of her remarkable voice. As she dipped and swooped, twirling notes and phrases with a confidence and playfulness that recalled Ella Fitzgerald in her prime, Mr. Stravelli began interpreting lyrics with a ferocity that her vocal pyrotechnics accentuated, and the show’s theme emerged.

The character Ms. Stravelli created was a woman who chooses the wrong men, because the intoxicating charms of a sexy cad are too powerful to resist. Instead of masochistic self-pity, her attitude toward her preference was a smirking complicity, as if to say, “You and I both know that some pleasures are worth the pain.” Her amusing defense for her crowingly vindictive rendition of “Goody Goody” was her Sicilian temperament.

Ms. Stravelli moved confidently into classic soul music with the great Aretha Franklin tribute to sexual healing, “Do Right Woman, Do Right Man.” In the riveting summary number, “Runnin’ Back for More,” written by Ms. Stravelli with Mr. O’Leary and Jason Robinson, she tells her lying, cheating, stealing boyfriend, “I’m getting a bad education, and you’re my professor.”

The show, directed by the singer Marilyn Maye, received the kind of tumultuous ovation I haven’t seen at the Metropolitan Room since Ms. Maye’s initial appearances there more than five years ago.