Mountain View Presbyterian Church invites the community out to the church's annual Easter egg hunt

Youngsters make a mad dash for eggs at the start of an Easter egg hunt Saturday at Mountain View Presbyterian Church. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Nine-year-old Quinn Bell methodically filled her Easter egg basket with blue plastic eggs, plus a green one, a white one and one that was pink.

The Longmont girl collected the empty eggs in her favorite color, blue, after rushing to get her eggs — the limit was eight for the second-annual Community Easter Egg Hunt at Mountain View Presbyterian Church. The event featured two egg hunts, a petting zoo, a bounce house, cupcake walks and games such as duck races, sack hops and egg tosses.

"I love blue," Quinn said after being disappointing in her first run to get eggs, when she got only one. "They were hidden in harder places. They thought we were the tallest person alive."

Quinn didn't like that eggs were on top of the pillars and under a grate on the church grounds.

If you go What: Free Easter Sunday breakfast. When: 8:30-11:15 a.m. Sunday, April 5; celebration worship at 9 a.m. Where: Mountain View Presbyterian Church, 2500 N. Garfield Ave. More info: Visit www.mymvpc.com or call the church at 663-3810.

She had a late start, so she didn't get to where most of the eggs were scattered in clusters on the lawn in easy view.

Advertisement

With the 70-plus children lined up at the starting line, competition was tough for the first run for children five and older, or the "rabbits." There were fewer children who turned up for the next run 50 minutes later for the "bunnies" ages four and older.

The older children who didn't get very many eggs the first time could go again.

Four-year-old Hadley Andryauskas got six eggs during the first run.

"I ran after them. It was hard to reach all of them at one time," Hadley of Loveland said.

Codi Rivard, 9, got four eggs and liked trying to find as many as he could, he said.

"I went around the bush, and I went back there," the Berthoud boy said, pointing to the far end of the lawn near one of the church entrances. "But it was all gone."

Jezzie Hamilton, 7, a family friend, also got four eggs.

"I really don't want to open them. I like them closed," Jezzie said. "I wish we could find some more eggs now."

A few children used strategies to get their eggs, like Isaac Green, 7, of Loveland, who collected eight eggs and stopped when he reached the limit.

"I just usually stay close while everybody rushes ahead. It's just fun," Isaac said.

Mountain View Presbyterian Church opened the Easter egg hunt to the community last year and 120 people attended, including adults and children. This year, the church advertised about the event and brought in 330 people.

"We do it really well, and we were having fun with it. We thought, why don't we open it up to the community," said Kimberly Caldwell, director of children's ministries for the church.

The church moved the event to the weekend before Easter from the morning to the afternoon to bring out more crowds, Caldwell said. The church also added the cake walks to last year's event, so that everybody could win something, she said.

"We feel like, number one, it's important to create access," said Pastor Jim Webb. "Sometimes coming in the doors of a church can be daunting. We want to make sure we're open, so people can see what we're about. The second reason is it's plain fun."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm