LAKEWOOD — It took more than being at the forefront of a thriving arts hub for 40 West Arts to be certified as a creative district last month.

Being centered on the west Colfax corridor, 40 West also has a unique history and story to tell: the crossroads of 1950s car culture and modern day light rail transit.

“They have a unique identity and brand,” said Margaret Hunt, director of Colorado Creative Industries. “They’re doing a great job promoting transit-oriented development and bringing a new generation of artists to live and work in the area.”

Colorado Creative Industries along with the Boettcher Foundation, announced June 20 the certification of four new creative districts, including 40 West.

The districts were selected out of seven applicants that all went through a two-year incubation period during which they received money, consulting services and networking opportunities to help strengthen their districts.

The designation means districts will receive between $10,000 and $20,000 in state grant money, as well as access to state resources and prominent placement on Colorado websites.

“We will automatically be on the short list for where people want to relocate their business to … cafes, brewpubs and coffee shops,” said 40 West director Bill Marino. “That’s already happening, and now it’s going to really accelerate.”

Hunt said that to receive the state certification, districts need to reflect the local community, include public gathering places, and provide living and work spaces for creative types. They also need to have strong integration with other community organizations and a governmental endorsement.

The program goes beyond traditional arts organizations to include architects, restaurateurs, specialty retailers and others who help define a community’s identity.

Spurred in part by the 2013 opening of the West Rail Line and anchored by the Rocky Mountain College of Art and Design, Marino said a new generation of entrepreneurs are being drawn to the energy and potential of the area, the epicenter of which is Colfax Avenue and Teller Street.

One of those entrepreneurs is architect and artist Faye Crowe, who relocated her home and office to the area from Golden to get an early foothold in the district.

“It’s a dynamic environment to be associated with,” Crowe said. “You can walk and bike anywhere, then you have the light rail to get a straight shot right into Denver.”

Or take the Edge Theatre Company, which relocated to the district into a larger venue last year and saw an 80 percent increase in show attendance from 2012.

“Moving here has allowed us to do bigger and better shows, and this year we were selected by Westword Magazine for best season by a theater company,” said Rick Yaconis, the Edge Theatre executive director.

All told, there was 248 creative jobs in the district in 2013, up 25 percent from the year before; the 40 West website lists 20 art galleries.

That doesn’t count artists who live in the area or the peripheral businesses popping up as an arts ecosystem continues to take hold in the corridor, Marino said.

“There’s a creative hum that’s attracting a whole supply chain … metal working, graphic design, shipping,” he said. “It’s an integral part of what’s becoming a complete transformation of west Colfax.”

Austin Briggs: 303-954-1729, abriggs@denverpost.com