Spent nuclear fuel stored safely at the Kewaunee Power Station

(Photo: Submitted)

Local Lens question:Do you think nuclear energy is safe?

Protecting the health and safety of our employees and neighbors remains a primary focus even as the Kewaunee Power Station begins to decommission the closed nuclear electrical generation station.

Much of the current focus revolves around safely storing the used nuclear fuel on site. Every uranium oxide pellet ever used in the reactor during Kewaunee's nearly 40 years of operation remains safely stored here.

The fuel is in the form of small ceramic pellets that are placed inside a 12-foot long metal rod, about the diameter of a pencil. These rods are bundled together in groups of 179 to form a fuel assembly. When Kewaunee was operating, 121 assemblies were in the reactor core. Every 18 months, one-third of those assemblies would be replaced to ensure the unit was operating at peak efficiency to help keep the lights on in Northeastern Wisconsin.

Approximately 40 fuel assemblies were retired during each of these refueling outages. These assemblies have released a considerable amount of energy, but have become radioactive as a result of the fission process inside the reactor. Used fuel is stored in a steel-lined, concrete pool inside the power station called the spent fuel pool. The used fuel is kept cool by pumps circulating cooling water. The water also helps shield workers and the plant environment from radioactivity. As Kewaunee approached expiration of its initial 40-year license and considered an extension, more storage was needed as the pool neared capacity.

Kewaunee's owner, Dominion, is a pioneer in dry storage of used fuel. It was the first U.S. energy company to use dry fuel storage in 1986 at its Surry (Virginia) facility. Dry storage units consist of a double-sealed, leak-tight, steel inner canister with a maximum capacity of 37 assemblies. The canister is placed inside a steel-reinforced, concrete structure with two-foot thick walls that weighs about 160 tons when filled. The canister can be removed and relocated when another storage option becomes available. About one-third of all of the fuel at Kewaunee is currently in dry storage. Most of the nation's nuclear plants use dry storage to supplement spent fuel pool storage.

While dry fuel storage was never intended to be a long-term storage option, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) has determined used fuel can be safely stored this way for a century or longer. The NRC continues regulating used fuel to ensure public safety. The responsibility for disposal was given to the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982. The Act also required that spent fuel would be accepted for disposal beginning in 1998, which has not occurred.

Nevada's Yucca Mountain has never opened and the NRC's license review of the project was halted. In January 2010, the Obama Administration established a Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future to conduct a comprehensive review of options available for storage, processing and disposal of used nuclear fuel. The DOE has adopted a strategy based on the commission's findings.

Strategy proposals include consolidated interim storage facilities, access to the consumer-funded Nuclear Waste Fund and establishing a new organization to implement the program. Congressional action will be required to move any of these initiatives forward.

Dominion will empty the Kewaunee pool by the end of 2016 and move the fuel assemblies to its dry fuel storage area. Construction will begin this spring with fuel movements scheduled in 2016.

Completion of the project puts all of Kewaunee's used fuel in one location, resulting in a more efficient protection strategy. The spent fuel pool and the associated pumps, valves and piping will no longer be needed. The dry storage structures rely on passive cooling created by the normal flow of air around the steel liner with no moving parts.

Dominion submitted a 60-year decommissioning plan to the NRC commensurate with the time allowed to return the site to Greenfield status. Whether or not there is used fuel still stored here upon completion of decommissioning activities in 2073 will be up to the federal government.

Read or Share this story: http://htrne.ws/1IyZ60O