Photo

WASHINGTON — This week’s elections ensure a new round of political attacks on the Affordable Care Act, but they also create potential opportunities to repair provisions of the law that people on both sides of the partisan divide would like to fix.

With the shift in power in the Senate, Republicans can turn up the heat on the White House, which has dismissed as political stunts repeated House votes to repeal the law.

Republican leadership aides in the Senate and the House said that a few more such votes were likely because many of the new Republican lawmakers had vowed in their campaigns to dismantle the Affordable Care Act. President Obama said Wednesday that he would oppose changes that “undermine the structure of the law” or “take away health care from the 10 million people who now have it and the millions more who are eligible to get it.”

But Mr. Obama said he would be “open and receptive” if Republicans proposed “responsible changes to the Affordable Care Act to make it work better.”

Republicans are sure to test that commitment, knowing that their idea of “responsible changes” can appear to Democrats like an attempt to gut the law.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“In the new Congress, there will be at least one vote on full repeal of the Affordable Care Act,” said Joseph R. Antos, an economist at the American Enterprise Institute, a right-of-center think tank. “New members ran on that as part of their platform. Beyond that, the likely strategy is to pursue targeted proposals that on their face make sense to the public at large.”

Mr. Antos pointed to provisions of the law that define employers’ responsibility to provide insurance to employees. Under the law, larger employers are subject to tax penalties if they do not offer coverage to “full-time employees,” defined as those who work at least 30 hours a week, on average. Senators Susan Collins of Maine, a Republican, and Joe Donnelly of Indiana, a Democrat, have introduced a bill to change that to 40 hours, and the House in April passed similar legislation.

Mr. Obama threatened to veto the bill last spring, saying it would increase the number of uninsured. On the other hand, some public and private employers say they have reduced the work hours of some employees to avoid the expense of providing them with health insurance, and if the Senate joins the House in pushing such changes, Mr. Obama would be hard-pressed to avoid negotiations.

Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican in line to be majority leader, and Speaker John A. Boehner said they would advance a proposal to restore what they called “the traditional 40-hour definition of full-time employment.”

Short of repealing the whole law, Republicans list other changes they may seek: repealing a federal excise tax on medical devices; eliminating an independent board that is supposed to limit the growth of Medicare spending; and abolishing special payments to insurers that Republicans criticize as a bailout for the industry.

Mr. Boehner made the case for piecemeal changes on Thursday. “Just because we may not be able to get everything we want, doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t try to get what we can,” he said.

Whether the administration is willing to negotiate is unclear. Even if the president authorized negotiations, Senate Republicans would still need 60 votes in most cases, and they say they doubt that Mr. Obama could deliver the votes of Democrats needed to achieve such a majority.

White House officials have repeatedly complained that Republican hostility to the health care law made it impossible to pass “technical corrections” or other legislation to clarify or modify its provisions. Supporters of the law would, for example, like to clarify that premium subsidies are available to people in all states, regardless of whether they have an insurance exchange established by the state or by the federal government. The administration and its critics are locked in court fights over that question, which arises from ambiguous language in the law.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The power shift in Washington comes just as some supporters of the Affordable Care Act are raising questions about its requirement for employers to offer coverage to employees.

Dropping that requirement would not significantly affect the number of Americans with coverage, researchers at the Urban Institute said in a recent report titled, “Why Not Just Eliminate the Employer Mandate?”

Prof. Timothy S. Jost, an expert on health law at Washington and Lee University, supports the Affordable Care Act but said the employer mandate “cries out for repair.”

Mr. Obama said Wednesday that he could not accept repeal of the individual mandate. But he did not make such a statement about enforcement of the employer mandate, which he has twice delayed.

In an interview Thursday, Representative Michael C. Burgess, Republican of Texas and chairman of the Congressional Health Care Caucus, said, “I would be surprised if the president vetoed repeal of the employer mandate.”

Mr. Obama had been hoping that the elections would increase the number of Democratic governors eager to expand Medicaid eligibility, and to that end, he campaigned last week for Democratic candidates in Wisconsin and Maine. But in both states, voters re-elected Republican governors opposed to expansion of the program.

The election results do not immediately alter the outlook for expansion of Medicaid, but could strengthen the hand of Republican governors negotiating with the Obama administration for permission to expand it in their own way. Gov. Gary R. Herbert of Utah and Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, both Republicans, have been engaged in such negotiations for months.

Speaking to state Medicaid directors on Tuesday, Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services, said the administration was eager to cut deals. “We’re eager and willing to work with states that have yet to expand,” Ms. Burwell said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Sara Rosenbaum, a professor of health law and policy at George Washington University, said some states that have refused to expand Medicaid might go along with a partial expansion — an option that is not allowed by the administration but could be considered by Congress.

Under the law, the federal government offers large financial incentives to states that agree to provide Medicaid to anyone with income less than 138 percent of the poverty level (less than $16,105 a year for an individual). Among states that have chosen not to expand Medicaid, some want to extend eligibility up to the poverty level ($11,670 for an individual), but no further.

“This is a request that states have repeatedly made to the administration,” Ms. Rosenbaum said. “They may find that a Republican Congress is more receptive to the idea.”