A day after a practice session at a different venue and a send-off from their supporters, the Columbia State men’s basketball team departed for Hutchinson, Kan. in quest of a National Championship.

Of course, 23 other schools will be there vying for the NJCAA Division 1 crown so the road won’t be easy for the Chargers.

“That’s been our goal since the start of practice, but we had to take it one game at a time,” said Columbia State head coach Brian “Penny” Collins, a former Belmont University player. “We’ve been taking it one game at a time all year.”

The Chargers had a workout at the Gentry Center on the Tennessee State campus Friday afternoon.

“Another venue gives us a different look and feel,” Collins said. “And there is more room at the ends of the court. It gives us a different shooting perception.”

After the baseball team completed their game, and the Chargers returned to their home gym to join school staff members and fans were they were given a send-off. The players and coaches expressed their appreciation to those who attended.

“We didn’t lose a game in this gym,” said Collins. “And you the fans were a part of it.”

Collins is like rhythm with a microphone in his hand and the music going as he led the way for line dancing performances shared by players, coaches and their supporters.

“Coach is really cool,” said point guard Josh Pride, who played at Huntsville Butler High School. “We really like him. He’s one of the best coaches I’ve had, too.”

Collins introduced all of the Chargers including those who were unable to play because of injuries or academic issues plus the players who are redshirted.

“This team has been ranked higher (No. 3) than ever before, maybe higher than any other Tennessee team ever has,” Collins said.

The opportunity to play in a national event is like a dream comes true for the players.

Pride, a co-captain, said, “I’m looking forward to it. I can’t wait to get there.”

T.J. Dunans, the TCCAA “Player of the Year,” is eager for the opportunity, too.

“That’s what we have been working for all season. I like this chance to play on a national level,” said Dunans, the co-captain from Atlanta.

Now it’s on to “Hutch” and Monday’s 8:30 p.m. game against Central Georgia Tech.