Nancy Marcus (left) is a constitutional law professor at the Indiana Tech Law School. Holly Brady (right) is a Fort Wayne labor and employment attorney. The two have different views on how a new religious freedom law will impact Hoosiers.

Related Coverage Gov. Pence signs Religious Freedom bill into law

FORT WAYNE, Ind. (WANE) — It’s not just politicians who disagree on the religious freedom bill Gov. Mike Pence signed into law Thursday. Legal experts differ on the impact it may have on the community.

The new law is said to prevent state and local laws from infringing on religious rights. Opponents say it opens the door for discrimination.

Holly Brady is a labor and employment attorney at Haller & Colvin PC and deals with discrimination issues on a daily basis. She doesn’t think the new religious freedom law will have a major impact on Hoosiers.

“The people of Indiana will continue to apply their own values to how they operate their businesses,” Brady said. “Are there some bad apples that will try to use this as some sort of a sword, perhaps. But I don’t see it having any dramatic change whatsoever.”

Brady called the uproar against the bill “a lot of hoopla” and doesn’t think it will open the door to new discrimination. She pointed to a similar federal law and first amendment rights that already protect religious freedoms.

“I think that, quite frankly, this law was passed because in recent times, people are feeling more and more like their religious beliefs are under attack,” Brady said. She referenced the Affordable Care Act’s attempt to require the Catholic Church to provide medical services contrary to their religious beliefs.

Nancy Marcus, on the other hand, believes the religious freedom law could have huge implications for discrimination against the LGBT community. She’s a constitutional law professor at Indiana Tech Law School.

Marcus said legislators proposed several amendments trying to specifically outlaw discrimination in the bill. But those were shot down, which she thinks reveals the true motive behind supporters.

“To me, what is suspect, is not just the bill on its face but the fact that they refused to amend it to protect children, to protect people from discrimination,” Marcus said.

Marcus said it opens the door for more people to use religion to shield themselves from the law, resulting in religious freedom coming head to head against civil rights.

“The problem, like I said, is when you have local ordinances that enact civil rights protections for people based on sexual orientation. This (the religious freedom law) could be interpreted as trumping that,” she said. “If even one person is denied public services from a public employee, it’s too much.”

19 other states currently have similar legislation. A federal version was signed into law by President Bill Clinton in the 90’s.

The U.S. Supreme Court used that federal law to say Hobby Lobby, as a religious organization, didn’t have to provide certain contraceptives through their health care plan.