The Eye

Is 'Long Island Medium' Star Theresa Caputo A Fake? Reporter Recounts 'Not-So-Psychic Experience,' Says Caputo Is A 'Damn Good Performer'

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : TLC) Caputo's father speaks out on the allegations of fraud.

After a private, seemingly legitimate reading with "Long Island Medium" star Theresa Caputo, Jaime Franchi, a reporter for the Long Island Press, attended Theresa Caputo Live! in Westbury to see the self-proclaimed medium in her element.



Unfortunately, the experience cast doubt on whether Caputo had really spoken to Franchi's father, as the reporter once believed.



"The doubt that had started to creep into my mind early on in the show now made a full-court press," writes Franchi. "I wasn’t buying it, any of it."



RELATED: 'Long Island Medium' Star Theresa Caputo Doesn't Care If People Believe in Mediums, Tells Dr. Oz Talking to the Dead Is Healthy

Franchi went on to describe a number of Caputo's attempts to connect with the audience with increasingly general questions.



For example, she asked a grieving mother who had lost her grown son, "Why do I feel like you are holding him when he died?" When the woman shrugged, Caputo quickly covered by saying that that means he believes that she was always there for him.

“Do you smell him?” Caputo questioned another. When there was no response, she immediately clarified that this meant that it seemed as if that person was still there, even though he had passed some time ago.



At one point, perhaps sensing the faith fizzling from the room, Caputo zeroed in on a pair of audience members and, after asking a few of the right questions and getting the answers she wanted, joked about some of the allegations she'd faced over the year.



“I Googled that!” she wise-cracked to the crowd in self-congratulation, a wink and a nod to allegations that she and her staff research details about audience members in anticipation of her shows, only to produce them later as part of the psychic act.



Check out Franchi's full article HERE and read the latest "Long Island Medium" news HERE.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.