Topics: Bernie Sanders, Dem primary, Elections 2016, Hillary Clinton, News, Politics News

The Super Tuesday results are in. On the Democratic side, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton won a fierce battle over Senator Bernie Sanders, taking home a majority of delegates in seven states compared to her rival’s four. In this heated campaign, you’d think that the stakes of the contest between Clinton and Sanders couldn’t be higher.

While you wouldn’t necessarily be wrong, there is the chance that while making this observation, you’d inadvertently miss a much bigger point – namely, how much they have in common, and why that is especially important in this election year.

Let’s start with the big issues. According to a Gallup poll last month, Democrats and Republicans agree that the top four issues in this campaign are terrorism and national security; the economy; employment and jobs; and health care and the Affordable Care Act. Additionally, the poll found that Democrats are disproportionately focused on education and income inequality. To round out this list, we should also add racism, sexism, xenophobia, and Islamophobia, all of which have been brought into particular prominence by the demagogic rhetoric of the Republican frontrunner, Donald Trump.

So how do Clinton and Sanders stack up?

We can start with their economic plans, which despite significant differences in scale ultimately strive to reach the same goals using comparable methods. Much has already been made of Sanders’ support for democratic socialism, which would invest $1 trillion in infrastructure spending to create 13 million jobs, raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour, establish worker-owned cooperatives to assist aspiring small business owners, strengthen protections for labor unions and workers who wish to form them, and eliminate free trade policies that have enabled companies to move American jobs overseas. While Clinton’s proposals are less radical than those of Sanders, their thrust is essentially the same – she wants to invest $275 billion in infrastructure to create as many as 3 million new jobs, raise the minimum wage to $12 an hour, create a $1,500 tax credit for every appreciate that a firm hires, offer tax breaks to companies that promote employee ownership, fight tech companies that attempt to undermine labor regulations, and oppose the same free trade deals that Sanders has denounced. (Although, on this one issue, there is merit to the charge that Clinton has a history of flip-flopping.)

When it comes to health care reform, Clinton and Sanders likewise agree that the government has a responsibility to protect the economic well-being of its citizens, even if they disagree as to the scope of that obligation. If elected, Sanders would strive to replace the Affordable Care Act with a single-payer system that would expand Medicare to cover all citizens; Clinton, by contrast, supports Obama’s health care reform policies and would fight Republicans in Congress so as to keep them in place. On college affordability, Sanders wants free tuition at all public colleges and universities, while Clinton emphasizes “debt-free” tuition adjusted according to family income. Perhaps their only stark contrast is on national security and terrorism, where Sanders advocates American disassociation with Middle Eastern geopolitics (opposing U.S. intervention to fight ISIS, withdrawing troops from Afghanistan) while Clinton supports those policies.

Before moving on to their shared opposition to Trumpian bigotry, it’s worthwhile to reflect on the precise nature of how Clinton and Sanders differ on the aforementioned issues. As you may have noticed, the running theme in any compare-and-contrast between the two candidates is that Sanders tends to support intensified versions of Clinton’s policies (or, if you will, Clinton advocates a watered down version of Sanders’ approach). Unlike their Republican counterparts, who are uniform in their desire to cut the social safety net for working class Americans in order to cut taxes for the wealthy, Clinton and Sanders would both strive to improve it. They side with the unemployed who need well-paying jobs over the rich who don’t want to pay more in taxes or wages, with the uninsured who can’t receive quality health care coverage over the insurance companies who would repeal Obamacare and loathe a single-payer system, with struggling college students who strive for an affordable education over student loan agencies and even the federal government itself.