Topics: Bikini, DAME, Gender, Sex, weight, Life News

This piece originally appeared on DAME

Over the last week, nearly every time I’ve checked Facebook, I’ve seen the same picture of a woman in a bikini.

Do you have a picture in your head of what this woman looks like? I suspect you do already, but if not, go ahead and do a Google image search for that phrase: “Woman in a bikini.” Save a few preggos of the “swallowed a basketball” variety, there’s almost no variation in body type among the top results. Women in bikinis are thin, and young. They are usually white, but tan. Their breasts are between a generous B-cup and a modest D-cup. Their hips are just a bit wider than their waists.

Even Bethany Townsend, the 23-year-old English woman with Crohn’s disease who recently made international news after posting a shot of herself in a bikini with her colostomy bag visible, otherwise adheres quite closely to the “Woman in a bikini” formula. Young and conventionally beautiful, she told ABC News she’s considering a modeling career, after receiving so much praise for the viral photo.

More from DAME: “‘I Don’t Want to Be a Girl'”

The woman who keeps popping up in my newsfeed, though, is not thin, tan, or easily contained by a few scraps of fabric. She’s Jenny Trout, who wrote the marvelous essay, “I Wore a Bikini and Nothing Happened,” and she looks basically like I would in a bikini, if I ever wore one.

I will never wear one.

Don’t get me wrong: I adore Trout’s essay, and shared it moments after I read it. She’s hilarious, and absolutely correct in her assessment of why people respond negatively to the thought—let alone the sight—of a fat woman in a bikini. “The reason these people do not want to see a fat body in a bikini is because traditionally, that garment is something a woman earns by proving herself attractive enough to exist. If fat women begin wearing them without shame or fear, what’s next? Will they have self-esteem? Will they demand respect? Then what will keep them in their proper place?”

Exactly. The culture tells us that women’s job is to be sexy according to a very narrow set of standards, and to hide in shame if we fail. The “fatkini” is a hearty fuck-you to that job description, and I love it for that. I hope Jenny Trout’s post, like Gabi Gregg’s collaboration with Swimsuits for All, will inspire hundreds, thousands, millions of women to be their own bosses when it comes to hotness.

I still don’t want to wear a bikini.

It’s not that I’m ashamed of my fat, wrinkly, blemished, pale, veiny, scarred, bug-bitten, normal, human body. I spent years getting to the point where I’m perfectly happy walking around in said body, and even co-wrote a book about how to do that. The reason I don’t want to wear a bikini has nothing to do with fear of strangers’ judgment or any residual self-hatred; it’s that—I don’t know if you’ve noticed this—wearing a bikini is exactly like wearing your bra and undies in public.

More from DAME: “Is Melissa McCarthy a Big Sellout?”

There are people of all sizes and shapes who would walk around in their underwear if local laws and customs permitted it. I am not one of those people. I like my shorts bermuda-length, my tank-top straps wide, and my necklines at least high enough to keep crumbs from dropping into my bra. Even with all those limits in place, every year, when I transition to summer clothes, I feel like a blinky, befuddled infant for the first few days. There’s sun touching my calves! And upper arms! What is this madness?