SEATTLE — Mustachioed manager Billy Martin on at least three occasions picked his lineup out of a hat, first as skipper of the Detroit Tigers in 1972, then with his last-place New York Yankees in 1977. He was trying to shake up the offense.

Don Zimmer picked his lineup out of a hat too, as boss of the Boston Red Sox in the late 1970s. But “seven of eight came out in the same place they batted in the day before. That’s how bad I was going,” Zimmer once said.

So Rockies manager Walt Weiss has precedent if he wants to use that willy-nilly method against Dodgers ace Clayton Kershaw in Los Angeles on Monday night.

“A right-handed lineup against lefties hasn’t really worked,” Weiss said Sunday. “I may pick it out of a hat tomorrow.”

Rockies hitters have struggled against southpaws, losing Saturday night to Seattle Mariners lefty Roenis Elias. The Rockies are 6-26 against left-handers this season.

Sunday, against Seattle lefty starter James Paxton, Weiss used a slew of lefty hitters, abandoning a traditional right-left advantage. He used Carlos Gonzalez, Charlie Blackmon and Justin Morneau.

But Kershaw is the most effective lefty of them all. And Weiss said he likely will look for any right-left boost he can find.

And, even if Martin and Zimmer tried the hat method, Weiss probably won’t go there.

“You do that today and you’d get buried,” he said.

Memorable moment. Catcher Tom Murphy made his major-league debut with the Rockies on Saturday night after a sudden call-up to replace veteran Nick Hundley.

“It’s something I’ll never forget, that’s for sure,” Murphy said. “It doesn’t really hit you until that one big moment in the game. That was in the first inning, when we went 1-2-3. And I came back to the dugout and I was like, ‘Dang, that just really happened.’ “

With Hundley (neck injury) and Michael McKenry (knee surgery) out for the season, the Rockies have a mostly rookie catcher complement between Murphy, Dustin Garneau (who started Sunday) and Wilin Rosario (a first baseman/pinch hitter most of the time).

“It’s not how you draw it up,” Weiss said. “But both (rookies) are cerebral and mentally strong. That helps a lot.”

Adames contributing. Rookie shortstop Cristhian Adames, who bunted Sunday to help score a run, is 9-for-21 since his call-up Sept. 1. He made his debut last season, but he looks much different this year, Weiss said.

“The game looked fast for him at times (last year),” Weiss said. “He looks very at ease on a major-league field now. I see a tremendous amount of growth in a short amount of time.”

Adames was helped by playing winter ball in the Dominican League for Toros del Este, where he won a batting title late last year. His fielding, though, is impressing his manager.

“I always liked his actions,” Weiss said. “When he got around the ball, his feet and his hands worked really well. That hasn’t changed.”

Footnote. Shortstop Jose Reyes sat for a third consecutive game with a sore left hamstring. “He had an ankle injury that was pretty serious” with Toronto earlier this season, Weiss said. “I’m going to be especially cautious because of that history there.”

Rockies’ Jon Gray (0-0, 5.17 ERA) at Dodgers’ Clayton Kershaw (13-6, 2.15), 8:10 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

In 30 starts against the Rockies, Kershaw has been dominant. He is 16-5 with a 3.27 ERA. The Rockies are hitting just .223 against him all time. He has 212 strikeouts against Colorado, second most of any team behind only the Giants. Gray, on the flipside, is looking for his first career victory. He’s just the second pitcher since at least 1914 to start a career with seven no-decisions. And the Rockies are just 1-6 behind him. His start Monday will be his first against the Dodgers.

Tuesday: Rockies’ Chris Rusin (5-8, 5.14 ERA) at Dodgers’ Brett Anderson (9-8, 3.36), 8:10 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (9-6, 4.28) at Dodgers’ Alex Wood (10-9, 3.67), 8:10 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Off

Friday: Padres’ Ian Kennedy (8-14, 4.28) at Rockies Chad Bettis (7-5, 4.59), 6:40 p.m., ROOT