Zack attack. This is must-read information! How would you think Denver’s offensive problems are not coach Gary Kubiak’s fault? He was run out of town in Houston. The Broncos broke every scoring record in 2013 with the no-huddle offense, and last season quarterback Peyton Manning threw 30 touchdown passes before they got rid of the no-huddle offense. The obvious answer is for Denver to run the no-huddle offense. For Kubiak to force his offensive scheme on the Broncos is a huge mistake. You are supposed to game plan to your players’ strengths, not to your own stubborn ideas that never work; otherwise, you would have done something as a coach.

Zack, very agitated!

Kiz: Here’s what folks tend to forget. On Nov. 16, 2014, Manning threw 54 passes in a 22-7 loss at St. Louis, and he was upset that one of his long, weak throws got teammate Emmanuel Sanders hurt from a big hit. After the game, it was Manning who said throwing 50-plus times per game needed to stop. The quarterback sees what fans fail to grasp: It’s nearly impossible to go back to the future.

Home of a homer. You are such a total homer. All you talk is Donkey smack, and Denver could very easily be 0-5. Without the defense, which is overrated, where would the Broncos be? Manning is Melba toast. Will holler back and see where you’re at after 10 games (6-4, maybe?). We’ll see if you talk smack then. The losses are going to start in Cleveland.

Peter, Broncos basher

Kiz: Hmm. You wouldn’t be from Oakland and dress up like Darth Raider for NFL games, would you?

Peyton’s place. You give nasty treatment and disrespect to Manning, who deserves a lot better. Denver is lucky to have him, in light of his character and ability to turn around the only winning sports team in the city.

Sherry, Broncos lover

Kiz: Hmm. Let me run a theory by you. Whether my column is viewed as Donkey smack or disrespectful nastiness often reveals as much about the reader as it does me.

Vegas venom. And today’s parting shot is an invitation with (expletives deleted) from a Raiders fan to visit Las Vegas.

You want your (butt) beat? Sounds like it. You want us to (mess) you up the next time you visit the Black Hole, so you can write in this (crummy) column how bad we treat you visiting (Momma’s boys) from Denver. (Knucklehead), we know if we gave you that beatdown, the first person the police would be looking for is us! How stupid are you? But if you are looking to come down to Vegas, you and I can chat all you want without any other media around.

Eric, delightful conversationalist

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or @markkiszla