The Bossier Parish Republican Executive Committee has voted to endorse Dr. Bill Cassidy for United States Senate.

In making the announcement, RPEC Chairman Richard Ray stated, “This year’s U.S. Senate election has far reaching consequences for our state and our nation will impact the direction of our country’s future and future generations. It is time for us to stand up and take this country back.”

Ray went on to explain: “Barack Obama and his allies in congress continue to pull this country farther away from the principles upon which it was founded. Mary Landrieu has been one of Obama’s most consistent supporters voting with the President 97% of the time. For far too long she has supported his liberal agenda to the detriment of the citizens of Bossier Parish and it is time we stand together to take back the U.S. Senate.”

Below is the letter issued to Dr. Cassidy by Chairman Richard R. Ray:

“As chairman of the Bossier Parish Republican Executive Committee I am pleased to report to you that our organization has voted to endorse your candidacy for United States Senate. As the leaders of the Republican party in Bossier Parish we realize the profound importance of defeating Mary Landrieu on November 4, 2014. Your opponent has voted with Barak Obama 97% of the time yet in each of the last two presidential elections, Bossier Parish overwhelmingly rejected Barack Obama and his liberal policies.

We know that you will fight to protect our religious freedoms, our 2nd Amendment rights, and the unconstitutional overreaches of Barak Obama. Please continue to work diligently to reduce our debt and deficit, secure our borders, and oppose the liberal agenda of Hollywood and the democrat party. We realize that most importantly, as a physician, you are uniquely qualified to correct the problems with the disaster that is the “Affordable Care Act” (Obamacare). We would ask that you continue to fight for full repeal of that destructive legislation which was passed with Mary Landrieu’s deciding vote and which she continues to support.

Stay strong on the campaign trail and be reminded of God’s promise in Isaiah 41:10: ‘So do not fear, for I am with you; do not be dismayed, for I am your God. I will strengthen you and help you; I will uphold you with my righteous right hand.’ Stand strong in your faith and your conservative principles and know that we in Bossier Parish are praying for you, Laura, and your entire family and that we stand with you in your effort to defeat Mary Landrieu and return return control of the United States Senate to the Republican party.”