Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

NEW YORK (AP) — Come on along and listen to the lullaby of Broadway: Marimba ringtones! Rat-a-tat texting! The shaming “shhhhh!”

Years of mounting tension over audience behavior hit a dramatic climax this month, when a teenager clambered onto a stage to try to recharge his phone and veteran star Patti LuPone whisked a phone away from a texting spectator, hours after performing a matinee punctuated by incoming calls. LuPone says she’s even considering quitting stage work because of the electronic onslaught.

As Broadway faces off against pocket-sized sound-and-light shows, performers and some patrons say smartphones and a hyper-connected culture are shredding the immersive experience of live theater.

“I’ve just spent pretty close to a day’s salary on theater tickets — I don’t want to be distracted by people turning on their phone to check the time or text,” Broadway fan Robin Satty of Piscataway, New Jersey, said this past week as she went to see the best-play Tony-winner “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time.”

Still, some theater-world insiders say it’s time to educate, rather than scold, a growing audience that’s used to interactivity and may not be steeped in theater etiquette. Some even are experimenting with embracing patrons’ digital habits, to a point.

“We have to be very careful that we let people know what’s appropriate without pushing them away,” said Broadway producer Ken Davenport, who allowed some “tweet seats” in back rows during a performance of “Godspell” a few years ago.

Distractions in Broadway’s storied houses are as old as candy wrappers and coughs, and habitues have complained about declining audience decorum since T-shirts started rubbing elbows with sport coats. But smartphones have proven especially nettlesome, with their combination of sounds, cameras and glowing screens that create their own Great White Way.

“If you’re onstage, you notice every single person who’s texting,” said actor Will Swenson, whose Broadway credits include starring roles in “Les Miserables” and “Hair.”

“The second that a light pops on in the audience, it’s impossible to not say, ‘Oh, yeah, I’m in a theater, and someone is out there not paying attention to my best efforts to tell a story,'” said Swenson, who recalls grabbing a video-shooting patron’s phone during “Hair.”

Other stars, from Matthew Broderick to Frances McDormand, have briefly stopped shows in response to spectators talking on phones and shooting video. But usually, actors just forge ahead.

New York City largely outlawed cellphone use in theater audiences in 2003, but officials couldn’t immediately say whether anyone has been fined. Theaters routinely advise patrons of prohibitions on taking photos or videos and try various tactics to urge them to silence phones. (Actually blocking cell phone signals is illegal for consumer purposes .)