Angela Shubert, Vice President of Health Care Services, Crosswind Media & Public Relations

Crosswind Media & Public Relations, one of the leading communications firms in the Southwestern U.S., today named Angela Shubert as vice president of health care services. Ms. Shubert will lead and develop all communications and media strategies for Crosswind’s health care clients, and drive strategic growth initiatives for the agency.

“Angela’s dynamic background and expertise in health care policy and her experience working with key stakeholders, including the pharmaceutical industry, hospitals, health care providers, consumer advocacy organizations, the health insurance industry and business associations, has helped strengthen Crosswind’s presence in the health care sector,” said Thomas Graham, Crosswind president and CEO.

“She has the ability to identify critical issues in all aspects of the health care industry, from the latest advancements in biotechnology, to global health challenges, to public health and prevention strategies and best practices for patient engagement, while mining the business end of our health care clients,” Graham said.

Ms. Shubert began her career in Washington, D.C. on the cusp of health reform, where she lobbied on a range of consumer health care issues for a nationally respected nonprofit organization. She went on to lead the government affairs portfolio for a national association representing more than 15,000 specialty practice nurses, enhancing the organization’s visibility and strengthening their influence with federal policymakers. Ms. Shubert worked closely with bipartisan Members of Congress to write and introduce a bill aimed to increase health care access in schools for our nation’s children. She also advocated on behalf of several key provisions in the Affordable Care Act. Prior to joining Crosswind, Ms. Shubert provided strategic counsel to a Texas-based business association to help its business members navigate the changes in the new healthcare law.

“Our health care clients are in a better position today to tell the stories that matter, and we’re a stronger agency in the healthcare industry because of Angela’s leadership both nationally, and in Texas,” Graham said.

Ms. Shubert received her Bachelor of Arts with double majors in journalism and government/international affairs from Augustana College in Sioux Falls, South Dakota.

About Crosswind

Crosswind Media & Public Relations is one of the leading firms in the Southwestern U.S., and ranks among the top 50 firms nationally. Headquartered in Austin, TX, the agency has offices in Washington D.C., Los Angeles, Houston, Dallas, Boston and New York. While Crosswind’s roots are in Texas, it has a global reach, serving corporate, public agencies and national governments across 5 continents. Crosswind provides expert counsel in public engagement; crisis and reputation management; executive positioning and media training; digital, print and broadcast media relations; text, video, photography, audio and event production; website creation, tracking and maintenance; and social media engagement. For more information, go to crosswindpr.com, or email info(at)crosswindpr(dot)com.