For the second consecutive week, the Colorado State Rams had fallen to a power five conference team in overtime. To make it more wrenching Saturday night, the 27-24 loss at Sports Authority Field at Mile High was to in-state rival Colorado in the Rocky Mountain Showdown, meaning — among many other things — a few CSU fans will have to pay off lunch and beer bets to co-workers and friends.

First-year CSU coach Mike Bobo said his postgame message to his team was both a challenge and praise, beginning with a declaration that any team he coaches would play hard, not quit and be “all in.” He said he added: “For three games, we played hard, we’ve been all in and played for 60 minutes-plus in the last two games. I expect the same thing Monday. If that’s not for you, if you doubt what we’re doing, my office will be open (Sunday) and you can come in. But the guys that are going to wear the green and gold are going to play hard for the green and gold every week.”

Late in his postgame news conference, Bobo acknowledged he understood that last season’s 10-3 record under Jim McElwain — which included a 10-1 start — was a tough act to follow, given the departures of quarterback Garrett Grayson and running back Dee Hart. The Rams also lost Ty Sambrailo, now starting at offensive tackle for the Broncos, and other key players.

“Coming into the season, I knew it would take time,” Bobo said. “When you lose a 1,000-yard rusher, when you lose a 4,000-yard passer at quarterback … and I felt we needed to play great defense. We’re playing great defense and we’re getting better on offense. The record’s just 1-2 and we’ll stick to the plan. I believe we’ll be fine this year.”

The challenge for the Rams — who led 14-0 after the first quarter and ultimately outgained the Buffs 500 yards to 345 — is to stay together.

CSU seems to have a winnable road game coming up, against Texas-San Antonio of Conference USA. The Roadrunners lost 69-14 to Oklahoma State and fell to 0-3.

After Saturday’s game at the Alamodome, Mountain West play begins for the Rams. Mountain West teams have been struggling in nonconference games.

But first, there is the sting of back-to-back overtime losses for the Rams to overcome.

“It hurts,” said senior safety Trent Matthews, who will be playing in his hometown Saturday. “It’s like they killed your joy. It kills your momentum. It makes you sometimes kind of wonder what kind of team we are. But I’ll tell you what, this team we have right here is a wonderful team. We’re going to stick together, we’re a family, and in a family, sometimes things happen.

“As a leader, I’m going to … keep encouraging my teammates because we’re a good football team and I know we’re going to be successful.”

Matthews added, “Last year, we finished. This year, we’re not finishing what we’re supposed to. Last year, we had an electrifying offense; this year we’re electrifying on defense. That’s the key components of our team last year and this year. But (it’s) the same brotherhood, same logo, same jerseys. We just didn’t find a way to win (the CU game).”

Sophomore quarterback Nick Stevens was 25-of-39 passing for 282 yards against the Buffs, rebounding after being pulled late in the third quarter of the 23-20 overtime loss to Minnesota.

“I definitely felt like I had a better day than last week,” Stevens said. “I felt like the offense, we moved the ball really well. … I felt like we moved the ball every drive, just didn’t finish.”

One bright spot for the Rams was that sophomore running back Dalyn Dawkins, a transfer from Purdue, rushed for 118 yards against CU, and he and Jasen Oden Jr. combined for 198 yards on the ground. That came a year after Hart and Treyous Jarrells combined for 260 yards in a 31-17 win over the Buffs.

“It hurts and hurts even more that the same thing happened last week,” Dawkins said of the loss.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei

Eye on …The Roadrunners

Colorado State at Texas-San Antonio, 5 p.m. Saturday, CBSSN

For the record: The Roadrunners fell to 0-3 after losing to Oklahoma State 69-14.

Streaking: Texas-San Antonio has played 29 consecutive Football Bowl Subdivision opponents since Nov. 10, 2012.

Who’s hot: Quarterback Blake Bogenschutze has completed 59.6 percent of his 89 passes for 546 yards and three touchdowns. But he has thrown three interceptions.

Who’s not: The defense hasn’t been solid. The Roadrunners have been outscored 141-49.

Key stat: Tight end Dave Morgan has 15 catches for 200 yards and one touchdown, including nine receptions for 109 yards in the season opener against Arizona.

FYI: This is only the fifth season of football for the Roadrunners.

Irv Moss, The Denver Post