Nancy Barto (Photo: handout) Story Highlights AZ Fact Check examines the statements of politicians, partisan groups and government agencies.

Submit claims to the azfactcheck.azcentral.com form or the AZ Fact Check mobile app.





WHO SAID IT: Nancy Barto.

TITLE: Republican state senator from Phoenix.

THE COMMENT: "Taxpayers are on the hook for elective abortions."

THE FORUM: Feb. 11, 2015, Senate Health Committee meeting.

WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT: Whether insurance plans on the federal health exchange use taxpayer subsidies to cover elective abortions.

ANALYSIS: State Sen. Nancy Barto introduced Senate Bill 1318, which would prohibit any insurance plan on a health-care exchange in Arizona from covering abortions, whether as a separate rider or otherwise. Barto argues that because insurance companies receive federal tax credits and subsidies, taxpayers are paying for elective abortions.

The bill is being pitched as a way to save taxpayers money, not as an effort to restrict abortion coverage.

"It's all about whether or not taxpayers are funding other people's abortions," Barto said. SB 1318 "does nothing to restrict access to abortion. It's all about who's paying for it, and in this case taxpayers are on the hook." Barto cites as evidence a congressional report from last year, among other things.

Federal law already prevents insurance companies from using tax credits and subsidies to cover elective abortions. And federal funds are not allowed to be used to fund abortions with three exceptions — rape, incest or when the life of the mother is threatened.

States regulate insurance coverage of elective abortions, and employers elect whether to offer plans that cover such abortions. In Arizona, 41 out of 199 plans available on the federal exchange created by the Obama administration offer coverage of elective abortions.

Current Arizona law requires any plan that covers elective abortions on a state-run insurance exchange to be offered only as an optional rider with an additional premium to cover that cost. However, Arizona does not have a state-run exchange, and instead residents receive insurance through the federal exchange operating in the state. As a result, the restriction has never been in force.

In addition to prohibiting insurance companies from offering plans that cover elective abortions, SB 1318 would also clarify that the new restriction applies to policies on the federal exchange.

RELATED: In abortion debate, Arizona Rep. Victoria Steele reveals she was molested

However, taxpayer funds can't be used to offset the cost of abortion coverage offered with those plans, and there is no evidence to suggest public funds have been used. The Affordable Care Act bans the use of federal funds to cover elective abortions, following the standard set by the Hyde Amendment since 1976. Under the ACA, companies must collect separate payments in plans that cover abortion services, and they must segregate money used to cover abortion services from accounts that accept public funds.

Both the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the Arizona Department of Insurance enforce the requirement to segregate funds to ensure no public funds pay for abortion services. Arizona has "not received any complaints or notices that insurance companies are not complying with the law," the agency said in an e-mail.

Barto and other abortion opponents have cited as evidence a congressional report from September 2014, which found abortion-related funds may not have been properly segregated.

In that report, the Government Accountability Office found instances where "practices of private issuers and others may have been inconsistent with federal requirements related to the coverage of non-excepted abortion services." Those included companies estimating the cost of elective-abortion coverage below the minimum $1 per enrollee per month, and not notifying enrollees of abortion coverage on their plans. The report didn't identify where the potential inconsistencies occurred.

The GAO said its review was not "designed to assess ... compliance with federal requirements." The report noted it found accounting inconsistencies, which suggested regulators could better advise private insurers of the law. But the GAO did not claim to have found violations, and it is inaccurate to characterize the report as evidence that federal law was violated or that public funds were spent on elective abortions.

Finally, Barto and others have argued that because insurance companies receive federal funds at all, the segregation of funds is irrelevant because money is fungible. One dollar is as good as any other dollar, whether received through premiums or government subsidies, so federal funds are indirectly paying for abortions. That argument only restates the problem the segregation of funds is intended to solve by separating the sources of funds.

BOTTOM LINE: The federal government prohibits insurance companies from using public funding to cover elective abortions. The segregation of funds is intended to guarantee that funds for abortion coverage are sourced from premiums, separate from federal funds. There is no evidence that taxpayer funds have been illegally used to cover abortion in Arizona.

THE FINDING: No stars, unsupported.

SOURCES: Phone call with Nancy Barto; e-mail from Arizona Department of Insurance; e-mail from United States Department of Health and Human Services; September 2014 GAO report "Coverage of Non-excepted Abortion Services by Qualified Health Plans."

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1MFoOoq