On Saturday, President Obama addressed the nation in his weekly speech which happened to fall on July 4, but unlike previous speeches, he left out any mention of God. The omission was not overlooked, as many criticized the president online.

Screengrab/YouTube/The White House

He talked about spending the day outdoors, "grilling burgers and dogs, and watching the fireworks with our family and friends." He also said the day would be more fun as it falls on Malia's birthday. He managed to mention the military, and spoke of how some would join him for a barbecue.

"As always, we’ve invited some very special guests to our backyard barbecue – several hundred members of our military and their families," he added. "On this most American of holidays, we remember that all who serve here at home and overseas, represent what today is all about. And we remember that their families serve, too. We are so grateful for their service and for their sacrifice."

He also remembered to mention the “founding patriots” who declared independence from Britain 239 years ago and said “that all of us are created equal, endowed by our Creator with certain unalienable rights including the rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” Obama wished the U.S. Women’s National Team "good luck" in the World Cup Final. But instead of mentioning God in his closing, he issued a more politically-correct proclamation.

"Thanks, everybody," he said in closing. "From my family to yours, have a safe and happy Fourth of July." The omission didn't sit too well with a number of right-leaning sites.

"He may as well have said, 'Tell all your friends you love Obamacare,'" said a post at BizPac Review. "I’m beginning to think he does things like this just to tick people off," Michael Dorstewitz added. The Gateway Pundit's Jim Hoft said it helps show the kind of man Obama really is and what he "truly stands for."

The Blaze said some might give Obama points for mentioning the word “Creator” in a paraphrase from the Declaration of Independence. "We remember as well that this is the day when, 239 years ago, our founding patriots declared our independence, proclaiming that all of us are created equal, endowed by our Creator with certain unalienable rights including the rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness," the president said.

Twitter users also criticized Obama for the omission. One person, for example, called the president a "Godless little man" and wondered if anyone was truly surprised by the omission.

"What is wrong with him?" another person asked. "This proves he is muslim." Another person called Obama "an atheist with Muslim tendencies."

In 2014, Obama ended his speech by saying: "God bless you all." A year earlier, he closed out with: "So, God bless you all. And may God bless the United States of America.' This year, he simply said, "thanks." Video of Obama's comments can be seen above.