Obama's proposal for free community college would expand opportunity, reduce student loan debt.

President Barack Obama unveiled his proposal for free community college Jan. 9 at Pellissippi State Community College, in Knoxville, Tenn. (Photo: AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster, File)

America has an education system that guarantees free schooling from kindergarten through 12th grade. In the 21st century, that is simply not enough education.

What we know now is that some forms of formal, intentional education need to begin well before kindergarten, and some type of postsecondary education — technical or vocational training or a four-year college degree — is a necessity for future success in the workforce.

In other words, learning starts earlier and ends later than is provided by the public school system we've built. This may be the best way to understand President Obama's proposal to make two years of community college free to qualifying students — and it's why we welcome the proposal and believe it deserves a place in policy discussions.

The proposal, unveiled earlier this month in a preview of Tuesday's State of the Union address, would make two years of tuition free to students who attend community college at least half-time and maintain a B average or better.

The proposal was met with interest by local technical college leaders and others, though everyone seems to agree that there would be oodles of details to be worked out. That might not matter much, though, since the policy — which would, after all, cost tens of billions of dollars — is vanishingly unlikely to pass a Republican-controlled Congress. (Shortly after the announcement, House Speaker John Boehner's spokesman issued a statement saying it "seems more like a talking point than a plan.")

Critiques of its cost are certainly fair game, and there are some other potential weaknesses to the policy, too. Arguably high dropout rates are a bigger problem for higher education than low enrollments; this plan wouldn't address that problem and might make it worse. The poorest students already have programs that cover their costs, meaning this aid might go to students who don't, strictly speaking, need it. And of course "free tuition" is not synonymous with "free education," since the cost of books, supplies, room and board wouldn't be covered. All this is true.

But the impulse to dismiss the idea as impractical or politically impossible obscures the real benefits to the policy, the first and most important of which is that it would signal that college really is for everyone. That's an important message and something that all students need to hear from an early age.

Certainly not everyone needs to earn a Ph.D. or even a bachelor's degree. But the days when a high school diploma alone would ensure you lifelong, family-supporting employment are gone. Training matters, whether you are going to be a welder or a hairdresser or a computer programmer.

The other big benefit to cutting down college costs is to reduce students' debt burden upon graduation. It has been shown that those who graduate with student loan debt — loans that often take a decade or more to pay off — are less likely to buy a house or a car. Reduced student debt would be an economic boost.

As an investment in our future workforce, free community college and technical training would be a step in the right direction. Obama's proposal should be taken seriously.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1BD1iWi