When the Oregon assistant Brian Fish and the trainer Clay Jamieson were spit on after a loss at Arizona State, they were heading up a ramp on the way to the visiting locker room, which is flanked by the Arizona State student section. Fish said the intended target was Oregon guard Jason Calliste, who had been taunted earlier in the game.

“Thank God, I’m old and slow; I couldn’t do anything about it,” said Fish, who later received an apologetic email from the offending student, against whom he declined to press charges. “You don’t know how a player would have reacted. It’s one of those things that turned out about as good as it could.

“The problem with Arizona State is you have to walk through the student section to get to your locker room. They should probably move the students to the other end.”

Yet that sort of intimacy has long been part of the allure of college basketball. Student sections like Duke’s Cameron Crazies and the storming of a court after a big victory help distinguish the sport from more dispassionate ones.

Scott Brooks, an associate professor of sociology and black studies at Missouri, said social media had altered the dynamic between spectator and participant. Engagement is not limited to the court, lending another layer of proximity to a tense environment.

“For good and bad, access to social media has blurred the lines between fans and athletes,” Brooks said. “Athletes will internalize this, and they start to see themselves as a victim. Now, you can respond back, but then the storm starts all over again. That act of being able to respond through social media, I think that’s played a lot into this.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The N.B.A., after an infamous brawl in Detroit in 2004, when a skirmish between Pistons and Indiana Pacers players spilled into the stands, drew up a fan code of conduct. Among the measures were limits on alcohol consumption, increased security in arenas and restrictions on abusive behavior, such as foul language or obscene gestures. In most N.B.A. arenas, a video message from a player on the home team is played before each game encouraging fans to enjoy the game in a respectful manner.

Hurd, the WAC commissioner, said his conference will explore such measures when the WAC administrators meet in May and the conference presidents gather in June.

“Honestly, we haven’t done enough,” Hurd said. “We haven’t sat down and had a real serious, in-depth discussion about this. We’ve pretty much left it up to the institutions to determine their game management policies. We have to talk with game management officials who deal with this on a regular basis and come up with best practices.

“I don’t know what the answer is — Bakersfield doesn’t have the same resources as Ohio State, and it doesn’t have the same crowds, either — but I want to find out what our options are.”

On Friday, Hurd suspended K. C. Ross-Miller, the New Mexico State player who threw the ball, for the final two regular-season games, and his teammate Renaldo Dixon, who threw a punch while coming to the aid of a teammate, for one game. Menzies, the coach, is considering further punishment for Ross-Miller; penalties may be imposed on Utah Valley once the university completes an investigation.

As an assistant in places like Louisville, Southern California, San Diego State and U.N.L.V., Menzies had thought it endearing when fans stormed the court after a victory. He might have thought coaches like Duke’s Mike Krzyzewski and North Carolina’s Roy Williams, who have complained about their teams getting off the court safely, were sapping the fun from the moment.

“I don’t know if I would have agreed with Coach K before I was actually out on the floor and felt the emotion that was going on with the fans,” Menzies said. “Looking at it on TV, it looks like, great, they’re celebrating, it’s all good. I’m telling you it was scary. My personal feeling is fans belong in the stands and players on the court.”

In less than two weeks, the WAC tournament championship will be played in Las Vegas. If the tournament goes to form, Utah Valley and New Mexico will be playing for an N.C.A.A. tournament berth. For the winner, a celebration is sure to ensue.