By

When Kelamar “Kel” Svoboda was named one of Realtor Magazine’s 30 Under 30 honorees last year, the magazine’s theme was Mad Men. The way he sees it, he came up in real estate during the Mad Men television series, featuring a variety of characters who worked 14 hour days, which all parallel the work he has done. He started in the real estate industry at age 18, working in the mortgage side of the business. “I didn’t want to be a broke college kid. I was driving past a sign for agents, and called a friend working in mortgages who got me into lending. I got involved with real estate in 2004 when I was attending UW-Milwaukee. I decided to join the real estate sales side of the business in 2005, and in 2006, I earned my broker’s license,” he said during this edited interview.



What do you enjoy about selling real estate?

Everything. I love the clients and their stories and it comes down to the individual you’re dealing with.



How do you consider yourself to be different than other agents?

I work to be innovative. Since I’ve been in the business, technology has been something I’ve worked to incorporate. I’ve been in real estate since I was 18 years old, and since I began prior to the recession, I’ve found it to be a lot different now. This is more of a tech-savvy crew.

How do you keep yourself current with all the aspects of real estate?

I read a lot of online newsletters and attend a lot of classes. I have to constantly learn because I’m a Regional Manager with many agents working under me, and I need to train them on technology. I also travel across the country to many seminars and conferences. One of the biggest ways is from my peers in this business, regardless of the company they work with.

How do you believe your age has helped you?

It has helped me to understand change is inevitable and nothing stays the same. In real estate, we’re constantly learning and we’re the Google agents nowadays. We can’t just chase the latest and greatest, but rather find what works and mix the traditional methods with websites and social media presence.

What role should an agent play for a client?

To be a facilitator and person of reason. You have to take the emotion out of it for clients and be the one who recommends whether they’re making a smart business decision or not. Also, be on top of things and give them the deadlines and reminders. Be reliable and trustworthy.

What qualities make for a good agent?

A go-getter and someone who cares about the individual regardless of where he or she is from. Also, someone who understands we’re all realtors regardless of where you’re employed and we have to work together to make transactions happen.

Have you had any mentors?

I haven’t had any particular mentor. If I see someone who is successful in any profession, I ask why they are successful. I’ve been appreciative and fortunate that most of the people I’ve reached out to have been willing and able to give me some sort of education or wisdom.

What’s the best advice you’ve been given?

Nothing stays the same and there is always a better day.

What have you learned from your clients?

You never fully get to know people until you understand their story by asking questions. I’ve sold homes all over the state ranging from $20,000 to $500,000 and obviously everyone is different.

What’s the best advice you give to clients?

If it’s meant to be, you’ll know. I tell buyers they will know if it is the house for them or not. If you walk in and feel like this is the right home, you’ll know.

How have you developed as a realtor since the beginning?

I’ve definitely improved my leadership and management skills. I’ve also improved my ability to market a property as well as manage my time.

What is the biggest challenge clients face in today’s market?

The demand for housing is so high and the inventory is so low, buyers are paying more for a property. Also, distinguishing fact versus fiction when going online is hard. There are services which still list homes sold months ago, and they’re not associated with a Multiple Listing Service.

What’s your business philosophy?

To be a person of value and always have the clients’ interests in mind.

How do you relax in your down time?

I have a beautiful wife, an 18-month-old daughter and 4-year-old son who I have committed to being a dad. When I’m not selling real estate, I’m enjoying the time and laughter with these little children and my wife. I also coach t-ball for my son’s team.

What professional/charitable organizations are you involved with?

I’m involved with Easter Seals. The Young Professional Network works to provide a solid foundation for young agents in the future. I’m always available to speak for the GMAR and I also go to Chicago to speak on behalf of Century 21 on how to recruit and communicate with Millennials and Millennial home buyers and sellers.