John Marietta

John Marietta announced Sunday that he will run as a Republican candidate for the Fremont County Commissioner District 3 seat in the 2016 election.

"I believe in the importance of economic development and job growth in Fremont County," Marietta said in a press release. "There have been a number of businesses close their doors in the last several years. The trend is alarming. We must find a way for the county to help these 'Mom and Pop' shops succeed. They are the backbone of our community.

"In some cases, it may simply be for the county to try and get out of the way. I love the rural nature and small town feel of Fremont County. That's why I moved here 28 years ago. We must be careful that anything we do preserves the personality of Fremont County."

Ed Norden is serving a third term as District 3 commissioner.

Marietta is active in the community and has been a self-employed businessman in Fremont County for 28 years. He is the President of the Royal Gorge Association of Realtors, Chairman of the Fremont County Airport Advisory Board, Treasurer of the Fremont Community Foundation, active in Fremont Economic Development Corp. and active in the Cañon City Chamber of Commerce.

"In my current profession as a realtor, I am either online or over at the county administration building almost every day. This combination of business experience and interaction with the Departments at the County gives me valuable experience that I will bring to the commissioners job."

Advertisement

Marietta was born and raised in western Kansas. He graduated from Kansas State University with a bachelor's degree in finance. He was an ROTC Distinguished Military Graduate and was commissioned as a Regular Army Second Lieutenant.

Marietta served in the Army until 1987 when he relocated his family to Cañon City to start Cañon City Tire & Service. He owned and operated Cañon City Tire until 2010 and is a partner and associate broker at Coldwell Banker Fremont Realty.

Marietta and his wife, Pam, have two children and four grandchildren, all residing in Cañon City.