Dems tackle heroin, high medical costs in debate

With help from Paul Demko and Joanne Kenen

THE HOME STRETCH — Congress has officially wrapped up its work for the year, both Republican and Democratic presidential candidates are done debating until the new year, and there are only a few days left in 2015. Here's what you need to know heading into today:

Story Continued Below

DEMS TAKE ON HEROIN, HIGH MEDICAL COSTS — Health care wasn’t a central focus of Saturday night’s Democratic debate, but candidates were pressed to explain what they’d do to address the heroin addiction epidemic and rising health costs. All three candidates stressed that doctors need to curtail opiate prescriptions since they’re often a gateway to heroin use, an issue that the CDC is currently weighing. “They have got to start getting their act together,” Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders said. “We cannot have this huge number of opiates out there.”

— Frontrunner Hillary Clinton reiterated her plans to provide a $5,000 tax credit to individuals with big medical bills and to grant Medicare the authority to negotiate with pharmaceutical companies as key tools for cutting costs. But she also took aim at health plans as part of the problem. “We don't have enough competition and we don't have enough oversight of what the insurance companies are charging everybody right now,” Clinton said.

PREMIUM APPLES AND ORANGES — The debate included a moderator question asking what Hillary Clinton would do to fix Obamacare because premiums had gone up 27 percent in five years.Actually that 27 percent figure (from this Kaiser Family Foundation study) pertains to employer-sponsored-insurance, not ACA exchange customers, and the time period predates most of the health law coverage expansion. And the prior five years — 2005-10 — also saw a 27 percent rise. That's historically relatively modest — the years 2000-2005 saw a 69 percent increase.

HAPPY MONDAY and welcome to PULSE, where your PULSEr didn't really realize how close Christmas had gotten until colleagues were asking about holiday plans at last Friday's effervescent holiday party. How were we to shop for gifts during all the hubbub around year-end spending bills, Medicare packages and debate nights? Tell us we're not alone — or better yet, send us some last-minute gift ideas — when you send tips and comments to emershon@politico.com and to Brianna, who'll be back at the PULSE wheel tomorrow, at behley@politico.com.

"The moon is right. The spirits up. PULSE'S here tonight, and that's enough. Simply having a wonderful Christmastime."

GAWANDE'S COST CONUNDRUM, REVISITED — Atul Gawande is reexamining his conclusions on health care costs in light of the fascinating new research comparing private health spending to Medicare that has recently shaken up the health world. While his theses about ordering too many tests or too much care still seem to be true for Medicare patients, he highlights the study's conclusion that it has been hospital prices driving up costs for private payers. And solving that problem, he says in his latest New Yorker piece is "the Cost Conundrum Squared." "The bigger the hospital, the more it can adopt systems that deliver better-organized, higher-quality, less-wasteful care. But the bigger the hospital, the more power it has to raise prices."

— The solutions, as he sees them: "We can regulate the prices hospitals charge insurers — this is what Maryland does. We can break up big hospitals. We can encourage hospitals to become the insurers [like Kaiser Permanente]. Or we can expand Medicare to more and more people until we’re single payer. But, whichever way we go (and this being America, we’ll no doubt try to do some hodgepodge of it all), we cannot let the complexities blind us to the core concern," which for Gawande, is shifting the system to reward value over volume or monopoly power. Read it: http://bit.ly/1MpNjCW

FTC CHALLENGES ANOTHER HOSPITAL DEAL — The agency is seeking a temporary restraining order to block a proposed merger between Advocate Health Care Network and NorthShore University HealthSystem, two hospitals in the North Shore area of Chicago. It's the third hospital deal the FTC has blocked in recent weeks, and the agency again says the proposal will mean higher prices and lower quality. More on that: http://1.usa.gov/22iOkbH

SOME LIGHT READING: CHRONIC CARE FRAMEWORK DROPPED — Here's hoping you didn't duck out early on Friday like the rest of Congress, since the Senate Finance Committee chose that afternoon to drop a sizable list of proposals it's considering in its efforts to improve long-term care and reduce costs for Medicare patients with chronic conditions. The 30-page report lists more than 20 proposals — quite a lot to sift through. Some of the ones we noticed: a nationwide expansion of the Independence at Home demonstration, a change to how MA patients can get hospice coverage, and allowing ACOs to waive beneficiary cost-sharing for services that treat chronic conditions.

— Important to note: the committee isn't endorsing any of these proposals so far — and it's stating up front that anything it moves ahead with will need to save Medicare money, not add to deficits. "While we are committed to tackling this urgent matter head on, the Committee has repeatedly stated its intention to proceed thoughtfully," the report states. The proposals: http://politico.pro/1JmkE1F

NEW YEAR'S RESOLUTIONS: HOUSE TO VOTE ON RECONCILIATION — Republicans have been promising that Congress will vote to repeal Obamacare for years — but 2016 is shaping up to be the year they actually fulfill that resolution. Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy promised the House will take up the Senate-passed bill early in the new year, saying it would be "one of our first actions."

SHKRELI OUT AT TURING; NO WORD ON WHAT'S NEXT FOR DARAPRIM — The much maligned pharma bro resigned as CEO of the company a day after he was charged in an unrelated multi-million dollar fraud scheme. Ron Tilles will take over as interim CEO of the company, which gained notoriety after Shkreli hiked the price of a drug often used to treat HIV patients by 5,000 percent earlier this year. The company didn't indicate whether the new leadership planned to reduce the price of Daraprim. Tilles has been chairman of Turing's board of directors since the company launched last year.

IN THE STATES — New Hampshire's legislative task force is out with new recommendations on heroin and opioid abuse, Minnesota's state-based exchange has to return some ACA grants to the federal government, and New York City is looking at a new ruling saying it can't require preschoolers to get flu shots. The details on all that in more, in the latest State Week, by Pro's Rachana Pradhan, here. http://politico.pro/1JnLCWI

GOOD TIMING: GAO GETS BEHIND SITE-NEUTRAL PAYMENTS — There was a good deal of partisan bickering last week over whether Congress should deal with a hospital payment fix that would affect rates for hospitals currently building outpatient departments. It was ultimately shelved until next year — which'll give this new GAO report a little time to sink in. GAO took a look at areas where hospitals are buying a lot of physician practices and charging higher outpatient department rates, rather than doc's office rates — and concluded that given the trends toward consolidation, Congress needs to equalize the payment rates for similar services provided in the different settings, to keep Medicare from paying too much for care. The full report, here: http://1.usa.gov/22iG2AJ

AS IF TWO MAJOR YEAR-END PACKAGES WEREN'T ENOUGH — Congress decided to give health reporters an early holiday present and hotline a small Medicare package, too. The package, from Sens. Rob Portman and Bob Casey, makes it easier to get a hardship exemption for meaningful use rules and includes changes to the way Medicare will reimburse for power wheelchairs and radiation therapy.

— What's not in it may be just as important: A similar bill was scheduled for a vote last week in the House, but was withdrawn when Democrats sought to insert a fix to so-called site-neutral payments to hospitals. The fix, as well as some language that would have exempted ambulatory surgery centers from meaningful use until ONC develops an EHR certification program for them, were both kept out of the package that did make it through Congress. Republicans on the Ways and Means committee have said they're eager to address the hospital payment provisions at the start of next year.

ICYMI: SIX MILLION SIGN-UPS — That's a number big enough for a presidential full court press. President Barack Obama touted the sign-ups at his year-end press conference Friday, saying the administration is on track to meet its modest enrollment goals for 2016. More than 3.7 million people visited HealthCare.gov on Dec. 14 and Dec. 15 alone, and more than 1.1 million people selected plans, administration officials said. More on all that, from Pro's Rachana Pradhan, here.

MENTAL HEALTH PARITY RULE TO OMB — A final rule on the way Medicaid managed care plans, CHIP and alternative benefit plans will offer mental health coverage is now at OMB. It first came out in March; read it here: http://1.usa.gov/1JmlVG2

MORE PEOPLE DYING FROM DRUG OVERDOSES — Via Pro's Brett Norman: "The CDC reported that 47,055 people died of drug overdoses in 2014 - a 6.5 percent increase from the year before and a startling 137 percent jump since 2000. Overdoses on prescription opioids in particular climbed by 9 percent, while overdoses involving heroin and synthetic opioids such as fentanyl grew by even more - 26 percent and 80 percent, respectively," he writes, per new data in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. The full story, from Brett.

WHAT WE'RE READING by Brianna Ehley

U.S. regulators are probing complaints about research practices at Theranos Inc., the Wall Street Journal reports: http://on.wsj.com/1RzgSKf

The New York Times looks at the rift between the U.S. and Cuba over a U.S. program that incentivizes Cuban doctors to go to the U.S. http://nyti.ms/1kbHouB

Days after his arrest, Martin Shkreli is accusing authorities of targeting him for hiking the price of Daraprim earlier this year, The Wall Street Journal reports: http://on.wsj.com/1kbByJV

The Los Angeles Times investigates how a medical device maker kept U.S. hospitals in the dark about deadly infections: https://t.co/RdNtPa77JT

The New York Times editorial board rails against high drug prices: http://nyti.ms/1Yv6qTc

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **