Gov. Charlie Baker will travel to Washington, D.C. on Tuesday to lobby on behalf of Massachusetts' military installations and to urge Congress to pass a transportation funding bill.

Massachusetts has six military installations, including Westover Air Force Reserve Base in Chicopee and Barnes Air National Guard Base in Westfield.

President Barack Obama has asked a Department of Defense commission to recommend a series of base realignments and closures, to begin in 2017. This is a process that the federal government has engaged in several times before as a way to save money by consolidating bases and to make sure that the military is structured in the most efficient way possible to meet the military's current needs.

It also means advocates for each state and each military installation will have to make the case for the importance of that base.

Baker's office said the governor will be joined by Adjutant General of the Massachusetts National Guard Major General L. Scott Rice and MassDevelopment President and CEO Marty Jones. MassDevelopment is a statewide economic development agency that has been working to keep the state's military bases open.

The Massachusetts delegation plans to meet with U.S. Sen. Jack Reed, D-RI, the ranking member on the U.S. Senate Committee on Armed Services, and U.S. Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-NH, the chairman of the Subcommittee on Readiness and Management Support for the Armed Services Committee. Both of these New England senators will play key roles in the process of determining which bases are closed.

Baker, Rice and Jones will also meet at the Pentagon with Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations and Environment John Conger, whose office will be involved in the base closure process.

As The Republican/MassLive.com previously reported, the Massachusetts congressional delegation has been lobbying on behalf of the state's bases since early 2014.

Overall, according to state figures, the military bases support 61,000 jobs and generate $13 billion in economic activity in Massachusetts.

Baker is a Republican and Obama is a Democrat, and Baker has had mixed results with the requests he has so far submitted to Washington. He secured a chance to apply for some federal disaster aid for this winter's snowstorms, but for far less money than he had hoped for. He received a one-year extension from complying with a provision of the Affordable Care Act that affects small businesses, but was denied a permanent waiver. Baker, however, has largely refrained from criticizing the Obama administration, saying he believes he has gotten a fair hearing from federal officials.

Baker will also be meeting with U.S. Rep. Stephen Lynch, a Democrat representing Massachusetts 8th District, which covers Boston and parts of southeastern Massachusetts. He will also address the New England Council, an organization that advocates for economic growth in New England on Capitol Hill.

Both Reed and Ayotte serve on committees related to transportation. Baker said he will be lobbying them and talking to the New England Council about the need to pass a long-term transportation funding bill.

The current federal transportation funding bill – which gives money to states for highway and other transportation projects – expires at the end of July. Although there is a Senate bill pending that would create a six-year funding plan, Congress has in recent years been unable to agree on more than short-term extensions. This creates uncertainty for the states, which are unable to count on federal funding for long-term projects.