Longmont United officials say duplicating resources could increase cost of health care

Editor's note: The original version of this story misidentified University of Colorado Hospital. It has now been corrected.

As plans move forward for Boulder County's fifth hospital — at the northwest corner of County Line Road and Ken Pratt Boulevard — those affiliated with nearby Longmont United say the new building is unnecessary.

University of Colorado Health is planning the 172,000-square-foot hospital on 32 acres at the eastern edge of Longmont, according to documents submitted to the city.

University of Colorado Health is planning a 172,000-square-foot hospital on 32 acres at the eastern edge of Longmont. (Image courtesy of UCHealth)

Longmont has had a single hospital since 1971, when Longmont United — itself a 1959 merger between St. Vrain Hospital and the Longmont Hospital — absorbed Longs Peak Osteopathic Hospital.

The new UCHealth hospital would include an ambulatory surgery center and a three-story acute-care hospital as well as 47,500 square feet of future expansion space. The $100 million hospital is set to open by late 2016 or early 2017 with 50 to 75 inpatient beds, an intensive care unit, operating rooms, an emergency department with a level-three trauma center, cardiology services and a birth center to serve an expanding Longmont population and the fast-growing tri-town area in the Carbon Valley.

Advertisement

"We're excited about bringing services to Longmont and the surrounding community," said Dan Robinson, CEO of the planned hospital. "Longmont is experiencing a 6 percent growth, and east of there, in the Carbon Valley, they're experiencing 15 percent or more, so there's significant growth in that area, and we're building for the future."

But Peter Powers, vice president for strategic planning and clinic operations at Longmont United, said he worries that more hospital beds won't be a good thing for Longmont.

"This is going to be the fifth hospital in Boulder County. People here are not lacking for health care options whatsoever," Powers said. "If you look at the four hospitals in Boulder County, they all are at 50 percent capacity."

Because Colorado is not a "certificate of need" state, UCHealth did not have to prove a need to get permission from the state.

In 1974, the federal government required all states to have a planning agency that approved major projects such as a new hospital, but the measure was repealed in 1987. There are now 36 "certificate of need" states, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.

Bordering fast-growing areas

Dan Weaver, spokesman for UCHealth, said the hospital's location on the edge of Boulder County was purposefully planned.

"It's a nice central location," Weaver said. "The Carbon Valley is growing very fast, and the location of this hospital allows us to provide care to those residents and to Longmont, Erie and Boulder County — it's central to those areas as well."

Weaver said that according to UCHealth data, roughly 1,000 residents left the Longmont community last year to get care at either Medical Center of the Rockies or University of Colorado Hospital in Aurora.

Officials at Longmont United Hospital say more hospitals in an area can raise — instead of lower — the cost of services. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

UCHealth has met with the city's development review committee and held a neighborhood meeting but has not formally applied for permits yet, said Shawn Lewis, assistant city manager. The project could possibly be approved by the city's planning and zoning commission rather than going all the way to the City Council.

The new UCHealth hospital would be the closest for Carbon Valley residents, who now go to Longmont United, Boulder Community Health or Medical Center of the Rockies in Loveland for care.

Jennifer King, 35, of Frederick, said she is for the new hospital.

"It sounds like a good thing," King said. "Of course, I have Kaiser (Permanente insurance), so a place that I can go is hard to find. Like, I can't go to these emergency rooms that are popping up on every corner."

Terry and Margaret Johnson, of Firestone, said they aren't likely to switch from Longmont United to the new hospital.

"They would have to have some reason for me to change," said Terry Johnson, 72. "But if I was being transported all the way to Longmont, I might as well go to LUH. If we're going 12 miles to Longmont, we might as well go three or four more miles to LUH."

Margaret Johnson, 69, said she isn't a fan of the planned location for the new UCHealth hospital.

"It's a poor location because there's way too much traffic at that corner," she said.

'Duplicating resources '

John Santistevan, president and CEO of Salud Family Health Centers, said Longmont United's capacity is working for the community.

Salud Family Health Centers aims to improve access to health care for people with low incomes, a lack of transportation or a language barrier. Salud works closely with Longmont United, referring patients there and accepting Longmont United doctors' donated time for indigent care. The Longmont clinic was expanded a year ago due to a slight increase in patients, but it isn't dealing with a large overflow of patients being turned away from Longmont United.

"We are not lacking for services from the hospital," Santistevan said. "Our standpoint is that it fits our need. ... They don't seem to be maxed out on the number of beds, and they don't seem to always be filled."

Powers, the Longmont United vice president, cited a theory about the health care system that says more hospitals in an area can raise — instead of lower — the cost of services.

"More hospital beds make things more expensive for the public," he said. "It's unbelievably expensive to run a hospital, and there is an unbelievable amount of regulation involved. So you're duplicating resources by buying very, very expensive equipment which already exists in multiple locations within the community, and it results in very, very high fixed costs."

Jeanne Wade, a retired Erie resident who travels either to Longmont or Boulder for hospital care, said she is concerned the area won't be able to sustain another hospital. Wade has several family members in the health care industry, including a son who works at Longmont United, and said the topic "comes up a lot around the dinner table."

"Regular competition suggests the more competition you have, the lower the price of goods, but that's not going to happen here because the market requires they keep up with their technology and have all this staff and have the ability to do procedures, whether they have the patients or not," Wade said. "This is very costly, so prices are not going to go down when patients have access to these services. Prices are going to stay the same or go up."

Robinson, CEO of the planned hospital, said the UCHealth hospital would create efficiencies in the way the staff delivers care.

"We intend to make this as lean of an operation as possible," he said. "It's not our intention to increase the cost of health care. ... One of our intentions is to grow our facilities and capacity to take care of patients that need and choose to go to UCHealth for health care."

Robinson said one the ways to make the new hospital as lean as possible is including physicians, staff and patients in the design process.

"That way, we can understand how the facility flows and be more efficient in order to spend more time with patients," he said.

Inpatient vs. outpatient

Powers said adding a new hospital in the area doesn't make sense because the health care industry is going the opposite way — away from hospitalization.

"We all know that health care is way too expensive in this country, and the biggest way to combat that problem is to keep people out of the hospital," he said. "That's the way the industry is going. With advances in technology, we've gotten better at treating people at lower-cost outpatient facilities, and there's a shift toward preventative care, to get to people sooner before they get so sick."

Data from the American Hospital Association shows that inpatient surgeries decreased in number from 1993 to 2013, while outpatient surgeries have been increasing. The average length of stay in community hospitals nationally was seven days in 1993, dropping to 5.4 in 2013.

At Longmont United, the number of inpatient surgeries declined from 2,133 performed in 2010 to 1,405 in 2014, according to t he Colorado Hospital Association.

Robinson said the trend toward outpatient care is obvious and something the new hospital plans to incorporate.

"We will be doing much more preventative programming in the way we deliver care in order to streamline the services in the hospital," Robinson said. "Our outpatient care is growing where the market is growing, and we intend to provide this ambulatory surgical setting in Longmont."

Transportation questions

There are now no Regional Transportation District buses serving the area where the new hospital is planned. That's a fairly big problem for Via Mobility Services, a Boulder-based nonprofit that provides transportation to people with disabilities, elderly people or others.

Executive Director Lenna Kottke said Via added 600 people from Longmont last year but has not been able to increase service in the city for the last five years due to financial constraints.

Via made about 2,000 trips to Longmont United in 2014, and a quarter of all trips taken in Longmont are for some kind of medical appointment, Kottke said.

"Longmont United is an easier location for us to serve because it's right in the heart of the city, and we can combine other trips with trips to LUH," Kottke said. "But that outlying area, it's going to be very costly and inefficient to serve."

Although Via has some relationships with volunteer drivers in Weld County, Kottke described them as "overwhelmed."

She said that while the new hospital is still in the planning stages, it's the perfect time to work out how it will get people to their hospital appointments.

"Whether they want to work with Via or the hospital wants to develop its own service, there needs to be some thought on how people will get there if they're not able to drive," Kottke said.

Robinson said there haven't been those conversations around transportation yet but that they are important.

"Transportation in an outlying community is a challenge for a lot of people," Robinson said. "We plan to enter a conversation with folks in the local market to see how to best provide that."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci