Mario Anzuoni/Reuters

Hot on the heels of last week’s move by Diageo to increase its stake in Guinness Nigeria, the U.S. cereal-maker Kellogg has announced a $450 million deal to expand its presence in Africa. Tess Stynes reports the $450 million deal with Tolaram Africa Foods includes a 50% stake in Nigeria-based food distributor Multipro and an option to acquire a stake in Tolaram in the future. Kellogg CEO John Bryant said sub-Saharan Africa offers a “tremendous” opportunity for growth.

The founder of Mara Group, Ashish Thakkar, shares Bryant’s optimism about Africa’s growth prospects and is launching a pan-African e-commerce company to capitalize on that growth. Thakkar unveiled his plans in an interview with WSJ Frontiers in New York, explaining that the new company, Mara Sokoni, would create an online “marketplace for global brands to plug into to sell locally in Africa, and for local brands to sell nationally, regionally and globally.”

In tandem with the launch of the e-commerce platform, Mara is building a logistics company, Mara Xpress, to handle “last-mile delivery” across the continent.

Uganda’s mission to capitalize on its oil reserves took a step forward with the news that the deal to construct a planned 30,000-barrel-per-day oil refinery should soon be sealed. The WSJ’s Nicholas Bariyo reports that the Russian firm RT Global Resources expects to reach a final deal in October for the $2.5 billion refinery.

The country’s plans for a pipeline to deliver future crude production to the coast appeared to take a step backward, though. After agreeing with Nairobi last month to route the pipeline through northern Kenya, Uganda revealed it is now is considering a pipeline through Tanzania as a cheaper option.

Ghana’s struggles continued. Fitch Ratings this week affirmed its negative outlook on the country, noting that “fiscal and external risks remain high, complicated by a slowing economy and low commodity prices.”

Cocoa farmers in Ghana. Reuters

Ghana has also struggled to meet its cocoa production targets. The Journal’s Katherine Dunn reports that cocoa farmers had been expected to produce 800,000 tons over the past season, which ends this month, but fell short by 100,000 tons. The country’s cocoa board did, however, manage to secure a $1.8 billion syndicated loan this week to fund the next cocoa-growing season, which is expected to yield 850,000 tons.

With its currency still under pressure, the country’s central bank pushed up interest rates by one percentage point to a lofty 25.0% this week. London-based analyst Capital Economics predicts that monetary conditions in Ghana will remain tight “for the foreseeable future”.

Fitch also presented a bleak picture for the Republic of Congo’s growth prospects and revised its outlook for the country to negative. “GDP growth is set to decelerate rapidly in 2015, hindered by a temporary slump in oil production, a sharp fall in public investment and struggling exports, Fitch said. The agency slashed its GDP growth forecast for 2015 to 2.5%—the lowest rate in eight years.

Burkina Faso’s future turned sharply bleaker this week after supporters of former president Blaise Compaore ousted the country’s transitional government just weeks before elections aimed at establishing democracy there. The WSJ’s Heidi Vogt and Drew Hinshaw report that world leaders condemned the coup, which triggered a wave of violence through the country.

The risk of political conflict is rising in Argentina, writes the Journal’s Taos Turner, after a provincial court annulled the recent election of ruling-party candidate Juan Manzur to the governorship of Tucuman province, citing vote fraud. Presidential Cabinet Chief Anibal Fernandez called the ruling “coup-mongering” and the leader of Argentina’s Lower House charged it’s “the gravest thing to happen since the return of democracy.”

Tension between Venezuela and Colombia, heightened by Venezuela’s recent closure of sections of the border, looks set to ease. Juan Forero reports that the two countries’ presidents have agreed to meet in Ecuador next week to discuss the issue.

People carrying their household belongings across the Táchira River that separates Venezuela from the city of Cúcuta, Colombia. Eliecer Mantilla/Associated Press

Venezuela’s president Nicolás Maduro may have been hoping the issue would divert attention from the dire state of his country’s economy. Analyst GlobalSource Partners forecasts that inflation will approach 300% this year, Kejal Vyas writes. The firm also expects GDP to shrink by 10.3%, 7.4% and 5.1% in 2015, 2016 and 2017, respectively, and warns “the risk of social unrest is high.”

Frontier-market investors excited by the prospect that Peru might soon be joining the ranks of frontier markets may be disappointed, Ryan Dube writes. Peruvian officials and business leaders are stepping up efforts to convince index provider MSCI that the country’s market shouldn’t be relegated to frontier status from its current position as an emerging market. But some analysts say the concerns are overblown—and the change could actually be positive.

Those looking to tap opportunities in Iran could also find their hopes are misplaced, Nick Elliott reports. According to Henry Balani, head of innovation at Accuity, a compliance data and screening company, as the nuclear deal takes effect there will be a piecemeal lifting of sanctions by different countries that will make the sanctions regime more complicated rather than less.

The next hot frontier? Associated Press

Cuba is suffering no such confusion, however. The Obama administration late this week announced plans to further loosen sanctions. The latest changes will further facilitate travel to the island, expand telecommunications and Internet services as well as allow some to establish offices and bank accounts there, Felicia Schwartz writes.

With Cuba and Iran tiptoeing back into the fold of countries that are open for investment, the most adventurous of frontier investors are having to look further afield. In an interview with the Journal’s Tim Puko and Tatyana Shumsky, Jim Rogers, renowned as the co-founder with George Soros of the Quantum Fund, reveals he is doing just that—and makes the case for the ultimate frontier market.

Key Stories from the WSJ

Egypt Swears in New Government

German Businesses Press Hard to Build Their Presence in Iran

Liberia’s Port Shows Surge in Trade as Nation Recovers from Ebola

TPG Chooses Morocco for Debut Africa Investment

Vietnam Cozies Up to Japan in South China Sea Strategy

US Buyout Firm Takes First Steps Into Vietnam

Sri Lanka Plans Legal and Political Change to Foster Postwar Reconciliation

Yemen’s Prime Minister Returns From Exile

In Africa, So Much Sun, So Little Electricity

Congolese Symphony Hits High Notes Around the Globe

Around the Web

Nigeria To Renegotiate Oil Contracts

Kenya Inks Nuclear Power Deal With China

Pakistan Cuts Interest Rates to 42-year Low

Bangladesh May Choose Japan Over China for Port and Power Projects

Argentina Wins In U.S. Court; Bad Time For Bonds?

Correa: Ecuador‘s Economy Will Not Grow This Year

Sign up here to have This Week on the Frontiers delivered to your inbox.