Charlotte Ziebarth places silk fabric for her abstract art quilt on the wall of her Boulder studio. The fabric is a digital print from a photograph Ziebarth took. ( David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer )

It took some time for Charlotte Ziebarth to find the perfect artistic medium.

A lifelong student of self-expression and tactile creativity, Ziebarth cycled through several different means of expression over decades. The Boulder resident tried her hand at weaving and tapestry production; she devoted time to knitting, photography and clothing design.

She finally found her creative calling in an art form with very deep roots. In quilting, Ziebarth found a perfect combination of old and new, an expression that paired the latest in digital technology with an age-old craft that spans centuries.

"I got more interested in what you can do with cloth. Anything you can do with paper, you can do it better with cloth," Ziebarth said, citing 3D and bas-relief as just a few of the medium's creative possibilities. "There are lot of people who do traditional quilting, but there is also a lot of innovation in the field."

Ziebarth has earned national recognition for her novel take on a storied artistic tradition, and she's not the only local artist to do so.

Ziebarth and two other quilters from Boulder County are among 86 artists to be featured in this year's Quilt National exhibition, which opens May 23 in Athens, Ohio.

Quilts created by Ziebarth, Jeanne Gray, of Boulder, and Carol Watkins, of Lafayette, will be featured in the prestigious biennial showcase. The other members of the Centennial State contingent are Ellen Zak Danforth, of Fort Collins, and Deidre Adams, of Littleton.

The Boulder County group's entries run the visual gamut from Watkins' more straightforward representation to the abstract designs of Gray and Ziebarth.

Despite her success as a quilter, Carol Watkins has no training in art. (Courtesy photo)

It's not the first time these artists have received praise for their work. As members of a thriving local arts scene (the three are members of the Front Range Contemporary Quilters group), each artist has experience spreading their artistic message on a national level.

Still, there's still a thrill to be included in the Quilt National juried show, a contest that draws entries from across the planet. The winning selections from Ziebarth, Gray and Watkins will be featured at the exhibition at the Dairy Barn gallery in Athens from May 23 through Sept. 7, and, afterward, the entire exhibit will embark on a two-year tour across the country.

"There are a lot of people who apply for these shows," said Carol Watkins, whose work titled "Messages from Poseidon" features a five-panel series of images related to the sea. "It's a thrill to be juried in and have the opportunity to not only be seen in Ohio, but then to travel around the country for the following three years."

Like Ziebarth, Watkins sees quilting as a way to present fresh artistic ideas in a flexible medium. Her works incorporate digital photography, as well as the tactile, three-dimensional boundaries of cloth. It's not the first time Watkins has been featured in the exhibition, but she's insistent she still has a lot to learn.

Jeanne Gray says her work is inspired by her Colorado environs. (Courtesy photo)

"I like the tactile quality of fabric," said Watkins, a former Boulder resident who has worked as a social worker for three decades. "I was never trained in art, and I think I felt comfortable starting in quilting because it's already something that I knew a little bit about. It was a good segue."

Gray credits her environment for her creativity.

"Living in Colorado has been such an inspiration for my work," she wrote on her website. "I look out the window and watch the wind blow the leaves on the trees, and see the sunlight shifting throughout the day. The seasons change and my work flows with these changes in nature."

It's the eclectic nature of the art form that has kept Ziebarth creating. She's a fan of abstraction in her work; she opts for patterns and designs that lack a definite form but that hint at larger narratives. With its multidimensional potential, quilting has become an ideal means of getting those messages across. Her entry for this year's competition, titled "Liquid Sunset," is rooted in the aesthetic patterns of waves on water.

"I am a photographer. I do take a lot of pictures, and I work on them a lot with Photoshop. Then it's coming up with a quilt design," Ziebarth said. "One of the things I like about this medium is that all of these components come together in the finished product."

Learning to properly integrate all of the different artistic ingredients has taken time for Ziebarth. Her successful entry in the 2015 exhibition and competition represents the capstone of a lot of work.

"It still feels new," she said. "I've entered six or seven times before I actually got in. They gave me an award last time called the 'Persistence Pays Award.' It's what I like to do and I just always entered my best work."