The storm systems that descended on Colorado's Front Range beginning Friday evening dumped nearly 15 inches of snow on Boulder, bringing the city's monthly total to 36.8 inches, breaking an all-time record for the month of February.According to Boulder meteorologist Matt Kelsch, 12.7 inches of snow had fallen in Boulder through 6:40 a.m. today. Light snow throughout the day added another couple of inches to the total by 5 p.m.Along with the record 36.8 inches of snow for the month, February also has a record 2.51 inches of liquid, according to Kelsch. The previous monthly snow record for February was 32.1 inches, set in 2012.

City of Boulder offices will be on a delayed start Monday morning, opening at 10 a.m. due to weather and anticipated road conditions.

Longmont wasn't hit as hard by the storms, with about 7 inches of snow reported this morning in the city, bringing the monthly total to 13.1 inches, according to Times-Call Weather Consultant Dave Larison.



Larison said that's about 10 inches below the city's all-time record for February of 23.7 inches, set in 1915.



While the snow began falling late Friday, it tapered off Saturday morning only to resume with much greater force that afternoon, forcing sporadic closures of U.S. 36 in and out of Boulder as cars slid off the roadway and became stranded.

Advertisement

According to the National Weather Service, snow accumulated at a rate of up to 2 inches per hour late Saturday afternoon in and near the foothills, and across the Palmer Divide during what has been described as a "long duration winter storm."

A winter storm warning has been in place since Saturday morning, and will remain in effect until 11 p.m. today, according to the National Weather Service.

Tonight, snow is expected to continue, mainly through 2 a.m. Monday. Another 1 to 3 inches of snow is expected tonight.

Monday's forecast calls for a high of 24 and a 30 percent chance of snow, mainly before 7 a.m., and then turning sunny later in the day. New snow accumulation of less than a half inch is possible.

Today, a steady stream of well bundled kids and adults braved the bitter cold and light snow to sled at Boulder's Scott Carpenter Park.

Ken Stillman brought his two kids, 8 and 5, “to get out of the house.”

“We like the snow,” he said.

Diana Lerner, a junior at the University of Colorado at Boulder sledding with friends, declared sledding “more fun than doing homework.”

The group agreed they needed to play while they had the chance, noting CU is stingy with declaring snow days.

Added CU senior Catherine Bacon, “This snow is awesome and fun to play in. I love this snow.”

Three friends from Boulder's Centennial Middle School — 14-year-olds Adam Kamphuis, James Spillmann and Jonny Suchor — brought several sleds but declared saucers the best.

“It's fun,” Jonny said. “You're with your friends and having a good time.”