Stephen Colbert was one of many comedians who made fun of Joni Ernst’s “Squeal” ad, but by the end of the campaign, it was considered one of the most effective TV ads of the cycle. (Photo: Special to the Register )

Sixty-seven seconds of video defined Iowa's U.S. Senate race this cycle: The 37-second caught-on-tape footage of Democrat Bruce Braley seemingly disparaging farmers, and the 30-second TV advertisement in which Republican Joni Ernst established her reputation as an undauntable farm girl.

The GOP operatives with America Rising who unearthed the Braley video declined to reveal details about its heritage, saying they shy away from behind-the-curtain political postmortems.

Ernst laughingly shared the story of the birth of "Squeal" with The Des Moines Register during an interview alongside Todd Harris, the California-born Washington, D.C.-based campaign strategist who masterminded the TV ad.

The spot, in which Ernst lightheartedly vows to use her hog castration skills to "make 'em squeal" in D.C., was ridiculed by liberals and comedians at first, but later made all the lists of the "best campaign ads of 2014."

REGISTER: How did this ad come about?

ERNST: We sat down when we had our team in place, when we had Todd and David (Polyansky, chief strategist), and we just started talking experiences that I'd had growing up. They're like, "What makes you a different candidate?"

HARRIS: You were working on a stump speech.

ERNST: Yeah, it was. They wanted to know about all this stuff so that we could roll it into the stump speech, and part of it was the walking beans, and the castrating hogs. Todd, didn't you have to look it up on YouTube?

HARRIS: I didn't know it was a real thing. When we were working on the script, I looked it up on YouTube because I was working on trying to figure out, if you were talking about something like this, where would you be? What would be the setting. So I Googled 'castrating hogs.' And was queasy.

ERNST: So it was just things that would set me apart, experiences that I'd had, just real Iowa.

REGISTER: Where did this meeting take place?

HARRIS: We were in the basement meeting room at the Hyatt Place, downtown Des Moines.

ERNST: Maybe July 2013, because I announced in July 2013.

REGISTER: So you knew you were going to do "Squeal" for a long time?

ERNST: It developed.

HARRIS: Well, we didn't have an ad. The first time we delivered the line, it wasn't how it ended up. But you used it in a debate, Joni.

ERNST: The (Americans for Prosperity/Des Moines Register/National Review) debate (in October 2013 at Drake University). The audience was supposed to be quiet, no clapping. And then when I used that line, that 'Hey, I castrated hogs with my dad, I'll know how to cut pork,' the audience just burst out laughing, and then at that point it was like, yeah, this needs to be a commercial. It's so funny. And it's not uniquely Iowa but it's something that connects so many people here in the state with agricultural roots. But we talked about so many things — working at Hardee's and all of those things.

REGISTER: How did you find the farm where you taped this ad?

ERNST: Oh, it was a friend of mine, back at Red Oak. One of the little boys I grew up with (David DeVries), they actually have show pigs — show pigs! They take their pigs all over. I mean they are, they're real show pigs. But Davy and I grew up together. He was on the farm that was right across from my grandma and grandpa. And they were so thrilled to do this. His wife, Tammy, cuts my hair, too. I mean, it's that kind of community.

REGISTER: Was there any hesitation about running this ad?

ERNST: Not really. I just thought it was so funny. And we had so much fun making that ad. When we made the ad — I mean it was great. We had some of the farm hands ... they were kicking back watching this thing (being filmed). I mean, it was such an oddity.

HARRIS: Oh, yeah.

ERNST: Davy and Tammy have cattle, too, and in the room next door in the barn, a cow was having a calf, but she was having problems with it. And it was making such a ruckus.

HARRIS: It would literally be like, "I'm Joni Ernst. I grew up —" (Imitates a cow bellowing.) Cut!

ERNST: Cut! Start over. She couldn't get the calf out, so pretty soon here comes the vet, strolling through the middle of our set, to come pull the calf. And so everybody took a time-out. All the sound guys, the camera guys, they all went to watch. They'd never seen anything like that. Once they got the calf out and the vet left, then we got back to shooting the ad.

REGISTER: So that's why you had such a big smile on your face in the ad? You're laughing so hard at this.

ERNST: Oh, my gosh, it was quite a day.

HARRIS: We shot four spots that day. We started with "Shot" (which featured a Harley-riding Ernst in black leather firing a pistol at a shooting range, as a narrator talked about how she'd "unload" on Obamacare).

ERNST: We did "Shot," and we did "Squeal," and we did two that were inside.

HARRIS: One was about service. And I can't remember what the other one was.

Harkin website recaps Senate career

There are fewer than 50 days left in Tom Harkin's tenure as Iowa's U.S. senator.

Now that it's a certainty that Iowa will have its first all-Republican U.S. Senate delegation since 1985, Iowans are starting to take stock of the totality of the Democrat's career.

Harkin has a website that details 40 years in Congress — including 27 years as a chairman of three Senate committees — as well as his work on such issues as disability rights, global human rights, civil rights, health reform, farmland conservation, food and nutrition, education, biomedical research, bike trails, law enforcement and care for seniors.

"From my first day in the political arena, I have strongly believed that a cardinal role of government is to provide a ladder of opportunity for every American," he says in a letter posted on the website, at http://www.harkin.

senate.gov/index.cfm. "Notice I didn't say escalator, I said ladder. This is not about a free ride."

His successor will be Republican Sen.-elect Joni Ernst, who will be sworn in on Jan. 3, 2015. That will mark a major change for Iowa, which has sent a split partisan delegation to the Senate for 53 of the past 100 years, including the last 30 with Republican U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley and Harkin, notes researcher Eric Ostermeier of the University of Minnesota.

Kochel talks politics at gathering in Italy

Iowa political strategist David Kochel was one of 14 panelists invited to speak at an "Inside American Politics" conference at New York University's La Pietra Dialogues in Florence, Italy, last week.

The Dialogues' website says it convenes thinkers from around the world "to confront some of the most intractable issues of contemporary society."

On a panel on money and messaging in the wake of the U.S. Supreme Court campaign finance ruling, Kochel said one of the reasons for the onslaught of campaign spending from powerful outside groups is that the candidates themselves are prohibited from taking more than $2,600 from individual donors per election.

"You can't run a modern campaign on $2,600 contributions," Kochel said.

Kochel, founder of the Des Moines-based Redwave Digital and a veteran of 30 years of Republican presidential campaigns and Iowa races, called for lifting the cap on individual contributions — as long as the names of donors are disclosed to the public almost immediately.

Other top politicos at the Dialogues included Joel Benenson, pollster for Presidents Barack Obama and Bill Clinton; Kevin Madden, a senior adviser to Mitt Romney's 2012 presidential campaign; Kiki McLean, a senior adviser to Hillary Clinton's 2008 presidential campaign; Steve McMahon, co-founder of Purple Strategies; and Maria Cino, a former deputy chairwoman for the Republican National Committee.

Political peace closer to heaven?

The limited number of flights between Des Moines and Washington sometimes makes for strange political seatmates.

No doubt the conversation, or lack of it, is sometimes strained. But at least occasionally, rivals find comity in the sky.

Take this tweet on Nov. 6 from Todd Harris (@dtoddharris), a Washington, D.C.-based GOP strategist and media consultant who masterminded the TV advertisement "Squeal," which helped Iowa U.S. Sen.-elect Joni Ernst overcome Democrat Bruce Braley in this fall's election.

"In random twist of fate, sat next to Braley comms director @drewpusateri on flight back to DC. Great guy #iasen."

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1qKBVZ3