WALLINGFORD >> Municipal officials from across U.S. Rep. Rosa DeLauro’s Third District told the congresswoman Tuesday that they want her to work to repeal the so-called “Cadillac tax” associated with the Obama administration’s health care reform plan.

The financial impact that the tax is estimated to have on communities in the district ranges from $750,000 in a town like North Haven to several million dollars for the city of Milford. Starting in 2018, the Affordable Care Act will impose a 40 percent excise tax on the portion of most employer sponsored health care coverage — excluding dental and vision — that tops $10,200 a year for individuals and $27,500 for families.

The tax, according to the policy journal Health Affairs, is designed to slow growing healthcare costs and finance expanded coverage under the Affordable Care Act. But the 20 local municipal leaders who attended DeLauro’s annual gathering with public officials in her district see the tax as yet another strain on their already tight budgets.

“It was something that I opposed right from the outset when we were debating the Affordable Care Act,” DeLauro said after the meeting. “I believe there is bipartisan support to repeal the Cadillac tax.”

Advertisement

Among the municipal leaders attending the meeting with DeLauro were Milford Mayor Ben Blake and Middletown Mayor Daniel Drew. Blake called the tax consequences the city is facing with the Cadillac tax “a huge liability.”

“Right now, we spend about $40 million a year for the city’s health care,” he said. “It’s about 20 percent of our overall budget.”

Drew said Middletown has “a very similar dynamic, a similar cost structure.”

“The dialogue we’ve had helps us to better understand what we’re dealing with,” Drew said of the meeting with DeLauro and her staff.

North Haven First Selectman Michael Freda is chairman of the South Central Regional Council of Governments, whose member municipalities include Third Congressional District towns. Other key issues discussed during the meeting with DeLauro, Freda said, were getting federal money to help cover the cost of snow removal this winter and separate funding for road repairs cause by the harsh winter weather.

“In that past, we’ve sought to recover 75 percent of the costs,” he said. “I don’t know whether we’ll get that this year. But these meetings are critically important letting municipal officials know what they need to go through in order to get help from the Third District office.”

Freda said he also got an update on possible federal funding for a train station off of Devine Street that would be part of a commuter rail service that will begin running between Springfield, Massachusetts and New Haven late in 2016. Funding for the design of the Devine Street train station was part of a $5.75 million bonding package the state’s Bond Commission approved in January.

“The (federal) money is not locked in yet,” Freda said. “But the process is far enough along that we’re going have public hearing on the station this spring.”

Call Luther Turmelle at 203-680-9388.