Glitches put stitches in health care rollout





Photo: Brooke Crum Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Russell Reado stands in his kitchen in Port Arthur on Tuesday after an appointment at the Gulf Coast Health Center. Russell Reado stands in his kitchen in Port Arthur on Tuesday after an appointment at the Gulf Coast Health Center. Photo: Brooke Crum Image 2 of 2 Russell Reado stands in his kitchen in Port Arthur on Tuesday after an appointment at the Gulf Coast Health Center. Russell Reado stands in his kitchen in Port Arthur on Tuesday after an appointment at the Gulf Coast Health Center. Photo: Brooke Crum Glitches put stitches in health care rollout 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

Glitches with Tuesday's long-awaited rollout of the online insurance marketplaces under the Affordable Care Act prevented Texans and others nationwide from obtaining information about coverage plans and rates.

For weeks, the Obama administration and local officials have encouraged Southeast Texas residents to use healthcare.gov to enroll for insurance coverage.

However, many people, including marketplace navigators hired to assist with enrollment, spent hours trying unsuccessfully to create consumer accounts required to begin the insurance-purchasing process.

They couldn't access plans or rates.

At the Gulf Coast Health Center in Port Arthur, navigators Susan Anaya and Carl Dahlquist did not know whether the problems with the marketplace website were a result of the government shutdown or overwhelmed servers.

Maybe it was both.

The appointments they had with people who wanted to learn more about the insurance exchange did not yield as much assistance as they had hoped.

It did not help that navigators did not see the marketplace applications until an online session Friday, Dahlquist said. Navigators attended training sessions in Austin to understand how to help people enroll in the health care exchange.

Still, the process is not perfectly clear, Anaya said.

The marketplace plans do not encompass everyone's needs according to income levels, and they are sure to change as the government works out the kinks in the new health care system, Dahlquist said.

One of those kinks turned out to be a significant gap between those who do not qualify for subsidies through the exchange and those who would qualify for Medicaid if Texas had agreed to expand its Medicaid program.

"We have a lot of people who are not going to qualify for the marketplace but would qualify for Medicaid," Dahlquist said.

In some other states, those people could receive health insurance through Medicaid, but because Texas did not expand its Medicaid program, their only options are to pay the full price of a marketplace plan or go without insurance and pay a penalty.

The penalty is $95 per adult or 1 percent of a year's income, whichever is greater, for the first year and increases each year.

There are exemptions to paying the penalty for certain hardships, such as people who qualify for Medicaid but live in a state that has not expanded its program.

Russell Reado found himself looking up from that gap Tuesday.

The 63-year-old Port Arthur resident does not have health insurance, and it does not look like the Affordable Care Act is going to change that.

Reado lives on $766 a month. He retired from working at the local refineries years ago, leaving his comfortable company-sponsored health insurance behind. Yet he still earns too much with his social security checks to qualify for a subsidy through the marketplace, according to a subsidy calculator on the website of the Kaiser Family Foundation, an independent, nonprofit health care policy research organization.

Reado's income is equal to 80 percent of the federal poverty level. Because Texas did not expand its Medicaid, he is also not eligible for assistance through the government assistance program.

Under a silver-level plan in the marketplace, Reado would pay $7,521 a year for insurance coverage. That is about 82 percent of his yearly income, exempting him from paying the penalty for not having insurance. The silver plan would cost him about $626 a month, leaving less than $150 for living expenses - a price he said he definitely could not afford.

He could pay $5,144 a year with a bronze-level plan, which has a lower premium but higher co-pays.

As it is, Reado has to ration out his funds when he does need to see a doctor. He goes to the Gulf Coast Health Center in Port Arthur for doctor's appointments where he can get in relatively quickly. Reado made his Tuesday appointment on Friday, and it cost $175.

Right now, Reado can't afford the plans on the insurance exchange. He said he needs more than $139 a month to live on.

Anita Hassan and Lora Hines contributed to this story.

BCrum@BeaumontEnterprise.com Twitter.com/broocrum