Boulder author Elaine Pease believes the tales in her book "teach things like empathy and address such Common Core issues as bullying." ( Courtesy photo )

If you go What: Boulder children's book author Elaine Pease reads from and signs her new book, "Safe at Last: True Stories of Horse Rescues," with special guest Minnie Pearl, equine ambassador for Colorado Horse Rescue When: 5-7 p.m. Thursday, Sept. 24 Where: Barnes & Noble, 2999 Pearl St., Boulder Tickets: Free Info: 303-444-0845 or bn.com/events

Poncho the palomino spent his career working at a Colorado dude ranch. But most of the time he stood by himself in a remote corral without a companion. When someone noticed how skinny he was, how his beautiful golden coat had become dull and how he was covered in ticks, they called Animal Control to check on him.

But Poncho was about to become one of the many happy stories at Boulder County's Colorado Horse Rescue in Longmont. The officers knew the owner could not afford to care for Poncho, so using "kind words" rather than force, they were able to rescue him.

Enter a little girl named Sierra who loved visiting a blind horse named Jesse at the rescue ranch northwest of Boulder. One day she arrived to find that Jesse had been adopted and a new horse was now living in his pasture.

"Something about him made Sierra think he needed a friend. Poncho turned his head and noticed Sierra, and they walked toward each other. Sierra reached through the fence and stroked Poncho's neck," writes Boulder-based Elaine Pease in her new nonfiction chapter book for young readers, "Safe at Last: True Stories of Horse Rescues."

Sierra fell in love with Poncho, then began doing extra chores and saving birthday money so she could afford his adoption fee. She didn't waver, even after Poncho was injured and could no longer be ridden.

"Poncho," said the little girl, "is my horse."

Poncho's story is one of six in Pease's colorful new book, which features photographs by Roxanne Capaul of the horses and their people. There also are frequent pearls of wisdom describing colors and describing horse terminology from Minnie Pearl, a white mini-horse who serves as the horse rescue's official ambassador and will be on hand at Barnes & Noble Thursday to help launch the book.

Safe at Last: True Stories of Horse Rescues, by Elaine Pease. Filter Press, 40 pages.

The book is geared toward readers 7 and older, Pease says.

"I think these stories are really great to learn about in school, because they teach things like empathy and address such Common Core issues as bullying," says Pease, author of five other children's chapter and picture books. "A lot of those things translate to what these horses have gone through. Some of them have overcome terrible odds to go on to have great lives. Some even become therapy horses for the disabled and children with special needs. Some go on to become companions for people or horses that are lonely."

Pease tells the story of one 4-year-old boy who isn't able to sit up unassisted. But when he is on a horse, he doesn't need help. The horse's walking gait gives him a sense of what it feels like to walk.

The book is also the story of the volunteers who work to bring abused and neglected horses back to health and train them to become companions or therapy horses.

"It's really wonderful to know that there are volunteers out there and workers going out to save these horses," says Pease, who has volunteered at the rescue for two years. "The book really goes through the process from the very beginning, when they are first alerted, through the inspection to see what's going on, negotiating with owner to surrender the horse, and then fattening them up and training them to be ready for adoption, fostering and sponsoring."