Acting on a Federal Trade Commission lawsuit, a federal judge has rejected the planned $6.3 billion merger of Office Depot and Staples. It’s yet another example of why our nation’s antiquated antitrust law should be either reformed or repealed entirely.

The ink wasn’t even dry on the judge’s order when, as CNBC.com noted, “analysts called into question the office-supply chains’ ability to effectively compete in the market as stand-alone companies.”

Specifically, Jefferies analyst Daniel Binder advised his investor clients that Office Depot and Staples “will continue to face secular declines and each company’s business is vulnerable to competition from online and non-office-supply retailers,” such as Costco and Wal-Mart.

Both companies are deeply troubled, suffering from revenue and profit declines in recent years. So we wonder: What, exactly, was gained by disallowing this merger?

Yet U.S. District Judge Emmet G. Sullivan, who has been on the bench since the 1990s, decided that there “is a reasonable probability that the proposed merger will substantially impair competition.”

“Impair competition?” Seriously?

As Binder noted, both companies separately face very real, very stiff competition whether merged or not. Amazon Business and other Internet-based business-supply companies don’t have the same enormous overhead as Office Depot and Staples. And they’re growing, not shrinking. So look for both of the brick-and-mortar companies now to close hundreds of stores, as they’ve already announced they will, and to lay off hundreds if not thousands of workers.

It’s now questionable whether Staples and Office Depot can stay in business at all. And they do go belly-up, guess what happens then? Less competition, higher prices, less choice, fewer jobs, poorer workers, another industry crushed, all for … nothing.

Just as bad, both companies plunged in trading on Wednesday, a result of the grim outlook for them. Office Depot lost nearly 40% of its market value in heavy trading, while Staples lost 18%.

This, too, will have a big impact, especially on the 401(k) and IRA retirement plans that own their stock — not to mention the companies’ employees, who may have a big part of their nest eggs locked up in company shares. The huge loss of wealth will have a big impact. But maybe that’s the point.

This is what antitrust in the Obama Era looks like. Antitrust for antitrust’s sake, with no actual economic reasoning behind it at all, an unthinking political reflex to serve progressive ideals about regulating markets. There will be no gain to consumer from this, but lots of pain.

Meanwhile, ObamaCare is doing exactly what Office Depot and Staples were accused of doing — reducing competition through anti-competitive practices, in this case encouraged and abetted by the federal government. So far, it’s done a bang-up job, with fewer hospitals, higher premiums, a growing doctor shortage, and less health care choice. Where is the FTC when you need it?