ATLANTA, May 28, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- MedAssets (Nasdaq:MDAS) today announced that Jackson Health System (Jackson), a not-for-profit academic medical system serving residents of Miami-Dade County, renewed its supply chain relationship with the company to achieve greater cost reduction across the organization. Plans call for Jackson to continue use of MedAssets Spend and Pharmacy Analytics, which help health systems monitor and control pharmacy and med/surg supply costs and improve contract negotiations through advanced analytics. The system also will continue to gain access to industry-leading pricing on supplies with the company's national group purchasing organization.

The renewal builds upon savings of more than $42 million since 2010 by leveraging MedAssets supply chain solutions as well as its recently completed enterprise consulting engagement, which focused on utilizing data-driven insights, evidence-based technologies and consulting expertise for sustainable margin improvement.

"The enacted Affordable Care Act legislation and continued pressure on reimbursement are driving hospitals and health systems like Jackson Health System to lower their cost structure and better manage the total cost of care delivery while maintain quality metrics," said Rosa Costanzo, vice president and chief procurement officer, Strategic Sourcing and Supply Chain Management Division, Jackson Health System. "Our work with MedAssets on cost reduction has delivered significant financial value and enhanced our operational and clinical excellence as we strive to provide the highest standard of care. MedAssets is an integral part of our team, helping us build an operational foundation based on data and transparency, and we look forward to continuing our partnership with them to best serve our community."

"We are excited that Jackson Health System has elected to continue working with MedAssets on its path to achieve savings opportunities and long-term optimization initiatives," said Mike Nolte, president and chief operating officer, MedAssets. "As healthcare systems look to manage costs and align price, process and patient care quality, MedAssets offers innovative strategies and advanced analytics that fully optimize supply chain operations."

Jackson also utilizes MedAssets Recovery & Collections, Patient Access, Claims & Billing, Charge Pricing & Compliance and Contract & Episode Management solutions to align reimbursement strategies, optimize financial performance and achieve coding compliance and best practice charging information.

About Jackson Health System

Jackson Health System is a nonprofit academic medical system offering world-class care to any person who walks through its doors. Governed by the Public Health Trust, a dedicated team of citizen volunteers acting on behalf of the Miami-Dade Board of County Commissioners, Jackson Health System ensures that all residents of Miami-Dade County receive a single high standard of care regardless of their ability to pay. An integrated healthcare delivery system, Jackson Health System consists of its centerpiece, Jackson Memorial Hospital; multiple primary care and specialty care centers; a variety of school-based clinics serving many elementary, middle and high schools; two long-term care nursing facilities; six Corrections Health Services clinics; a network of mental health facilities; Holtz Children's Hospital, Jackson Rehabilitation Hospital, Jackson Behavioral Health Hospital, Jackson North Medical Center and Jackson South Community Hospital. For more information, please visit www.jacksonhealth.org.

About MedAssets

MedAssets (Nasdaq:MDAS) is a healthcare performance improvement company focused on helping providers realize financial and operational gains so that they can sustainably serve the needs of their community. Approximately 4,500 hospitals and 123,000 non-acute healthcare providers currently use the company's evidence-based solutions, best practice processes and analytics to help reduce the total cost of care, enhance operational efficiency, align clinical delivery and improve revenue performance across the care continuum. For more information, please visit www.medassets.com.

MDAS/B

Media Contact: Nicole Spinuzzi 678.966.2665 nspinuzzi@medassets.com Investor Contact: Robert Borchert 678.248.8194 rborchert@medassets.com