Robert J. Fisher: Drawing comparisons between Obama and Taft

Yet, he is frustratingly unable to stay on task with respect to his legislative goals. Some of Obama's predicament can, of course, be attributed to an almost fanatical Republican opposition, some of which predates his inauguration.

All but his most ardent supporters would agree that President Barack Obama lacks basic political instincts. His academic visions have endeared him to progressives. His oratorical skills are superior.

At times, however, he seems distracted by his own initiatives. Like an attorney considering a plea bargain, he instinctively pursues a consensus.

Case in point is his handling of the controversial Affordable Care Act. The single-payer health care system embraced by progressive Democrats for the past four decades was compromised into an unholy alliance between government and for-profit private insurance companies. Even the less-than-perfect public option, included in the original proposal, was allowed to whither away.

In "Double Down," the book about the 2012 presidential election, authors Mark Halperin and John Heilemann revealed an Obama who was easily annoyed with the mundane intricacies of campaigning and debating, always trying to elevate his positions to a more lofty political plateau. At times he seemed ill-suited psychologically to his chosen profession.

Has there ever been another American president like Barack Obama?

Recently, after reading Doris Kearns Goodwin's best-selling "The Bully Pulpit," the thought occurred to me that Obama was the virtual, though most unlikely, reincarnation of the corpulent William Howard Taft.

A brilliant legal official, Taft dreamed of winning a seat on the Supreme Court. After serving in several Ohio judicial positions, Taft was appointed in 1890 as the solicitor general of the U.S., when he became the confidant and friend of Theodore Roosevelt, who became president in 1901.

In 1904, Roosevelt appointed Taft to be the secretary of war, a largely nonpolitical position. In that same year, Taft repeatedly declined Roosevelt's numerous invitations to be his vice presidential running mate, citing his distaste for inherent political functions.

Reluctantly, in 1908, Taft did accept the Republican Party's nomination for president.

Then the problems began for Taft and the Republicans.

During the 1908 presidential campaign, Roosevelt repeatedly advised Taft to deliver a knockout blow to his well-respected opponent, William Jennings Bryan. Taft, like Obama, felt that an intellectual presentation of the facts should be sufficient.

When engaged in trying to further Roosevelt's trust-busting agenda, Taft became involved in an unnecessary dispute over whether all large corporations should be broken up as a matter of principle or whether the government should simply attempt to correct specific infractions.

Obama, like Taft, has often been accused of hairsplitting, particularly with respect to the dispute over the Keystone XL Pipeline.

Taft failed at tariff reform by signing into law the Payne-Aldrich Tariff Act, which raised as many duties as it lowered. He was trying to balance the interests of the corporations with those of Western farmers who wanted pure tariff protection.

Obama made several concessions to moderate Democrats with respect to the health care law, much to the chagrin of true progressives.