Exxon Canceled Quality Climate Research, Carson Superpac $ Vanished, High Price of Cheap Toys: Nov 30, 2015

DISCOVER OUR BLOG



Did you know that in addition to everything else we offer, we now have a Blog? It is dedicated to providing you with a mix of short, timely items you might well not see elsewhere. From “Deep Politics” Eyebrow-raisers to updates to “rants,” it’s an entertaining and informative addition to your daily reads. Follow along by clicking on Blog Posts on our menu bar.

Now Live on WhoWhatWhy

Distillation towers and flare in dawn light

Photo credit: Roy Luck / Flickr (CC BY 2.0)

Exxon Feeling the Heat Ahead of Paris Climate Conference

By Klaus Marre

As all eyes turn to the Paris climate talks, ExxonMobil finds itself in hot water. A series of disclosures reveal that the oil giant not only knew about the risk of climate change in the 1970s but slashed funding for further research when it became clear that there was not going to be any regulation on the issue for a long time.

PICKS

PICKS are stories from many sources, selected by our editors or recommended by our readers because they are important, surprising, troubling, enlightening, inspiring, or amusing. They appear on our site and in our daily newsletter. Please send suggested articles, videos, podcasts, etc. to picks@whowhatwhy.org.

Paris Climate Change Conference will take place from November 30 to December 11, 2015, in Paris, France. About this photo: Hoover Dam. Hydroelectricity is getting less reliable due to global warming. And the world is doubling down on it.

Photo Credit: Kuczora / Wikimedia (CC BY-SA 3.0)

Global Warming “Hiatus” Never Happened (Russ)

Review of 40 studies debunks claim that global warming stalled 15 years back.

The High Price of Cheap Toys (Russ)

The other side of that Black Friday orgy: the horrendous conditions of the workers who make the stuff.

Mathematician Apologizes for Causing Bush 2000 Victory (Reader Pat)

An op-ed he wrote was misinterpreted, then cited by a judge, then became a partial basis for decision not to continue recount.

How to Turn $6 Million into $140,000 (Gerry)

With Ben Carson as its public face, a Super PAC founded by Newt Gingrich and his wife took money from small donors who wanted to fight Obamacare – and made most of it (the money, not Obamacare) disappear.

For Their Second Act, Keystone Killers Tackle Exxon (Trevin)

The goal is to force Exxon to face similar consequences for allegedly covering up climate change risks “as Big Tobacco did for lying about cancer.”

Ex-US Intelligence Chief on Islamic State’s Rise: ‘We Were Too Dumb’ (Trevin)

“I just don’t think people took them seriously. When I first heard about the recent attacks in Paris, I was like, ‘Oh, my God, these guys are at it again, and we’re not paying attention.’”

Third Turkish Journalist Arrested Amid Fears of Ankara Censorship: Reports (Trevin)

The reporter for Hurriyet, a Turkish newspaper, was arrested after penning an “allegedly slanderous article criticizing the country’s president, local media and German news agency.”

Beauty Contest for Holocaust Survivors (Russ)

What a beautiful thing–13 women took part in the third annual pageant.

SIGN UP

Like what you see? Sign up here to subscribe to this newsletter — our daily roundup of stories from around the web that our editors or other readers thought worth reading. You can also sign up for our weekly newsletter, which recaps all of the exclusive WhoWhatWhy pieces of the past seven days.

Related

Speak Truth to Power We are 100% reader funded. Your tax-deductible contribution enables our next investigation. Make an impact now. Our Comment Policy Keep it civilized, keep it relevant, keep it clear, keep it short. Please do not post links or promotional material. We reserve the right to edit and to delete comments where necessary.