TRENTON — State lawmakers have eliminated one of most controversial aspects of a high-profile bill aimed at preventing price-gouging and "surprise" billing by out-of-network doctors and hospitals in New Jersey, the sponsor announced Monday.

In a concession to physicians and hospitals, the sponsors agreed to eliminate a proposed limit on what health care providers may charge, state Assemblyman Craig Coughlin (D-Middlesex) announced at the outset of a four-hour hearing in Trenton. The original legislation introduced last month said doctor and hospital out-of-insurance network expenses could not exceed 2-1/2 times the median price of other claims for the same services.

The legislation still retains two major reforms in lawmakers' effort to end "surprise" billing by health care providers — most of them specialists, like anesthesiologists and radiologists — whom consumers were not aware were outside their coverage network. The bill also aims to control out-of-network costs for emergency room care, which by state law insurance companies must pay.

Under the bill, physicians and hospitals would have to issue patients a statement 30 days prior to a procedure that identifies the medical professionals providing the care, whether or not they are in in-network or not, and how much the procedure costs.

The bill also retained the creation of an independent arbitration process to decide billing disputes between insurance companies and health care providers and protect consumers.

Major insurance carriers in New Jersey say it's at least a $1 billion problem that drives up premium costs for all policyholders.

Coughlin, chairman of the Assembly Insurance and Financial Institutions Committee and one of the bills sponsors, told the packed room the bill balances consumer interests with the concerns raised by the health care industry, which described the bill as a "giveaway" to insurance companies.

"Our goal is to be fundamentally fair to the consumer first and foremost," Coughlin said.

Insurance companies, physician and hospital executives agreed the bill was an improvement, but they still found a lot to dislike.

After three hours of polite but critical comments, Coughlin jokingly said: "I'm begging you, please, somebody testify in favor of the bill."

Doctors and hospital executives questioned why they would have to provide an estimated price for procedures, and an accounting of in-network specialists – all before the patient undergoes the procedure.

"We are concerned that it may slow down care," Ryan said.

Leslie D. Hirsch, president and CEO, Saint Clare's Health System in Denville, wondered how a hospital could know what a procedure would cost without knowing the patient's co-pays and deductibles.

Mishael Azam, chief operating officer at the Medical Society of New Jersey, a lobbying group for physicians, said the bill does nothing to require insurance companies to pay more reasonable rates. Not does it address the trend, driven by the Affordable Care Act, of restricting the number of doctors in an insurance plan in an attempt to hold down costs.

"If the carriers made an effort to get doctors and hospitals (in network), you would have less of an out-of-network problem.," Azam said.

Ward Sanders, president of New Jersey Association of Health Plans, said the bill is a win for consumers, "who have no bargaining power. . .when they are on a stretcher" to pick their anesthesiologist.

But even he had concerns about the bill. "The start-up costs for the health payer database could be millions of dollars," Ward said. "This could stop or slow the legislation."

The biggest complaints came from Dennis Kelly, CEO of CarePoint Health, which includes Bayonne Medical Center, Hoboken University Medical Center and Christ Hospital in Jersey City. Insurance carriers have accused the for-profit company of capitalizing on its out-of-network status to charge among the most expenses prices in the nation.

Only seven percent of its patients are subject to out-of-network billing because the county has a concentration of low-income, immigrant and uninsured patients.

"We are out of network out of necessity. It's not a business strategy," Kelly said.

"If you reduce reimbursement for the 7 percent, it will have a devastating consequence," Kelly said, saying Christ Hospital in particular would not survive. "It's just not sustainable."

Maureen Collinsgru of Citizen Action, a left-leaning consumer organization, told the committee to disregard CarePoint's threats, noting that many urban hospitals support the bill. "It's egregious they are trying to leverage this bill as a scare tactic."

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.