Chicago Health System, which has 1,000 About seven months after it was acquired by Tenet Healthcare Corp. , the Chicago-area physicians group that provided care at four former Vanguard Health Systems hospitals is pushing to double its size in the coming year.Chicago Health System, which has 1,000 physicians in its fold, including about 100 employed doctors, was among the properties swept up by Tenet in October when the Dallas hospital giant purchased Nashville-based Vanguard and its 28 hospitals in a deal valued at $4.3 billion. Vanguard's local hospitals—Weiss Memorial in Chicago, Westlake in Melrose Park, Ill., West Suburban Medical Center in Oak Park, Ill., and MacNeal in Berwyn, Ill.—were also part of the transaction, which brought Tenet's total to 77.





In its pitch to doctors, the network says it will let independent practices maintain their autonomy, while providing back-office support and IT infrastructure that most small practices wouldn't be able to afford on their own. Further, affiliation would potentially offer them access to more patients and higher



“The aggregation of a large group of providers is stronger than individual units,” Mr. Sorrentino said. “We want to be able to put a group together to withstand the changes that health reform is bringing.”



The recruitment push comes at a moment when the economics of medical practices are under pressure, leaving independent doctors looking to sell out to bigger groups or to hospitals. The fixed costs of a practice—rent, malpractice insurance, technology investments—gobble up a sizable chunk of revenue before a single patient walks in the door, and small-fry practices have little clout with insurance carriers to negotiate higher payments.



Plus, with government and private payers shifting to ACO-type payment contracts that reward doctors for good health outcomes rather than high volume, independents risk missing the boat on those quality-based payments, one expert said.



“It's not just being able to bill at a higher rate—it's things like clinical integration that a lot of payers are willing to pay for, that you can't do alone,” said Dr. Joel Shalowitz, director of the health industry management program at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management. Now, Chicago Health wants to increase its headcount, between affiliated and employed doctors, to 2,000, and bring its number of employed physicians to 170, CEO Patrick Sorrentino said.In its pitch to doctors, the network says it will let independent practices maintain their autonomy, while providing back-office support and IT infrastructure that most small practices wouldn't be able to afford on their own. Further, affiliation would potentially offer them access to more patients and higher reimbursement rates through Tenet's national insurance contracts, which would include quality-based incentives like those found in accountable care organizations , or ACOs.“The aggregation of a large group of providers is stronger than individual units,” Mr. Sorrentino said. “We want to be able to put a group together to withstand the changes that health reform is bringing.”The recruitment push comes at a moment when the economics of medical practices are under pressure, leaving independent doctors looking to sell out to bigger groups or to hospitals. The fixed costs of a practice—rent, malpractice insurance, technology investments—gobble up a sizable chunk of revenue before a single patient walks in the door, and small-fry practices have little clout with insurance carriers to negotiate higher payments.Plus, with government and private payers shifting to ACO-type payment contracts that reward doctors for good health outcomes rather than high volume, independents risk missing the boat on those quality-based payments, one expert said.“It's not just being able to bill at a higher rate—it's things like clinical integration that a lot of payers are willing to pay for, that you can't do alone,” said Dr. Joel Shalowitz, director of the health industry management program at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management.

HOSPITALS GAIN, TOO