HERE’S A LOOK AT THE DAY AHEAD

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: President Barack Obama meets with Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau at 10:05 a.m. at the White House. Secretary of State John Kerry also attends. They hold a joint news conference at 11:40 a.m. A State Dinner is held at 8:40 p.m. Vice President Joe Biden holds a meeting with King Abdullah II of Jordan at the Husseiniya Palace.

ELECTION 2016: The Republican debate, broadcast on CNN, is held in Miami at 8:30 p.m. EST. Hillary Clinton campaigns in Tampa, Fla., and Durham and Raleigh, N.C. Sen. Bernie Sanders holds rallies in Kissimee and Tampa, Fla.

ECONOMIC INDICATORS: The Labor Department releases weekly jobless claims at 8:30 a.m. The Treasury releases the federal budget for February at 2 p.m.

CONGRESS: The Senate resumes consideration of S.524, the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act of 2016. The Senate Homeland Security Committee’s subcommittee on investigations examines the Affordable Care Act’s health-insurance co-op program at 9:30 a.m. HUD Secretary Julian Castro testifies at a Senate Appropriations subcommittee hearing on the budget at 2:30 p.m. Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert McDonald testifies at a Senate Appropriations subcommittee hearing on the proposed budget at 11 a.m. House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R., Calif.) and Chief Deputy Whip Patrick McHenry (R., N.C.) are meeting with a trio of Silicon Valley companies as part of a new House push to reduce regulations on start-ups.

TOP STORIES FROM WSJ’S CAPITAL JOURNAL

CLINTON, SANDERS SPAR OVER IMMIGRATION: Hillary Clinton and Sen. Bernie Sanders faced off Wednesday night, sparring over immigration and making direct appeals to Latino voters ahead of next week’s contest in Florida. The two Democratic contenders delved into the details of immigration law, invoking long-ago votes and critiquing the intricacies of each other’s record. Mr. Sanders reflected on his own immigrant heritage, and both candidates cited spots in the other’s record that are out of step with Latino voters and immigration rights activists.

getty images

Mrs. Clinton was questioned about the right way to handle the 2014 influx of Central American children at the southern border. Mr. Sanders was under fire for his opposition to the 2007 immigration bill that would have legalized people in the U.S. illegally. Under aggressive questioning from Univision anchor Jorge Ramos, Mrs. Clinton promised not to deport children who are already living in the U.S., and to target for deportation criminals and those who pose a risk. Mr. Sanders also pledged not to send children away. Colleen McCain Nelson, Laura Meckler and Rebecca Ballhaus report.

Plus: WSJ’s play-by-play recap of the debate ... Sen. Bernie Sanders’s upset win in Michigan this week left Democrats bracing for a long and costly primary fight and another round of split decisions in five contests next week … The Republican National Committee on Wednesday filed two lawsuits seeking access to Mrs. Clinton’s records, potentially opening a new chapter in the ongoing legal saga over her decision to use a personal email server while secretary of state … The Sanders coalition—a mix of young voters, liberals and independents—is still a potent force in the Democratic primary race … White House press secretary Josh Earnest said that President Barack Obama has no plans to endorse in the Democratic presidential race … The Senate’s long-lasting affection for its own members may have reached its limit with Mr. Cruz’s presidential campaign … The world should take note of the extraordinary power the president has to take the country in a protectionist direction, writes Greg Ip.

ARIAN CAMPO-FLORES: RUBIO TARGETS HISPANIC VOTE IN SOUTHERN, CENTRAL FLORIDA

As Florida Sen. Marco Rubio fights to keep his presidential bid alive by winning the Republican primary in his home state on March 15, he needs to perform strongly with one group in particular: Hispanics in southern and central Florida. Read Arian Campo-Flores’s full post in Washington Wire.

PAUL SANCYA/ASSOCIATED PRESS

DECISION TO PURSUE A NATIONAL STRATEGY HOBBLES RUBIO CAMPAIGN: At the start of his presidential bid, Marco Rubio made a fateful, strategic decision to run a national campaign rather than build momentum by targeting specific states and regions. Now, a humiliating and campaign-ending defeat Tuesday on his home turf looms for the once-rising Florida senator. Several polls on Wednesday showed front-runner Donald Trump trouncing him in Florida by double-digit margins. Thursday’s Republican debate in Miami offers one more chance to try to shake up the race, and Mr. Rubio has no plans to leave the state before Tuesday’s primary. Beth Reinhard reports. [Plus: Mr. Rubio said his children were “embarrassed” by the tone of his attacks on Mr. Trump, expressing regret and a desire to set a good example.]

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

NGUYEN HUY KHAM/REUTERS

FREE TRADE LOSES POLITICAL FAVOR: After decades in which successive Republican and Democratic presidents have pushed to open U.S. and global markets, resentment toward free trade now appears to have the upper hand in both parties, making passage this year of a sweeping Pacific trade deal far less likely and clouding the longer-term outlook for international economic exchange. Many Democrats have long blamed free-trade deals for big job losses and depressed wages, especially in the industrialized Midwest, which has been battered over the years by competition from lower-cost manufacturing centers in countries like Japan, Mexico and China. But one big surprise Tuesday was how loudly trade fears reverberated among Republican voters in the primary contests in Michigan and Mississippi—evidence, many observers say, of a widening undercurrent of skepticism on the right about who reaps the benefits from loosened trade restrictions. Bob Davis reports.

CHARLES REX ARBOGAST/ASSOCIATED PRESS

FOR KASICH, FISCAL SUCCESS COMES AT SOME COST: John Kasich says he fixed Ohio’s ailing economy and he can fix the nation’s. But his statehouse success came at the expense of many of Ohio’s cities and towns, which had to raise taxes or cut services, his critics charge. The Ohio governor’s central argument in his bid for the Republican nomination is that he is the only candidate left who has the experience and wiles to run the federal government properly. It is a pitch he has made at every GOP debate and likely will repeat when the candidates take the stage in Miami on Thursday. Exhibit No. 1, he says, is that he turned an $8 billion budget shortfall into a $2 billion surplus. But Mr. Kasich’s accomplishment—and even his critics back home acknowledge he did turn a big looming deficit into a surplus—involves a fair amount of luck, as well as some controversial decisions. Bob Davis reports.

ALSO IN THE NEWS

The nation’s largest banks paid fines totaling about $110 billion for their role in inflating a mortgage bubble that helped cause the financial crisis. Where did that money go? A Journal analysis.

Iran test fired two types of medium-range ballistic missiles on Wednesday, extending a barrage of tests this week following vows by officials to press ahead with its missile program despite U.S. pressure to curtail it.

Vice President Joe Biden criticized the silence of Palestinian leaders following a wave of Palestinian gun and knife attacks against Israeli Jews, along with the stabbing death of an American tourist.

Attorney General Loretta Lynch chided the White House on Wednesday for offering opinions about the probe into Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton’s use of private email while at the State Department.

The Environmental Protection Agency will begin devising regulations for hundreds of thousands of wells in an effort to reduce the emissions by 40% to 45% from 2012 levels.

A federal jury found a U.S. veteran guilty of attempting to join Islamic State in Syria, the government’s first trial victory in its efforts to root out the terrorist group’s sympathizers. Plus, the U.S. military captured one of Islamic State’s top chemical-weapons experts in a recent raid in northern Iraq and has spent several weeks interrogating him about the terror network’s capabilities and planning, U.S. officials said Wednesday.

Two weeks ahead of President Obama’s historic visit to Cuba, Havana has a message for him: We’ll treat you well while you’re here, but don’t push it.

Specialty physicians and other health-care providers have launched efforts to derail a federal proposal to test whether paying doctors less for drugs administered under a Medicare program reduces spending, one day after the Obama administration released the plan.

Volkswagen replaced the head of its U.S. operation, a move coming about six months after a cheating scandal over diesel emissions tests and criticized by U.S. dealers as ‘counterproductive.’

New Jersey officials shut off drinking water in the state’s largest school district Wednesday after tests showed elevated levels of lead.

Twitter is sweetening its employee compensation packages to stem a talent drain, a pressing move that may be followed by other tech companies with sinking stock prices.

SEIB VIDEO: SANDERS FACES TOUGH ODDS

An upset win in the Michigan primary has boosted Sen. Bernie Sanders‘s presidential prospects, but he must close Hillary Clinton‘s big lead in the delegate count — an uphill battle thanks to the way the Democratic Party awards delegates. WSJ’s Jerry Seib reports.

WHAT WE’RE READING AROUND THE WEB

In a lengthy review of President Obama’s foreign policy, based on years of interviews with him, The Atlantic’s Jeffrey Goldberg writes that “I came to see Obama as a president who has grown steadily more fatalistic about the constraints on America’s ability to direct global events, even as he has, late in his presidency, accumulated a set of potentially historic foreign-policy achievements—controversial, provisional achievements, to be sure, but achievements nonetheless.”

As a sign of the role trade and lost manufacturing jobs played in Tuesday’s Republican primary, “Michigan’s Republicans voted roughly as expected,” writes Brendan Greeley of Bloomberg. “The counties that had lost the most jobs, proportionally, were more likely to give a higher percentage of their votes to Trump.”

In the Washington Post, Ben Carson writes about how down-ticket GOP candidates could handle a Donald Trump nomination when campaigning, but says “Trump’s lack of consistency on the issues, and even in the rhetoric he uses, makes him unpredictable,” which “has to give any candidate pause.”

In the WSJ’s Think Tank, Dan Schnur writes that Republican leaders contemplating a choice between Donald Trump and Sen. Ted Cruz “are beginning to decide that the type of McGovern-esque landslide defeat that Mr. Cruz is likely to suffer is preferable to a full-out hostile takeover by Mr. Trump.

MILESTONE

18th: A new report finds U.S. workers rank dead last among 18 industrial countries when it comes to using digital technology to perform practical tasks.

FEEDBACK: The Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter is The Wall Street Journal’s morning rundown of the biggest news stories and exclusive features from Washington on politics, policy, financial regulation, defense and more.

Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.