Now that it is clear that Donald J. Trump has fairly become the presumptive nominee, most understand that it is high time we ALL coalesce around him to beat Hillary.

MOST.

It is amazing to me, and many others in the conservative movement, that there are still "hold outs" in this primary election.

It has come to reason that they are just like the candidate that they support! Ted Cruz. Petulant, jealous and delusional. Okay, so your guy didn't win. Now, it's time to THINK about what you are proposing to do......vote third party or stay home.

So, you think that Mr. Trump is lying about what he promises to do to fix the incompetence, corruption and sheer idiocy in the republican party. Why on earth would he do this? He has an amazingly beautiful, mutually respectful relationship with his family, and you think he is LYING to the whole country? To accomplish what?

He has promised EVERYTHING that we want to be done. He says it the way we want and need him to. But all because you are angry and bitter that your guy didn't win, you pout and dig your heels in and refuse to give in, even with the possibility of a murderous, lying, devious woman possibly becoming the next president. You KNOW what she will do. Your second amendment rights will be first. Then, illegals will be allowed to vote. Do you understand what that means? You won't have a republican president in decades! Then, there's the Supreme Court.

Another thing I don't understand it how you can see your conservative friends, some being celebrity, support Mr. Trump and you STILL think you are so right!

Again, all it shows me is that this is about a personality type, not "PRINCIPLES" as you all say. You are Cruz. You cannot handle the fact that you didn't win. You cannot accept the fact that Cruz can never win a general election. You are Cruz. Delusional, stubborn and petulant.

So, it is my opinion that we leave you behind. We move on and get Mr. Trump elected and you will miss the party. You will not be a part of the great celebration we will have when he beats Hillary and when he builds the wall, strengthens our Military, repeals Obamacare...etc., etc.

I will never stop telling you how unpatriotic and un- American you are, but I will leave you behind for the celebration.

Barbara Gonzalez

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/27s0gup