By Tom Leyden

Peoples’ lives were upended and communities devastated in the wake of Superstorm Sandy. As areas of New York and New Jersey work to rebound from 2012’s catastrophic storm, our leaders should strive to invest in infrastructure that makes us more resilient in the face of future disasters. Taking advantage of the tens of thousands of solar projects already installed over the last several years and accelerating support for new installations — this time with storage — should be a key component of plans for rebuilding.

Typically, solar photovoltaic (PV) systems are designed to shut down for safety reasons when utility power is interrupted. However, when PV systems are paired with battery storage, they are able to operate and generate power during outages — and store energy for use at night. A properly designed PV-plus-storage system can provide emergency power indefinitely, something millions of people would have welcomed in the aftermath of Sandy.

At the very least, states, cities and local communities should work to outfit hospitals, schools, shelters, gas stations and emergency centers with backup generation that includes solar in the energy mix. Adding PV-plus-storage at venues that provide critical services will stretch hard-to-get resources such as gasoline and diesel in the wake of natural disasters.

While PV-plus-storage investments would help us respond to the next disaster, they would also provide ongoing annual benefits to homeowners and building owners by reducing their utility bills and stabilizing costs.

Furthermore, PV-plus-storage multiplies solar investments further by providing benefits to grid operators that use battery storage 24 hours a day to balance power on the grid and advancing our utility grid into the 21st century. Govs. Chris Christie of New Jersey and Andrew Cuomo of New York, along with their fellow policymakers, can have an enormously positive impact on their states — not to mention the planet — if they were to make PV-plus-storage a priority.

Both Christie and Cuomo have been visionary in their support of solar energy deployment in their respective states. Cuomo has aggressively advocated for stronger solar policies in New York state and expanded the market for residential and commercial solar through New York State Energy Research and Development Authority’s innovative solar programs.

As for Christie, last year, he signed a bill to strengthen support for solar energy across New Jersey. “We’re taking a huge step to maintain New Jersey’s position as a national leader in the solar industry,” Christie noted. “Already the solar industry in New Jersey has created thousands of jobs, generated over 8,000 megawatts of clean energy and helped businesses thrive and grow . Having renewable energy in our state, having it be a larger part of our portfolio, creating jobs, is not a Republican issue or Democratic issue. It’s an issue that the people of our state demand we work on together.” New Jersey’s solar deployment now stands at more than one gigawatt, with more than 23,000 installations, and it continues to accelerate.

Govs. Christie and Cuomo and their respective state legislatures could have a positive impact by working together to set an example for the rest of the nation. By creating effective public-private partnerships that support solar and PV-plus-storage, these leaders could ensure that new homes and businesses built in New Jersey and New York are not only energy-efficient but also better prepared for future disasters.

Investing in solar and innovative energy-storage technologies goes hand-in-hand with economic development, job creation, smart grid deployment and sound environmental policy. Regional grid operators have taken steps to deploy new grid technologies under the guidance of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Clean energy advocates believe it’s crucial for the states to enact additional policies that help residents and businesses use affordable and reliable solar power to enhance their competitiveness and make the utility grid more resilient during power outages. New York and New Jersey can extend their nationally recognized solar and clean-energy programs and support the continued development of clean energy technologies as rebuilding gets underway.

As Christie and Cuomo continue taking steps to rebuild areas devastated by Sandy, clean energy advocates are urging them to do everything in their power to pair new construction and retrofits with clean, reliable solar energy that includes energy-storage capability. In so doing, they’ll set an ambitious example for the rest of the nation and improve the quality of life in their region for generations to come.

Tom Leyden is CEO of Solar Grid Storage and a 25-year solar industry veteran based in Princeton.

On mobile or desktop:

• Like Times of Trenton on Facebook

• Follow @TimesofTrenton on Twitter