Topics: Farah Fawcett, Medical Privacy, ProPublica, UCLA, Life News

This originally appeared on ProPublica

Seven years ago, I sat across from Farrah Fawcett in the living room of her Los Angeles condo. In what would be her last media interview before she died in 2009, she described her suspicion that an employee at UCLA Medical Center had shared details of her cancer treatment — and the setbacks along the way — with the National Enquirer.

Whenever she sought treatment there, the tabloids were quick with a story, even if it wasn’t right.

“I actually kept saying for months and months and months, ‘This is coming from here,’ ”Fawcett told me in the summer of 2008. “I was never more sure of anything in my life.”

To prove her theory, Fawcett set up a sting: In May 2007, she withheld news of her cancer’s return from nearly all of her relatives and friends. Within days, the story was in the Enquirer. “I couldn’t believe how fast it came out,” Fawcett said.

A UCLA employee was caught and charged with selling information to the tabloid. She pleaded guilty, but died before she was sentenced.

In 2008, prompted by Fawcett’s experience and those of other celebrities, California passed a law authorizing fines against hospitals that fail to protect patient privacy. Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger signed it; his then-wife, Maria Shriver, was one of those whose records had been accessed inappropriately at UCLA.

At the time, I thought that this was a problem largely confined to the People magazine world of celebrities and that this law would quash the prurient interest in their medical records.

I was wrong.

After spending the past year reporting on loopholes and lax enforcement of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, the federal patient-privacy law known as HIPAA, I’ve come to realize that it’s not just celebrity patients who are at risk. We all are.

Over the course of my reporting, I’ve talked to hundreds of people who said their medical records were hacked, snooped in, shared or stolen. Some were worried about potential consequences for themselves and their families. For others, the impact has been real and devastating, requiring therapy and medication. It has destroyed their faith in the medical establishment.

I spoke to Jacqueline Stokes, a cybersecurity consultant whose story I wrote about in The Washington Post. When she went to what was supposed to be a secure website to check the results of a paternity test she’d purchased at a local pharmacy, she stumbled upon 6,000 other people’s test results. She complained to the federal regulator that enforces HIPAA, but she was told that the lab wasn’t covered by the law — when it was drafted in 1996, its authors probably hadn’t anticipated such things as over-the-counter paternity tests. Stokes gave up when she was told to contact a different agency.

I met Kenneth Chanko, whose dad Mark was rushed to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center in 2011 after being struck by a sanitation truck. Unbeknownst to his family, a real-life medical show, “NY Med,” was filming in the hospital at the time. The following year, Mark Chanko’s widow was watching the show on ABC and realized that the blurred-out man dying on the TV screen in her living room was her husband. No one had told the family — or asked for permission. The Chankos filed a lawsuit against the hospital and the TV network, as well as a complaint with the Department of Health and Human Services’s Office for Civil Rights, which enforces HIPAA. The lawsuit was dismissed and is being appealed to New York’s top court. The complaint with the civil rights office, filed in January 2013, is pending. In the meantime, New York City’s hospitals voluntarily agreed this summer not to allowcommercial filming of patients without their permission.

I talked to Edie McGee, a lawyer for a federal agency who lives in Maryland and whose name was leaked to the media in 2003. She had just returned from China after adopting her daughter when she came down with an upper respiratory infection. Doctors suspected she had the SARS virus. Before the lab results even came back ruling out SARS, a Washington Post reporter showed up at her door, and other media outlets wanted interviews, too.

And I spoke with a woman named Frances whose diagnosis with a sexually transmitted disease was plastered on Facebook by a former friend who worked at the Indiana hospital where she received treatment. “PLZ HELP EXPOSE THIS HOE!” the public post said. Frances now drives miles out of her way to go grocery shopping so she can avoid people in her town. I was surprised by just how many health workers have leaked details about acquaintances who have STDs.

I’ve written about nursing home workers who posted dehumanizing, explicit photos of residents on Snapchat and about a New Jersey psychology practice that didn’t redact patients’ mental health diagnoses or their treatments as part of legal actions to secure payment of unpaid bills. Even the names and diagnoses of minors were included.