Professor Richard Edwards at UW-Sheboygan. (Photo: Submitted )

By Richard Edwards

There are three things that one must know about IS (Islamic State), also known as ISIS (Islamic State in Iraq and Syria) or ISIL (Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant), in order to evaluate its threat to the United States, if any.

One, "jihad," often translated as "war" or "holy war," generally means to struggle against or resistance to any oppressor of Islam and its' believers. There are two recognized forms of jihad: the "inner jihad" and the "outer jihad." The "inner jihad" refers to the believer's struggle resisting the evil spiritual forces of this world, known as "spiritual warfare" in Evangelical Christianity. "Outer Jihad" is the struggle against or resistance to any force outside of Islam that seeks to change or conquer Islam.

These forces are not limited to physical warfare but include attempts to impose on or infiltrate into Islam different cultures and world views alien to Islam that influence or change the laws and practices of Islam.

Two, IS, and other radical jihadi movements within Islam, do not represent a majority of Islamic believers. These radical movements constitute between 4 percent and 8 percent of Muslims worldwide and terrify many Muslims. Such violent minorities also exist outside of Islam in religions ranging from Hinduism and Buddhism to Evangelical Christianity and Judaism.

For example, a similar minority of Christians assert that the best way to fight abortion is by bombing abortion clinics and killing physicians, and some conservative militia believe they must preserve Christianity by violence against other religions. Judaism's Temple Mount Faithful sect does not hesitate to promote violence in the furtherance of rebuilding Solomon's Temple on Temple Mount in Jerusalem, even if that means destroying the Dome of the Rock and the Al Aqsa Mosque that now inhabit Temple Mount — together comprising the third holiest site in Islam.

Third, IS is an unintended consequence of the political decisions made following World War I and II, along with what radical Islam sees as the physical and cultural oppression waged against Islam by Western cultures and religions in the late 20th century and early 21st centuries, especially in Iraq, Afghanistan and many other Muslim countries.

This began in 1924 with the termination of the Islamic Caliphate (khilafa) following the defeat of the Islamic Ottoman Turkish Empire in WWI and the formation of the secular Republic of Turkey in 1923. The Caliph, literally "successor" to Mohammad, also known as the "Commander of Believers" and "Ruler of Islam," and the office of the Caliphate had been the glue that united Islam for over 1,000 years. The Caliph was and is seen as the supreme political and religious leader of Islam and the final authority in all matters related to Islam as a people group, a nation, a culture, and a religion.

The termination of the Caliphate resulted in religious and political chaos in the region as a leaderless Islam fragmented into new states and divergent understandings of Islam. This splintering went well beyond the pre-existing differences between Sunni and Shi'ia Islam, even though they did and do not disagree on the role of the Caliph, but how one qualifies for the office. Sunnis assert that the Caliph should be elected and Shi'ias assert that the Caliph should be a direct descendent from the "Family of the House" of Mohammad.

The core belief of the Islamic State is that the Caliphate should be re-established so that there is a coherent and unifying leader who directs Islam's defense against the cultural, religious, and physical attacks and infiltration on Islam by the non-Islamic world. This is why ISIS re-established the Caliphate in June 2014, renamed itself as IS, thus representing all of Islam, and declared the Irqai Abu Bakr al Baghadi, the current leader of IS and former prisoner of the US released in 2009, as Amir al Caliph Ibrahim.

This Caliph-led Islamic State intends to reconstitute the Islamic Empire to its old glory, including the domination of Spain, North Africa, most of the Middle East, and eventually all of Europe and beyond.

Professor Richard Edwards teaches and creates traditional and online courses in ethics, religious studies and philosophy. He is a professor at UW-Sheboygan and teaches at other UW System schools. He teaches in the Middle East during most summers and is on the Editorial Advisory Board of the Encyclopedia of Arab-Israeli Wars, authoring 10 percent of the four volumes. He serves as well as a teaching pastor at Bethel Orthodox Presbyterian Church. He has written over 250 articles, book chapters, and reviews and made more than 200 academic presentations in the United States and overseas.

Read or Share this story: http://htrne.ws/1sboozG