An explainer on the Paris climate change talks which have just kicked off -- who will be there, how it has been affected by the Paris terror attacks, what the goal of the summit is, how likely it is that there will be movement, and what challenges President Obama faces at home on the issue.

A young American climate scientist has come to Svalbard, a collection of Norwegian islands just 800 miles from the North Pole, to try to unlock some of the secrets of climate change that have been frozen into the landscape for tens of thousands of years. She won't see the sun again until mid-February, but Sarah Strand has a lot more to worry about than the dark.

As the Paris climate summit kicks off, a CBS News/New York Times poll finds Americans generally approve of the summit's goal: to come up with a treaty that will help slow the progression of climate change. A small majority also believe that global warming is caused by human activity, according to the poll.

Officer William Porter is expected in a Baltimore courtroom as jury selection begins in his trial on charges stemming from the arrest and death of 25-year-old Freddie Gray while in police custody. The defense tried to get the high-profile trial taken out of the city, but Officer Porter's fate will be decided by a jury of Baltimore residents.

CBS News has obtained evidence that the Peace Corps is struggling with sexual assaults in its ranks. A survey shows nearly 20 percent of volunteers experienced some type of sexual assault, and more than half of those say they suffered repeated attacks. Some survivors still say it's them being blamed or punished.

CRISPR, a revolutionary technology that can edit genetic mistakes, is getting a lot of attention. It could help get rid of diseases like cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and even HIV and cancer, but many scientists, including the woman credited with developing the gene-editing technology, are calling for a moratorium on its use.

The outcome of the 2016 presidential election could have a major impact on federal health care benefits, including Obamacare and Medicare. We look at each of the candidates' positions on these government programs.

More top news:

U.S.

Nebraska police officer shot, suspect killed

Homeowner lights fire, suspected burglar dies in chimney

Multiple college students hurt as bus overturns in Virginia

U. of Chicago cancels classes due to online threat

World

President Obama visits site of Paris attacks massacre

What can Paris climate conference hope to achieve

Israel says Russian jet breached airspace

More stabbings, killings as Israel widens security operations

Pope brushes aside security worries to visit CAR

Politics

"Miscommunication" behind Trump "endorsement" event mixup

Influential N.H. newspaper throws support behind Christie

Clinton pitches major investment in infrastructure

Trump: There's a "tremendous dislike" for Planned Parenthood

Business

Public pension funds reconsider risky investments

Galactic payouts for early Star Wars collectors

Science and Tech

Why 2 degrees are so important to the climate

Entertainment

Carey Mulligan on acting, and her other life