More than 200 low-brass instrumentalists performed for hundreds Sunday in a small park nestled between Denver’s skyscrapers.

It was a day for garland-wrapped tubas, sousaphones and euphoniums. It was TubaChristmas in Skyline Park.

Although this was the 39th annual tuba gathering, the group was composed almost entirely of new acquaintances.

Some players show up year after year, play their part, and disperse without a word, players said.

Derek Leroux, a 14-year-old baritone player, braved the new experience on his own after his father dropped him off at the Auraria Event Center rehearsal.

“We all just came and played Christmas music, and now we’re going to perform,” Derek said.

A freshman at Horizon High School, Derek plays in the marching and jazz bands.

TubaChristmas was fun, he said, because he had the opportunity to play a lead role, which he is not usually offered in band.

“It’s cool when we have the important part,” Derek said.

The performance Sunday included players from six elementary, 10 middle and 38 high schools as well as 15 colleges and 19 community band groups.

“Today’s their day,” said Rick Davis, who lives in Denver and has attended the Christmas performance for more than a decade.

“Tuba players sit in the back of bands and play oompah parts all the time, the background music,” said Bill Clark, founder of the Denver event. “One day a year, they get to play the melody.”

Clark conducted the 220 players on Sunday. Forty years ago, as a professor of music at the University of Denver, Clark led his first group of tuba carollers around the city.

In New York, Harvey Phillips conceived and organized TubaChristmas’s first performance on Dec. 22, 1974, at the Rockefeller Plaza Ice Rink.

“About 10 years later, I realized what he was doing, and I joined with him,” Clark said.

This month, TubaChristmas will be held in 274 cities across the United States, as well as in Canada, Costa Rica, Switzerland and New Zealand.

Alison Noon: 303-954-1223, anoon@denverpost.com or twitter.com/alisonnoon