President Barack Obama has been criticized from the left for continuing many of President George W. Bush’s policies and has been criticized from the right for blaming Bush for problems he inherited when he took office. (Photo: Associated Press file)

Re: “Obama has only polarized America” (Rabble Rouser, Oct. 15)

I completely disagree with virtually every word the Rabble Rouser wrote on Barack Obama’s presidency.

The writer calls it “a disaster” and says Obama “has done very little, if anything, to improve the lives of the average American.” Is he serious?

Obama is responsible for the Affordable Care Act, which has resulted in possibly lifesaving medical coverage for millions of Americans who couldn’t get any before. All Americans now cannot be denied coverage because of pre-existing conditions. Young people can stay on their parents’ coverage until 26. Many items of preventative care are now free or at reduced cost.

How can any these accomplishments not improve the life of the average American? They are literally lifesavers.

But that’s just one of many accomplishments. Obama pulled the country out of the worst recession since the Great Depression. The stock market has doubled, there have been 55 months of positive jobs created (a new record), unemployment has dropped, and the deficit has dropped.

This president directed the rescue of the auto industry when his opponent in 2012 suggested letting it go bankrupt.

This president directed the killing of the man who was instrumental in murdering 3,000 Americans, after his predecessor openly admitted that wasn’t a top priority.

This president made student loans more affordable and available to millions of college students, helped the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act become law, helped create bank reform after his predecessor let banks run wild and destroy people financially, and stopped the military from kicking out gay Americans.

There’s much more, but I’m out of space. And all of this with absolutely zero cooperation from the other party.

The writer also complains about Obama for blaming President George W. Bush’s policies. Sorry, but history didn’t begin six years ago. Bush’s disgraceful invasion of Iraq not only cost us 4,000 lives, tens of thousands maimed, and a trillion dollars, but it screwed up that country for decades to come. The Sunnis that he kicked out have now morphed into ISIS. His tax cuts for the rich are still crippling the economy.

Talk about a president who did nothing to improve Americans’ lives. Bush had eight years, six with his party in control of both houses of Congress, and a record of zero achievements.

The writer lives in Voorhees.

Read or Share this story: http://on.cpsj.com/1wdUVn2