VIDEO: Deputy, Citizen Rescue Injured Pelican

By Wayne Ivey, Brevard Sheriff // January 1, 2015

Loading the player ...

incapacitated by hooks and fishing line

ABOVE VIDEO: This video which was posted to the BCSO Facebook page, captures the compassionate actions of Ag/Marine Deputy Chris Ferrante and Martin Skurla who worked together to free a distressed pelican that was incapacitated by fishing hooks and fishing line.

BREVARD COUNTY, FLORIDA — This video which was posted to the BCSO Facebook page, captures the compassionate actions of Ag/Marine Deputy Chris Ferrante and Martin Skurla who worked together to free a distressed pelican that was incapacitated by fishing hooks and fishing line.

The rescue occurred Wednesday afternoon in Port Canaveral when Seaport Security Marine Deputy Chris Ferrante was flagged down by a crowd of concerned citizens who had observed a distressed pelican.

The beautiful bird was incapacitated by hooks and fishing line, which would have eventually led to a very slow and painful death.

The group directed the Deputy to meet them at the pier behind Grill’s Restaurant where Deputy Ferrante was able to bring the bird aboard his patrol boat. With the help of Martin, who was a visitor to Port Canaveral they were able to remove the hooks and fishing line that were in the feet and wings of the pelican.

Once the obstructions were removed, the pelican was freed back into the wild amid cheers from citizens who watched the rescue as it took place.

Related Story:

Patrick Sean Coats Wanted By Brevard County Sheriff Without the compassion and care of the wonderful visitors of Port Canaveral the Pelican would have suffered immensely and succumbed to his injuries. I would like to personally thank Martin for assisting in the rescue efforts and Karen Skurla for filming the rescue as it took place and for reaching out to us to commend the actions of Deputy Ferrante. I am always amazed at the abilities of our Deputies to stand strong as our first line of defense against criminals but even more so at their ability to shift gears and come to the rescue of an innocent creature like this in need. ABOUT THE AUTHOR Brevard County Sheriff Wayne Ivey has been a law enforcement officer for over three decades. Sheriff Ivey is a graduate of the FBI National Academy and has a Bachelor’s Degree from Daytona State College in Management and Supervision. Sheriff Ivey’s background in law enforcement is inclusive of Management, Criminal Investigations, Narcotics, Patrol Services, Public Integrity Investigations, and Corrections. Prior to being elected in 2012, Sheriff Ivey served the citizens of the State of Florida as a Resident Agent in Charge for the Florida Department of Law Enforcement. As a member of the Florida Department of Law Enforcement Sheriff Ivey developed and created the country’s first ever statewide Task Force on Identity Theft. That same year the Task Force was named one of the top five most innovative programs in the country by the International Association of Chiefs of Police and investigated approximately 44 million dollars in fraud cases. Additionally, as a member of FDLE, Sheriff Ivey created the Child Abduction Response Team (C.A.R.T) that re-defined the way Child Abduction cases are conducted throughout the country today. Brevard County Sheriff Wayne Ivey has been a law enforcement officer for over three decades. Sheriff Ivey is a graduate of the FBI National Academy and has a Bachelor’s Degree from Daytona State College in Management and Supervision. Sheriff Ivey’s background in law enforcement is inclusive of Management, Criminal Investigations, Narcotics, Patrol Services, Public Integrity Investigations, and Corrections. The program was later selected as the most innovative program in the country by the International Association of Chiefs of Police and is now used as a nationwide model in the response and investigation of child abductions. Sheriff Ivey has testified before the United States Congress on law enforcement related matters and has extensive experience in the area of Public Integrity Investigations. Sheriff Ivey was honored as the Florida Department of Law Enforcement’s Special Agent of the Year (1996) and was also recognized by the Commissioner of the Florida Department of Law Enforcement for his Outstanding Contributions to Criminal Justice. In August of 2011 Sheriff Ivey was honored by the National Organization of Victims Advocacy for his work at the national level as an advocate of victim’s rights and protection. Sheriff Ivey speaks regularly on topics such as Identity Theft, Crime in America, Human Trafficking, Domestic Violence, and Self Defense through Mental Preparedness. Sheriff Ivey firmly believes that Crime Prevention and Education are vital to reduce our crime rate and protect our community.

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free