In 2009, pro-abortion president Barack Obama promised the American people that Obamacare would not fund abortion. He made this promise because he knew that the religious and pro-life community were concerned that Obamacare would make them pay for the killing of children through abortion.

Now, in 2014 we know for sure their concerns were valid. Earlier this year, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report that identifies 1,036 ObamaCare plans that cover abortion on demand and receive taxpayer subsides.

The GAO report also found that nearly all of the insurance issuers sampled are not itemizing the required separate abortion surcharge on its bills – confirming that the Obama Administration is ignoring the law’s abortion accounting gimmick. In 2014, taxpayers are funding over a thousand Obamacare health plans that subsidize abortion on demand—even late-term abortion—in defiance of the Hyde Amendment the President publicly said he would honor.

However, despite these facts, some Catholics still support the flawed healthcare system. In fact, a CEO at a Catholic Hospital recently acknowledged that she believes Obamacare is more important that protecting the Right to Life.

According to Creative Minority Report, Nancy Steiger, the chief mission officer of PeaceHealth, a Catholic Health System, said she believed that Obamacare is a part of the greater good and therefore the abortion aspects of the “health care” should be overlooked.

She said, “While not everything in the Affordable Care Act fits Catholic social teaching – most notably birth control and abortion – the whole idea of access to health care for all is a fundamental Christian, Catholic belief. That is a greater good over what we disagree with. And abortions are not done in hospitals fundamentally.”

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

Additionally, as LifeNews previously reported, in 2011 the Catholic Health Association angered the pro-life Catholic community when it endorsed the Obamacare bill even though they knew it failed to protect against taxpayer funding of abortions.

Michael Hichborn from the American Life League explained why some Catholics support Obamacare. He said, “The morally bankrupt provisions in Obamacare make it impossible for any Catholic to support it, even in the best possible light. By taking government funds to enroll people into Obamacare, it is clear that as far as Ascension Health and Catholic Social Services of Mobile are concerned, money is more important than souls. If the Catholic faith is to survive Obama’s America, then sellouts like these must be reigned in by the shepherds of the Church.”

Thankfully, however, the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, has strongly opposed Obamacare. In a statement they said, “We are united in our resolve to continue to defend our right to live by our faith, and our duty to serve the poor, heal the sick, keep our apostolates strong and faithful, and insure our people.”