Photo

Dr. Michael Kaplan looked across his desk at a woman who had sought out his Long Island Weight Loss Institute and asked the question he often poses to new patients: “Where do you think you go wrong with food?”

The 38-year-old patient was about 20 pounds overweight and, as she described it, desperate. Weight Watchers, nutritionists — she had tried them all in vain. A physician like Dr. Kaplan, she reasoned, might be the only one left who could help her. “I’m really tired of it,” the woman said one recent afternoon, declining to give her name to a reporter. “I feel like something is off with me.”

Dr. Kaplan, a leader in the medical weight-loss industry, nodded sympathetically, interjecting questions that ranged from what she typically ate for breakfast (protein shake) to whether she felt depressed (sometimes). By the end of the 50-minute session, the woman had chosen Dr. Kaplan’s most expensive weight-loss plan: $1,199 for six weeks’ worth of meal-replacement products, counseling and vitamin supplements.

Then he delivered some good news: Her insurance would probably reimburse her for at least a small portion of the bill, thanks to a provision in the federal health care law that requires insurers to pay for nutrition and obesity screening.

The news was pleasing to the patient. But it has also created a financial opportunity for a corner of the diet industry that has often operated on the fringe of the medical establishment: for-profit diet clinics overseen by doctors.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It’s really a game changer,” said John LaRosa, research director at Marketdata Enterprises, who has studied the weight-loss industry for more than 20 years.

Mr. LaRosa estimates that medical weight-loss programs, which include those run by hospitals as well as clinics, bring in $1 billion annually and that the market will grow about 5 percent a year through 2019.

The prospects are so lucrative that in March, Mr. LaRosa sponsored a seminar advising entrepreneurs how to open their own weight-loss clinics to take advantage of the new stream of insurance coverage.

And Dr. Kaplan recently started a consulting business to teach primary-care doctors how to bill insurers for obesity treatments.

“We’ve been in a rapid expansion mode as a result of the insurance companies covering obesity treatment,” Dr. Kaplan said. He estimated that a doctor could earn as much as $3,000 more a year for each obese patient, according to promotional materials for his new company, Obesity Management Systems.

But the prospect of rapid growth in the diet-clinic industry, fed by insurance payments, has exposed deep philosophical differences on the best ways to help patients lose weight.

Obesity specialists at major medical centers say the proprietors of diet clinics often employ unproven tactics — like vitamin injections, costly supplements and extreme diet plans — that lure customers but do not lead to lasting results. Diet-clinic owners contend that they are filling a needed role because the mainstream medical establishment pays little attention to patients’ struggles with weight.

Photo

Meanwhile, Americans keep piling on the pounds. In 2013, the American Medical Association classified obesity — defined as having a body mass index of 30 or higher — as a disease, and solving the obesity epidemic came to be viewed as one of the nation’s most pressing public health challenges. Beyond the federal requirement that insurers cover obesity screening, many states go further, requiring coverage that ranges from basic counseling to weight-loss surgery.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Sustained weight loss is notoriously difficult to achieve. Lasting results require long-term care and follow-up, said Michael D. Jensen, the director of the obesity treatment research program at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., who has studied the effectiveness of weight-loss programs.

“It just takes most people so long to make permanent changes in eating or activity habits,” he said. “There’s always this search for the quick fix, and usually you can find somebody who’s willing to sell it to you.”

Dr. Pieter A. Cohen, a primary-care doctor at the Cambridge Health Alliance in Massachusetts and an assistant professor at Harvard Medical School, said several of his patients had used such clinics, only to return to him in frustration. “My clinical experience is that at least nine out of 10 patients who do these kinds of diets don’t just regain the weight, but go up again,” he said.

Few clinics follow patients long enough to demonstrate their programs’ effectiveness, although they point to individual success stories and say they do offer comprehensive behavioral counseling. Some are trying to improve treatment standards by employing doctors with backgrounds in obesity and certified nutritionists, while recommending only evidence-based treatments. And they say they offer real options to patients who have been shunned by mainstream medical providers.

“Doctors — even my own doctor — they would just say, ‘Stay under X calories and get lots of sleep and get lots of water,’ ” said Cris Cawley, chief executive of Thinique, a small medical weight-loss chain based in Texas. “But that’s really difficult.”