Ask any record store owner or employee about Record Store Day, and you’ll probably hear a response as heavily mixed as a Kanye West album.

“It’s gotten so janky and ridiculous, it might be overblown at this point,” said Dave Hoenack, co-owner of Hymie’s Vintage Records, referring to the product and hype generated by record labels specifically for Saturday’s 10th annual national celebration of independent shops. He singled out one of the first names on the alphabetical list of exclusive RSD merchandise for proof.

“I don’t think there’s anybody rushing out to buy a limited-edition A-ha record.”

Hoenack and the rest of his Twin Cities record-shop peers nonetheless expect music fans to flock to their stores Saturday. Hymie’s usually makes enough money from RSD to cover the cost of booking a dozen bands and erecting an outdoor stage for its annual block party, which is just the biggest of the live music lineups being offered by local stores to mark the big day.

Here is a rundown of the RSD 2015 offerings around town. Most stores have been storing up merchandise for the big day and will feature food, drinks, giveaways and other activities to add to the fun. Which it unquestionably still is, A-ha or no.

Hymie’s

RECORD STORE DAY What: 10th annual celebration of independent record shops nationwide. • When: All day April 18. Info: RecordStoreDay.com.

With an unusually unscary weather forecast this year, the E. Lake Street vinyl mainstay’s two-stage block party will run from 11 a.m.-6 p.m. and feature Chastity Brown, the Ericksons, Barbara Jean, Jack Klatt, Brian Laidlaw & the Family Trade, Pennyroyal, Southside Desire, Wizards Are Real and more. The Dumpy Jug Bumpers will also play to tout their debut album. 3820 E. Lake St., Mpls.

Electric Fetus

A national RSD participant, They Might Be Giants, joins the Fetus’ in-store performance lineup this year (4 p.m.) alongside all-over-the-map local faves Greg Grease (1 p.m.), Dosh & Ghostband (2), Rupert Angeleyes (3) and Frankie Lee and Erik Koskinen (5), with a new kids craft area also part of the mix for shopper parents. Doors open 9 a.m., 2000 4th Av. S., Mpls.

Fifth Element

Performances are promised by Greg Grease, Andrew Broder, Crescent Moon, Uprock and Freez & Mike Frey alongside all the Rhymesayers and indie-rap exclusive items (schedule TBA). Doors at 9 a.m., 2411 Hennepin Av. S., Mpls.

Eclipse Records

St. Paul’s downtown outlet will have celebrity guest DJs starting at 10 a.m., including competing radio jocks Brian Oake and Jason Nagel at noon and 1 p.m., respectively, and musicians Christy Hunt and Martin Dosh at 3 and 4 p.m. Doors at 10 a.m., 381 N. Wabasha St., St. Paul.

Extreme Noise

The punk and metal bastion has a trio of heavy hitters: Grant Hart, Rank Strangers and Mute Swan, starting at noon. Veggie dogs, too, which are very punk rock. Doors 8 a.m., 407 W. Lake St., Mpls.

HiFi Hair & Records

The rocking salon shaped its live sets around the Slim Dunlap double-LP release with Nick Leet’s Pasadena ’68 (2 p.m.), a “Slimtown Singles” edition of the Mad Ripple Hootenanny (3), Curtiss A (6) and Street Hassle (7:30), the latter touting a raucous new single. 1637 Hennepin Av. S., Mpls.

Barely Brothers

A newcomer this time last year and already a local institution, the vinyl outlet will kick off its live music at noon. Acts include Holy Broke (1 p.m.), the Counterfactuals (3), April Fools (4) and High Crimes (5). 9 a.m. doors, 783 Raymond Av., St. Paul.

Mill City Sound

This year's most happening newcomer will host Lehto & Wright (2 p.m.), Pill Hill (3:45) and Two Harbors (5). 9 a.m. doors, 812 Mainstreet, Hopkins.

Treehouse Records

Only one performer this year at this mainstay shop, but it’s a good one: Mississippi acoustic roots songwriter Cory Branan (5 p.m.), who’s playing the Turf Club that night — and whose label Bloodshot is issuing an RSD 7-inch with him covering Prince’s “Under the Cherry Moon” backed with Lydia Loveless’ “I Would Die 4 U.” 9 a.m. doors, 2557 Lyndale Av. S., Mpls.

Other stores

They’re also stockpiling the bins at Agharta Records (10 a.m., 2512 W. University Av., St. Paul); Go Johnny Go (4775 Banning Ave., White Bear Lake); Down in the Valley (8020 Olson Hwy., Golden Valley), Know Name (6009 Portland Av. S., Mpls.) and Roadrunner (4304 Nicollet Av. S., Mpls). And don’t forget It Records, new from former Let It Be owner Ryan Cameron, inside Find Furnish antique store (13 Fifth Av. NE., Mpls.).