David J. Beacom

Website URL: N/A

Age: (Candidate declined to respond)

Family: Wife, three children and four grandchildren

How long have you lived in Broomfield? Since early 1999

Professional background: Retired from Xcel Energy

Political/community experience: First elective office was citizen volunteer on the Local Licensing Authority, was the chairperson the last five years

Education: BA and JD from Creighton University in Omaha, Neb.

Name a person you admire and explain why: My mother and I am who I am today because of her.

Broomfield recently agreed to purchase the former Safeway building for the future civic center. How much priority should be given to and/or money devoted to development of the civic center?

My campaign has been about listening to our citizens, understanding what they want and don't want. Then making the best possible decisions that enable the desires of the citizens. According to focus groups, the Broomfield Citizen Survey and the task force working on the master plan for Broomfield, the citizens want a civic center. They want one that succeeds and is a focal point of community life. We need to do what is necessary to create such an area while not harming the rest of Broomfield's quality of life.

Advertisement

2. Broomfield rents and housing prices are among the highest in the metro area. What policy change would do the most to increase affordable housing in the city?

There is no single policy change that will solve this issue. There are things the city and county can and should do. There are issues regarding the building of condo developments through out the state. There is the matter of less availability of rentals than the needs. More building helps this imbalance but takes time. So we are looking at many parts to put the solution together and it will take time.

Broomfield has seen a number of businesses — large and small — close or announce their closings in recent months and years. What steps should the city take to stem the departure of both major retailers and small businesses?

Other entities and Broomfield provide incentives to business. The issue is how much is too much. Broomfield balances incentive with return. Remember that we are working with private businesses not parts of government. We can offer help and assistance but the real drivers are related to the fact: Can the business prosper. This is their decision in the end. The citizens of Broomfield help this by supporting our businesses, if they can succeed then they likely will stay.