2/25 PoliticsPA Playbook

Written by PoliticsPA Staff

Wolf reveals cancer diagnosis, Dems rally around Kane and Knoll drops out of the Treasurer race. Good morning politicos, here’s the Playbook!

PA-Gov: Wolf Diagnosed with Prostate Cancer: The Governor revealed he has a treatable form of cancer.

Dermody Signals that Dems May Not Support Kane Impeachment: The Democratic Party seems to be somewhat rallying around the AG recently.

PA-9: Halvorson Calls on Shuster to Resign: A new report that the Congressman was partying with lobbyists prompted the declaration.

Knoll Drops Out of Treasurer Race: Albert Baker Knoll is withdrawing from the Democratic primary.

PA-Gov: Pennsylvanians Extend Good Wishes to Wolf: Reactions flood in after the Governor reveals his cancer diagnosis.

PA-BGT: Legislators Calling for Audit of Wolf’s Spending: Reports indicate Gov. Wolf has spent $37.5 billion since the state last had a budget.

PA-16: Rep. Cartwright Endorses Hartman: The human rights activists adds to her list of endorsements.

UFCW 1776 Endorses Shapiro: The AG candidate secures the support of the food and commercial workers union.

SD-9: Killion Launches First TV Ad (VIDEO): The State Rep. and GOP nominee hits the airwaves.

Legislative Elections Update

HD-19: There’s been good news and bad news for State Rep. Jake Wheatley this week. The good news is that Aerion Abney has withdrawn from the Democratic primary.

“As a lifelong Democrat and a former Democratic committeeman, I have nothing but the utmost respect for the Allegheny County Democratic Committee and the annual endorsement process,” Abney said. “Unfortunately, our campaign did not win the 2016 Primary Election endorsement, and as a result of the decisive vote, I have decided to withdraw from the race and end my campaign for State Representative, PA-19.”

The bad news is that his other opponent Jessica Wolfe bought up his old campaign web domains.

“I purchased them because I knew it would be a strategic advantage,” Wolfe explained. “He reuses his campaign literature from election to election and it all has jakeforstate.com [or jake4state.com] on it. I knew it would anger him a little bit and throw him off a little. And I knew it would force him to redo his campaign literature.”

Statewide

PA Watchdog: Digital Learning Day and the digital divide

PLS Reporter: VIDEO: Gov. Wolf announces he has treatable form of prostate cancer

PLS Reporter: VIDEO: Actuary gives 8 observations about the state of Pennsylvania’s pension systems

State House Sound Bites: Time and money

State House Sound Bites: Wolf to undergo treatment for prostate cancer

Philadelphia

Inquirer: Wolf: I have ‘treatable’ prostate cancer

Inquirer: Point Breeze meeting ends after ‘anti-Semitic’ comments

Inquirer: Philly D.A. promotes detective who is suing AG Kane

CapitolInq: GOP-aligned group launching $1M ad buy boosting Toomey

WHYY Newsworks: At Philly forum, civil rights attorney Crump addresses community-police relations

WHYY Newsworks: Incumbents prevail in internal Philly teachers union election

SEPA

Daily Local News: Phoenixville school’s $3M roadwork decision in Wolf’s hands

Montgomery Media: Montgomery County commissioners raise fees for inspection; Gale opposes

Buck County Courier Times: Naughton lists education, science among priorities in race for 8th District Democratic nomination

Bucks County Courier Times: Email alleges ‘Islamification’ of Central Bucks curriculum

Bucks County Courier Times: Bucks, Montgomery election officials anticipate complaints about PA ‘closed’ primary

Pittsburgh

Post-Gazette: Human services organizations still feeling impact of budget impasse

Post-Gazette: Mayor ends practice of paying officers beyond base pay while on suspension

Post-Gazette: Former Pa. Congressman Patrick Murphy sworn in as Secretary of the Army

Tribune Review: Hampton Council OKs new UPMC complex

Tribune Review: McKeesport councilman-elect barred from office over drug convictions

KDKA: Pa. Attorney Challenging Ted Cruz’s Right To Run In Republican Primary

City Paper: U.S. Senate candidates talk fracking in Pennsylvania

Southwest

Beaver County Times: Beaver County officials weighing whether employee buyouts could cut personnel costs

Beaver County Times: Beaver County officials ponder policy changes, ways to make meetings more productive

Altoona Mirror: Sestak meets with supporters

NEPA

Times-Leader: Harveys Lake Borough Council member Thomas Kehler’s residency under investigation

Times-Leader: U.S. House approves Eric Williams Correctional Officer Protection Act

Times-Tribune: Lackawanna County commissioners to launch disability action committee

South Central

York Dispatch: Wolf has cancer treatment options in York

Lancaster Intelligencer: Leaders vow to fight elimination of the district judge seat in Lancaster’s poverty-stricken Southeast

Lancaster Intelligencer: Highmark draws criticism for trimming doc pay on Obamacare plans

York Daily Record: DEP pushes on, despite halted Clean Power Plan

York Daily Record: How did York County schools plan for funds?

Patriot News: Cheating scandal prompts review of testing practices at Pa. State Police Academy

Patriot News: Pennsylvania’s skyrocketing public pension tab gets a tote board in the Capitol

Patriot News: Fatal attack on Pa. officer inspires bill to arm prison guards with pepper spray

Lehigh Valley

Express Times: Medical marijuana amendments, vote planned in Pa. House

Express Times: PNC to stop funding congressman in light of his comments on gays

Reading Eagle: Reading to end contracts to rehabilitate city-owned buildings downtown

Reading Eagle: Reading dentist on ballot for Congress

Reading Eagle: U.S. Rep. Charlie Dent backs Kasich for president

Morning Call: Environmental activist David McGuire appointed to Allentown Council

Morning Call: The Watchdog: Obamacare website crash stemmed from extreme government incompetence

North by Northwest

Centre Daily Times: Did Obama shrink the military? GOP candidates sure seem to think so

Centre Daily Times: Challenger to Rep. Hanna reports more petition signatures

Erie Times-News: U.S. Senate candidate Joe Sestak campaigns in Erie

Williamsport Sun-Gazette: Commissioners blast governor for budget stalemate

Opinion

Bucks County Courier Times: Conflict compromises legislation’s intent

Inquirer: Supreme mess: Ruling will erode Philly school district

York Dispatch: Wolf diagnosis a vital reminder

Lancaster Intelligencer: Just what does GOP presidential front-runner Donald Trump stand for exactly?

Carlisle Sentinel: Durst: FAQ – Scalia’s replacement

Patriot News: Court action on climate plan a disappointing speed bump

Patriot News: Micek: Donald Trump is a hateful blight on our politics – here’s why

Erie Times-News: Restitution a key part of child-porn cases

Erie Times-News: Gerson: The politics of the middle finger

Morning Call: White: Pennsylvania incumbents feel too comfortable

Tribune Review: The Thursday wrap

Tribune Review: Bill Shuster’s conflict: Way too cozy

Post-Gazette: Courting disaster: Senate obstructionists reject the Constitution

Post-Gazette: Rising hatred: A new report reveals equal opportunity extremism

Blogs

Citified: Report: Feds Have Joined the Johnny Doc Investigation

Citified: Op-Ed: Can an App Help Fight the Scourge of Unshoveled Sidewalks?

Commonwealth Foundation: Governor Wolf’s Sixth Tax Hike Plan

Keystone Crossroads: Why is Pennsylvania’s water expensive?

February 25th, 2016 | Posted in Features, Front Page Stories, Playbook, Top Stories | No Comments