The hunt is on. The city of Austin is searching for a new general manager for Austin Energy. It should take this opportunity to find a visionary leader who can prepare our city-owned utility to remain prosperous as the electricity market changes.

This is a transformational time for electric utilities. The business model that served utilities so well throughout the 20th century — buy or produce energy at large, centralized facilities and profit by selling that energy to customers — won’t keep utilities afloat throughout the 21st century.

Affordable renewable energy from large-scale wind and solar farms enables utilities to reduce rates for customers, but the draw of distributed solar is a growing threat. As solar prices continue to drop, more customers will choose to use solar at their homes and businesses, reducing the amount of energy that utilities can sell. Declining battery prices will only add to the effect and will give customers an affordable off-grid option. And as energy prices and limits on carbon emissions increase, improvements for energy efficiency will become even more attractive, further reducing the need for centrally produced energy.

The next leader of Austin Energy needs to be fully committed to reform Austin Energy’s business model to enable the utility to not only survive these changes, but also to flourish in new energy markets they transform and develop. In addition to prioritizing a rapid transition to 100 percent renewable energy, the utility’s next manager should be committed to innovation for incorporating energy efficiency, distributed energy (including solar), and energy storage — and should also demand response into the utility’s business model.

The new Austin Energy general manager may come onto the job just as the City Council is deliberating the rate case that is now under way. Austin Energy is trying to keep the scope of the rate case relatively limited compared to the last rate case, which became quite contentious. That is somewhat understandable, but every rate case offers an opportunity to modernize Austin Energy’s business model. The new general manager should be prepared to take advantage of that opportunity with the next rate case, which will likely be in just two years.

The new Austin Energy general manager will need to be someone who is capable of gaining the respect of the workforce and harnessing its collective abilities to provide excellent customer service, even as the definition of those services is changing. And the new manager will need to ensure that all staff have the necessary technical skills to meet the utility’s needs and avoid costly mistakes. Navigating these changes while keeping the utility prosperous will require excellent financial acumen and experience setting transparent operating and capital budgets.

Austin Energy is an important city asset, so having a general manager with a strong commitment to public power will be critical. As a publically owned utility, Austin Energy offers significant benefits to our city, including predictable, affordable rates and the ability to invest dividends into city services. Over the years since much of the Texas electric market was deregulated, Austin Energy’s rates have been more affordable than those utilities found in the deregulated market. And instead of utility earnings going into investors’ pockets, Austin Energy’s revenues help pay for city services such as parks, libraries and firefighters.

The general manager will need the knowledge and political savvy to continually convince the Texas Legislature that the utility is acting in the best interests of its customers in order to stave off deregulation. The manager will need to fully understand the benefits of public power and be able to prove to skeptical lawmakers that the City Council, which sets policy for Austin Energy, is acting in the public’s best interest.

The next Austin Energy general manager must have the ability to bring together diverse community interest groups and contentious parties to garner support for needed changes. As Austin continues to struggle with affordability, the manager must have experience and empathy in working with low- and moderate-income customers and be committed to reducing electric bills for this group.

The needed utility transformation will only occur with the blessing of the City Council and the support of the community, so the next general manager must be willing and able to work collaboratively and respectfully with all parties, residential and business customers, citizen commissions, public interest groups, chambers of commerce and research organizations. Concise, timely and honest communication with the City Council and the public will be required.

Austin Energy needs a talented, visionary leader who is committed to working for the public good.