The contrast is stark and striking, and it holds the promise of a classic World Series.

The New York Mets, the boys from the Big Apple, won the National League pennant with powerful starting pitching and timely slugging. New York plays an American League style of baseball. The Mets tied for third in the NL in home runs (177) but ranked last in stolen bases (15).

The Kansas City Royals, the darlings from the heartland, have a style that would play well in the NL. The contact-hitting, base-stealing Royals ranked second in the AL in stolen bases (104) but just 14th in home runs (139).

While the Mets’ strength comes from their starting pitching, Kansas City counters with a nearly impenetrable bullpen.

What the clubs share is a nearly three-decade championship drought and some history. This is the first World Series between franchises born in the expansion-era 1960s.

These clubs have been without a World Series title since the mid-1980s. The Royals beat the St. Louis Cardinals in 1985, and the Mets stunned the Boston Red Sox in 1986.

Kansas City returns to the World Series after falling in seven games to the San Francisco Giants last year. The Mets are making their first appearance since 2000, when they lost 4-1 in the Subway Series against the Yankees.

Game 1 of the 2015 World Series starts at 6:07 p.m. MDT on Tuesday at Kansas City’s Kauffman Stadium.

Following are three keys to this year’s Fall Classic:

Dynamic starters vs. contact hitters

From top to bottom, the Mets’ powerful rotation is the best in the majors. If their starters can pitch deep into games and protect a fragile bullpen, the Mets have an edge in the World Series.

New York has three starters whose fastballs averaged at least 95 mph during the regular season. Among starters with at least 150 innings pitched, Noah Syndergaard ranked No. 1 overall at 97.1 mph, with Matt Harvey (95.9 mph, fourth) and Jacob deGrom (95.0 mph, ninth) close behind.

Mets pitchers can overpower a lineup, but they’re facing a Royals team that gets on base and causes damage. No team in the majors came close to striking out as little as the Royals. They ranked 30th in baseball with 973 strikeouts, with Atlanta next on the list, striking out 1,107 times.

Numbers Game

• Kansas City hitters had the highest contact rate in the majors this season at 81.9 percent.

• Mets starters had the best strikeout-to-walk rate (4.18) in the majors.

Stingy relievers vs. big bats

Royals relievers were far from perfect in the American League Championship Series against Toronto. For example, Kelvin Herrera gave up a huge, three-run double to Troy Tulowitzki in Game 5, and Ryan Madson served up a game-tying, two-run blast to Jose Bautista in Game 6.

However, over the long haul, K.C.’s hard-throwing trio at the back of the bullpen — Wade Davis, Luke Hochevar and Herrera — was tough to crack. The trio has allowed one earned run in 21 innings this postseason for a 0.43 ERA. Basically, opponents have to take the lead in the first six innings or face defeat.

But Mets hitters can strike at any time, especially sizzling second baseman Daniel Murphy, who has hit a home run in a record six consecutive playoff games. The addition of outfielder Yoenis Cespedes at the trade deadline gave the Mets’ offense a boost. New York finished third in the major leagues in scoring and fourth in OPS after the all-star break.

Numbers Game

• Royals relievers struck out more batters (59) in 41 innings this postseason than did Kansas City starters (55) in 55 innings.

• Murphy has hit .421, with a 1.026 slugging percentage, 11 runs scored and 11 RBIs, in the postseason.

Experience vs. momentum

The Royals are back in the World Series after beating powerful Toronto in six tough games. After taking the Giants to seven games in last season’s World Series, the Royals are a seasoned bunch.

Mets manager Terry Collins is in his first World Series, and so are most of his players. Indeed, few of them had played in a postseason game until this year. The Royals have eight regular players who have participated in a World Series, while only Curtis Granderson has World Series experience among the Mets’ regulars.

But the Mets have proven themselves in the playoffs. They beat the Los Angeles Dodgers in five games in an NLDS, besting ace Zack Greinke, at Dodger Stadium, in Game 5. Then the Mets swept the Chicago Cubs in the NLCS, never trailing in the series.

The downside, however, is the Mets’ long layoff. They will have had five days off between the NLCS and the World Series. That’s not good for New York, because five of the last six teams with five or more days off went on to lose the World Series.

“I don’t know if every team’s the same,” Collins told reporters. “You know, we’re going to ride that pitching. And by the way, our pitching right now could use a blow, because we’re pushing them pretty hard. I’m glad our starters are going to get an extra day.”

Numbers Game

• In games at Kauffman Stadium, the Royals will have Kendrys Morales as the designated hitter. He hit 22 homers and drove in 106 runs in the regular season.

• The Mets will probably use a Michael Cuddyer /Kelly Johnson platoon at DH. The duo combined for 24 homers and 88 RBIs, including Johnson’s time with the Braves earlier in the season.

Saunders’ prediction: Royals in seven games