SPRINGFIELD, Mo. -- Allegations of discrimination at downtown Springfield nightclub, Zan, have evolved into a protest planned Thursday night.

Dylyan Florence who organized the protest said although he's never been discriminated against at Zan claims that staff often deny entrance to African Americans including some of his friends for what appear to be vague reasons; or that if staff do give a reason for not letting someone in, it's often because of the dress code policy, which he says don't seem to be enforced fairly.

He hopes the protest will bring awareness to what he said appears to be an ongoing issue.

"I want people to realize that discrimination takes place in all kinds of places and takes place in places that you might not necessarily look for like a club downtown," Florence said.

One of his friends who claims he was discriminated against said he hopes what happened to him doesn't happen to anyone else.

"Just to be turned away for something because I look like something I can't even control that hits home. That hurts," said Terik Lewis.

The owner of Zan, Billy Jalili, said the allegations of racism are not true and that the dress code is needed for safety reasons. He does admit though that enforcement of the dress code is not easy nor do his staff always do it perfectly.

"When we see somebody come in with the baggy pants and hat on we just have to say no. Was it maybe the right decision or not we have to make a decision. It's a tough job and I don't think there's anybody out there that can do this job 100% correct. We make mistakes but for most of the time we have been correct," Jalili said.

The students who organized the protest also reached out to the NAACP.

In a statement it said "we have received numerous reports of various and inconsistent reasons used by the club management to prevent members of ethnic groups from entering the establishment. Our hope is to try to mediate a workable solution to eliminate these discriminatory practices. We look forward to meeting in person with the owner and the students to reconcile the differences and reach a mutual agreement. "

Jalili said he looks forward to meeting with them too, and is open to speaking with anyone about the allegations to try and clear things up.