Photo

In eight years on the City Council, Daniel R. Garodnick has pushed for police reform, rallied with labor leaders in support of paid sick days and fought to preserve middle-class housing in his district.

So until recently, it would have been hard to imagine him being pilloried by former allies as he now wages an uphill fight for the City Council speakership. His opponent, Melissa Mark-Viverito, a fellow Manhattan Democrat, has the backing of powerful unions and, not least, the new mayor, Bill de Blasio. She currently claims the support of 30 of the 51 council members and is trying to hold her majority together until the Council votes on Wednesday to elect a speaker.

Mr. Garodnick has refused to concede, saying that he believes that the mayor’s interference threatens to weaken the Council. He hopes that he can sway six council members to his side before the vote, aided by the backing he has secured from the powerful party leaders of Queens and the Bronx.

Asked last week if there was any awkwardness for him in being the candidate of party bosses often vilified as vestiges of a different era, Mr. Garodnick let out a short laugh, then left a long, long pause.

“Not really,” he said finally, “because at this point we are trying to win an election.”

Mr. Garodnick, 41, is no one’s image of a party hack. A graduate of Dartmouth College — president of his class all four years — and a former securities lawyer at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, he is described by current and former colleagues as hard-working and unflappable.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He grew up in his district, first in Stuyvesant Town and then in Peter Cooper Village, where he now lives with his wife and two children, two buildings away from his parents.

He showed an early bent for politics: He worked on his first campaign in high school, stuffing fliers under doors in a district leader race. As a young lawyer, he took the subway on weekends to far-flung neighborhoods to explore; his dates were subjected to round-trip ferry rides to Staten Island for dinner.

When he first ran for the Council in 2005, he knocked on the more than 11,200 doors in Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village and called every Democrat in Waterside Plaza, a 1,470-unit complex. He won a four-way primary with 56 percent of the vote.

Months after he took office, Metropolitan Life, the longtime owner of Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village — leafy brick developments that have been an oasis for middle-class families in Manhattan, and where some 20 percent of his constituents live — announced that it would auction them. Working with the tenants association, Mr. Garodnick helped raise $4.5 billion in a bid to turn them into a tenant-owned cooperative.

When the bid failed, and the new landlords began trying to evict rent-stabilized tenants, Mr. Garodnick organized free legal clinics and helped bring a lawsuit against MetLife and the new owners that resulted in thousands of apartments coming back under rent stabilization. Since 2010, when the new owners defaulted on their mortgages, Mr. Garodnick has been at the center of new efforts to buy the properties on behalf of the tenants.

“Dan has been an amazing leader,” John Marsh, the president of the tenants association, said.

In the Council, Mr. Garodnick has often collaborated with the members of the Progressive Caucus to pass legislation, but he has also shown an independent streak, which may be hurting him now.

Ms. Mark-Viverito, 44, a co-chairwoman of the Progressive Caucus, endorsed Mr. de Blasio early in the mayoral primary, and some believe that he is now repaying the favor. (Mr. Garodnick did not make an endorsement in the primary.) Local 1199 of the Service Employees International Union, the health care workers’ union, which gave Mr. de Blasio critical support, made it clear soon after his election that it wanted Ms. Mark-Viverito to become speaker.

Both candidates reached out to business and real estate leaders as they ramped up their campaigns, but Mr. Garodnick is better known in those worlds. Developers see him as an honest negotiator, if not a consistent ally. Ms. Mark-Viverito is viewed more warily, partly because of her close labor ties. Leading figures in real estate made their feelings known early in the campaign, but it is unclear whether they are continuing to lobby for Mr. Garodnick.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Nonetheless, Ms. Mark-Viverito’s supporters accuse Mr. Garodnick of becoming a stalking horse for forces trying to stall Mr. de Blasio’s agenda, and they warn that by standing in the way of the person who would be the first Latina speaker — Ms. Mark-Viverito was born in Puerto Rico — he is stoking enmity.

Mr. Garodnick, for his part, says that if the mayor essentially chooses the speaker, the Council will be unable to serve as an effective check on the mayor’s power.

“Holding hearings, questioning the way things are done, pushing commissioners to do better — that is a central role of the City Council,” Mr. Garodnick said.

“Where the mayor is involved in determining the leadership,” he added, “that becomes much more difficult.”

With only three days left, his supporters say that they believe he can prevail, and that it may not be clear until Wednesday how all the council members will vote.

The speaker’s race, which tends to be decided in back rooms, was not Mr. Garodnick’s first choice of a next step. Early in 2012, he announced a campaign for comptroller, but he withdrew when Scott M. Stringer, who was Manhattan borough president and had been campaigning for mayor, decided to run for comptroller instead.

“Anyone would have to have misgivings about this process,” Andrew Ehrlich, a partner at Paul, Weiss and a close friend of Mr. Garodnick’s, said. “Pure politics isn’t what drives him,” he added of his friend. “In fact, I think he hates it.”