"I would think he would also want to prove he’s a good debater by opening himself up to scrutiny." Jeff Bell on Cory Booker

Mickey Carroll of the Quinnipiac Poll joked recently on a radio program that he would “commit hara-kiri” before the station’s microphones if Republican Jeff Bell somehow were to beat Democrat Cory Booker in the U.S. Senate race.

That led Carroll’s son Mike to joke that he might head over to his dad’s house on Election Day and hide the knives.

Mike is, of course, the Republican assemblyman from Morris County whose conservative views are not necessarily shared by his father, a former New York Times reporter who is now the spokesman for the polling institute connected to the college with the funny name.

This isn’t about ideology, however. It’s about odds. The poll that was the subject of that radio program showed the former Newark mayor leading Bell 51-40 among likely voters.



But if you’re a betting man, it’s not a good idea to bet against the 70-year-old Bell. The guy has made a habit of running races under the radar. In 1978, the then-34-year-old Bell came out of nowhere to oust incumbent Clifford Case in a low-turnout Republican primary. He then lost the general election to Bill Bradley, who began a Democratic winning streak in Senate races that has continued to this day.

Bell pulled off another shocker in this year’s GOP primary. He didn’t even bother to attend the party’s county nominating conventions. Instead he relied on a single mailing sent out to likely GOP primary voters. That was enough for him to pick up the win with a mere 29 percent of the vote in a four-way race.

Due to a lack of campaign cash, Bell hasn’t made much of an impression so far on potential voters in the general election. Two-thirds of those polled didn’t know enough about him to form an opinion.

That would seem to permit Booker to coast to victory, as he did last year in that special election to fill the unexpired term of the late Frank Lautenberg. And he appears to be doing just that. Booker’s been appearing mainly at venues packed with loyal Democrats.

Such an event was the New Jersey Black Issues Convention Thursday in New Brunswick. When he gets up a head of steam, Booker is every bit as charismatic a speaker as that other nationally known New Jersey pol who’s also rumored to have presidential ambitions.

The first subject Booker brought up in his 35-minute speech was America’s habit of imprisoning a big portion of its population.

“The chilling reality is that America has 4 to five percent of the world’s population but we have 25 percent of the world’s imprisoned population,” Booker said.

He went on to note that 70 percent of them are imprisoned for nonviolent crimes and that blacks are much more likely to be in that group.

“When I was at Stanford, I saw guys with bags of marijuana,” he said. “Were they getting raided by the police? Of course not. But kids in Newark and Paterson and Passaic are.”

Booker then toldl how he is reaching across the aisle to Republican Rand Paul to change that approach. He and the Kentucky senator are putting together a package to permit young people to resume their place in society after convictions, Booker said.

It was an impressive spiel and it earned him a standing ovation. But most voters won’t be hearing it. Booker has agreed to only one debate with Bell and is keeping a low profile.

That worked last year in the race against former Bogota mayor Steve Lonegan. But

Lonegan’s no-holds-barred attacks on Booker’s record as Newark mayor helped drive up his negatives. They were at 26 percent in that poll. As for Bell, he barely had any negatives – or positives.

When I got him on the phone, Bell told me he was nostalgic for the days when he was against Bradley. “I debated him 21 times” – once for every county, he said.

As for Booker, “I would think he would also want to prove he’s a good debater by opening himself up to scrutiny,” said Bell. “But I guess he doesn’t think that’s relevant.”

If so, that’s a loss for the voting public – and perhaps for Booker as well. This election could be shaping up as a referendum on President Obama. If Bell has any chance at all, it’s that an anti-Obama groundswell combines with a low turnout to make the race competitive.

When I got Mickey Carroll on the phone, he said those factors are not likely to matter much. The numbers show there are unlikely to be any surprises on the night of Nov. 4, he predicted.

So that’s bad news for Bell. As for the good news, Mickey said that if Booker loses he’ll invite me to the hara-kiri ceremony – assuming of course Mike doesn’t hide the knives.

ADD: In this post on the primary election, I noted that Bell won but fell below what I termed "the Byrne line" - the 30 percent total Brendan Byrne got in the 1981 Democratic when he beat a crowded field to win a chance to run for re-election as governor.

In that piece, I noted I'd won a six-pack betting with Monmouth University pollster Pat Murray on that race (one I still haven't collected, by the way.)

If anyone wants to be on the Bell-Booker race, I hereby propose a wager. It's based on what I'll call "the Kyrillos Line." That would be the 19-point margin by which state Sen. Joe Kyrillos lost to incumbent Democrat Bob Menendez in the 2012 U.S. Senate race.

That was an amazingly bad result when you consider that the Monmouth County state senator was the handpicked choice of Chris Christie and that he had the full backing of the state Republican establishment.

Menendez has a rather checkered history as a Hudson County pol. Yet Kyrillos failed to capitalize on those negatives. He ran a campaign so lackluster that it barely made news.

Maybe that's why Christie stayed out of this year's nominating process. Anyway, is there anyone out there who wants to bet Bell will fall below the Kyrillos Line? If so, I'll take your money - or beer as the case may be.



ALSO: Check George Will's piece on Bell here:

Booker, who is ignoring Bell, just as Case did, has a better résumé (Stanford, Oxford, Yale Law School) than reputation. His liberalism is as conventional as his eccentricity is disturbing. He is a fabulist (he has been called “the Garden State’s Mother Goose”) given to asserting as facts various self-aggrandizing figments of his imagination (e.g., T-Bone, a nonexistent Newark drug dealer, with whom Booker has had, he says, instructive interactions). Worst of all, Booker is perfectly suited to today’s Senate. Flitting like a waterbug on the surface of things, he seizes fleeting headlines as excuses for wielding the federal government in opportunistic grandstanding. His crusade du jour would increase taxes on professional sports leagues in order to spend $100 million on domestic violence prevention.

PLUS, you can read this column on Mickey Carroll's excellent book on Jack Ruby and the Kennedy assassination.