Hillary Clinton made a campaign stop in Nashville after winning South Carolina's democratic primary this weekend. // HOME PAGE MEDIA GROUP EMILY R. WEST

Franklin sisters Becca and Rachel Fuqua swiped through the pictures on their phones after posing with a selfie with Secretary Hillary Clinton on Sunday afternoon.

After joking, the Democratic frontrunner for president touched their phone and winked at them.

The two girls, who both graduated from Centennial High School, said Clinton touched on issues that affected their lives, from student loan debt to health care.

"I thought she was great," Rachel Fuqua said. "It was worth the hours of waiting."

Hundreds of supporters lined around the corner of 21st Avenue North in Nashville to hear Clinton in the center of the ballroom.

She largely touched on health care and student loan debt, both of which have straddled some with financial burdens across the country.

As Republicans have made their way through Franklin, most of them have threatened to repeal the Affordable Care Act if they were elected. Clinton pointed to the fact that 90 percent of Americans are now insured.

"When the Republicans vote to repeal it, they won't tell you what they will replace it with," she said. "They want to hand it back the insurance companies. Right now, 90 percent of Americans are now insured. I want to build on that, and I want to make it better."

The former First Lady also said she remained disappointed some states have reduced their Medicaid spending, including Tennessee.

"I am really sorry that your state wouldn't extend Medicaid," she said. "I am going to try to convince governors and legislators to expand it."

Secretary Clinton also touched on her desire to increase the amount of small businesses across America, and how she wants to grow that market and make it more available for up and coming generations.

"I want to help small business for young people and support more minority and women businesses," she said. "I want to be a small business president. I want to get back to creating and growing small business. And while we are at it, lets raise the minimum wage."

Franklin resident Holly McCall, who helped create the event, has been working since the late fall on the press side of the campaign. She said as a woman growing up watching her mom in politics in the 1970s as a school board member, Clinton's rise to a future potential presidency has become an inspiration.

"For me, as a 51-year-old woman who is interested in politics, there is no other option," she said.