The Estes Park Salud Family Health Center has announced that it has added a new physician to its Estes Park clinic.

Dr. John K. Stanton, D.O., joined the clinic in January.

Dr. Stanton earned his degree in Osteopathic Medicine from the Kirksville College of

Osteopathic Medicine in Kirksville, MO. Dr. Stanton completed his residency in Family

Medicine at Deaconess Hospital in St. Louis, MO.

Dr. Stanton recently stepped down from private practice in Westminster, CO after 20 years.

Dr. Stanton is a Board Certified Family Medicine provider and has significant experience in the areas of Family Medicine, Urgent Care, Sports Medicine, Bariatric Medicine, Osteopathic

Medicine, and Acupressure/Acupuncture. Dr. Stanton will be providing primary care services for

all ages as well as clinical acupuncture services at the Estes Park Salud Family Health Center.

Dr. Stanton is looking forward to the opportunity to serve a rural and underserved area of

Colorado at the Estes Park Salud Family Health Center.

"Salud clinics have been at the forefront of community healthcare and their staff has been second to none," Dr. Stanton said.

Outside of his work at Salud Family Health Centers, Dr. Stanton will be working as a consultant with government agencies in Broomfield and Denver, as well as with aviation, travel, racing, and medical informatics groups.

Advertisement

He is excited to have the opportunity to hike, climb, and fish in Estes Park.

The Estes Park Salud Family Health Center continues to accept new patients.

For more information, please visit our website at www.saludclinic.org. To schedule an appointment with Dr. Stanton, please call (303) MYSALUD (697-2583) or (970) 484-0999.

Salud Family Health Centers accepts all insurances, including most private insurance plans, Medicare, Medicaid, and CHP+. Salud strives to uphold its mission to provide quality medical, dental and behavioral health services to all patients, regardless of ability to pay. For uninsured individuals, we offer discounted services based on family size and income.