Then-New York Gov. Mario Cuomo gives a thumbs-up during his address to the Democratic National Convention in 1984. Cuomo passed away Thursday at the age of 82. AP

TGIF, the second day of 2015, and the 23rd year since then-New York Gov. Mario Cuomo left a plane idling on a tarmac at Albany International Airport instead of going to New Hampshire to file for the 1992 Democratic presidential primary. The death of Cuomo yesterday at age 82 has prompted an outpouring of condolences from politicians on the left and right -- and triggered new speculation over why the outspoken liberal decided not to challenge another prominent governor, Bill Clinton of Arkansas, for the White House.

[READ: Mario Cuomo, a Giant in NY, Liberal Politics, Dies]

It’s the last week of freedom for freshman lawmakers, who jump into Congress with both feet next week. And, with Ohio State’s upset of perennial contender Alabama, it’s the first time since 2005 that the Southeastern Conference isn’t represented in the NCAA’s college football championship game (go Bucks!). Here’s today’s Three-Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less:

Keynote Speech: In honor of the passing of former New York Gov. Mario Cuomo, here’s the speech from the 1984 Democratic National Convention that made him a liberal icon among Democrats. At the time, the speech, titled, “A Tale of Two Cities,” propelled Cuomo from a political unknown to a rising star that had infatuated Democrats envisioning him at the Oval Office desk -- much like what happened to a certain U.S. senator from Illinois with big ears and a funny name in 2005.

Dream Deferred: That speech, however, was arguably the beginning and the end of Cuomo’s White House ambitions. He flirted with running for the Democratic presidential nomination but ultimately came no closer than that. No one knows for sure why Cuomo couldn’t commit, but MSNBC’s Steve Kornacki has a good take on what might have been.

Duke’s Up: The graft of former Virginia Gov. Bob McDonnell, campaign ads featuring squealing pigs and vomiting sharks, and Alison Lundergan Grimes’ refusal to say whether she voted for President Barack Obama - the leader of her party. Those are some of the winners in Talking Points Memo’s Golden Duke Awards, honoring the most dubious political achievements of 2014.

[ALSO: The Political Year in Twitter: From Sublime to Ridiculous]

Blocked Access: The Arizona Supreme Court has opened up another front in the right’s fight against Obamacare by allowing a court challenge to outgoing Gov. Jan Brewer’s decision to expand Medicare to bring health insurance to thousands of Arizonans -- a move that prompted a lawsuit backed by her successor and fellow Republican, Doug Ducey.

Missed It By That Much: Good news, 113th Congress! You weren’t the least productive after all! Thanks to a burst of activity before the winter recess, the session that just ended last month squeaked past the 112th Congress of 2011-2012 by a measly 12 votes, avoiding the official title of Do-Nothing Congress -- but becoming the second least productive legislature in the history of the nation.

Dumb and Dumber: NBC News also channels The Onion with its 2014 retrospective, titled, “Our Dumb Year In Politics.” Their list includes some rare bits like a bizarre debate in the Idaho governor’s race, a bizarre debate over a fan in the Florida governor’s race and the national apoplexy over the tan suit Obama wore to a press conference that one time.

Youth Movement: The sustained national protests over the police use-of-force deaths of Michael Brown and Eric Garner have given birth to what some are saying is a new civil rights movement. Politico Magazine says it was born at the grassroots level, is propelled by a diverse coalition of young activists and organizers and has swept aside the 1960s model along with leaders like Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson.

Don’t Spend It All At Once: Raise a styrofoam cup to your local fast-food worker: starting this week, he or she will get a raise, along with punch-clock brethren in 29 states where the minimum wage gets hiked past the federal level of $7.25 an hour, reports the New York Times. Don’t ask your local barrista to pick up the tab, though: the raises vary from a few pennies more per hour to about $1.25 an hour, affecting about 3.1 million employees.

Wedding Bells: If you live in Florida and want to get married to your same-sex partner, call the caterer and book the hall. A federal judge has given the all-clear for county clerks to issue marriage licenses in all counties in the Sunshine State. Opponents had maintained the judge’s initial ruling was limited to just one county.

[MORE: Long Read: Steve Scalise Feeling the Heat]

Common Problem: The fight over Common Core educational curriculum, Obama’s signature educational initiative, will get nastier this year. In the spring, Vox reports, hundreds of thousands of students will be tested on the curriculum for the first time, they probably won’t do so well, and that will be a problem for the White House and the 2016 presidential contenders.

Spared: Perhaps shoring up his progressive credentials for his White House run, Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley commuted the sentences of the state’s death row inmates to life in prison. Maryland eliminated the death penalty in 2012; five men were still on death row.

Stat of the Day: Number of minutes Mexican men and women work each day, respectively: 580, 607. Respective percentage of that work that is unpaid: 19 percent, 62 percent (courtesy Harper's Index).

Duly Noted: On this date in 1788, Georgia became the fourth state to ratify the Constitution, and in 1900 Secretary of State John Hay announced the "Open Door Policy" to facilitate trade with China. Bruno Hauptmann, accused kidnapper and murderer of the Lindbergh baby, went on trial in Flemington, N.J.; he was subsequently found guilty and executed. In 1960, Sen. John F. Kennedy, a Massachusetts Democrat, launched his presidential campaign. New York Jets owner Sonny Werblin signed University of Alabama quarterback Joe Namath to an NFL contract reportedly worth $427,000.