John Roberts celebrates 10 years as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court on Tuesday — a decade that has seen the courts preside over some landmark decisions.

Roberts — who was appointed during George W. Bush's administration — replaced the late Chief Justice William Rehnquist.

In his confirmation hearings before he was sworn in, Roberts stressed the importance of his duty as "the modest judge."

"The role of the judge is limited," he said.

"The judge is to decide the cases before them; they're not to legislate; they're not to execute the laws."

His tenure has been a mixed bag of these sentiments, as the court has seesawed across party lines and overturned rulings with deep-set precedents on significant social issues.

Here are some of the important and controversial cases over which Chief Justice Roberts has presided:

Massachusetts v. EPA (2007)

The 5-4 decision in this case was a big score for environmentalists.

It gave the Environmental Protection Agency the authority to regulate greenhouse gases, which effectively backed the belief that these emissions are tied to global warming.

District of Columbia v. Heller (2008)

In a divisive ruling, the Supreme Court overturned the District of Columbia ban on handguns.

An example of a shift to the right for the Roberts Court, this decision supported the Second Amendment by saying that the Constitution protects the right to keep a loaded gun at home for self-defense.

Roberts sided with the 5-4 majority opinion in this case, which was written by Justice Antonin Scalia and stated that "It is not the role of this court to pronounce the Second Amendment extinct."

Under Roberts, the Supreme Court has made landmark decisions. (wikimedia commons)

Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (2010)

Campaign financing is a much-discussed issue when election season rolls around, and this decision gave corporations and unions the green light to spend big on campaigns.

The decision overruled two previous cases — Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce and McConnell v. Federal Election commission — and used the First Amendment rights of corporations as backing.

President Obama decried the decision as "a major victory...for powerful interests that marshal their power every day in Washington to drown out the voices of everyday Americans."

National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius (2012)

In defense of President Obama's healthcare plan, this decision ruled that the Affordable Care Act was constitutional.

The case challenged the Act's "individual mandate," which required most individuals to purchase a health insurance policy providing a minimum level of coverage.

Justices for the majority argued that the individual mandate is similar to a tax, and therefore does not violate the Constitution.

Roberts was lauded by supporters of the Affordable Care Act for voting with the majority.

Arizona v. United States (2012)

A 2010 immigration law instituted by the state of Arizona was in question, and the Court provided a two-sided ruling.

The 5-3 majority upheld part of the law, which allowed state law enforcement officials to stop and detain people thought to be illegal immigrants, but it struck down the other three parts of it as unconstitutional.

The law purported to curtail what Arizona said was a growing illegal immigration problem in the state, but Justice Kennedy wrote for the majority that the state could not break federal law in the process.

Roberts voted for the majority in support of the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act. (Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP)

"Arizona may have understandable frustrations with the problems caused by illegal immigration while that process continues, but the state may not pursue policies that undermine federal law," he said.

Roberts voted in the majority on this decision.

Burwell v. Hobby Lobby (2014)

Part of the Affordable Care Act required that family-owned corporations provide contraceptive coverage to their employees, and two businesses took issue with this mandate.

Religious freedoms were invoked in the case, because Hobby Lobby and Conestoga Wood Specialties are both run with Christian values in mind.

In a blow to reproductive freedoms for women, the court ruled 5-4 in favor of Hobby Lobby.

Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote in her dissent that the decision meant allowing companies to make other undue exemptions based on religious freedoms.

"The court's expansive notion of corporate personhood invites for-profit entities to seek religious-based exemptions from regulations they deem offensive to their faiths," she wrote.

Obergefell v. Hodges (2015)

In perhaps the most monumental decision under Roberts, the Supreme Court legalized same-sex marriage.

It was a long time coming for gay rights activists, who deservedly received equal marriage protection under the Constitution.

Though Roberts dissented in the 5-4 ruling, saying that the Constitution made no mention of the subject, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy provided the swing vote.

"It would misunderstand these men and women to say they disrespect the idea of marriage," Kennedy wrote. "Their plea is that they do respect it, respect it so deeply that they seek to find its fulfillment for themselves."