The outspoken “Real Time” host made the comparison during a takedown of the Supreme Court’s Citizen’s United, Voting Rights Act Rulings

Bill Maher blasted Chief Justice John Roberts and fellow conservative members of the Supreme Court over their ruling on the Citizen’s United, Voting Rights Act during Friday’s episode of HBO’s “Real Time.”

“John Roberts is kind of the legal equivalent of the guy (Jeremy Renner) in the ‘Hurt Locker,’ except in his case, he always cuts the wrong wire and everything always blows up,” Maher said.

He also made a new rule: It’s a no-brainer — if a lawmaker promises the American people something won’t happen when they change the law, and something does happen, than they have to be held accountable.

And Maher wasn’t talking about Barack Obama’s broken health care insurance promise. He instead took issue with the part of the Supreme Court’s decision that guts the 1965 Voting Rights Act, which required certain “naughty” states to get permission from the Justice Department before making changes in voting laws.

Also read: Washington Post Op-Ed Writer Richard Cohen Slammed for ‘Racist’ Column (Updated)

“Why? Well, because in the past, these states had been naughty, and had prevented minorities from voting with little tricks like poll taxes and literacy tests,” Maher said. “But the conservatives on the court — all excited from being born yesterday — said racism had been cured, and that laws against voter suppression were unnecessary, relics of a bygone era like cassette tapes or moderate Republicans.”

Racism, Maher opined, is still alive and well in the U.S., yet the Roberts refuses to recognize it.

“Justice Roberts actually asked, with a straight face and a cocked head, ‘Is it the government’s submission that the citizens of the South are more racist than the citizens of the North?'” Maher reminded his viewers. “Well, for example, in the last election 66 percent of whites in Vermont voted for our black president. 10 percent of whites in Mississippi did. So maybe a tad.”