Chef Scott Miller prepares to make roasted butternut squash and local goat cheese crostini. (WFSB)

Here are the directions for roasted butternut squash and local goat cheese crostini:

Ingredients

1 1/2 pounds butternut squash, peeled, seeded and chopped into 3/4-inch cubes

5 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, divided

Kosher salt

Freshly ground black pepper

1 baguette, cut into about 24 slices (1/2-inch-thick)

1/2 orange, rind only, minced

1 tablespoon finely chopped shallot

1 tablespoon freshly squeezed orange juice

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh rosemary

1 cup fresh goat cheese (chevre)

Instructions

Preheat the oven to 425°. In a large bowl, toss the squash with 2 tablespoons of the olive oil and season with salt and pepper. Spread the squash on a baking sheet in a single layer and roast in the oven for about 45 minutes, until tender . Arrange the baguette slices on another baking sheet, brush with 2 tablespoons of the olive oil and bake in the oven until golden and toasted, 8-10 minutes. While the squash roasts, stir together the chopped orange rind, shallots, orange juice, 1 tablespoon of the chopped rosemary and the remaining 1 tablespoon olive oil. Season to taste with salt and pepper. To assemble, spread each crostini with goat cheese. Top with a few pieces of butternut squash and a small amount of orange rosemary sauce. Arrange the crostini on a serving platter.

Warm Crab & Roasted Fennel Dip

Ingredients

6 oz jumbo lump crabmeat

1/2 cup diced roasted fennel

2 tbsp olive oil

1/2 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley

3 tbsp chopped fresh chives

1/2 cup mayonnaise

4 oz cream cheese

1 1/2 tbsp lemon juice

1/2 tsp hot sauce

1/2 tsp grated lemon zest

salt & pepper, to taste

Instructions

Dice fennel and rinse. Toss with 2 tablespoons of the olive oil and season with salt and pepper. Spread the fennel on a baking sheet in a single layer and roast in a 350 degree oven for about 25 minutes, until tender. Place the crabmeat in a medium bowl and flake with your fingers. Stir in the roasted fennel, parsley, lemon zest and chives. Using a rubber spatula, gently stir in the mayonnaise, cream cheese, lemon juice, and hot sauce. Transfer to a 1-qt shallow baking dish. Preheat the oven to 425°F. Bake until dip is bubbling at the edges, about 12 minutes. Serve hot with your favorite crackers and chips

Copyright 2015 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.