Obamacare is ripe to be exploited by scammers, with many people still not understanding the requirements more than a year after they took effect.

I didn't think tax preparers would be the ones exploiting it, but the IRS warns that's what's happening. Be aware of that if you're rushing to get your taxes filed in the next few weeks.

The agency says sleazy preparers nationwide are telling clients to pay them any penalties they owe for not having health insurance.

It's true that Obamacare levies penalties, officially called "individual shared responsibility," on people who didn't have health insurance last year. It's not true that those penalties should be paid to tax preparers. They are to be paid to the government, just like any other money you owe Uncle Sam at tax time.

In some cases, taxpayers are being told to pay when they don't owe a penalty because they had insurance or were exempt, the IRS said.

"The sham return preparers are telling their trusting, unsuspecting clients that the clients owe a tax that they don't actually owe, and then the sham return preparers are lining their own pockets with the direct payments their clients have made to them," the IRS told me in a statement.

Some of the fraud is targeting people who may not know better because of a language barrier.

"In some parts of the country, unscrupulous return preparers are targeting taxpayers with limited English proficiency and, in particular, those who primarily speak Spanish," the agency warned in an advisory last month.

It said they are being told they must pay the penalty to their tax preparer because of their immigration status. Some are told their penalty will be less if they pay the preparer directly.

The best way to avoid being scammed is to understand how Obamacare, aka the Affordable Care Act, works. Most people don't owe any penalty because they have health coverage or are exempt, the IRS says.

You owe nothing if you are insured through your employer or government programs including Medicare, Medicaid and veterans coverage, or if you bought coverage yourself on your own or through a marketplace set up by the federal or state government.

You may be exempt from the coverage requirement if you belong to a religious sect, a federally recognized Indian tribe, or a health care sharing ministry.

You also may qualify for an exemption if you are suffering a hardship such as homelessness, eviction, foreclosure, domestic violence, death of a close family member or unpaid medical bills. You can be exempt based on your income, too, if buying insurance would have been considered unaffordable because it would have cost more than 8 percent of your household income.

You can find more information about exemptions, qualifying coverages and penalties at http://www.irs.gov/aca and http://www.healthcare.gov.

There are enough "ifs" that I can see how this could confuse people and expose them to fraud. What could be equally as confusing is figuring out how much of a penalty, or individual shared responsibility, you owe if you weren't insured or exempt.

For tax year 2014, the penalty is the greater of 1 percent of your household income or a flat amount of $95 per adult and $47.50 per child, up to a family maximum of $285.

The maximum amount you could owe is capped at $2,448 for an individual and $12,240 for a family of five or more.

"The IRS reminds individuals who owe the payment that it should be made only with their tax return or in response to a letter from the IRS," the agency said in its warning. "The payment should never be made directly to an individual or return preparer."

This scam also is another reminder not to trust just anyone to prepare your taxes, even though the system is set up so that anyone can.

I've written about that farce several times.

There are no national competency standards for federal tax preparers. All that's required is an identification number from the IRS, which the agency hands out without requiring any kind of skills. There are more than 666,000 registered preparers nationwide for this tax season.

Many preparers do have formal training and answer to some authority or licensing board. They include certified public accountants, attorneys and enrolled agents and actuaries. But many others don't have to prove their qualifications to anyone.

The IRS tried a few years ago to regulate preparers, but a court ruled it didn't have the authority.

In an effort to help steer taxpayers to qualified preparers, the IRS recently created an online database of preparers who have "credentials" — such as certified public accountants, enrolled agents, actuaries and attorneys — and preparers who passed a new IRS voluntary training program designed to ensure they are qualified to file federal tax returns.

The database is at http://irs.treasury.gov/rpo/rpo.jsf.

The Watchdog is published Thursdays and Sundays. Contact me at watchdog@mcall.com, 610-841-2364 or The Morning Call, 101 N. Sixth St., Allentown, PA, 18101. I'm on Twitter @mcwatchdog and Facebook at Morning Call Watchdog.