A plaque in honor of a teenager whose death sparked a nationwide outcry for health care reform will be unveiled Thursday night at Veterans Memorial Park in Granada Hills.

The Rotary Club of Granada Hills will unveil a granite plaque that displays an etched image of Nataline Sarkisyan, who died on Dec. 20, 2007. She was 17. The Porter Ranch teen’s story drew nationwide attention because the liver transplant she needed was denied by her family’s health insurer, CIGNA.

Since then, her family established the Nataline Sarkisyan Foundation and has organized an annual fashion show to raise scholarship funds for students interested in the arts and medicine. The seventh annual show is scheduled for Saturday in Calabasas.

It is for the family’s ongoing community service and activism that the plaque is being dedicated, said Rotary Club member and sponsor Jake Parunyan.

“Her mom’s been working so hard to change our insurance system,” Parunyan said.

Parunyan, who owns several dry cleaning businesses, said he has worked to revitalize Veterans Memorial Park at the corner of Zelzah Avenue and Chatsworth Street for the last five years.

The park features hundreds of bricks on a walkway with the names of veterans and other loved ones and a statue of a young boy holding an American flag. Parunyan said he purchased that statue himself to honor his parents who came to the United States from Turkey.

“My father and mother’s dream was to come to America,” he said. “It was time for me to thank the United States, to honor the veterans and my mother and father.”

Nataline’s mother, Hilda Sarkisyan, said she is honored that her daughter’s memory will continue at the park, where heroes are remembered.

The Sarkisyans have been working to repeal a provision of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 that protects insurance companies from being sued for lack of coverage. It was that provision that prevented the family from suing CIGNA for deeming Nataline’s transplant medically unnecessary.

The provision is so tightly ingrained into the way health insurance works that it is untouchable even under the Affordable Care Act.

Below Nataline’s photograph on the memorial tile are the words “Together we can make change.”

“The more people know about Nataline’s story, the more people will say we have to change the laws,” Hilda Sarkisyan said. “Innocent kids are dying. Now she’s an angel. She’s helping me to be an angel for others.”

The free, public unveiling of the plaque will be held at 7 p.m. Thursday at Veterans Memorial Park in Granada Hills, at the corner of Zelzah Avenue and Chatsworth Street.