James Simpson, CEO of SQFT, with the SQFTx app, a mobile real estate tool that allows buyers and sellers to conduct every aspect of the home-buying process directly from their mobile device. ( Photos by Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photogarpher )

This week, SQFTx.com in Boulder launched a mobile application it believes is the first "fully transactional" real estate app allowing buyers and sellers to conduct every aspect of the home-buying process directly from their phones and tablets. Sellers are able to create free home listings that instantly post to Zillow, Trulia and 450 other real estate sites, while sellers are able to schedule showings, make offers and complete the closing using only the app.

In addition, instead of the traditional 6 percent closing costs, the platform slashes commissions down to 1 percent, which translates into thousands of dollars in savings.

From first listing the home, to making offers directly to the seller to signing the contracts, everything is done from this new mobile technology.

We sat down with SQFT CEO and broker James Simpson at his downtown Boulder office to discuss this new trend in real estate.

1. Are you a real estate firm, or a technology company?

We have an office we share with a full service real estate company called Teles Properties. Square Feet is its own stand alone real estate brokerage. It's a little different than a traditional brokerage in the sense that we have created a software suite of tools that put control in the sellers hands in terms of creating their own listing. They can show their own home, accept offers through the app from buyers.

2. What do you do for the seller? Where do you come in beyond the app?

We help them transact from contract to closing. So we're sort of a second tier, limited service model that supports sellers differently than the traditional real estate broker would.

3. So if I am using this, I would as the seller upload my own photos of the property and write up the descriptions of it?

The new app allows buyers and sellers to conduct every aspect of the home-buying process from their mobile device. (Photos by Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photogarpher)

Our app, our software, takes you through the process from the beginning to the end. If you decide you want to sell your house you download the app, then create an account. We ask you for some basic information, we double-check everything, and then we lead you through the process of creating a professional listing on your property.

The difference really is we're still a real estate brokerage, but we don't have a whole bunch of independent contractor agents working for us. We allow the seller to act as that entity on behalf of themselves.

4. OK, so I, as the seller, am the person showing the property to potential buyers, to interested parties?

Yes so you are your own agent. We put your listing in the MLS, we syndicate it out to Zillow, Trulia, Realtor.com and hundreds of other real estate sites out there. We attract buyers through all the normal channels so its no different than if I were working on your behalf as a full service broker. Buyers are instructed to download our app if they want to communicate directly with you as the seller.

Commission is established when a seller signs a listing agreement with a full service broker. So that 6 percent is essentially spent when you list your home with them. We charge 1 percent on the listing side. The listing is free, we don't get paid the 1 percent until the house is actually sold. So it saves the seller a tremendous amount of money. In a market like this homes are selling in 24 hours, so sellers are kind of resentful of the idea that they are paying 6 percent and the realtor hasn't even gotten the sign in the ground yet and they've gotten multiple offers.

The app has a make an offer button. The buyer can arrange a visit through the app. It all happens in real time.

We're like a hybrid between a true for-sale-by-owner and a full service listing broker, we're kind of in the middle. We have ten listings live right now.

5. And do you handle all the paperwork, all the little details involved in selling a home?

It's a fairly cumbersome amount of documentation. We do all of that. Doing the state contract, making sure all the disclosures are correct, we do all of that .

Once the seller and buyer agree on a price, we come in and support them with the necessary paperwork, to get from contract to closing. The app is designed to go from listing to contract, then we support them from contract to closing.

To find it go to the app store and type SQFT in the search bar and we're the first thing that comes up. We also have a desktop solution. We also are creating SQFT Pro which is designed for new home builders and developers.