Obama - - Destroyer-in-Chief



Who could not understand the still-extant scandal of Fast and Furious and the fact that no one has been held accountable for the cold-blooded murder of U.S. Border Patrol Agent Brian Terry.





Who gaped in horror at the Benghazi slaughter and the fairy tale of a video that excused it, as well as the abject failure of Hillary Clinton's State Department to send military aid to that beleaguered garrison.





Who are disgusted that Lois Lerner, a top official of the IRS, took the criminal's way out by invoking "The Fifth" and getting away with months of pay for no work and an eventual good-conduct retirement.





Who still wait for a valid explanation from the White House that explains the National Security Agency's (NSA) illegal snooping on American citizens – and now we find out on our European friends as well.





Who are uncomprehending that Israel, our greatest ally in the Middle East, was dropped by Obama like a hot potato in preference to Islamic radicals in Egypt, to whom he sent both moral and financial support. But when Egyptians discovered their mistake and ousted their dictatorial leader, Obama cut off their funding as punishment.





Who shudder at Obama's decision to "negotiate" with Iran! Obama has given them the green light to obtain a nuclear weapon and to use it, eventually, against Israel – their oft-stated goal. Iran's path to control the Middle East has been cleared by the United States. Our nation has now been set adrift from the free world.



By Alan Bergstein Many of us, at the introduction of Obamacare on October 1st, initially diagnosed the problem as simply a poorly-constructed website. Wrong! It was planned that way. It would be an impossibility to spend almost four years, at a cost of over $600 million dollars, to create a site that never even made it through pre-opening trials.Obama and his crew – Cass Sunstein, William Ayers, Kathleen Sebelius, Valerie Jarrett, et al. – all knew it would never get off the ground. They understood the mass confusion it would cause and the ultimate disruption of the lives of millions of helpless people who bet their bottom dollar on a utopian medical care system. Insurance companies have already dropped policies for hundreds of thousands of customers, and firms have discontinued employee coverage for millions of their employees – all in preparation for Obamacare.With great fanfare it was thrust on the nation like no other scheme we have ever seen, utilizing massive advertising and "everyday" citizen support, only to come crashing down to earth. Like another 9/11, but even worse in its potential to destroy lives – yes, from the death panels former Governor Sarah Palin warned about so presciently and which are now factored insidiously in the Obamacare law for all to see.Disaster! The nation is now in turmoil. This chaos was in the books from the moment Obama decided to run for office the first time – not for the presidency but for the Illinois legislature and then the U.S. Senate. Everyone knew of Obama's record of voting "present" – in other words, his terminal inability to take a stand or make a decision.Everyone knew that in his entire life he had never "run" anything – as Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal has said, he "never ran a state, never ran a business, never ran a lemonade stand."And everyone knew about his far-left background, from his choice of preacher in Rev. Jeremiah Wright to his too-cozy relationship with "Rev." Louis Farrakhan and especially to his irresistible attraction to the uber-Marxist Saul Alinsky, whose entire life – and that of his acolytes – was devoted to overthrowing capitalism and "sharing the wealth."Now, with the advent of the laughably named Affordable Care Act, we know that part of Obama's Alinsky fetish is to punish all of the bad Americans who disagree with his totalitarian style. The proof? The fact – yes, fact – that we can't keep our doctors and we can't keep our medical-insurance plans as he often promised while crossing his fingers behind his back.The net result of this flaming fiasco is that even Obama's supporters have been mumbling about the quite frightening incompetence of his administration. These are the same dyed-in-the-wool Americans who are equally horrified by Obama's reckless – and many posit, anti-American – foreign policy, citizens:On the domestic scene, Obama has created a tsunami-like wall of hatred against Republicans. "Millionaires and billionaires" – whom he loves to hang out with and lusts to emulate – have been stealing from the middle class and must be stopped at all costs, he claims. Banks have been humbled and are paying billions in fines – for what?The animosity between blacks and whites is at an all-time high. Our coal industry is on the rocks, yet Obama refuses to encourage our independence from foreign oil. The Keystone Pipeline that would create tens of thousands of immediate jobs was railroaded by Obama with the flimsiest of excuses. The nation is in shambles because of Obama's planned and well-laid-out strategy. This is calculated chaos, designed to bring big bad America to its knees, and it is just the beginning.Again, it was planned that way. No one really knows who is behind this calculated dismantling of America – the Communist Party? George Soros? Valerie Jarrett? The unions in whose presence Obama unfailingly genuflects? But what is known is that whoever is pulling the strings, Obama himself is dancing to their tune!He came into the national scene from out of nowhere. He was pushing 40 but had accomplished nothing notable in his life. He was a mere community organizer with college grades that to this day are invisible to the public. His Muslim background, together with the financial and educational support he received from radical Islamists, helps to explain his essentially anti-American philosophy. Add to that his command to NASA to function now as a technological tutor to Muslim nations. Together with his open support of Islamist activities in this country, we see a man determined to weaken our country both from within and internationally, in order to clear the way for its destruction. From the outset, he has displayed a total lack of American patriotism. He has disdain for this country and for those in the military who have and would give their lives defending it.In short, Obama is a cunning, calculating domestic terrorist, holding the highest and most powerful seat in the world and using it to bring down this nation. And we are seeing it play out before our very eyes. Obamacare is but the latest manifestation of his contempt. Will we ever be wake up to stop this maniacal meteor from crashing into and destroying our magnificent nation? It's up to you and me. Good luck!© Alan Bergstein