I had some fun (for weird econonerd values of “fun”) yesterday thinking through the interesting possibility that our pre-Obamacare health system created a “reverse notch” that induced some people to work too much. But I think I should step back and talk about the broader issue here.

So the CBO estimates that the incentive effects of the ACA will lead to a voluntary reduction in labor supply of around 1 1/2 percent, the equivalent of 2 million full-time jobs. Labor compensation would fall less, around 1 percent, because the reduction in hours would be skewed toward the less well paid. Although they don’t say this, we would expect potential GDP to fall by roughly the same amount (assuming wages more or less reflect marginal productivity); since compensation is about 55 percent of GDP, this would mean reducing potential GDP by a bit over 0.5 percent.

That’s not a very big number — nothing like the claims you hear on the right that Obamacare is bringing economic doom. Even so, however, it’s a clear overstatement of the true economic costs of the program.

Why? Because when workers voluntarily withdraw 1 percent of their hours, it’s very different from what happens when 1 percent of workers lose their jobs and become involuntarily unemployed.

When workers lose their jobs, it’s almost always a terrible experience: not only does it cause financial hardship, it eats away at the soul. Every study I’ve seen says that the effects of unemployment on perceived welfare are vastly greater than you can explain simply as a result of the loss of income. So the true cost of 2 million workers laid off is huge, much more than the GDP loss.

When workers choose to work less, by contrast, they presumably do so because they gain something that is, to them, worth more than the foregone income: more time with their children, an earlier retirement, etc.. Now, in making these choices they won’t take into account the spillovers to the rest of society that come from their paying less in taxes or receiving more in benefits; so you probably don’t want to think of the reduction in labor supply as a net economic good. But it’s surely a smaller cost than the headline effect on GDP.

A somewhat educated guess (I’m thinking of the de facto marginal tax rate on lower-income workers, which for the wonks out there is the only source of first-order welfare effects from a small change in labor supply) is that the net economic losses from the kind of labor supply effect CBO analyzes are on the order of 0.3 percent of GDP.

Oh, and that’s in the long run. In the next few years, with the economy still depressed, it’s all positive: reduced work by some will open up job opportunities for others, and higher incomes for beneficiaries will mean higher overall employment.

But back to the long run: Even if CBO is completely right about labor supply, we’re really talking about a very small economic cost here for a huge social benefit — giving Americans the assurance that they’ll be able to afford essential health care.