I had just stepped out the door for a morning jog when I saw a blizzard of pink Styrofoam packing peanuts swirling and skipping down the street. What idiot did that? I thought.

My stomach turned inside out when I realized the eye of the storm was my trash can. Moments before, it had been filled to the brim with the pink packing material, which had cradled my mother’s china on its sentimental journey from California to Florida.

The trash collectors had just been by. It was a windy day. And I had instantly become that neighbor. I can’t stand people like me.

I dashed down the street and began chasing hundreds, perhaps thousands, of pink peanuts, asking myself for the zillionth time: How did I get into this mess?

It all started just before Thanksgiving. I was setting the holiday table and suddenly got choked up. A wave of nostalgia washed over me as I flashed back to all those holiday dinners around my mother’s table, with her delicate, ivory china and its hand-painted gold pattern.

Now Dad’s gone. Mom’s in a rest home and I’m 3,000 miles away trying to make my own meaningful traditions. The family china was sitting in a box in my brother’s garage in California, waiting for me to claim it.

Last spring, some of you will recall, I cleared out my parents’ home, selling and donating their furnishings. I brought home a few items — some jewelry, glassware, an oil painting — but held off on the silver and china. I wasn’t ready, emotionally (the memories!) or physically (where would I put it?) to deal with the 12 place settings.

But as I set the Thanksgiving table, I did some mental math, which sounds like a hand-crank pencil sharpener, and figured that I have likely had more Thanksgivings than I can look forward to.

Forget what anyone tells you. This is the definition of midlife. And it is a crisis. Suddenly, my desire for Mom’s china became a stage-five obsession, not seen since the days of my “I need a barbecue chicken pizza NOW!” pregnancy cravings.

“Please, send the china,” I said to my sister-in-law over the phone. She took the boxes straight to Art Ono, owner of the UPS store in Culver City, Calif., who promptly panicked.

A piece of advice: If you want to send a shipper’s vital signs into the ozone, just utter the words “heirloom china.” An all-points bulletin goes out to delivery trucks nationwide, and the entire transportation network goes on red alert. No two boxes of china can travel on the same truck for the same reason that the president and vice president can’t fly together.

Then the packer corners the market on pink peanuts.

Ono, a certified packing expert, and his crew, who happen to be his kids, took the heirloom china job to heart. Several days later, I received three boxes the size of Smart cars, and a smaller fourth box, which held the silver.

The boxes were so thoroughly packed you could have dropped them from a freeway overpass and had them knocked around by 18-wheelers without damaging the dishes. Only delivery by armored car could have offered more protection.

My Christmas table was a beautiful — if sentimental — blend of old and new: Mom’s gold-rimmed china with my plain ivory, her silver with my crystal. I discarded the packaging.

And that is how, one recent morning, for love, for family, and so I wouldn’t make the neighbors mad, I was trolling through neighbors’ yards and the streets like a stray dog, chasing that which was fleeting.

Syndicated columnist and speaker Marni Jameson is the author of “House of Havoc” and “The House Always Wins” (Da Capo Press). Contact her through marnijameson.com.

Getting it there in one piece

Here is how UPS-store owner Art Ono says you, too, can wrap and pack fragile valuables like a pro.

Pad all parts. When shipping breakables, individually wrap each piece with bubble wrap until you can’t feel any edges, said Ono, who used several layers of small-bubble wrap on each dish.

Don’t spare the peanuts. Next put a layer of peanuts on the bottom of the box. Layer in wrapped dishes so they’re not touching, add another layer of peanuts, then more dishes. Once filled, overstuff the box with more peanuts so nothing moves.

Box the box. Ono then put that box in another box, 2 inches bigger all around, and filled the gap with more peanuts.

Assume rough handling. When packages ship by ground, they typically go from truck to truck, and “can be thrown around quite a bit,” said Ono, “even when they say fragile.” Picture boxes being dropped from a height of 3 feet and pack accordingly.

Nix the newspaper. The most common mistakes Ono sees self-packers make are: wrapping breakables in paper; and leaving too much room in the box. “When you grab a box, you shouldn’t feel contents moving,” he said. “But customers bring their china in that way and think it’s ready to ship.” UPS is good about honoring insurance, but often want to inspect the packing to see why an item broke. “If it’s because the sender didn’t pack properly, it’s not UPS’s fault.”

Once it’s packed, insure it. With UPS, each box is automatically insured for $100. For $1.50 more per box, you can buy an additional $100 of protection.

Expect some sticker shock. This kind of packing doesn’t come cheap. Ono said he can usually pack eight place settings of dishes in two boxes, and charges $100 per box. Shipping and insurance get added to that. To pack, ship and insure our four boxes cost $500. When I asked Ono if perhaps he overpacked them, he replied, “Was anything broken?” No, I told him. “Then the job was perfect,” he said. And I can’t argue with that.

NOTE: Since this column was published, readers have let me know that I deserve to be tarred and rolled in packing peanuts. I did not think of, and therefore did not mention, that I should have recycled those peanuts! Thanks to hundreds of evolved readers who wrote, I will never again throw away good packing peanuts. From here on, back to the shipping store they will go.