MARGIE Abbott reveals she has visited Long Bay and Goulburn jails as a community visitor - helping to forge her passion for child protection and early childhood education.

She believes the hard work of stay-at-home mums is "undervalued". Yet the former merchant banker-turned- childcare director laughs at suggestions she is a "white picket fence" political wife.

One example is her diplomatic backing last week for Australia to have "a conversation" about gay marriage, treading a middle ground between her daughters' support and her husband's opposition.

Mrs Abbott emerged as a secret weapon for the Liberal Party - deployed to defuse claims her husband was a misogynist. She hasn't yet made up her mind to give up her day job as a childcare director.

But perhaps her most intriguing backstory is her 2009 revelation of the community work she first did in some of NSW's toughest jails.

"In some cases I met the perpetrators of crimes against children and, despite the disturbing crimes they had committed, I became acutely aware that these people, regardless of their crime, have families, particularly children, who find themselves isolated, alone and shamed because of the actions of their mum or dad.

"It has been said we all are the product of those who loved us or those who have failed to love us, and I often wonder what has become of those children who, through no fault of their own, have been deprived of the love of a father or mother."

Early childhood education is her passion. "I will leave the political debates for others," she says. "However, the opportunity to add my voice in support of learning for under-fives is my greatest interest.

"Acknowledging the significant brain development that occurs in the first three years of a child's life, and how the lifelong impact of a child's early experiences have in shaping their brain are important.

"Given the opportunity, I do want to be a champion for children at risk in our country, and to support the fine work of so many groups involved in watching out for and helping our children. While abuse of children in whatever form occurs, no community, no society can ever rest on their laurels."

In her first political speech she admitted she laughed at suggestions she was a 1950s cardboard cut out. "I recall when Tony entered politics he was painted as a traditionalist - white picket fence, long-suffering wife at home raising the kids," Mrs Abbott said then. "I recall laughing to myself as I read this particular article, having just brushed the remains of Bridget's Weet-Bix off my shirt; dropped the girls off to school and day care before I raced off to work."