Executive Briefing | by Monica E. Oss | March 9, 2015

Decision support is like exercise. Everyone knows they should do more of it, but no one does. Despite calls like the one from JASON, the independent group of scientists that advises the U.S. government on science and technology that called for the U.S. to develop an “agile, national-scale learning health system for sharing effective practices of care,” (see Data For Individual Health and A Robust Health Data Infrastructure), the use of decision support tools is spotty at best (see Taking Decision Support From Concept To Practice and Clinical Decision Support: More Than Just ‘Alerts’ Tipsheet).

I do think the use of tools to aid clinical decision making will grow – largely with the growth of value-based contracting. Executives of provider organizations will soon realize that a “less than optimal” decision about consumer care wastes precious resources – and will decrease the financial viability under these new arrangements. Simply put, these are the future tools for financial success – success in the face of increased value-based competition, and success at improving the performance necessary to reduce costs (see Survival Of The Smartest: Organizational Information Literacy As The Challenge & Opportunity and Performance Measures & Metrics-Based Management).

While we wait for the science-to-service gap to shorten around decision support models, there are some great tools emerging in the market, and with substantiated proof of concept. One example – computer-aided assessment of consumers with behavioral health and substance abuse related conditions – was presented this year at the 2015 OPEN MINDS Performance Management Institute, How An Online, Consumer Administered Tool Can Improve Assessment, Recovery & Outcomes While Reducing Costs, by Al Villapiano, Vice President, Clinical Development of Inflexxion and Philip O. Toal, Ed.D., LMHC, CET, Sr. Vice President, Residential Services, Aspire Health Partners. The tools presented were the tech-enabled ASI-MV (Addiction Severity Index-Multimedia Version) and the BHI-MV (Behavioral Health Index – Multimedia Version). The ASI-MV is an automated, web-based version of the traditional paper-based Addiction Severity Index (ASI) – an assessment designed to address potential problem areas in substance-abusing patients: medical status, employment and support, drug use, alcohol use, legal status, family/social status, and psychiatric status. The BHI-MV is an interactive, online behavioral health assessment based on the ASI-MV, and designed to help behavioral health provider organizations improve clinical assessment effectiveness and consumer monitoring; and enhance treatment planning and clinical decision-making.

The advantages? The system provides users with access to research-based standardized assessment, which reduce staff time and provide cumulative data – leading to what Dr. Villapiano explained as, more reliable data, more candid consumers, more in-depth information, better data sets, and cost savings through staff efficiencies. The benefits of decision support in general, and ASI-MV/BHI-MV in particular, is the ability to assess addiction and mental health problems in a standardized way, allowing automated collection of data that is useful to the consumer in treatment, the clinical professional in planning treatment, and the administrative team in managing the assessment and treatment process. Another benefit is in the relationship with payers and auditors – who accept the use of a standardized process for diagnoses and treatment planning.

Mr. Toal provided some field-level experience with using a tech-enabled assessment tool. He discussed overcoming his initial skepticism of “why have an online tool to gather this information when I already pay people to gain this information?” And he added that part of the benefit that has been useful to the Aspire team is having data on their consumer population for both planning and advocacy – data that allows them to compare to national averages and track trends from year to year.

The ability to use technology for decision support is an integral piece of the information literacy needed for success in an increasingly performance-focused market. For more, check out The Decision Supports Tools Needed To Succeed In Pay-For-Performance Arrangements, Use of Clinical Decision Support Expert Rules within Clinician Workflows: Improving Quality of Care for Vulnerable Populations Through HIT, and One Of The Many Advantages To EHRs: The Ability To Use Your Data For Strategic Decision Support & Market Differentiation – or listen to this web briefing: Going With The (Knowledge) Flow: The Future Of Decision Making In Improving Outcomes.

And, join me at the 2015 OPEN MINDS Strategy & Innovation Institute, for the session Making Health Tech Work – Perspectives From Organizations With A Track Record.