This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... the reason ... that I ask you to come here today ... is I want to lay out ... my number one goal for the house next year ... the key speaker just over a month ago ... and like to think we've hit the ground running ... I'll explain ... the big thing I think House Republicans need to do in twenty sixteen ... refreshed ration in our party ... is that we've not had a real national majority in seven years ... we controlled Congress shore ... not the presidency ... and we need to ... this country has enormous problems ... but if we do not have the president ... will work with us ... we will not solve those problems that is ... well there's still so lovable ... so if we want to save the country ... if we want to do will we believe in than we need a mandate ... from the people ... and if we won a mandate and we need offer ideas ... and if we won offer ideas that we need to actually ... have ID this ... that's for the House Republicans coming ... so all or the number one goal ... for next year is to put together a complete alternative to the last agenda ... we think government should encourage personal responsibility not replaced ... we think prices are going up because people into fewer choices not because they have too many ... and we think this problem is so urgent that's next year ... we will unveil a plan to replace every single word of Obamacare ... we are trapping people in poverty in this country ... we have to make sure that it always pays to work ... the truth is ... the left wants to make this debate about personalities ... the paint SSE responsible ... that's because ... we all know what the left stands for ... we all know another progressive presidency will mean just more of the same ... so don't take the bait ... don't play that game ... don't give them a win by default ... put together a positive agenda ... and taken to the American people ... give the people of this country the choice in the inning during four ... and as next year ... this house can say that we have done that ... then we will have done our job ... then the people now ... that we stand for a more prosperous ... a more secure ... and yes the more confidence in America ... and the rest ... will the