University of Colorado, local community colleges weigh in

State lawmakers have introduced a bill that would indefinitely cap tuition increases at 6 percent per year for most Colorado colleges and universities.

The bill was introduced by Sen. Andy Kerr and Rep. Brittany Pettersen, both Lakewood Democrats, to help keep college affordable.

"On the campaign trail, you hear it over and over, that this is really hitting every family very hard," Pettersen said. "Everybody is struggling to send their kids to school. It used to be that the state paid two-thirds and (families) paid one-third, and now it's switched. I can't imagine what students go through now."

She's referring to statistics compiled by the Colorado Department of Education that show how students and families have taken on more of the cost of college.

In 2000-2001, the state general fund covered 68 percent of the cost of in-state tuition per student, and families covered 32 percent. In 2013-2014, Colorado covered 34 percent of the cost and families covered 66 percent.

Last year, the Legislature appropriated an additional $100 million for higher education from the state's general fund and put in place a two-year, 6 percent tuition cap.

The lawmakers want to extend that cap indefinitely as a way of controlling the cost of higher education for students and their families.

"It worked," Kerr said of the cap last year. "We had basically the lowest tuition increase we've had here in Colorado in over a decade, so I think we need to continue that and make sure we keep tuition at an affordable rate for middle-class families."

Advertisement

Kerr said he understands that state support and tuition are linked. As it's written now, the bill says that if state higher education funding does not increase by at least the rate of inflation, schools could request permission to increase tuition by more than 6 percent.

The tuition cap as proposed would apply to in-state tuition for undergraduates.

"It holds institutions accountable, but it also holds politicians and the Legislature accountable by saying that we have to keep funding our institutions," Kerr said.

The University of Colorado increased tuition on its Boulder campus last year by roughly 3.3 percent, the smallest hike in eight years.

That relatively small increase was largely a product of the state's 11 percent increase for public institutions' operating budgets.

This session, CU's lobbyists plan to work closely with the bill's sponsors to see if there's a way to more closely link a tuition cap to state funding.

"We're as concerned as anyone about tuition costs, and last year we came in well below the tuition cap that the state instituted," said Ken McConnellogue, CU spokesman. "Of course, that came along with significant state funding. So we're fine with the notion of tuition caps, but we would hope that they go hand-in-hand with continued state funding increases."

Though CU came in below the 6 percent cap last year, some schools didn't.

With an 11 percent increase in state funding, Adams State University and Fort Lewis College increased tuition by the maximum 6 percent.

Other schools, such as Western State Colorado University and Colorado State University, got close to the cap with 5 percent increases.

For most schools, including CU, there's a direct link between state funding and tuition.

State funding per full-time, in-state student at CU is still roughly 20 percent below 2008-2009, when state support for higher education peaked prior to the recession.

That forced the university to look for new funding sources and rely more heavily on tuition dollars, especially those of out-of-state students. This year, state funding makes up 5 percent of CU-Boulders $1.35 billion overall budget.

It's also meant increasing tuition.

"Tuition costs are closely yoked to state funding, and they can't be viewed in isolation," McConnellogue said. "We are as concerned as anybody about tuition costs and what Coloradans have to pay to attend our institutions, but we also know that the state's investment plays a big part in what those tuition costs are."

Community colleges

The bill would also apply to Colorado's community colleges, including the Front Range Community College campus in Longmont.

Around 94 percent of Colorado community college students come from inside the state, and pay around $124.90 per credit hour. That's an annual tuition payment of less than $3,747, according to Colorado Community College System President Nancy McCallin.

Community colleges get around 20 percent of their total funding from the state, McCallin said.

Last year, with the state's 11 percent increase for schools' operating budgets, the community college system raised tuition by 4.5 percent.

She said it's too early for community colleges to weigh in on the bill, but added that the system "always strives" to maintain affordability for Colorado students.

"We take affordability very seriously, which is why we have kept our tuition increases in check when state funding comes back," she said. "Just like everyone else in higher education, there has been a sea change in our reliance on state funding, but we do maintain and attempt to maintain as affordable an opportunity in higher education as we can."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta