On June 14, North Dakota Republicans will go to the polls to decide who will represent them in November's election for governor.

We've already told you what architect Paul Sorum and businessman Doug Burgum think about the issues.

Now, we get Attorney General Wayne Stenehjem's take.

Stenehjem has far and away the most political experience out of the three candidates, which he says is still a strength, even in a year of political outsiders.

After 40 years of experience at the Capitol, The Memorial Hall of the People is Wayne Stenehjem's home turf.

"Why is experience so important for the governor's office?"

"Well, let me put it this way. When I get on an airplane, the last thing I want to hear from the pilot is, 'I really don't have a plan, I've never flown an airplane before, so just bear with me and trust me," said Stenehjem.

The North Dakota Republican Party trusts Stenehjem, as he was elected to be the party's endorsed candidate for governor at the convention in April.

"Those are the people who are the volunteers, who are the most active in the Republican party, who decided that I was worthy of their endorsement and of course I'm very proud to have it," said Stenehjem.

The party wants Stenehjem to lead them through this period of low oil and low agriculture prices.

"This gives us a perfect opportunity to really build on diversifying our economy so we're not just reliant on ag and energy, though they're critically important," said Stenehjem.

Despite the downturn, Stenehjem remains optimistic.

"The situation remains really good and there's never been a better time to live here than right here, right now," said Stenehjem.

With the challenge of establishment versus outsider in June, the primary may well be a referendum on that very statement.

Stenehjem says that North Dakota must continue marketing its agriculture to a global market to stay competitive.

On health care, Stenehjem says he opposes Obamacare, however, he said he is in favor of guaranteed insurability and letting kids stay on their parent's coverage until they're 26. He says congress missed the boat by failing to address the overall cost of the country's health care system.​