Facing opposition to a bill that would allow more midwives to practice legally in Illinois, advocates on Tuesday staged a protest complete with colorful signs, baby carriers and cozy blankets.

The group of midwives, mothers and children gathered in front of the American Academy of Pediatrics' headquarters in Elk Grove Village after the academy's Illinois chapter came out against the Home Birth Safety Act.

The proposed legislation, which has yet to make it out of committee, would license midwives who did not attend nursing school. Currently, certified nurse midwives who have their nursing degree as well as additional midwifery training, are able to practice legally in Illinois. Officials with AAP's Illinois chapter said both groups of midwives should be held to the same standards of doctor supervision.

But proponents of the bill contend there are far too few certified nurse midwives and that the certified professional midwives meet standards set by a national group.

Licensing certified professional midwives would meet the rising need of women who want to deliver at home in a safe environment while putting an end to the "black market of maternity care," said Michelle Breen, spokeswoman for the Coalition for Illinois Midwifery.

"We have a home-birth maternity care crisis in Illinois," said Breen, who estimated that 30 states license certified professional midwives.

The debate is not new, with different versions of the bill making their way to Springfield through the years.

Medical groups, including AAP's Illinois chapter and the Illinois State Medical Society, have opposed the bill.

Dr. Barbara Bayldon, president of the executive committee of the AAP's Illinois chapter, said the primary concern with this version of the proposed legislation is that it does not outline a formal collaboration between certified professional midwives and doctors.

"As pediatricians, we know firsthand that even a routine birth can unexpectedly become complicated putting both the infant and mother in danger," Bayldon said in a statement. "Physicians with experience in identifying high risk births, such as obstetricians, need to be an integral part of the midwifery team through a written collaborative practice agreement to provide guidance and support to (certified professional midwives) when needed to reach the mutual goal of a healthy birth, healthy mother and healthy infant."

deldeib@tribune.com

Twitter @deldeib