Untangling the complicated web that is physician payment is one of the problems confronting the Affordable Care Act. The Obama administration is aiming under the law to tackle the way doctors are paid and to reimburse them based on the quality of care provided to patients, rather than by the number of services provided – many of which often do not increase patient health.

A recent bill passed by Congress, lauded as one of the most significant examples of bipartisanship by lawmakers in recent years, also provided a fix for the current Medicare payment formula. Leaders in the House worked behind-the-scenes to negotiate the solution, after 17 short-term patches had been passed since 2003.

In a new Medscape survey of 19,500 physicians in 25 specialties, it's clear there are still issues to solve, including pay gaps by gender and differences in income between areas with a high cost of living and poor and rural areas, where the demand for health care is high.

One takeaway: 64 percent of physicians with a private practice and 79 percent of other physicians said they would continue taking both new and current Medicare and Medicaid patients. Critics feared that cutting payment amounts for procedures would mean doctors would take fewer of those patients.

In terms of income, primary care physicians still make less on average than specialists: PCPs make $195,000 and specialty physicians make $284,000 – figures that can include salary, bonuses and profit-sharing. PCPs earn an average lifetime income of about $6.5 million compared with $10 million for specialists, according to a 2009 study.

This pay difference is one factor that has led to a primary care shortage in the U.S. Nationwide, only 60 percent of the need for PCPs has been met; in order for all needs to be met, we need 8,000 more PCPs, according to data from the Kaiser Family Foundation.

The specialty area in which physicians earn the most for patient care is orthopedics, which also led in the 2011 report, followed by cardiologists and gastroenterologists.



Courtesy Medscape

Compared with the previous year, only the incomes for rheumatologists and urologists declined among specialists. The rest increased, some significantly. Income for infectious disease physicians, for example, rose 22 percent. Compensation for family physicians went up 10 percent.

Pay by state reflects the government's continued dance around setting Medicare fees and creating incentives to draw doctors to needed areas. While certain areas have a much higher cost of living than others, there is also a need to create incentives for doctors to practice in poorer and rural areas.



Courtesy Medscape

In contrast, most of the lowest-earning states are on the East Coast, with the District of Columbia leading.

The report also uncovered several gender differences for physicians. While 36 percent of male physicians had a private practice, 23 percent of women did. This difference affects the pay gap for physicians – whether in primary care or specialties, self-employed physicians earn more than physicians employed outside of their own private practices. Even among physicians in the same employment situation, there was a large income gap between the sexes, with self-employed women earning $65,000 less per year on average than their male counterparts.



Courtesy Medscape