Citing the ongoing probe into former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s emails, the Senate Judiciary Committee chairman on Monday asked Defense Secretary Ash Carter for a full inventory of the emails from his private account disclosed in the press last November.

“The use of private email in this context exposes the information to possible hacks and intrusions by foreign intelligence agencies,” Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, wrote to Carter on Feb. 1. “As the secretary of Defense, you are inevitably a prime target for foreign hackers. As such, the threat is real and compliance with the law is essential.”

Though Carter acknowledged and apologized for his lapse, Grassley is seeking an accounting of how the Pentagon handled the online security procedures when he assumed the department’s top job, how it is handling the aftermath and whether Carter’s claim that no classified information was involved holds up.

“Personal email use is against various government laws and rules, including those maintained by the National Archives and Records Administration and the Defense Department, and might impede compliance with the Freedom of Information Act,” Grassley’s letter noted, citing the Archives’ 2013 bulletin providing guidance for officials on retaining federal records. Conducting business on personal email accounts is permitted only in case of emergency.

The Judiciary Committee is “looking into potential compromises of classified information due to Secretary Clinton’s email arrangement,” Grassley wrote. “It is troubling to learn of your use of personal email for official matters, especially since you continued using that arrangement even after the risks of private use were made clear when news of Secretary Clinton’s use broke in March 2015.”

The senator cited federal law stating that a government employee “may not create or send a record using a non-official electronic messaging account” unless that employee copies an official government account or forwards a complete copy of the email to a government account no later than 20 days after transmission. “Defense Department Instruction 8550-01 prohibits the use of personal accounts for official business,” Grassley said.

He asked Carter to provide, by Feb. 16, answers to such questions as: