TheBlaze TV’s Dana Loesch made good on her vow to appear on MSNBC and debate Ed Schultz about Obamacare on Thursday — and things got tense in a hurry.

After starting with some friendly small talk about the Dallas Cowboys, Schultz pressed Loesch on why Republicans don’t have a health care plan to replace Obamacare. He argued that the GOP’s only plan is to repeal President Barack Obama’s health care law.

“Because Harry Reid has hid it on his desk, that’s why,” Loesch replied. “You know that there are over at least nine plans that have been submitted by House Republicans and sent to the Senate — alternatives to Obamacare.”

The host and guest started to clash when the reality of Americans losing health insurance plans under Obamacare became the topic of conversation. Schultz claimed only “junk” plans were dropped because they no longer complied with federal standards, but Loesch disagreed.

“Remember, it was Politifact’s ‘Lie of the Year’ just recently that the president promised that if you like your health care plan you can keep it,” Loesch said.

“That’s not the question!” Schultz yelled as he and Loesch talked over each other. “I want you to tell my audience — Dana, I’m not gonna do this.”

When Schultz told Loesch that he was showing her “respect by doing the interview,” she snarked back, “I’m doing you a favor by doing this interview.”

Plenty of heated crosstalk continued, with Schultz telling Loesch at one point that she was being “rude” and “unworkable.”

Eventually, Schultz allotted Loesch 30 seconds to make her point.

“Do I believe that health insurance needed to be reformed? Absolutely,” Loesch said. “We could’ve increased portability, we could have decoupled business from people’s health insurance so that they could always maintain their health insurance.”

She also said there should be increased competition in the health care industry, which she argued would result in more choices for the American people.

“Excuse me, there are 25 percent… more competition in the market today offering plans. So that’s been taken care of in that regard,” Schultz shot back.

“No, having the federal government do it isn’t competition,” Loesch interrupted.

The MSNBC host’s “we had an election” line also slightly backfired as TheBlaze personality reminded him, “Yeah, and we had another one and we have a Republican Congress.”

At the end of the interview, Loesch revealed that she has a friend who is battling cancer and claimed the person has lost treatment options due to Obamacare regulations. Schultz immediately grew angry, proclaiming that he didn’t believe her and asked if he could interview the friend.

There’s plenty more to the interview. Watch it below via MSNBC: