Tennessee argues that its laws banning gay marriage should be upheld in a rational review by the 6th Circuit Court of Appeals.

On Wednesday, Tennessee's acting solicitor general, Joseph Whalen, argued before the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals that Tennessee had a "rational basis" to deny recognition of otherwise legal same-sex marriages because the state has an interest in procreation and insuring the stability of families that procreate.

The "rational basis" argument Whalen made was not defending the rationality of Tennessee's ban, but to say that the court must rule in the state's favor because the government had a legitimate, justifiable reason to limit marriages to those only between a man and a woman.

: Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission criticizes column

Tennessee was appealing its March loss in Tanco vs. Haslam where U.S. District Judge Aleta Trauger ruled the state must recognize the New York marriage between Valeria Tanco and Sophy Jesty, and the marriage of two other same-sex couples. Tennessee banned same-sex marriage in 1996, and, in 2006, easily passed a constitutional amendment banning gay marriage. Trauger stayed her decision in May pending appellate rulings.

The case was one of a group of appeals from Michigan, Ohio, and Kentucky challenging various aspects of those states' laws against same-sex marriages heard by a three-judge panel in Cincinnati, Ohio; sitting on the panel were Judge Deborah L. Cook, appointed by President George W. Bush, Judge Martha Craig Daughtrey, appointed by President Bill Clinton, and Judge Jeffrey S. Sutton, another Bush appointee.

Worth listening

Listening to the oral arguments (http://player.piksel.com/p/w70z36r9) is enlightening both for understanding how arcane the legal process can seem, but also for hearing how human it is.

Tennessee's argument is the essence of arcane, asking the court to rule in favor of the constitutionality of its law on a "rational review basis."

"No one can deny that marriage has other aspects," Whalen told the court, "... but they are not the reasons the Supreme Court identified it as a fundamental right."

Whalen argued that the state has a legitimate interest in making sure that children in Tennessee, whether created on purpose or accidentally, grow up in a stable household and that its laws defined a stable household as one where one man and one woman were married (presumably to each other, but I couldn't hear whether he made that distinction). "There is nothing at all irrational about this connection," he said.

He said that the plaintiffs could argue that same sex marriages may provide stability and they "ought to be recognized," but those arguments are irrelevant under a "rational basis review" of the law.

He argued that Tennessee has the right to proceed on a "step basis" to ensure its interest in stable families for children. The first step in furthering the state's interest, he said, is legally promoting one man-one woman marriages.

Whalen did not comment in his argument what step two might be.

A stark illustration of "step two" was sitting in the courtroom, listening to the oral arguments. Among the plaintiffs were several lesbian couples, each with their newborn children, a story in The New York Times reported.

Tanco and Jesky, both of whom had moved to Knoxville to teach at the University of Tennessee veterinary school, had a daughter in April, during the month-long period before Trauger stayed her decision. Jesky is listed as a parent on the birth certificate.

Procreation and stable families

I don't know how these judges do it. Listening to "rational" legal arguments that have little factual rational basis would drive me crazy.

We all know that Tennesse's law is about a rigid view of religious morality. And the law is one that is cloaked in legal illogic to preserve the state's ability to defend its will against constitutional challenge from those who think or live differently

If what we really wanted was for children to grow up in safe, stable and healthy families, we would welcome gay marriage. Nope, we want something different, and we are willing to subvert our legal system to make it happen.

Reach Frank Daniels III at 615-881-7039, or @fdanielsiii.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/opinion/columnists/frank-daniels/2014/08/07/rational-basis-marriage-discrimination/13727223/