SANTA CRUZ >> About 7,000 Santa Cruz County residents who applied for Medi-Cal, the state's health care program for the poor, are waiting to be enrolled, caught in a backlog that is affecting about 900,000 Californians.

Jessica Scheiner, senior analyst with the county Human Services Department, attributed the delay to "ongoing glitches and unresolved technical defects" in the state computer system known as CalHEERS.

"We recognize the anxiety this causes for our clients, and are in daily conversations with our state partners to resolve the issues," she said. "Our goal is to be current with applications by August."

Scheiner said county human services staff are "handling an incredible volume of applications," not only working through the backlog but also taking new applications and helping existing clients.

The Affordable Care Act expanded Medi-Cal to childless adults making up to $15,800. People are still enrolling because there is no deadline, so even as county workers process applications, new ones come in.

The state's aging computer system was overwhelmed by demand, according to Norman Williams, spokesman for the state Department of Health Care Services, noting 1.9 million people have enrolled in Medi-Cal.

"We are devoting a lot of resources to resolving the pending application pool," he said.

Verifying residency

By law, counties are supposed to complete Medi-Cal applications within 45 days of receipt.

Williams said the residency of Medi-Cal applicants must be verified, and in some cases an address has not been provided, creating a delay.

One upgrade is a process to verify residency electronically, although Williams said that is not the entire answer.

According to California Health Report, the same contractor was hired to create two interfaces for the state computer enrollment system, one for Covered California, which launched Oct. 1, and one for Medi-Cal, which wasn't ready until Jan. 21 and as of May 4 was rendering wrong answers due to programming errors or taking up to 40 hours to produce answers.

In Los Angeles County, the problem was getting the state computer enrollment system to communicate with county computers, with stability hampering progress.

A mid-April report to the Covered California board said "defect resolution" in the Medi-Cal system is ongoing.

Santa Cruz resident Steve Fuehrer got enrolled in Medi-Cal in February. He started at the Covered California website and was referred to Medi-Cal. He ended up visiting the Human Services Department, at 1400 Emeline Ave., where a county employee provided personal service, which Fuehrer said was "fantastic."

Anxious applicants

One example of the anxiety cited by Scheiner was evident at Dominican Hospital on Wednesday when a woman in the lobby was hoping social service staff would see a doctor about a worrisome lump.

She said she used to have an $80,000-a-year job and now works part time, making her eligible for Medi-Cal. She did not want to go to the county's Emeline clinic because she thought an X-ray was needed.

"That's a situation we want to address as quickly as possible," said Williams, suggesting the woman obtain a temporary card from the county Human Services Department or look for a doctor who is a Medi-Cal provider who would see her pending eligibility.

In Santa Cruz County, the Central California Alliance for Health, which serves Medi-Cal enrollees, lists on its website a handful of primary care providers in Santa Cruz seeing new patients.

"It's not an easy situation, we're not suggesting that at all," Williams said.

A Santa Cruz woman who did not want her name used said her son, 28, "has health concerns that are waiting to be addressed," and has been waiting months for his Medi-Cal card to arrive.

She said her son told her he was directed to apply at the homeless shelter and that the enrollment counselor who assisted him neglected to process a number of applications and was fired. He told his mother he re-applied, but that was more than a month ago, and he has heard nothing.

She said she would advise her son to visit the county Human Services Department for a temporary card.

Pamela Fugitt-Hetrick of DCD Financial & Insurance Services in Santa Cruz said two people walked in Wednesday morning "out of desperation" for Medi-Cal enrollment.

"I felt obligated to enroll those who qualified for Medi-Cal that came my way," she said, noting she is not compensated for that.

What to do

TIPS FROM STATE: Visit county human services office, 1020 Emeline Ave., Santa Cruz, or 18 W Beach St., Watsonville, to get a temporary Medi-Cal card.

Look for a provider who will see you pending eligibility. See providers accepting new patients at www.ccah-alliance.org/

TIPS FROM COUNTY: If emergency, call 888-421-8080 for help getting Medi-Cal benefits. If approved, Medi-Cal coverage will be retroactive to the date the application was submitted. For questions about start date of coverage, eligibility determination or "notices of action," call 888-421-8080.

Source: County Human Services Department, California Department of Health Services