My dad owned a store on Fifth Avenue Downtown that sold stereos, among other appliances, so when I was a kid in the ‘70s I had one of those all-in-one Soundesign systems with the turntable built in. Working in the stockroom upstairs, I eventually saved my money to upgrade to separate components — a new line that Panasonic was putting out.

Back in the day, when you’d get a new stereo, you had to have your first song planned out. (No point in doing this anymore with iPhones and laptops.) Mine was “Frankenstein”! What better way to test your speakers and shake the walls of your house, while driving your parents crazy, than the insane instrumental from “They Only Come Out at Night”?

When a free Edgar Winter Band at Station Square turned up on the Drusky calendar, it occurred to me that I had never seen Edgar Winter live. Or at least I don’t remember. I’ve been too waaaay too many concerts. (By the way, “Edgar Winter Band” is a bit of a buzzkill; it’s always been the Edgar Winter Group!)

With Rascal Flatts and Waka Flocka Flame passed off to interns, I had an open Friday night and realized there were worse ways to spend it than with one of rock’s living legends, so don’t laugh at me for reviewing this in 2015.

The location wasn’t all that appealing as I had stopped by at another one of the free Friday shows and it was set up by the fountain, with a chintzy sound. I did not want to hear “Frankenstein” sounding worse than it did in my bedroom. Fortunately, this special Summer Jam had a big stage on the main road between the Hard Rock and Houlihan’s and there were several hundred people there who had either brought chairs or were standing in front or along the sides. Average age in the 60s.

Winter, with long white hair and shiny silver jacket, hit the stage with “Keep Playing That Rock N’ Roll,” a song from 1971’s “Edgar Winter’s White Trash” that he probably never dreamed he’d be doing at 68. His scratchy voice, comparable to Alice Cooper’s, doesn’t sound any worse for the wear and tear.

With the second song, he indulged his blues roots while testing the patience of everyone assembled. The three-piece backing band (a tight one) broke down “Tobacco Road” so he could flash his scat vocal skills, which are indeed impressive. Then he kept doing it ... and doing it, turning it into a call and response with guitarist Doug Rappaport. You’ve all seen this. Think Robert Plant. The singer scats something like do-do-la-do and then the guitarist plays it, and then he adds more syllables and it escalates from there. We got the idea right away. It went on for an hour (or maybe just 15 minutes — “Sunshine of Your Love” was in there, too), but it was dedicated to his late brother/beloved guitar hero Johnny, so we waited that one out without complaining.

The blues-rock kept coming in the first hour, with more squealing solos than any of us have likely heard in ages, on “Texas” and “Texas Tornado” and hard-driving, hard-partying Edgar Winter Group cut “Hangin’ Around,” “We All Had a Real Good Time” and the “The Power of Positive Drinkin.’ ”An instrumental of Led Zeppelin’s “Nobody’s Fault But Mine” was tossed in as well.

Finally, he strapped on the portable keyboard and delivered into the monster riff of “Frankenstein.” It was the face-melting moment we were all waiting for, from the metal theme into the rock fusion middle with Winter juggling keyboard, sax and drums. The only thing we didn’t need was the obligatory drum solo breaking the cohesion.

The Edgar Winter Band rocked to a crowd-pleasing, fist-raising finish that included another pair of classic-rock staples, “Free Ride” (a song from “They Only Come Out at Night” written by late guitarist and Harrisburg native Dan Hartman) and “Rock N Roll, Hoochie Koo,” a song that writer Rick Derringer recorded with brother Johnny.

I don’t have such a list, but if I did, “hearing ‘Frankenstein’ live” might be on it somewhere, maybe down low. Now I can mentally check that off.

Scott Mervis: smervis@post-gazette.com; 412-263-2576. Twitter: @scottmervis_pg