David Ernesto Munar, CEO of the AIDS Foundation of Chicago, is taking the reins of the Howard Brown Health Center, a Chicago nonprofit that has been working to rebuild its reputation after nearly closing amid a grant mismanagement scandal.

Mr. Munar, who started his tenure at the AIDS foundation 23 years ago and has been CEO and president since 2011, begins his new position on April 1. He replaces Karma Israelsen, Howard Brown's former board chairwoman, who has been serving as interim CEO.

In a statement today from Howard Brown announcing his appointment, Mr. Munar, 44, said he knows firsthand the fear and isolation of an HIV diagnosis and the service gaps that persist in diverse communities. Mr. Munar was diagnosed with HIV at Howard Brown in 1994.

“Howard Brown's mission – to enhance community health and wellness through culturally competent, high-quality health care – is not an abstraction; for me, it is very real and immediate, and part of the reason why I'm alive and well today,” Mr. Munar said in the statement.

Founded in 1974, Uptown-based Howard Brown provides services at three sites, treating about 14,000 patients a year with a focus on the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered community. It also is engaged in research, HIV prevention and youth services, and operates the Brown Elephant resale shops.

The organization has been without a permanent CEO since August 2012, when Jamal Edwards, a patent lawyer who helped turn around the financially struggling center, stepped down after two years at the helm.

BACK FROM THE BRINK

The nonprofit was on the brink of collapse in 2010 amid a federal investigation into mismanaging more than $3 million in grants related to an HIV/AIDS study. A major fundraising effort helped Howard Brown avoid closing its doors, and in 2012, the health center agreed to a settlement with several federal agencies and separately with Northwestern University. The Evanston-based school became the lead agent for the HIV/AIDS study after Howard Brown became the subject of investigation.

In an interview, Mr. Munar said restoring faith among its employees and patients, as well as community organizations and donors, is critical after years of troubles .

“I think that there's been a perception, particularly in the LGBT community, that the organization is not in touch with community members and those it's striving to serve, and that merits careful attention,” Mr. Munar said.

Mr. Munar has been involved in local and national HIV/AIDS policy for years. In 2011, the White House named him one of several Champions of Change.

His current employer and Howard Brown have a lengthy relationship. The AIDS foundation provides public policy advocacy at the local, state and national level and distributes grants and other funds to about 55 agencies, including Howard Brown.

Mr. Munar said his policy experience will be particularly helpful in light of the impact of the Obama administration's Affordable Care Act. Keeping people healthy rather than waiting to treat them when they're sick is a key part of the health care law's effort to reduce medical costs.

About 43 percent of Howard Brown patients were uninsured in 2012, according to the health center's most recent publicly available audit. Some likely have gained coverage either through an expansion of the Medicaid program for the poor and disabled, or by buying plans on the state health insurance exchange. If some uninsured patients gained coverage, it would help Howard Brown get paid for care it now provides free.

MAPPING GROWTH PLAN

Being a destination for not only the LGBT community but for straight patients is Howard Brown's vision. About 40 percent of the organization's patients are straight.

“If we can get to a place where we can afford growth and we can map that out, part of my job is going to figure out where those opportunities lie,” Mr. Munar said.

Howard Brown board Chairman Duke Alden said Mr. Munar was chosen from a pool of 76 candidates.

“I think those people who know David well understand his level of commitment to health care not only in Chicago but as a national health care leader,” said Mr. Alden, a vice president at Aon Corp. in Chicago.

John Peller, vice president of policy at the AIDS foundation, has been named interim president and CEO while the organization conducts a national search for a replacement.

Chicago-based Kittleman & Associates LLC, an executive search firm, helped Howard Brown conduct the national CEO search.