Republican Bruce Rauner, longtime partner in the GTCR hedge fund, which bought Cision, Vocus and Gorkana this year for close to $900 million, bested incumbent Democrat Patrick Quinn for governor of Illinois. Rauner, whose $27 million+ contribution to his own campaign made him the “top self-funded candidate of 2014,” according to the New York Times, received major help from Edgar Jannotta, principal of GTCR from 2002-11, including a $100,000 contribution on Dec. 4, 2013, HuffPost reported. Conservative media including The Christian Post, which claims to be the world’s largest such news medium, said candidates that “championed pro-life, socially conservative principles were decisive winners.” It listed numerous races won by such candidates including Kansas Republican Pat Roberts; Tom Cotton of Arkansas; Joni Ernst, Iowa; Thom Tillis, North Carolina; Elise Stefanki, New York; Mia Love, Utah; Greg Abbott, Texas, and several others. Republican Scott Brown lost in New Hampshire because he did not take a strong stance against gay marriage and abortion, said a report on Newsmax by John Blosser. Rauner's Views Tracked Rauner, according to research by the Campus Election Engagement Project quoted by HuffPost Oct. 22, did not believe that “human activity” is causing climate change; did not support the Affordable Care Act; had a history of “strong opposition to raising the minimum wage which then shifted to limited support,” and was initially against gay marriage which shifted to refusal to comment at all on the subject. GTCR, at which Rauner was a principal for 30 years until 2012 when he decided to run for governor of Illinois, paid an estimated $150 million for Cision earlier this year. Meltwater, owner of 10% of the stock of Cision, had made a cash offer of $138 million for the company but this offer was topped by GTCR, which also owned 10% of Cision. Vocus, like Cision a provider of data to the PR industry including editor contacts as well as providing many analytic services, was purchased for $447 million. An estimated $300 million was paid for Gorkana. PR Shifting to Social Media

Peter Granat Losses at Cision and Vocus, providers of contacts to hundreds of thousands of editors, indicate the move of some of the PR industry from pitching editors to interfacing directly with consumers via social media. Cision had a loss of $41 million in the latest year available and Vocus had a loss of $21.8 million. Revenues of Vocus were about $180M and Cision, $156M. Peter Granat, CEO of Cision, announced that Cision would be the name for the combined Cision/Vocus at a press conference Oct. 13 during the annual PR Society of America conference in Washington, D.C.