Lt. Col. André Dean (Ret.) spent 27 years fighting for his country as an officer in the U.S. Army.

Returning home to Texas, and seeing the state of the leadership of his country, has compelled him to fight on a different battlefield — the battlefield of politics.

Dean, a Republican, is in Madisonville for fundraising and to raise awareness of his candidacy. He’s running against Kevin Brady, the Republican incumbent in Texas 8th district.

“I ran against him 17 years ago,” he said. “He’s been in office, 19 years. That’s a long time in office.”

Dean said that years ago, while campaigning for a justice of the peace job in Brazos County, he had his first opportunity to hear Kevin Brady speak.

“I said, ‘Oh, my gosh. That’s the strength of our leadership there?’” he said. “I had just come from active duty at that point, and I was used to strong, charismatic leaders, and Kevin doesn’t have much of that.”

Dean said that the incumbent doesn’t feel very strongly about many things; “Maybe a ‘safe’ politician is the way to describe him. But it’s not my world of leadership.”

For Dean, living in the 8th District, which he describes as the second most conservative district in Texas, provides the perfect base from which to lead on strong conservative issues.

“That we’re not is a serious lack of leadership,” he said.

Dean began his path to leadership as student council president in Madisonville High School, because, he said, he liked “being in the thick of trying to win the confidence of my peers, and trying to make a difference in school spirit and raising visibility of student programs.”

He later achieved a master’s degree in public policy from the University of Texas, where he was an aide to Congresswoman Barbara Jordan.

After turning down a position with the CIA, he took a commission as a second lieutenant in the Army.

“I gave service to country in the military, and service through student council in high school,” he said. “I feel if you give a little extra time like that, you will make the world a better place. I would like to be in a discussion about where we are as the American People. I think I can make the world a little bit better.”

The biggest change necessary, Dean said, one that he feels most passionate about, is the national debt.

“We need to wage war on the $18.2 trillion national debt,” he said. “There’s a lot of talk about climate change, even by the president to the midshipmen at Annapolis, that (climate change) is the greatest danger to our nation; any of the polls I read say it’s not even in the top 20.”

Dean said that if the country continues to spend more than it has, again and again, it will come to ruin.

“We will be Greece, we will be Spain, we will be Italy — countries losing control of their own government because they overspend,” he said.

To eliminate the debt, Dean is an advocate of the penny plan, which asks government to cut one penny of every dollar of spending each year for five years, then caps spending at 18 percent of national income.

Other points that Dean advocates are:

•eliminating the IRS;

•securing the border;

•expunging the Affordable Care Act;

•12-year term limits for Congress;

•jail Lois Lerner and Eric Holder for contempt of Congress; and

•pass a 30th Amendment defining marriage as between a man and a woman.

Dean said he has become aware of a sense of despair and lost hope in the people of this country. However, he said he and his campaign are reaching to the area to let people know there’s hope.

“In my life, I hadn’t heard, like I have recently, people throwing up their hands and saying, ‘I give up. We’re over. This nation is done,’” he said. “I say, ‘Don’t say that,’ and they say, ‘Don’t you see what’s happening in this nation?’

“I say we’re not done. If we go through another eight years like we just went through, then I’d say we’re on an irreversible track, but we’re not done yet,” he said. “If we just get good people who don’t care about their own wealth, who love their country and have a proven record of preparation and intelligence and can make good decisions, we can turn the ship around.”