Blue Cross Blue Shield Q&A: Obamacare in action

In contrast to Minnesota, where MNsure runs the state's health insurance exchange, North Dakota's exchange is run by the federal government through the website, healthcare.gov.

Tim Huckle, CEO of Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Dakota—the state's biggest provider of health insurance—talked recently to the Herald editorial board about his company's experience on the exchange.

Q. How many companies are offering products on the North Dakota exchange, which is found at healthcare.gov?

Huckle: I think there were four last year, and one of them has left the individual marketplace. Now we have Sanford, we have Medica and we have Blue Cross Blue Shield.

Q. How have things changed for you and the others this year?

Huckle: We're entering the open enrollment period for the North Dakota health insurance exchange. It's an interesting season for us, and we're really not sure—as also has happened in other years—what to expect.

Are we going to see a lot of new entrants, or will it mostly be just people who shop? We do know that of the shoppers who have come through the health insurance exchange each year, two things have prompted them to shop: one is that the price of their product has changed, and they're shopping to see if they have other options. And the other issue is that their income has changed, and they're wondering if they're eligible for more of a subsidy or less.

Q. Typically, these are people who are not being covered through their employer, right?

Huckle: Right. So, what we see every year is that beginning in October, people see what their rate is and where their income is at, and they go shopping.

On the old market for individual insurance policies, once you bought a product and went through underwriting, you kind of stayed there. That was because the only way to get other coverage was to go through underwriting again, and in most cases, you had to be healthy to do that.

But what happens now is that there's no underwriting. So, on an annual basis, customers can select a different product, they can select a different carrier, they can drop coverage altogether.

So it just makes for a very busy time, because people are making a big economic decision annually, and they call and ask for a lot of help.

Q. How has the basic math of the Affordable Care Act held up? The idea was that everybody would qualify without regard to pre-existing conditions, but in return, everybody would have to have insurance.

Huckle: That's a great question, and I would say the answer is that nobody knows for sure.

There were two goals of the Affordable Care Act. One was to cover more people, and the other was to reduce overall health care costs.

We know more people are getting covered; and on the cost side, because more people are covered, we know that this has helped the providers some. They're doing less charity care and writing off smaller amounts of bad debt.

But as far as the impact on health care premiums, that's less clear. There probably was a lot of pent-up demand for health care in America because we had so many uninsured. So, in the early years, I think people were expecting an increase or a spike in health care costs; and then over time, in theory, that might diminish.

But this is the first year in which we're going to renew our rates with a full year's worth of data behind us. And I think that in North Dakota, if you look at the premiums for individual policies, you'll see that the companies have come pretty close in their estimations of what their premiums needed to be.

Remember: In the beginning of all this, we were dealing with assumptions layered upon assumptions. How many people are going to enroll? What are their demographics? What is their illness burden?

But even with that, in North Dakota we've come pretty close.

On the other hand, in the Minnesota marketplace, you may remember the story of Preferred One. They entered the Minnesota individual market exchange as the lowest priced product, and one year later, they exited that line of business because they attracted a population that their premiums simply couldn't cover.

Also, if you look in Iowa, they actually formed a consumer-owned cooperative to sell health insurance. They created a new business, CoOportunity Health, that had not existed before; the Affordable Care Act provided some funding for innovators to get into the space.

They had the lowest prices in the Iowa market, but then they ceased doing business, and the other carriers had to pick that up. And I think you've seen recently what's expected in the Minnesota market for premiums for the "metallic products" on the exchange.

I'm aware of a number of insurance companies nationwide that lost hundreds of millions of dollars on just one block of business because their assumptions on who they'd attract and their premiums should be to support that were off. But it seems like in the North Dakota market, we all hit it pretty close, even though for us, too, it was writing a new book of insurance business with no experience to base it on.

Now, as each year goes by, we all should have a fuller picture of the claims and the utilization for this block of business, and we'll see where it goes.

The key thing is this: Are the younger and healthier people going to enter into the marketplace? Are the penalties and incentives that are designed to get them to buy insurance going to work? That's the critical question, here and in other states.

Q. Have you figured out that answer yet?

Huckle: There remain a lot of younger people who are not insured. Now, the trouble also is that younger people have to pay more than they would have had to a few years ago, because they're helping to subsidize the insurance costs for people who are older and much sicker.

And there were wider age bands, too. So, the difference between what the youngest person and the oldest person paid was much bigger, which meant that the younger person could buy cheaper insurance.

The Affordable Care Act collapsed the age bands, and as a result, younger people have to pay more than under the old system—but older people probably pay less.

So, you've got people who are young and healthy who have to pay more now than they did before. Furthermore, they may not see a need for insurance now, and they also know they can buy it a year from now if they need it. Then they weigh this against such things as the penalties for not having insurance at all.

Q. How often have people been buying insurance when they're sick?

Huckle: It's hard to tell, because generally, they can't join unless they do so during an open enrollment period.

If you pass through an open enrollment period and say, "I'm not buying," then all of the sudden you get sick, you have to wait for a "qualifying event" --- getting married, say, or moving to a new state—or another open enrollment period before you can buy insurance.

And then when they come to us, we don't get a lot of data—or any data—on what they did before as far as their health status.

We know on average that we have a more expensive risk pool than we had before when we had underwriting, which is to be expected, because underwriting was a great tool to keep a product affordable.

So, this is a whole new risk pool, and the question is: Over time, what does the risk pool evolve to? The answer will depend on how many people we get into the pool—how many new entrants, how many employers opt out and their employees opt in. So, there are multiple ways that things could change.