Photo

WASHINGTON — In March 1997, two congressmen proposed a welfare law so detailed that it had 77 sections. Within a month it sailed through the House by voice vote.

There was nothing unusual about swift passage for the Welfare Reform Technical Corrections Act of 1997. But in retrospect, it underscores the deteriorating conditions in Washington today, as the Supreme Court has accepted a case threatening the Affordable Care Act over the interpretation of a single ambiguous phrase.

The 1997 act passed a year after President Bill Clinton and a Republican-led Congress had struck a broader deal on welfare, a racially charged issue that had roiled politics for two decades. The passage of the 1996 law followed fierce fighting — Mr. Clinton vetoed two welfare bills before signing the third — as well as a bitter budget fight that had temporarily shut down the government the previous winter.

By 1997, however, the political guns had fallen silent. Though Democratic leaders of both the House and Senate had opposed the 1996 law, the fight was over. The top House Republican on the issue, Representative E. Clay Shaw Jr. of Florida, quietly consulted Mr. Clinton’s aides about ways the new welfare law needed clarification and adjustment to be implemented more effectively.

“We worked with the administration even though we shut down the government — twice,” recalled Ron Haskins, then Mr. Shaw’s top welfare adviser. In August, the numerous “technical corrections” to the 1996 bill were folded into a budget deal and passed into law.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Today the Affordable Care Act faces grave danger before the United States Supreme Court because such legislative repair work, once routine, has grown impossible.

The challenge in King v. Burwell, the case that the court recently accepted, rests on a part of the law creating taxpayer subsidies for the purchase of health insurance through marketplaces “established by the state.” That phrase, the plaintiffs argue, prohibits subsidies for purchasers using marketplaces established by the federal government for the 37 states that do not have their own.

The Obama administration and the law’s sponsors in Congress counter that they never intended such a prohibition. None was discussed in debates leading to the law’s passage. The Congressional Budget Office, which estimates the costs of legislation, never considered one. Subsidies for customers with modest incomes represent a linchpin of the law’s entire architecture.

A simple technical corrections bill, specifying that consumers using the federal marketplace would receive subsidies as well, would resolve the ambiguity. But his fellow Republicans, Mr. Haskins says, will not “lift a finger” to fix a law they loathe.

One reason is the fundamentally different partisan backdrops to the health and welfare debates. Mr. Clinton had campaigned on promises of welfare reform, traditionally a Republican priority, to brand himself “a different kind of Democrat” at a time when his party was struggling to compete in presidential elections.

That set up Mr. Clinton’s compromise with a Republican-led Congress. On health care, by contrast, a Democratic president pushed a longstanding priority of his party through a Democratic-controlled Congress.

Another reason is the rightward ideological shift in the Republican Party. The health law pushed by Mr. Obama strongly resembled a plan that Republican leaders themselves once proposed as an alternative to the 1993 plan that Mr. Clinton had offered in vain.

Republicans unanimously opposed Mr. Obama anyway, with a zeal that has not ebbed four years later.

“In the old days, like when I ran Medicare, when we had this kind of conflict in what appeared to be the intent versus the actual wording, we would go in and ask Congress for a rifle shot to clarify in the statute what needed to be said,” said Gail R. Wilensky, a Republican health care expert who served in the administration of President George Bush.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Instead, House Republicans who have repeatedly voted to repeal “Obamacare” vow to try again with the new Republican majority in the Senate. And a dispute that legislative aides once would have resolved with minor editing has been turned over to Supreme Court justices.

“In my experience there’s never been a controversial major piece of legislation that didn’t get followed by a technical change,” said Representative Henry A. Waxman, Democrat of California, who is retiring after a 40-year House career renowned for legislative craftsmanship.

“It’s become very difficult to legislate on any subject,” Mr. Waxman added. “On this one, it’s become such a part of the ideology of the Republican Party. They never wanted to change the law. They just want to stop it.”

It is just one example of how political polarization has compounded obstacles to action built into America’s constitutional system. Ideological and partisan lines have hardened and merged to form mutually reinforcing walls of division.

Frustration over the consequences underlies Mr. Obama’s determination to alter the immigration system with a stroke of his pen — which in turn promises to exacerbate those divisions.

Ms. Wilensky holds out hope that the court might yet prod Congress to act. If a majority of justices call on lawmakers to resolve the ambiguity, she reasoned, Republicans might then salvage the challenged subsidies in return for changes such as curbing health-care mandates on employers.

That may be wishful thinking.

“The kind of changes that Gail is talking about come from a mentality about negotiation between the two parties that used to be the rule here in Washington,” said Henry J. Aaron, a policy analyst at the Brookings Institution who served in Mr. Clinton’s administration.

“People of good will on both sides got together, they didn’t always agree, they worked out their differences and they dealt with problems,” Mr. Aaron said. “That is all too regrettably now missing from the scene here.”