In “New York’s hospitals are businesses, and should be taxed like them” (Op-Ed, July 23), Leonard Grunstein shows a profound misunderstanding of why hospitals are tax-exempt.

The notion that generating a “profit”—which simply means that revenues exceed expenses—somehow disqualifies an organization from being tax exempt has no basis in fact or law. Hospitals’ exempt status is tied to their meeting prescriptive standards on whether they operate for a community’s benefit, such as providing free care to the uninsured, community health investments, health professional education, and research.

Far from providing “some” community benefit, as Mr. Grunstein suggests, New York’s hospitals provide billions in community benefits annually—significantly in excess of their property tax exemption. And the few New York hospitals that actually are profitable—thanks in part to the charitable contributions and grants their tax-exempt status enables them to receive—channel those profits back into additional community activities.

Mr. Grunstein also asserts that the Affordable Care Act’s health insurance expansion undercuts hospitals’ tax-exempt status, but the ACA actually includes four tightened requirements for hospitals to maintain their tax exemptions.

And in referencing hospital executive compensation, Mr. Grunstein fails to mention that both federal law and the Internal Revenue Service define the procedures and regulations that tax-exempt organizations must follow when establishing executive compensation, and recognize that hospitals compete with the private sector for individuals with the skills and experience to run such complex institutions.

Finally, the New Jersey case that Mr. Grunstein cites sets a potentially dangerous precedent that could jeopardize the vital care that hospitals provide to their communities.

By any measure, New York’s hospitals earn their tax-exempt status each and every day.

Kenneth E. Raske

Dennis Whalen

The writers are presidents of the Greater New York Hospital Association and Healthcare Association of New York State, respectively.





Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments