University students in China have taken a strong interest in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) (Chance Chan/Reuters) This April, when Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST) launched Asia’s first MOOC, they expected modest interest from students mostly from greater China. Instead, they were astonished to find that over 17,000 students signed up worldwide, with 60 percent coming from U.S, U.K. and Canada. Meanwhile, at a large MOOC forum in China, more than 30,000 members are actively translating material from American MOOC courses., exchanging notes on and reviewing them for peer learners. Once obscure, MOOCs, or Massive Open Online Courses, have become increasingly important in a world where the demand for tertiary education, combined with rising tuition costs, have created a market opportunity for alternatives to traditional universities. One of the largest of these new organizations, Coursera, has teamed up with 84 universities in the U.S.—including Ivy League schools like Yale, Brown, and Columbia—to offer over 400 online courses to learners worldwide. And after securing $43 million in funding this summer, the company has accelerated its international expansion, with a geographic focus on China, India and Russia, markets that Coursera hopes to penetrate through distribution partnerships with local institutions.

Coursera has already launched a Chinese-language platform linked to National Taiwan University's history and probability classes and similar services for a course on the role of the renminbi run by the Chinese University of Hong Kong. In early May, Coursera partnered with Peking University to offer three classes taught in Mandarin, and is still negotiating contracts with two top universities in Shanghai—Shanghai Jiaotong University and Fudan University. And in August, Yeeyan, the largest public translation community site in China, joined Coursera’s Global Translation Partners Program to translate select English courses into Chinese (and vice versa, since Coursera has launched more courses in Chinese), in order to make them more accessible. Guokr, a science website popular among young people, immediately followed suit. At the end of September, NetEase, a leading China Internet technology company, announced its cooperation with Peking University to support the technical services of its online courses on Coursera and edx, a competitor. In China, this steep investment in online education is justified by tremendous interest, and as the number of students studying abroad goes up by 20 percent each year, the government has worked to improve the education system while private companies, entrepreneurs and angel investors have flocked to the new online market. Around 10 Chinese online-learning platforms have secured angel investments, and China’s three Internet titans—NetEase, Sina and Sohu—have all entered the fray and started their own online education divisions. The courses they pulled up feature TED Talks, popular lectures from top universities, and open course initiators such as the Khan Academy. Yu Minhong, president of New Oriental Education—China’s biggest private-education mogul—recently predicted that online education would account for 40 percent of the company’s market share within three to five years. But despite this surge in interest in MOOCs in China, the Chinese market presents challenges to would-be investors.