University of Alabama cheerleaders celebrate national championship wins in January in Tuscaloosa, Ala. (Photo: USA TODAY Sports)

University of Alabama sororities are accused of barring two black women from pledging. Should Greek organizations be forced to be more inclusive? Comments from Twitter and Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

The idea that two girls were dropped from sorority recruitment at Alabama because they're black sickens me. That's unacceptable.

— @MrJakeFleming

Sororities and fraternities extend invitations to pledge to those students who fit the culture, social structure, and academic or athletic standing of that particular Greek organization.

If their culture is accepting of a racial mix, then students of color will be invited. If not, so be it. Forcing a sorority to accept certain students strictly on skin color goes too far. This is not about equal rights. It's no different from a country club deciding whom to admit.

— Fred Clemens

Historically black Greek letter organizations accept all races. I was recently at my HBGLO's national convention, and I saw faces of all different races represented in our membership, not just those of African descent. Not to mention that there are African Americans and other racial groups who are members of predominately white Greek letter organizations.

It's unfortunate when people assume national organizations are racially exclusive based on what they saw during a short time in their undergraduate years.

— Terri Holland-Hill

Wow, Alabama. Of course, it's not just this school. Racism is alive.

— @Exquisitely_Me_

There is just as much as, if not more, diversity in predominately white fraternities as there is in predominately black ones.

Let's not pretend that one incident reflects the overall Greek system.

— Michael Carlisle

My sorority was listed in that article about rush racism at the University of Alabama. It is not a national policy. Sad.

— @SassySouthSays

Want more of the conversation? Follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/19Vv8o1