Buy Photo Steven Odom (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)Buy Photo

You used to hear talk about the “third rail” in politics, namely, demographic and budgetary issues relating to Social Security. I don’t hear that phrase as often since George W. broached the subject of privatizing Social Security, and was, well, at least not tarred and feathered. W. was hated for his foreign policy more than domestic anyway.

But there’s a third rail in religion, as well, and it’s called “politics.” Now, interestingly enough, my generation used to say “everything’s political,” but that’s not what I’m talking about. Mainly it’s partisan, presidential politics that raises problems. When I came here in 2007, I had an old bumper sticker on my car for a candidate who wasn’t even running in 2008, but a couple in church told me I shouldn’t have even that on my bumper. The sticker stayed.

With the rise of the civil rights movement, Nixon’s southern strategy, Carter’s Year of the Evangelical, and the Reagan fueled rise and fall of the Moral Majority, the Christian Coalition and their successor avatars, we’ve seen a lot of religious, even, ministerial involvement in politics. There’s even a group of ministers who deliberately preach partisan sermons in an effort to draw the IRS into litigation over the Johnson Amendment (yes, that Johnson, LBJ). It was this amendment which first said a church can have tax-exempt status only if it eschews “significant” use of its time or resources in partisan political activity.

Now I know what I said a few weeks ago about ad hominem arguments, but if you’ve read any of Robert Caro’s LBJ biography you know LBJ never took a breath that wasn’t for partisan purposes, and this makes me at least suspicious that maybe, just maybe, the jurisprudential aspects of the (1954) Amendment are, let’s say, murky. Less than Madisonian in constitutional fidelity.

So while I may not think the amendment is constitutionally valid, if I had the magic wand to make it disappear, I don’t think I would. The pre-World War II environment in this country was less divided politically within its geographic segments, its states, cities, towns, neighborhoods. The South was Democratic, New England and the Midwest (except big cities) were Republican and the West, well, it flipped and it flopped. Within a given community though, you knew pretty much what people’s politics were and they were more “sectional” let’s say. More based on the interests of the miners, or the farmers, or the factory workers, or the shop owners, or the stockholders. So while Kansas City might be machine politics Democratic (think Pendergast and that crowd, or Boss Tweed in NYC) the rest of Missouri was more Republican, just like they’d been since Teddy Roosevelt.

My point is, that is not our world. We live in hyper-partisan times. And to tell you the truth my opinion of the political judgment of my American colleagues, the preachers, generally is not high. I don’t believe one can, or should, move straight from the Sermon on the Mount to the Legislative floor. There needs to be some intervening, I don’t know, rasslin’, some fermenting, some aging, maybe. I do believe the Bible and the church in general speak to what’s right and just and moral, but I don’t think we can sit down and just paste the Bible into the law books. Heck, the Affordable Care Act is 7 feet tall if you just stack up the pages. Maybe we need less laws, not more ...

There are issues upon which the church has labored for centuries to gain understanding and persuade others, but unfortunately those issues that churches often wish to speak to most directly are the issues on which we’re most divided nationally, issues of abortion, bio-ethics, sexuality, etc., issues that seem to stir up the most partisan rancor.

The focus on politics from the pulpit that a repeal of the Johnson Amendment would open the door to would also distort what I think the church’s true message is. Many people, I think, even (especially?) those who are in favor of a relatively high profile for religion in modern policy questions, see the raison d’etre of the church to be morals, ethics. Right and wrong. And while a broad church liberality re: behavior is probably the last thing I would ever be accused of, I think the image of the church as primarily the propagator and defender of morality proper is essentially misguided, and false.

Of course, the Bible does have laws and ethical teaching. After all, Thou Shalt Not. We can’t and don’t want to do without that. And I believe heedless, slipshod immorality, individually and in terms of public policy, damages people and harms those who live as if there aren’t any laws inherent in the fabric of the universe.

But the church has a prior word, a higher word than telling people how to live. It’s more like telling people why to live, for whom to live. Morality comes out of character and habit. And those come out of identity, and it’s identity that is closer to the church’s call and purpose. I am a child of God, God come to earth as one of us, to bless and to love us in his body, the body of Christ, and having died, to offer that body to us as the building-blocks of the new world, the world that will one day (this is our hope) be his gift to all who call upon His name. Whosoever will.

Steve Odom is pastor of Central Christian Church on East Main Street in Murfreesboro, a former community member of the DNJ Editorial Board, and can be reached at steven.odom@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.dnj.com/1Ysply4