Kochia, left, and Russian thistle, right, are non-native. They turn magenta-red in fall, break free from their moorings and tumble across the prairie. ( Steve Jones / Courtesy photo )

Other October events • Itinerant black bears — facing scant rations this year — are becoming frequent visitors to town in search of food. Secure your trash. • Western rattlesnakes converge on communal hibernating sites in rocky hillsides and prairie dog colonies. • Marmots, ground squirrels and meadow jumping mice also start to hibernate. • Elk bulls bugle to attract harems of does. Listen for them in Golden Gate Canyon State Park and along the Peak to Peak Highway as well as in Rocky Mountain National Park. • Bottle gentians, gumweed and asters continue to bloom in the foothills.

It's exciting to watch tumbleweeds bounce across the fields and race across the road in front of your car.

It's sobering to watch thousands pile up against fence lines and in irrigation canals and to see photos of houses barricaded by enormous balls of brittle Russian thistles.

A 1919 Scientific American article describes children attaching tumbleweeds to a fishing pole and using them as kites. Seventy years later, High Country News writer Ray Ring tried the kite stunt but conceded, "It'll take some major wind ... to revive this sport of flying tumbleweeds." He imagines repeating the attempt in a speeding pickup truck and inspiring regional competitions.

Advertisement

Tender Russian thistle shoots, sometimes called the spinach of the Wild West, are said to be delicious raw or sautéed in oil and garlic. Inventive cooks have created some unusual recipes such as jellied tumbleweed salad and tumbleweed cookies. We'll leave both tumbleweed kiting and cooking to more adventuresome souls.

Tumbleweeds inspire artists as well as chefs. In Albuquerque, a 14-foot "snowman" built from tumbleweeds painted white looms over Interstate 40. Some people spray paint them gold for Christmas decorations, and many people regard them as icons of the West. But tumbleweeds have, in reality, become a scourge of the West.

Trying to find a use for the ubiquitous weeds, some ranchers feed them to livestock. Prairie dogs, bison, deer, elk and pronghorns eat the young plants before the leaves develop into sharp spines. Small mammals and some birds, such as Gambel's quail, consume the seeds.

But that's not enough to halt the inexorable spread of tumbleweeds. They not only survive but thrive during the severe droughts that are becoming worse as the climate warms.

Last year, El Paso County resorted to snowplows for clearing tumbleweed-blocked roads, and roadman Russell Bennett devised a machine called "Puff the Magic Dragon," which grinds them to dust.

When crushed by cars, tinder-dry tumbleweeds can ignite and blow for miles across the prairie. Several Colorado counties declared a state of emergency in 2014. Vogel Canyon in Comanche National Grassland was buried in tumbleweeds in January and was closed because of "the extreme fire threat." Volunteers helped clear the way for a mulcher, and the Forest Service re-opened the scenic canyon in April.

Although kochia and other wanton weeds also race across the West, the chief culprit is Russian thistle (Salsola kali ) sometimes called Nevada barbed wire, wind witch and roly-poly, among the more printable names. According to a 1991 Scientific American article by pre-eminent researcher James Young, the populations from which tumbleweeds arose no long exist in Eurasia.

In 1877, Young writes, seeds were inadvertently brought from Russia to South Dakota possibly in sacks of flax seed. Russian thistles do not compete well against native prairie or established vegetation, but like other invasive plants, they exploit areas degraded by poor farming practices, roads, railroads and development. The first plant to re-establish a population at ground zero on Nevada's nuclear test site was Russian thistle.

Tumbleweeds are winning the West partly because they are super efficient at seed dispersal. The upper part of the plant breaks from the roots in autumn and rolls before the wind, spreading seeds, like a colossal seed sifter.

A single plant produces about 250,000 seeds. Multiply that by thousands of bouncing thistle balls, and you realize that this wheel-shaped weed is on a roll.

Ruth Carol Cushman and Stephen Jones are authors of "Wild Boulder County" and "The North American Prairie."