Photo

FAIRFAX, Va. — Hillary Rodham Clinton on Friday night berated her Republican presidential rivals for protesting the Supreme Court’s decision legalizing same-sex marriage and for resisting stricter gun laws after the shooting that killed nine churchgoers in Charleston, S.C..

Reflecting on what she called “an emotional roller-coaster of a day,” Mrs. Clinton lauded the 5-to-4 decision recognizing same-sex marriage and renewed her calls for “common sense” gun control. But she saved her strongest words for criticizing the Republican contenders, who she said “seemed determined to lead us right back into the past” on those and other issues.

“Instead of trying to turn back the clock, they should be joining us in saying loudly and clearly saying no — no to discrimination, once and for all,” Mrs. Clinton said. “I am asking them, please, don’t make the rights, the hopes of any American into a political football for this 2016 campaign.”

Following the court’s decision Friday morning, several Republican presidential hopefuls, including Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana, and Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, called for a constitutional amendment allowing states to define marriage as they wish.

Mrs. Clinton, who has repeatedly argued for “common sense” gun control measures since the shootings last week, also drew attention to a vote by the Republican-led House Appropriations Committee on Tuesday against an amendment that would have channeled increased funding to the Centers of Disease Control to study gun violence.

“How can you watch massacre after massacre and take that vote?” Mrs. Clinton said.

She proceeded to critique the Republicans systematically on a long list of issues, from the Affordable Care Act to climate change to women’s reproductive health, and without using his name, again rebuked Donald J. Trump for referring to Mexican immigrants in his campaign announcement speech this week as rapists and criminals.

Mrs. Clinton opened her speech, though, by addressing the court’s same-sex marriage ruling directly. She called it a triumph for love, equality and the country, and read aloud the concluding portion of the court’s majority opinion, written by Justice Anthony Kennedy.

“Today’s decision confirms we’ve been working toward equality as a nation, step by step, case by case, court by court, and that equality has been right there in the Constitution all along,” Mrs. Clinton said. “There is something quite remarkable about that.”

Her remarks came before the Democratic Party of Virginia’s annual Jefferson Jackson Dinner at George Mason University here. Before taking the stage, she spent the afternoon in Charleston, where she attended the funeral of Rev. Clementa C. Pinckney, a state senator and the pastor of Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church, who was killed there along with eight others in a mass shooting last week.

Mrs. Clinton’s visit to Virginia was the first since declaring her candidacy in April. It is also one of her first campaign events outside the early primary states. She has close ties to Democrats in the state, but Virginia is expected to be hotly contested in 2016.