During the 2012 presidential contest, both President Barack Obama and his Republican challenger Mitt Romney staked their candidacies on competing interpretations of the nation’s economy. Obama argued that he had inherited an economic mess created by Republicans and that, although the economic turnaround had begun under his leadership, he needed more time to complete the job. Romney countered that the economy had not improved nearly enough under Obama’s stewardship, and that as a business person with practical experience, Romney was better suited to effect an economic recovery. In the end, Obama’s campaign frame proved slightly more popular, and he won a second term.

In the ensuing two years, by many measures the economy – while still struggling – continues to improve. Unemployment has dropped almost 2 percent, from 7.8 percent to 5.8 percent since Obama’s re-election. The annualized gross domestic product grew by 4.6 percent in the second quarter of 2014 – the highest growth rate in 2.5 years. The stock market has hit record highs.

Yet none of this seemed to matter to voters in Tuesday’s midterm elections, who reacted to the improving economy by punishing the president’s party at the ballot box. Republicans picked up at least 14 seats (they will likely gain additional seats in the races that are yet to be decided) to increase their House majority to 243 – a margin of control not seen by their party since the 80th Congress from 1947 to 1949. In the Senate, Republicans picked up at least seven seats to regain a majority in that chamber, 52 to 45, with a good possibility that number will go to 54 when Senate races in Alaska and Louisiana are decided.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

So what explains the apparent repudiation of the president’s party despite an improving economy under his watch? In a column written shortly before the election, political scientist Lynn Vavreck argued that midterms are not about the economy – they are referendums on the president. But this tells only part of the story. In fact, exit polls from Tuesday indicate that 45 percent of voters said their views toward the president played no part in their midterm vote. So what did drive their vote? Evidently the economy! It was cited as the most important issue for 45 percent of the voters, eclipsing concern for foreign relations, immigration and health care. However, of those voters citing this issue, 50 percent voted Republican versus 48 percent for Democrats.

I think there are several related reasons why Democrats did not benefit from the improving economy. First, as I indicated in an interview with Bloomberg News, perceptions of economic conditions by midterm voters were a great deal more pessimistic than objective indicators seem to warrant. According to exit polls, 70 percent of voters said the condition of the economy was either “not so good” or “poor,” and among this group Republicans beat Democrats by two-to-one. Similarly, 78 percent reported that they are “very” or “somewhat worried” about the direction the economy will go in the next year, and they also broke for Republicans over Democrats, by 58 percent to 40 percent. So it is clear that perceptions of the economy did play a role in the midterm in a way that did not help Democrats.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2014 Congressional Elections]

Why weren’t Democrats able to reprise Obama’s success in 2012 in making the argument that the economy was on the upswing? Undoubtedly, part of the explanation is that the economic improvement has been both slow and uneven. Wage growth has remained quite slow, for instance, and the overall economic improvement has been so incremental that perceptions continue to lag behind reality. But it is also the case that perceptions of economic performance are shaped by voters’ partisan leanings. We should not be surprised, therefore, that in 2014 an electorate that was smaller but also older, whiter and generally more Republican had a more jaundiced view of the economy than did the electorate in 2012.

Moreover, the basic dynamics driving midterm elections made it more difficult for incumbent Democrats to make the economy work for them. Generally speaking, it is the president who is held responsible for the state of macroeconomic conditions. And most Democrats, as I wrote about here, were not eager to associate themselves with a president whose approval rating hovered in the low 40 percent range and who, based on past midterm election cycles, was almost certainly going to drag down the Democratic vote. This was particularly true for the seven Democrats running for Senate in states won by Mitt Romney in 2012. For this reason, most incumbent Democrats facing tight races tried to steer clear of national issues and instead focused on emphasizing local factors, such as "pork barrel" projects and constituency casework. At the same time they ran for Congress by running against it as an institution. If you are running against the president and against Congress, it is very hard to also claim that you are responsible for an improving economy.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Congress]

Note that Republicans didn’t give Democrats much of an opening to discuss the economy. It is true that they sought to nationalize the midterms by linking Democratic incumbents to Obama, often by citing how many times a Democratic incumbent had voted with the president. However, they did not, for the most part, try to tie Democrats to the economy. Instead, they sought to indict the Obama administration, and by extension Democrats who voted with him, for a failure of competence. In this vein, Republicans cited the botched rollout of Obamacare, mismanagement of veterans’ hospitals, the failure to anticipate the rise of the Islamic State group and even the mishandling of the Ebola outbreak. In short, neither Republicans nor Democrats made this campaign about macroeconomic conditions to the degree that voters were forced to examine whether the economy had improved.