Missing python up your sleeve? Cornish villagers warned that escaped snake called Popeye may be hiding inside a coat

Popeye went missing from its tank in Torpoint, Cornwall, last Tuesday

Owner Charly Honey, 22, has warned it could be hiding in coat sleeve

But insisted python was 'only' an 18in baby and posed no serious risk



Neighbours in a small town are braced for a nasty surprise - after a python went missing and its owner warned it could be hiding in a coat sleeve.

Charly Honey insisted Popeye was ‘only’ an 18in baby and posed no serious risk to the public.

‘I’ve got a puppy and a two-year-old stepdaughter and we’ve looked everywhere,’ said the 22-year-old, from Torpoint in Cornwall.

Neighbours in Torpoint (pictured), Cornwall, have been warned a missing python may be hiding in a coat sleeve

‘They turn up in the strangest of places, like the arm of a coat. But I can’t find her anywhere.’

Popeye – named because it has lost an eye – was safe in its tank last Tuesday when its owner gave it a mouse to eat.

But when Miss Honey returned a little later, she found the mouse untouched and the snake missing.

She said she would usually be confident of finding the three-year-old pet in the house, but the doors had been left open because of the hot weather.

‘The neighbours are not happy, and that’s understandable, but she’s of no risk to anyone,’ added Miss Honey.

Ambush predators: Pythons are non-venomous but adults can eat animals the size of a cat (file picture)

‘She’s only small, she’s still a baby really. When she’s fully grown she’ll be around six foot long.

‘We’re starting to panic a bit. In the winter they go for the heat but it’s so warm she could have gone anywhere. I put another mouse in the tank in the hope that she would come back but she didn’t.

‘If she’s found I’d ask people not to touch her. If they’re brave they can put her in a pillow case.’



' The neighbours are not happy, and that’s understandable, but she’s of no risk to anyone. She’s only small, she’s still a baby really'

Charly Honey



Miss Honey said Popeye had escaped once before, but it had happened when the python was being looked after by someone else during a house move.

Pythons are native to Australia, Africa and Asia and are ambush predators – meaning they remain motionless and strike suddenly at passing prey.

They are non-venomous but have sharp backward-curving teeth which are used to grab prey before killing them by constriction, leading to asphyxiation.

Adults typically eat animals equivalent to the size of a domestic cat but some larger species have been known to devour adult deer.