“Doc-in-a-box” facilities are popping up all over.

Urgent care offices — dubbed a “doc-in-a-box” when the medical facilities debuted two decades ago — are expected to thrive under Obamacare.

New Jersey is seeing an 18- to 20-percent annual growth rate in urgent care facilities, according to Sam Yates of the Urgent Care Association of New Jersey.

While many market forces are behind this growth, Yates said the Affordable Care Act is playing its part in the surge as well, for a variety of reasons:

• More people will have insurance. In short, the pool of potential customers has been enlarged by the Affordable Care Act.

• People who were uninsured probably didn’t have an existing relationship with a doctor. That diminishes reluctance on their part to be treated by an unfamiliar face.

“They’re looking for medical treatment, period,” Yates said. “They’re not basing it on a relationship.”

• Having relied on emergency rooms during health crises, they’ve grown accustomed to getting treatment right away, without waiting for an appointment, Yates said.

“Their past exposure to health care has been the ER,” he said. “Their model of health care is, ‘I need to go see someone right now.’ ”

When Keena White’s 10-year-old son broke his thumb in a baseball game this week, the Bloomfield woman bypassed several hospital emergency rooms to take him to PM Pediatrics, an urgent care facility in Livingston that is open until midnight.

“Hospitals usually have a lot of people waiting,” she said. “Here, they stick with their motto: They’re truly urgent.”

And, an emergency room visit would cost “way more,” she said.

PM Pediatrics co-owner, physician Jeffrey Schor, said his chain probably won’t see a huge bump from the ACA, simply because previous government programs have already insured children.

Other economic forces are also fueling urgent care success, said Katherine Hempstead, a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation expert in insurance, health care price transparency and value.

The main one is a simple pocketbook concern: Health insurers have gradually been getting stingier about reimbursing visits to the emergency room.

“Even if it’s an appropriate use of the emergency room, you’re going to have a big cost share,” she said.

Most of the plans available through HealthCare.gov come with a big deductible that has to be met before anything is covered. If someone seeks treatment for a sprained ankle, they’re probably going to have to pay for it out-of-pocket.

People are going to learn — perhaps the hard way — that going to the emergency room for a non-life-threatening issue is going to hit them hard in the wallet.

a long wait could be in store at er

A 2013 study reported the median charge for outpatient conditions in the emergency department was $1,233. By contrast, the insurer Aetna puts the average cost of an urgent care visit at $110 to $150. (Cost aside, call 911 or go to an ER if you experience chest pain, uncontrolled bleeding, sudden or severe pain, coughing or vomiting blood, severe allergic reaction, difficulty breathing, sudden dizziness, weakness, or changes in vision, severe or persistent vomiting or diarrhea, or changes in mental status, such as confusion, according to the American College of Emergency Physicians.)

Besides costing more, ERs also take a long time if you haven’t been shot, in a car accident, or in the throes of a heart attack, said William Gluckman, an emergency room physician who founded FastER Urgent Care in Morris Plains. Having worked in busy urban ERs, he knew that patients whose illnesses weren’t life-threatening usually waited a long time.

The newly insured may not realize that very few policies cover everything from the moment the ID card arrives, Gluckman said. Such patients often seem surprised their insurance doesn’t cover their visit because they’re still meeting their deductibles.

The popularity of doc-in-a-box establishments also reflects the industry’s belated acceptance of other ways to deliver health care besides the classic face-to-face appointment with a doctor, said Hempstead.

That time-honored model often means a bit of waiting on the part of the patient: waiting for an appointment, then waiting again at the appointment.

“It’s not particularly imaginative,” Hempstead said. “It’s one solution to every problem: a face-to-face meeting with a medical doctor.” That’s the gold standard of clinical care, but it has its drawbacks.

Urgent care offers timeliness — an important factor when it’s nearly bedtime and a parent suspects a child has an earache. In those situations, she said, “patients don’t want to call some office that’s only open 9 to 5 and get an appointment for three weeks from now.”

“People want a little more choice now. They want care when they need it, and urgent care fits that model,” said Schor. “People are aware now there are more alternatives to the emergency room.”

Urgent care appointments usually cost more than routine appointments at a doctor’s office, but Hempstead said the convenience of a quick resolution has to be factored into their value.

“It’s not that much more, if you’re looking at having to skip work or miss school otherwise,” Hempstead said.