In gauging whether ObamaCare exchange policies make health care reasonably affordable, federal enrollment data have been little help.

They’ve offered no clarity on a key metric: the type of policies that households with modest incomes are buying.

But evidence from the one state that’s breaking out such data suggests cause for concern: In Washington, one in four individuals in households earning less than 250% of the poverty level signed up for a bronze plan with a deductible of $5,000-$6,350 per person and $10,000-$12,700 per family.

Even after premiums, these households could face medical costs ranging from 17% to 40% of income before ObamaCare’s nonpreventative-care benefits kick in.

By any standard, these enrollees hailed by many ObamaCare defenders as success stories are woefully underinsured. The Commonwealth Fund, which studies the health care system, generally considers a person who has to pay at least 10% of income on medical care (excluding premiums) to be underinsured. Households earning under 200% of the poverty level, whose budgets are already stretched, are deemed underinsured if medical costs take up even 5% of income.

The nature of ObamaCare’s subsidies has set up what for many individuals and families may be a coverage decision with no good choices. They can stretch their budgets up to, if not beyond, the breaking point to buy generous coverage — or face financial disaster if they get a low-cost, high-deductible plan and wind up in the hospital.

As the Commonwealth Fund warns, modest-income households with insurance “who face high out-of-pocket costs for medical care relative to their incomes are nearly as likely as the uninsured population to go without care because of costs (or) forgo care when sick.”

Beyond the premium subsidies that the law provides, households earning up to 250% of the poverty level qualify for cost-sharing assistance. It can greatly reduce the deductible that must be exhausted before benefits kick in and, after that, the co-payments required for medical services and prescription drugs.

But those cost-sharing subsidies are available only for those who buy silver-level coverage, a decision made by the law’s crafters that might have held down ObamaCare’s cost but looks questionable in light of the Washington state data.

Consider a single 40-year-old in King County who makes twice the poverty level ($22,980): That individual would have to pay $1,080, or 4.7% of income, in premiums for the cheapest silver plan with a $250 deductible. If $1,080 seems too pricey, the cheapest bronze plan would cost only $370, or 1.6% of income, but it carries a $6,000 deductible. The deductible applies not just to medical visits but to prescriptions as well.

While strained household budgets may have led some low-income enrollees to opt for a bronze plan, limited understanding of health insurance and the concept of deductibles and co-pays may explain why some selected low-cost bronze plans.

The Department of Health and Human Services has reported that of just over 8 million ObamaCare exchange sign-ups through mid-April, 1.6 million, or 20%, selected bronze plans.

The most useful data point provided by HHS: In the 36 states using the federal Healthcare.gov sign-up site, 688,000, or 15%, of those qualifying for subsidies have selected bronze plans.

Still, these data are of limited use in gauging affordability because they include households making up to 400% of the poverty level. They also include all sign-ups — not just those who pay.

The Washington state figures reflect only paid enrollment, but even these data have shortcomings. The state breaks subsidized enrollees into two groups: those earning up to 250% of the poverty level and those earning more.

It would be useful to know the age of the bronze-plan enrollees and how many earn only 200% of the poverty level. For example, a high-deductible plan may not be as much of a concern for a 32-year-old at 245% of the poverty level as a 52-year-old at 150% of poverty.

Advocates for low-income families in Minnesota have criticized ObamaCare’s “bronze plan trap” which will get even worse next year, when ObamaCare deductibles rise as high as $6,600.

Families “with little to no discretionary income left after paying for essentials like food, housing, transportation and child care . . . are likely to fall into the ‘bronze plan trap,’ where they select the zero-premium bronze plan but must pay high deductibles and co-payments when they seek health care,” said the Minnesota Budget Project, which analyzes budget and tax issues.

The Minnesota Budget Project warned that the likely result would be “poor health outcomes and more costly medical interventions later on.”

Minnesota is the only state so far to implement what some have seen as an antidote to ObamaCare’s bronze problem: a state-run public plan covering households earning up to 200% of the poverty level.

This option, known as the Basic Health Plan option, was included in the 2010 Affordable Care Act. But this option may have a downside. Because Minnesota’s ObamaCare exchange sign-ups generally earn more than 200% of the poverty level, it is attracting an older population, with three adults age 55 and up for every two young adults.

It remains to be seen if Minnesota’s exchange risk pool is healthier, which would offset upward pressure on premiums that may result from an older tilt.