Those 18 minutes in Boston reshaped American politics. 10 years later: Obama's hits, blunders

Barack Obama’s Democratic National Convention keynote delivered 10 years ago Sunday evening started his journey to the White House.

Those 18 minutes in Boston reshaped American politics. Obama spent a long passage of his speech extolling Democratic nominee John Kerry, but he wasn’t the one whose presidential prospects most people left the Fleet Center buzzing about. Caught by surprise by a convention keynote that was actually worth watching, the crowd went wild. Even Hillary Clinton and Jesse Jackson were spotted clapping for him.

Story Continued Below

A decade later, the speech remains a road map to the Obama agenda — and the many places where he’s fallen short in his term and a half so far.

( Also on POLITICO: How Obama's court strategy may save Obamacare)

The parts that hold up well: transitioning from a manufacturing base, the pursuit of enemies (like Osama bin Laden), a cooperative economy, voting rights, solving the “health care crisis,” “a road to opportunity” for the middle class.

But parts come across as the oratorical equivalent of an embarrassing hairdo in a high school yearbook.

The line most associated with the speech — “there’s not a liberal America and a conservative America, there’s the United States of America” — is the part that’s probably held up the least well over time.

“The most memorable passage in that speech that he’s not been able to break through on is the real polarized division in the country,” said Robert Gibbs, then Obama’s Senate campaign communications director and later his first White House press secretary. That passage was there from the first draft and stuck around through every round of 3 a.m. emails Obama sent to his small Senate campaign staff.

( Also on POLITICO: First lady: 2014 election key)

But nothing prepared Obama’s staff for what happened next.

“We all read the speech, but none of us was prepared for the reaction it got,” recalls Tommy Vietor, a Senate campaign spokesman who also went on to the White House. “It was powerful on paper, but it was nowhere close to the way he delivered it. … The delivery was pitch perfect, and it was just the right speech for the time.”

Here’s POLITICO’s look back at key lines from the speech that defined Obama and how they’ve held up in the 10 years since:

“Well, I say to them tonight, there’s not a liberal America and a conservative America; there’s the United States of America.”

Turns out there actually is. And the divisions have gotten so much worse, particularly since the beginning of Obama’s presidency, with the rise of the tea party and the hopelessly gridlocked Congress, that it’s the most famous Obama line you never hear anymore.

“I think he feels deeply frustrated and disappointed by it,” Vietor says. “I don’t think anyone wants to be constrained by partisanship, but there’s only so much he can do.”

But Obama hasn’t exactly backed away from the divide, spending over $700 million after opting out of the campaign finance system in 2008 and then over $1 billion in 2012 in a relentless us-vs.-them push against Mitt Romney.

Try to find a Republican in Washington who thinks he hasn’t been partisan. But to Obama’s team, it’s mostly the GOP that has built the wall of opposition, to the point where they’re convinced many Republicans reflexively turn against anything he supports.

“I’d love nothing more than a loyal and rational opposition,” Obama put it to a Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee fundraising luncheon last week in Los Altos Hills, California. “But that’s not what we have right now, and as a consequence we’re going to need change.”

“Do we participate in a politics of cynicism, or do we participate in a politics of hope?”

That was three years before the Shepard Fairey poster, but these days Obama has returned to the idea repeatedly, telling people, as he did in Los Angeles on Thursday, “Cynicism is a choice, and hope is a better choice.”

Now, though, Obama has to contend with the reality of a hostile, dysfunctional Congress and the limits of falling back on executive actions to get his agenda through. He does it by adding a darker message to his speeches: Washington wants to discourage you, so don’t let them do it.

Back then, though, the pitch was just starting to take shape. He was aspirational. Now he’s weathered. Then, the crowd called “Hope!” back at him when he asked the question in the speech. Now he’s hoping he can still get Democrats inspired for the midterms.

“It’s a quintessentially forward-looking, hopeful vision for America,” Gibbs said.

But it’s also a reminder, five and a half years into his presidency, of how much of that vision Obama hasn’t gotten accomplished.

“The wonderful thing about that speech is that you could give it today,” Gibbs said, though adding, “Anybody and everybody would admit that there are things that are unfinished in that agenda and won’t be finished in his term.”

“We worship an awesome God in the blue states, and we don’t like federal agents poking around our libraries in the red states.”

Oh, right — the whole surveillance thing. Turns out people hate that.

Obama delivered that line in a very different context — when the issue on everyone’s minds was the Patriot Act and all the other kinds of post-Sept. 11 surveillance being practiced by the Bush administration. Libraries were especially concerned about national security letters, which allow the FBI to issue top-secret demands for records about Americans’ private communications.

In the Oval Office five years later, Obama surprised supporters and allies by maintaining, and in some cases expanding, the Bush-era intelligence apparatus and doing more with drone strikes and kill lists than that man on stage in Boston probably could have ever envisioned.