MISHAWAKA - Tony and Peggy Laskowski, of Mishawaka, paid off more than $57,000 in credit card debt.

And it took them only four years.

What is even more remarkable is that they did it during the recession.

"It's possible," Tony Laskowski said about paying off debt. "It's possible for everybody." In 2008, the Laskowskis decided that they needed some professional help.

They contacted GreenPath Debt Solutions, a nationwide, nonprofit credit counseling organization, which assisted the couple in setting up a plan to pay off their debt. The agency has named the Laskowskis its 2013 GreenPath Clients of the Year.

"They did a fantastic job," said Amanda Walker, GreenPath regional manager and counselor in

Indiana. "They didn't get through it without challenges, but they persevered. That's why they are our shining example for the year."

Providing help

GreenPath has been in the Michiana area since 2004 when it joined with Credit Counseling of Northern Indiana. Now it has two local offices, one in Elkhart and one in Mishawaka.

"People come to us with all sorts of hardships," Walker said, in an interview at the Mishawaka office. Hardships like overwhelming credit card debt or a mortgage going into foreclosure. Some people come because they want help in setting up a budget.

While some programs require clients to have a minimum of $10,000 in debt, GreenPath offers assistance to anyone, even if they owe on only one credit card.

In the past five years, the agency's client load has in-creased a lot, Walker said.

"In this office, we have about 450 people and families actively repaying debt through the debt management plan," she said. "And in Elkhart, it's about 550."

Most clients hear about the agency through word of mouth. But GreenPath also gets referrals from banks, creditors and community partners.

"A lot of clients have tried to fix it on their own before they come to see us," Walker said. "But a lot of times people just don't know the right questions to ask or it's intimidating."

How it works





When potential clients visit GreenPath, they meet with a counselor to go over their situation and discuss options. One option could be a debt management plan, which is the option that the Laskowskis chose when they visited with a counselor in 2008.

"We got in over our heads," Tony said, explaining that many of the credit card companies were charging as much in interest -- around 19 percent -- as the minimum payments. On one card they were paying about $287 per month on interest alone. Of course, that meant that only a small amount of the Laskowskis' payments went to actual principal.

"It was just unsustainable," Tony said. "In fact, I'd go online and look up credit card calculators and punch in the amount and interest rate and it would flash red."

At the initial appointment, a GreenPath counselor finds out what the clients' needs and goals are, outlines a budget and discusses various options that might be available. Debt management plans, like the Laskowskis', are not appropriate for everyone, Walker explained. The visit is free.

"What we can do is provide some direction and some first steps in assistance," she said. "Everybody leaves the appointment whether it's phone or face-to-face with a written copy of their budget and a list of to-do items."

At the Laskowskis' appointment, their counselor told them they had two options: a debt management plan or bankruptcy.

"That was not an option," Tony said about bankruptcy. "That was money we spent and we were responsible for it. We weren't going to cheat anyone."

So, GreenPath set the Laskowskis up with a five-year plan, which is the standard time frame for credit card repayment plans.

Then, the agency began working directly with the couple's creditors to reduce interest rates, eliminate late fees and set up a workable payback plan. Some of the companies lowered their rates to 6 percent and one went as low as 3 percent, Tony said.

"Creditors are willing to bring their interest rates down because they know the people are attempting to pay it back," Walker said, explaining that GreenPath pulls the funds from a client's account electronically.

GreenPath took a specific amount of money out of the Laskowskis' account every two weeks. It was their job to make sure the money was available.

GreenPath charged the Laskowskis only $50 per month, Tony said. Walker explained that once a client chooses to set up a debt management plan, Green-Path charges a small monthly fee based on the percentage of debt the agency is handling for the client, but it is capped at $50. The rest of the agency's funding comes from grants and creditors' contributions or donations.

The program wasn't easy. The Laskowskis had always lived simply, bought used cars and taken few vacations, but they still found themselves making sacrifices during their program. Peggy Laskowski said she clipped coupons and Tony learned how to maintain their vehicles himself.

"Our vacations were taking the kids to hockey or swim meets or going up to the camp that we work at, volunteering our time," Tony said.

Then, during the recession, Tony's hours were cut.

"He still worked full time," Peggy said, "but he lost a lot of overtime, and that is where the money is."

So, GreenPath altered the Laskowskis' plan, reducing payments slightly. And Tony picked up some lawn mowing jobs.

"I was working at my real job from 5 to 3 and then after that I'd go mow," he said. "There were two lawns that would take me until 8:30 at night. I did that a couple of nights a week."

After a year, Tony received a pay raise.

Through it all, he kept careful track of the payments and the amounts on each bill. He said his blotter at work was full of columns of numbers and tick marks and he knew exactly when each card would be paid off.

"He's always messing with his numbers," Peggy said, with a laugh. "The last year, he said, 'Next August, we'll be done.' He was doing a countdown."

But, even when they were getting close to the end, the Laskowskis never paid extra, Tony said. He asked the GreenPath counselor once if he should.

"She said, 'No, put it in your house or into savings,'" he said. The last payment was made in July 2012, just 47 months after they started.

"It's nice to not have to constantly count your pennies," Tony said. "I wish more people would take advantage of programs like this instead of turning to bankruptcy. When the credit card companies won't talk to you, you almost need a liaison."

He recommends that anyone looking into credit counseling ensure the firm is reputable. GreenPath wasn't the first option the Laskowskis tried. First, they contacted a company that he found online.

"They didn't do anything for me except take my money," he said.

A company or agency should be accredited or licensed. The National Foundation for Credit Counseling, the Association of Independent Consumer Credit Counseling Agencies and the Council on Accreditation are all "like seals of approval for the industry," Walker said. "A lot of the unreputable places do not have those accreditations."

But don't be afraid to reach out, she said. Many clients say they wish they would have called earlier.

"Money is intimidating and it's not easy to fess up and say, 'I need some help.' The first step is picking up the phone and making the appointment."

574-235-6343

ACulp@SBTinfo.com