Not that they thought so in the first place, but conservatives and Christians will be relieved to know that famed neurosurgeon Ben Carson is no longer considered an "extremist hater" by a left-wing advocacy group.

Less than a week after the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) was reported to have put potential Republican presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson's name on its "Extremist Watch List," the notorious left-wing activist group pulled it off. The "crime" that got him on in the first place? Carson was charged with being "anti-LGBT."

Ironically, the controversial "civil rights group" that was established to fight the Ku Klux Klan placed Carson — the sole prospective African-American 2016 presidential candidate — on its "Extremist Watch List" last October for his biblical stance on same-sex "marriage." Because of his biblical take on marriage, SPLC dubbed him as "anti-LGBT," placing him on its list primarily designed for white supremacists such as neo-Nazis, Klansmen, skinheads and other hate groups.

When it was reported last week that Carson has been on SPLC's list since last October, the leftist group came under intense fire, as many critics argued that the "evidence" against the world-famous neurosurgeon just didn't add up and fit the "crime."

Having little justification and evidence to prove that Carson belonged on its "Extremist File," SPLC yanked his name from its list, stating on its website:

"In October 2014, we posted an 'Extremist File' of Dr. Ben Carson. This week, as we've come under intense criticism for doing so, we've reviewed our profile and have concluded that it did not meet our standards, so we have taken it down and apologize to Dr. Carson for having posted it."

Carson's take on SPLC and his inclusion on its list

After learning about his spot on SPLC's Extremist File, Carson was asked if he thought SPLC was a crooked organization.

"Oh, definitely … certainly that's been the impression of everybody I've heard from," the retired surgeon replied. "I find it very ironic that they would castigate someone as a hater whose entire professional career was spent saving people's lives."

After Carson pointed out his endowment of a scholarship program and the literacy programs that he's funded in low-income areas, he found it hard to believe that SPLC targeted him because he supports traditional marriage.

"But because I don't agree with them about traditional marriage, I'm a 'hater,'" Carson explained. "And that's pretty interesting that someone could come away with that belief."

SPLC actually started as a civil rights legal aid charity, but it has expanded its focus to attack the credibility of conservatives who oppose leftist policies, groups and agendas.

Let the evidence speak for itself … or not

What's the incriminating evidence that SPLC brandished over Carson's head, earning his place on its list for five months? Following are some quotes that the SPLC pulled to make their case against Carson as an extremist hater.

"Marriage is between a man and a woman," Carson told Sean Hannity on Fox News in March 2013. "It's a well-established pillar of society and no group, be they gays, be they NAMBLA [North American Man/Boy Association, a group advocating pedophilia], be they people who believe in bestiality — it doesn't matter what they are, they don't get to change the definition."

SPLC also didn't appreciate Carson's criticism of the president, which undoubtedly propelled their initial decision to categorize him with "hate groups."

"Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson rapidly ascended as a far-right political star after publicly scolding President Obama, whom he sat a few feet away from, at a National Prayer Breakfast in February 2013," SPLC posted under Carson's profile on its Extremist File. "Carson's reproach of Obama for his healthcare and tax policies went viral, unleashing a flood of adulation from right-wing media and hate groups."

Believing that it is an upstanding American citizen's duty to support ObamaCare, SPLC took great offence to Carson's critique of the president's problematic and unpopular federal healthcare plan.

"ObamaCare is really the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery," Carson proclaimed at the Value Voters Summit in the nation's capital in October 2013. "And … in a way, it is slavery."

SPLC also wasn't a fan of Carson pointing out the ills of big government and its alleged socialist/fascist way of silencing the masses by overriding the democratic process and trampling the freedoms that most Americans hold dear.

"I mean [our government and institutions] are very much like Nazi Germany," Carson was quoted by Breitbart News last March. "You know, you had a government using its tools to intimidate the population. We now live in a society where people are afraid to say what they really believe."

Also not advocates of religious freedom and the Bible, SPLC saw Carson's reference to God and Scripture when discussing taxation as one of the three strikes against him.

"What we need to do is come up with something simple," Carson shared at the White House Prayer Breakfast in February 2013 when exploring the advantages of a flat tax. "And when I pick up my Bible, you know what I see? I see the first individual in the universe, God, and he's given us a system. It's called a tithe."

How could he be on that list?

For those familiar with the SPLC, Carson's temporary inclusion on the list came as little surprise.

Conservative American leaders who have boldly stood for pro-family values, especially when it comes to same-sex marriage, have been placed on SPLC's list and stamped with an "anti-LGBT" badge as their "ideology" — much like Carson. Some currently listed under this designation are Family Research Council (FRC) president Tony Perkins, American Family Radio talk-show host Bryan Fischer, and Wallbuilders founder and president David Barton.

Influential American personalities who advocate security measures to protect America and the world from the threat and onslaught of Islamic terrorism are also included in SPLC's Extremist Files under the ideology "Anti-Muslim" instead of "anti-terrorism" or "pro-national security." Family Research Council executive vice president Lt. Gen. William G. "Jerry" Boykin (USA-Ret.) and Jihad Watch director Robert Spencer are listed under this designation.

Champions of American values who stand against anti-American policies and oppose organizations that seek to impose oppressive global agendas (such as the United Nations) have been labeled as belonging to the "Patriot Movement" ideology. Some of the bastions of liberty and the American way listed by the SPLC in this ideology are WND founder and editor-in-chief Joseph Farah and American Policy Center president Tom DeWeese.

With SPLC's allegiance to President Obama's pro-immigration and amnesty programs, it now has the ideology of "anti-immigrant" in its extremist listing. It has yet to be seen whether Carson's stance on immigration will earn him a spot back on the list if he pursues a spot on the 2016 GOP presidential ticket.

Related article:

Black conservative floats theory why SPLC went after Carson