Buy Photo Speaker Beth Harwell and Gov. Bill Haslam make a "health care announcement" in the Old Supreme Court chambers in the Tennessee State Capitol April12, 2016 in Nashville, Tenn. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Underwhelming is the kindest way to describe the response to Speaker Beth Harwell’s “3-Star Healthy Project,” a task force to prepare alternatives to Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee plan, which she announced Tuesday.

When Insure Tennessee failed to garner any support in the legislature last year, Harwell said, she began looking for alternatives.

After a series of informal meetings with “experts in health policy at Vanderbilt University’s School of Medicine” got her fellow house members excited about some of the ideas discussed, Harwell decided a task force was needed to “delve into these ideas and formulate a specific proposal.”

Harwell, R-Nashville, announced the project with Haslam at her side, and said that a group of four house Republicans would have proposals ready in June for a meeting with the governor and federal officials from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Harwell hopes that her task force can accomplish in two months what Haslam could not do in nearly two years of negotiating with CMS, devise a way to expand access to health care for Tennessee’s working poor (Insure Tennessee hoped to cover 280,000 or so Tennesseans) without using state money or money from the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare).

The task force was announced, but no potential alternative solutions were offered at the press conference.

Skeptics

Her proposal immediately drew derision from Democrats and supporters of the Insure Tennessee plan.

“Tennesseans waited two years while Governor Haslam negotiated a plan with the federal government. Then the House never even got a chance to vote on it,” said Rep. Jim Cooper, D-5th, in a statement. “Now we have to wait at least another year? Cancer patients don’t have that kind of time.”

“The so-called '3-Star' proposal unveiled today deserves a rating of 'two thumbs down' from Tennessee families,” said Rep. John Ray Clemmons, D-Nashville. “How embarrassing it must have been for the governor to stand there and watch his signature piece of legislative policy be reduced to nothing before his own eyes.”

Andy Spears, executive director of Tennessee Citizen Action, a group supporting the governor’s plan, wrote in a blog post: “Today, some expected that Harwell would finally support Governor Haslam’s plan and call on her body’s members to debate the legislation and take a vote.

“Instead, she announced she’s forming a task force …"

Politics

After Harwell’s press conference, Haslam said, “We've always been about finding an answer. Insure Tennessee obviously didn't get the votes that were needed.”

The governor has repeatedly said that his plan could only move forward when, and if, “something changed,” meaning the electoral politics for Republicans over Obamacare. He added, “You're always trying to find the answer that works best."

Harwell appointed Rep. Cameron Sexton, R-Crossville, chairman of the House Health Committee, to lead the task force. Joining Sexton will be representatives Matthew Hill, R- Jonesborough, Steve McManus, R-Cordova, and Roger Kane, R-Knoxville.

"I was probably one of the most vocal opponents to Insure Tennessee because there were just no controls implemented, and so it was not fiscally conservative," Kane said. "It's kind-hearted, but not fiscally conservative."

Nashville radio host Ralph Bristol, 99.7 WTN, asked Hill whether Harwell had specified whether the proposed solutions could be funded with Medicaid expansion funds.

“That remains to be seen,” Hill said.

“We are charged with finding fiscally conservative solutions that are manageable, that are measurable, and, ultimately, that increase access to care. Those were the only charges we were given.”

One alternative

At least one alternative proposal has met with approval, but was not mentioned by Harwell or the task force members.

Sen. Mark Green, R-Clarksville, urged the task force to consider his TennCare opt-out pilot program, which passed the House Insurance and Banking committee on March 29. The proposed program would establish health savings accounts and issue electronic banking cards to enrollees, who would be able to decide when and where to get health care and be able to keep any saved funds.

Reach Frank Daniels III: fdanielsiii@tennessean.com, 615-881-7039, or on Twitter @fdanielsiii

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1N9Aynq