Annual Light the Lights celebration includes several activities

Santa and his helpers will be turning on the Christmas lighting at the Logan County Courthouse Friday, Nov. 27, during the Logan County Marketing Committee's annual Light the Lights celebration, ( Sara Waite / Journal-Advocate file photo )

The Logan County Marketing Committee is inviting everyone to "Come Home for the Holidays" with this year's Sterling Sparkles holiday campaign.

The 12th annual High Plains Turkey Trot on Thanksgiving morning, Thursday, Nov. 26, serves as a prequel to the promotion. If you are not pre-registered, registration is at 7:30 a.m. at Peace Lutheran Church, and the 5K/Walk begins at 8:30 a.m. at the same location.

Then on Friday is the much anticipated Light the Lights celebration at the Logan County Courthouse. Along with the annual 6 p.m. lighting ceremony, many activities will be offered before and after the switch is flipped on the courthouse lawn. Cocoa with Santa — an opportunity to visit with Santa, get a photo taken, and enjoy cookies and cocoa — will run from 3 to 6 p.m. in the Courthouse Gazebo. Reggie the Reindeer also will be on the green from 4 to 6 p.m. Clarence's Corner will offer popcorn courtesy of Boy Scout Troop 99 with all proceeds going toward the troop. Horse and carriage rides sponsored by Ag Tec Services and Premier Farm Credit will take visitors around the courthouse from 5 to 7 p.m.

Advertisement

, with all donations going to Cooperating Ministries.

Throughout the event, many holiday-costumed committee members will meander around the courthouse lawn to greet you. The First Presbyterian Church and Christ United Methodist Church choirs will co-host a concert to kick off the holiday season with Christmas songs from the courthouse steps. Many local downtown businesses will be open late for business, and will have holiday window displays and holiday specials that might just make your loved ones feel just as special.

For more information, contact Chamber of Commerce Executive Director Kim Sellers at 970-522-5070.