ENLARGE Linda Fargo with Iris Apfel and Devin Bruce Billy Farrell Agency

"We belong to an industry that has a lot of people with big hearts," said Jimmy Rosenfeld, the president of the YMA Fashion Scholarship Fund at the organization's Geoffrey Beene National Scholars awards dinner on Wednesday.

And, accordingly, patience. The dinner and cocktail event at the Waldorf Astoria gathered more than 1,000 members of the fashion industry—including master of ceremonies Linda Fargo, Tamara Mellon and Karlie Kloss—as well as 131 college students, all of whom are YMA FSF scholarship recipients, and eight Geoffrey Beene National Scholar finalists.

ENLARGE Linda Fargo with YMA Fashion Scholarship recipients at the award dinner Billy Farrell Agency

ENLARGE Minty Mellon, Karlie Kloss and Kimberly Ovitz Billy Farrell Agency

ENLARGE The award dinner Billy Farrell Agency

College students, primarily female, proudly sporting over-sized nametags with their name and school, circled the well-known faces of fashion during cocktails like mild-mannered prey, jumping on any opportunity to speak with them.

"I think they're all curious; They all want to know how you got there, what's the journey," said Ms. Fargo, Bergdorf Goodman's senior vice president, fashion office and store presentation, who like several of the students, attended University of Wisconsin at Madison.

She wasn't the only one generously giving face-time to the students throughout the evening, which raised $1.85 million, and presented $820,000 in scholarship grants.

Ms. Kloss, who presented a FSF Innovator Award to Ms. Mellon, posed for photographs with students on her way into the ballroom and all throughout the seated dinner, as they meekly approached her at her table, which she shared with Ms. Mellon and Cosmopolitan's editor in chief, Joanna Coles.

"You may not know it, but I am also a student of fashion like many of you here tonight," said Ms. Kloss on stage, after jokingly adjusting the microphone to fit her height. "My day job has allowed me the incredible opportunity to learn from some of the fashion industry's most incredible people."

One of these "incredible people," according to Ms. Kloss, is Ms. Mellon, the co-founder of Jimmy Choo who recently launched her own namesake label.

When accepting her FSF Innovator Award, she shared a few lessons she's learned while working in the fashion industry.

"Pay your dues, and work for somebody."

"Make sure you have a good finance director," but "do not let the accountants run your business."

And "never forget this number: 51% equity."

She concluded: "Believe in yourself and don't let anybody tell you who you should be. You have a vision; people will like it or they won't."

Also honored were Lana Cain Krauter of Sears and George Feldenkreis, the chairman and CEO of Perry Ellis International, who received the Lifetime Achievement Award.