x of x Centers for Disease Control and Prevention officials participate in a conference call from the agency's Emergency Operations Center in Atlanta discussing the deadliest Ebola outbreak in history with team members deployed in West Africa Tuesday. The disease has claimed more than 900 lives and started in Guinea in March, health officials say. It has since spread to Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and possibly Saudi Arabia. David Goldman/AP

x of x As "Ebola hysteria" mounts, bodies like this one, seen Tuesday in Monrovia, Liberia, are suspected to have been infected with the virus and are increasingly being found left in the streets. The U.N. called an emergency meeting Wednesday in Geneva to review the seriousness of the outbreak with the World Health Organization’s Emergency Committee of International Experts. Abbas Dulleh/AP

x of x Lagos State Health Commissioner Jide Idris announces at a press conference Tuesday that eight people are being kept in quarantine with symptoms of Ebola and after having primary contact with Patrick Sawyer, who flew into Lagos, Nigeria, and died of the disease in July. Idris reported that others may have been infected before doctors isolated the Liberian-American, about 24 hours after he arrived at the hospital. The Nigerian government has since acknowledged the response was too slow. Sunday Alamba/AP

x of x Nigerian health officials wait to screen passengers at Murtala Muhammed International Airport on Monday in Lagos, Nigeria. U.S. health officials warned Americans not to travel to Ebola-hit countries in an advisory issued Thursday. On Wednesday, officials announced that a nurse who came in contact with Sawyer had died. Sunday Alamba/AP

x of x A quarantine officer, right, checks the body temperature of a passenger against the possible infection of Ebola virus at the Incheon International Airport on Monday in Incheon, South Korea. Other countries are stepping up precautions, heightened by the recent news that top Ebola doctors in Sierra Leone and Liberia lost their lives from treating patients. Shin Jun-hee Yonhap/AP

x of x An undated image by the CDC shows an Ebola virus, which has affected people in Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Nigeria in what has become the deadliest Ebola outbreak in medical history. CDC/AP

x of x Tobacco plants grow in a controlled environment at the Kentucky BioProcessing facility in Owensboro, Ky., which are being used to manufacture the experimental drug ZMapp to treat patients infected with Ebola. It has been tested with animals but never on humans, until the two Americans recently brought to Atlanta after being infected in Liberia received the medication. Kentucky BioProcessing/AP

x of x An ambulance transporting Nancy Writebol, 59, arrives at Emory University Hospital on Tuesday in Atlanta. Writebol is one of two Americans currently receiving treatment for Ebola in Atlanta after contracting the virus while working with aid organizations in Liberia. David Goldman/AP

x of x An ambulance departs Dobbins Air Reserve Base near I-75 on Saturday in Marietta, Ga., after Dr. Kent Brantly, the first person infected with Ebola to be brought to the United States from Africa, arrived there on his way to treatment. John Bazemore/AP

x of x Dr. Kent Brantly and his wife, Amber, are seen in an undated photo. Brantly arrived at Emory University Hospital Saturday. He was treating Ebola patients in Foya, Liberia, as a missionary with Samaritan's Purse, an aid organization, when he was infected. Samaritan's Purse/AP

x of x This Oct. 7, 2013, photo provided by Jeremy Writebol shows his mother, Nancy Writebol, with children in Liberia. Courtesy Jeremy Writebol/AP

x of x An undated photo of an Aeromedical Biological Containment System, a sealed isolation tent used for transporting patients with Ebola. CDC/AP

x of x An isolation room is seen at Emory University Hospital on Friday in Atlanta. Experts say the hospital, whereBrantly and Whitebol are receiving supportive care in a isolation unit separate from the general hospital, is one of the safest places in the world to treat someone with Ebola. Jack Kearse/Emory University/Getty Images

x of x A view of Emory University Hospital on Monday in Atlanta. Jessica McGowan/Getty Images

x of x Medical personnel stand in a clinic for Ebola patients on the outskirts of Kenema, Sierra Leone, on July 27. Youssouf Bah/AP

x of x Red Cross staff prepare a body for burial at the isolation ward of the Donka Hospital in Conakry, Guinea, on July 28. The Liberian government announced Ebola victims' bodies would be burned in an effort to stop the disease from spreading. Cellou Binani/AFP/Getty Images

x of x Water buckets sales have increased dramatically in Monrovia, Liberia, according to local reports, as people use them to hold disinfectant for washing their hands. Jonathan Paye-Layleh/AP

x of x A worker sprays disinfectant inside a government building in a bid to prevent the spread of the virus Friday in Monrovia, Liberia. Abbas Dulleh/AP

x of x A woman prays with others from different religious groups to end the spread of the virus on Saturday in Monrovia, Liberia. Abbas Dulleh/AP