CBS: ObamaCare forcing millions to lose their insurance

posted at 8:01 am on October 25, 2013 by Ed Morrissey

And that number comes from a UCLA expert interviewed by CBS who supports the ironically-titled Affordable Care Act. Around 14 million people buy their own health insurance on the individual markets, which is actually about the same as the true number of Americans uninsured by circumstance rather than choice. Half of those insured will lose that insurance thanks to the mandates imposed by ObamaCare, and will get forced to buy new policies. UCLA public health policy director Gerry Kominski says that they will get a better product with more protection, but don’t tell that to Natalie Willes:

“I was completely happy with the insurance I had before,” Willes said. So she was surprised when she tried to renew her policy. What did she find out? “That my insurance was going to be completely different, and they were going to be replaced with 10 new plans that were going to fall under the regulations of the Affordable Care Act,” she said. Her insurer, Kaiser Permanente, is terminating policies for 160,000 people in California and presenting them with new plans that comply with the healthcare law. “Before I had a plan that I had a $1,500 deductible,” she said. “I paid $199 dollars a month. The most similar plan that I would have available to me would be $278 a month. My deductible would be $6,500 dollars, and all of my care after that point would only be covered 70 percent.”

Do the math here. Willes will have to pay $948 more a year for the new policy, but that’s not all. She will also have to another $5,000 extra on top of that to get past the deductible each year before she gets any benefit from the policy at all. If she’s reasonably healthy, all of her medical costs will get paid straight out of her pocket, on top of her insurance policy costs which will now total $3,336, or almost a cool $10,000 after the deductible before she sees any benefit at all.

Who’d bother to buy insurance under those conditions? Only the sick and infirm, or those who suddenly get that way and can now force insurers to cover them when they need care. The website is only the portal to much larger problems, and Americans who suddenly experience the trauma of sticker shock will not be pleased to live through what Barack Obama and Democrats have done to their finances.

Related Posts: