A tragedy that should move the U.S. and Europe to act. Illustration by Rachel Brody for USNWR/DOMINIQUE FAGET/AFP/Getty Images

Until a missile shot down a Malaysia Airlines jet over eastern Ukraine killing all 298 people aboard, the crisis in Ukraine may have seemed to be another flashpoint in a world confounded by conflict. But the downing of flight MH17 all too vividly demonstrated that the conflict in Ukraine poses wider risks.

Photos: Rescuers Comb Plane's Wreckage EXPAND GALLERY Photo Gallery x of x Full Screen A refrigerated train loaded with victims of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 departs the railway station Tuesday in Kharkiv, Ukraine. A Ukraine spokesman said "we will do our best" to return the remains to the Netherlands by Tuesday, as the journey back has been agonizingly slow for victims' relatives. Officials said the passenger plane was carrying 298 people when it was shot down at 33,000 feet by a surface-to-air missile, and both the Ukraine government and pro-Russia separatists fighting in the region have denied responsibility. WARNING: Some of the following images depict graphic scenes of death and destruction. Sergei Chizavkov/AP x of x Full Screen Dutch King Willem-Alexander, left, Queen Maxima, center, and Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte, far right, leave a meeting with relatives of MH17 victims in Nieuwegein Monday near the central city of Utrecht in the Netherlands. "This terrible disaster has left a deep wound in our society," the king said. "The scar will be visible and tangible for years to come." Phil Nijhuis/AP x of x Full Screen A Russian BuK SA-11 missile launcher like the one officials suspect pro-Russian militants used to shoot down MH17 is displayed at a military show outside Moscow in 2010. If rebels did shoot down the airliner, it may have been because they didn’t have the right systems in place to distinguish between military and civilian aircraft, experts said. Mikhail Metzel/AP - File x of x Full Screen Lt. Gen. Andrey Kartopolov, head of Russia's military staff operations, left, speaks to the media during a news conference Monday in Moscow, where officials offered evidence they said proved that Ukrainian surface-to-air systems were operating in the area in the days before the crash. They also offered evidence that a Ukrainian Sukhoi Su-25 fighter jet had flown within 2 to 3 miles of the Malaysia Airlines plane. Screens show traffic control recordings, left, and a scheme of air traffic over Donetsk, Ukraine. Ivan Sekrtarev/AP x of x Full Screen People gather next to a sign reading "AIDS 2014" Friday at the 20th International AIDS Conference in Melbourne, Australia. As many as 100 passengers aboard the downed Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 were bound for the biennial HIV/AIDS conference. STR/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen People search a wheat field for victims Sunday near Hrabove. Vadim Ghirda/AP x of x Full Screen A pro-Russian fighter guards the crash site Sunday near Hrabove. Evgeniy Maloletka/AP x of x Full Screen A man looks for the remains of victims Saturday in the debris at the crash site of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 near the village of Hrabove in eastern Ukraine. Vadim Ghirda/AP x of x Full Screen Ukrainian emergency workers carry a victim's body at the crash site of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 on Monday near the village of Hrabove. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x Full Screen A paramedic walks by a part of the plane's fuselage Saturday near Hrabove. Vadim Ghirda/AP x of x Full Screen People inspect the crash site of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 on Thursday near the village of Grabovo, Ukraine. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x Full Screen A man observes plane wreckage Friday in Grabovo, Ukraine. The majority of the passengers on the Boeing 777 from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, were Dutch, and were traveling along with Malaysians, Australians, Indonesians and residents of the U.K., officials said. President Barack Obama said at least one American was on board. Brendan Hoffman/Getty Images x of x Full Screen A woman walks amid the debris near the village of Rozsypne, Ukraine, on Friday. Rescue workers estimate the debris field ranges across 4 to 6 square miles. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x Full Screen A woman walks past a body covered with a plastic sheet next to a sunflower field Friday near Rozsypne, Ukraine. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x Full Screen A man covers a body near Rozsypne, Ukraine, on Friday. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x Full Screen Bodies lie among the wreckage Friday near the town of Shakhtersk, Ukraine. Dominique Faget/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen People search for bodies Friday near Shakhtersk, Ukraine. Dominique Faget/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Passengers' belongings are strewn about Friday near Shakhtersk, Ukraine. Dominique Faget/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen A passenger's relative cries as he speaks to journalists in Medan on Friday in the North Sumatra province of Indonesia. Binsar Bakkara/AP x of x Full Screen Members of the media surround a passenger's relative at Kuala Lumpur International Airport Friday. Joshua Paul/AP x of x Full Screen Passengers' relatives board a bus at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol in the Netherlands on Thursday, headed for an unknown destination after receiving additional information about the crash. Olaf Kraak/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen People gather near flowers and candles placed in front of the Netherlands Embassy in Kiev, Ukraine, on Thursday. Sergei Supinsky/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen People pay tribute outside the Netherlands Embassy on Thursday in Kiev, Ukraine. Sergei Chuzavkov/AP x of x Photo Gallery x of x A refrigerated train loaded with victims of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 departs the railway station Tuesday in Kharkiv, Ukraine. A Ukraine spokesman said "we will do our best" to return the remains to the Netherlands by Tuesday, as the journey back has been agonizingly slow for victims' relatives. Officials said the passenger plane was carrying 298 people when it was shot down at 33,000 feet by a surface-to-air missile, and both the Ukraine government and pro-Russia separatists fighting in the region have denied responsibility. WARNING: Some of the following images depict graphic scenes of death and destruction. Sergei Chizavkov/AP x of x Dutch King Willem-Alexander, left, Queen Maxima, center, and Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte, far right, leave a meeting with relatives of MH17 victims in Nieuwegein Monday near the central city of Utrecht in the Netherlands. "This terrible disaster has left a deep wound in our society," the king said. "The scar will be visible and tangible for years to come." Phil Nijhuis/AP x of x A Russian BuK SA-11 missile launcher like the one officials suspect pro-Russian militants used to shoot down MH17 is displayed at a military show outside Moscow in 2010. If rebels did shoot down the airliner, it may have been because they didn’t have the right systems in place to distinguish between military and civilian aircraft, experts said. Mikhail Metzel/AP - File x of x Lt. Gen. Andrey Kartopolov, head of Russia's military staff operations, left, speaks to the media during a news conference Monday in Moscow, where officials offered evidence they said proved that Ukrainian surface-to-air systems were operating in the area in the days before the crash. They also offered evidence that a Ukrainian Sukhoi Su-25 fighter jet had flown within 2 to 3 miles of the Malaysia Airlines plane. Screens show traffic control recordings, left, and a scheme of air traffic over Donetsk, Ukraine. Ivan Sekrtarev/AP x of x People gather next to a sign reading "AIDS 2014" Friday at the 20th International AIDS Conference in Melbourne, Australia. As many as 100 passengers aboard the downed Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 were bound for the biennial HIV/AIDS conference. STR/AFP/Getty Images x of x People search a wheat field for victims Sunday near Hrabove. Vadim Ghirda/AP x of x A pro-Russian fighter guards the crash site Sunday near Hrabove. Evgeniy Maloletka/AP x of x A man looks for the remains of victims Saturday in the debris at the crash site of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 near the village of Hrabove in eastern Ukraine. Vadim Ghirda/AP x of x Ukrainian emergency workers carry a victim's body at the crash site of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 on Monday near the village of Hrabove. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x A paramedic walks by a part of the plane's fuselage Saturday near Hrabove. Vadim Ghirda/AP x of x People inspect the crash site of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 on Thursday near the village of Grabovo, Ukraine. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x A man observes plane wreckage Friday in Grabovo, Ukraine. The majority of the passengers on the Boeing 777 from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, were Dutch, and were traveling along with Malaysians, Australians, Indonesians and residents of the U.K., officials said. President Barack Obama said at least one American was on board. Brendan Hoffman/Getty Images x of x A woman walks amid the debris near the village of Rozsypne, Ukraine, on Friday. Rescue workers estimate the debris field ranges across 4 to 6 square miles. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x A woman walks past a body covered with a plastic sheet next to a sunflower field Friday near Rozsypne, Ukraine. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x A man covers a body near Rozsypne, Ukraine, on Friday. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP x of x Bodies lie among the wreckage Friday near the town of Shakhtersk, Ukraine. Dominique Faget/AFP/Getty Images x of x People search for bodies Friday near Shakhtersk, Ukraine. Dominique Faget/AFP/Getty Images x of x Passengers' belongings are strewn about Friday near Shakhtersk, Ukraine. Dominique Faget/AFP/Getty Images x of x A passenger's relative cries as he speaks to journalists in Medan on Friday in the North Sumatra province of Indonesia. Binsar Bakkara/AP x of x Members of the media surround a passenger's relative at Kuala Lumpur International Airport Friday. Joshua Paul/AP x of x Passengers' relatives board a bus at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol in the Netherlands on Thursday, headed for an unknown destination after receiving additional information about the crash. Olaf Kraak/AFP/Getty Images x of x People gather near flowers and candles placed in front of the Netherlands Embassy in Kiev, Ukraine, on Thursday. Sergei Supinsky/AFP/Getty Images x of x People pay tribute outside the Netherlands Embassy on Thursday in Kiev, Ukraine. Sergei Chuzavkov/AP x of x ×

As tragic and senseless as the attack was, this newly demonstrated danger to outside innocents is just a part of the broader, longer-term threat posed by the crisis in Ukraine. Along with the threat of expanding regional violence, the conflict also jeopardizes security in Europe and America’s global interests.

Recently, during a discussion session with a panel of RAND Russia-Ukraine experts, an audience member apologized for asking a possibly “naïve” question: “Why should Americans care about the fate of Ukraine anyway?” The experts leaned forward eagerly. It was a question — hardly naïve — that they have been examining for years. The short answer, posited by David Ochmanek, whose background includes more than five years in the U.S. Office of the Secretary of Defense, was that a stable Ukraine is important to the “prosperity and security of Europe, (which) is fundamental to our own prosperity and security.”

Indeed, since the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, RAND research has consistently stressed the importance of U.S. engagement to protect NATO’s eastern flank and to stabilize the regions adjoining NATO. The latest challenge to these goals is the crisis in Ukraine and Russia’s continuing efforts to block Ukraine’s integration into the West.

To promote and protect security and democracy in Ukraine, the United States and its NATO allies must first seek to end the conflict in eastern Ukraine, where Russia-backed separatists are at war with the fledgling government in Kiev. At the same time, the United States and Europe should maintain a focus on longer-term goals, such as political and economic reform and strengthening ties among Ukraine, the European Union and, yes, NATO, even if that does not mean formal NATO membership for Ukraine.



To end the unrest and promote internal stability in the near term, the United States and Europe should continue to expand pressure, including sanctions, aimed at convincing Russia to abandon its tactics of coercion and destabilization in Ukraine. The United States should also continue providing aid and otherwise cooperating with the new government in Kiev.

If Russian President Vladimir Putin thought that exerting muscle in Ukraine was a path toward renewed global respect for Russian power, he miscalculated. Putin’s stubbornness on Ukraine has attracted international condemnation and scorn, threatened Russia’s already shaky economy, and focused NATO anew on the need to counter potential Russian aggression. It has also sparked a surge in anti-Russian and pro-NATO sentiments in Central and Eastern Europe. The tragic loss of a commercial aircraft and its innocent passengers only intensifies these sentiments.

The United States and its allies should continue efforts to show Russia that incursions into Ukraine will not boost its global respect or influence but will, in fact, have the opposite effect. The exclusion of Russia from the G-8, now the G-7, group of industrial nations and the imposition of targeted economic sanctions are a good start. Engagement with the government of Ukraine’s newly elected president, Petro Poroshenko, is key. This kind of cooperation, including direct aid, can send a signal to the Ukrainian people, and to Moscow, that the United States sees the region as a priority and that it pledges solidarity with an independent Ukraine.



Rachel Brody for USNWR

The United States currently provides Ukraine with $120 million per year through Foreign Operations Appropriated Assistance to promote democratic institutions, expand market reforms and build relations between Ukraine and Europe. Wisely, the United States has been boosting aid to Kiev since the spring, including a $1 billion loan guarantee, $50 million for crisis response, $23 million for security assistance and $48 million for economic and constitutional reforms. In a statement issued in Poland in June, President Barack Obama cautioned Russia against further provocative actions and announced $1 billion in security aid to NATO nations in Central and Eastern Europe.