There are some parts Montee Ball wants to keep from his college days. His production, for one. He set all the college career rushing yardage and touchdown records at Wisconsin. He also wants to keep his college number: 28.

After practice Tuesday, Ball switched from No. 38 to the No. 28 he wore for the Badgers.

But there are other parts of college Ball is glad to leave behind.

In particular, all those pad-popping practices. A college coach can have his team practice two, three, four times a week in full pads if he wants. And that’s during the season.

“That’s the weird thing about the difference, in college, you’re banging heads 24-7,” said Ball, a Broncos rookie who figures to get his carries in the season opener Thursday night against Baltimore. “Here, I feel fresh. The way Coach Fox has us practicing, without pads, he does a good job of keeping us fresh.”

Broncos coach John Fox doesn’t have much choice. The league’s collective bargaining agreement limits him to 11 padded practices through the first 11 weeks, and only three in the final six weeks.

Fewer pads means more time in the film room.

“As a rookie, all I can say is from what I’ve seen on film, the Ravens’ defense plays fast,” Ball said. “Especially 55 and 58. Those are some players that play fast.”

Ball is focusing on the correct players. No. 55 is Terrell Suggs, and No. 58 is Elvis Dumervil, the Ravens’ top two edge pass rushers, whom Ball must pick up as Peyton Manning’s blitz protector.

McCray’s fate. It’s likely that had Lerentee McCray not suffered such a severe right ankle sprain in the second half of the Broncos’ fourth preseason game, the undrafted rookie would have made the team as the sixth linebacker.

Instead, the doctor said his high ankle sprain would take six to eight weeks to recover, so the Broncos put him on season-ending injured reserve. The day after setting their 53-man roster, the Broncos waived fullback Jacob Hester to add that sixth linebacker, Adrian Robinson.

McCray was playing extremely well in the preseason, including the first half of Game 4 against Arizona.

“Disappointing, but hey, it’s part of the business,” McCray said.