Q: What does it mean when your health insurance plan places you in a “narrow network” of providers?

A: Consumers seem increasingly comfortable trading a greater choice of hospitals or doctors for a health plan that costs significantly less money.

“Are they willing to trade choice and access for price? There’s no question about that,” said Mark Newton, the chief executive of Swedish Covenant Hospital, a Chicago hospital that recently teamed with an Illinois insurer, Land of Lincoln Health, to offer a health plan.

This year, nearly half of the plans offered on public health care exchanges are so-called narrow network options, which sharply limit the medical providers whose services will be covered, new data shows. Furthermore, nearly a fifth are considered “ultranarrow networks,” which offer even fewer choices.

At the same time, more employers are also embracing the plans for their workers, largely as a way to lower health care costs.

The data, gathered by the McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform, is significant, given early criticism from some providers and patients who reacted to these plans last year by arguing they were like the overly restrictive health maintenance organizations, or HMOs, of the 1990s, which were ultimately rejected by consumers.

The financial strategy is relatively simple. Insurers say one way to lower the price of a plan is to limit the number of hospitals and doctors in their networks. They can then ask providers to discount their prices in return for a potentially higher volume of patients; some also say they are trying to pick a select group that provides better care.

But consumers can find themselves responsible for high bills if they do not understand how the plans work or which providers are included in the network — as was often the case during the first year of the federal law. If they go to a specialist or hospital whose services are not covered by a narrow network plan, they face paying the full cost of the care.

The percentage of narrow networks this year is about the same as last year. McKinsey, which looked only at the hospitals included in a network, considers a plan to have a narrow network if anywhere from 31 to 70 percent of the hospitals in a geographic region participated. An ultranarrow plan includes 30 percent or fewer.

McKinsey found that 70 percent of the lowest-priced plans for 2015 were based on narrow networks of hospitals. They also had much lower rate increases in 2015, with a median increase of 4 percent, about half as much as broader plans.

“The marketplaces were working the way they were intended to work,” said Sabrina Corlette, a researcher at Georgetown University’s Center on Health Insurance Reforms. “Narrow networks are not going away.”

The Land of Lincoln plan, a consumer-oriented co-op, has found a sort of middle ground in the narrow-network world. By teaming with eight specific providers, including Swedish Covenant Hospital, to offer new health plans for 2015, it was able to lower the prices by 20 percent from the plans it had last year. Enrollment increased significantly in 2015, from just 3,800 to more than 50,000 consumers. Customers in the plan also have access to a broader network if they are willing to pay more.

While small employers have generally been more willing to offer plans with narrow networks because of their low prices, large employers are also becoming interested.

Regulators and consumer advocates continue to press insurers to be clearer about who is in the network and make sure patients have no problem seeing the right doctor.

“This is going to be a work in progress for years,” said Mike Kreidler, the insurance regulator for Washington state.

– Reed Abelson, The New York Times