Owner of Pike Medical Consultants, a former Army doctor, stresses a personal approach to health care.

Dr. James Pike, who reached the rank of major as a physician in the Army Medical Corps, is the owner and chief medical officer of Pike Medical Consultants in Indianapolis. (Photo: Provided photo.)

In the age of giant conglomerates, Obamacare and e-medicine, Dr. James Pike still believes in taking a personal approach to health care.

Pike recently relocated Pike Medical Consultants from a northwest side business park to a former Walgreens at 79th Street and Michigan Road.

“We wanted to stay in Pike Township not only because it’s where I live, but because it’s among the most medically underserved in Marion County,” he said. “We were able to convert an abandoned building into a thriving medical facility.”

Pike says his focus is twofold — to provide excellent care at a reasonable cost. Because his practice is an independent entity, Pike and his associates are able to deliver a variety of services to a wide range of patients from a centralized setting.

“We have an urgent-care clinic, primary care, occupational health, weight care, X-rays and bone-density scans all under one roof,” he said. “Another factor that makes us unique is we offer an element of transparency; most costs for our services are published on our website.”

After completing medical school on a health professional scholarship through the U.S. Army, Pike was an active-duty physician from 1984 until 1994, leaving the Medical Corps with the rank of major. He returned to Indianapolis, and in 2007, founded Pike Medical Consultants with his wife, Jan, a respiratory therapist.

“We want to continue to grow UrgentCare Indy and WeightCare Indy, which we just launched in 2015,” he said. “That’s our goal, to offer services that will help improve the lives of our patients.”

Question: What’s been the most surprising thing you’ve learned in your career?

Answer: “Length of life and quality of life aren’t synonymous. As patients age, they deal well with their sense of mortality, but often, their children do not. However, as we age, health-care decisions often are driven by children, who want their parents to live as long as possible and may want medical procedures that don’t help improve quality of life. There has to be a balance between medical treatment to improve quality of life versus medical treatment that simply prolongs life.”

Q: Do you have a professional philosophy you try to follow?

A: “When we established Pike Medical, our goal was to establish a faith-based organization focused on caring for all people. We adhere to three basic principles: compassion, devotion and respect. It’s how we treat our patients, our employers we work with, and how we treat each other.”

Q: What does being a leader mean to you?

A: “I truly believe that if you love developing and caring for your employees, they will respond with a greater sense of loyalty and work harder for you. I always wanted to create an organization that had a sense of co-ownership. As a leader, I believe I’m working to not only treat my patients, but to serve my employees. My staff sees that my wife and I are here after hours, rolling up our sleeves and working alongside them.”

Q: What’s the best piece of career advice you’ve ever received?

A: “My mentor, Dr. Raymon Dunkin, said to me that most people go to work every day with the intention of doing a good job, but then something goes amiss. When that happens, we’re obligated to give everyone the benefit of the doubt. I’ve carried that with me throughout my career, whether I’m working with patients, sitting on an advisory board or dealing with employee issues.”

Q: What are you most proud of accomplishing so far?

A: “Creating this practice. Jan and I love what we do. And, I’m passionate about mentoring young adults, pre-med students and kids graduating from high school. I was especially proud when the Marian College of Osteopathic Medicine opened; I serve as the chair for the dean’s advisory committee, and that’s a really neat thing to be a part of. I love being able to lecture a couple of times a year. I find it a real accomplishment to know the lives I’ve been able to touch through mentoring.”

More about Dr. James Pike

Job title: Owner and chief medical officer, Pike Medical Consultants.

Education: Kansas City University of Medicine and Biosciences; completed training in pulmonary and critical care medicine as part of the U.S. Army Medical Corp. Board certified in internal medicine, pulmonary medicine and critical care medicine.

Prior employment: Partner, Pulmonary Associates in Indianapolis; Partner, Respiratory and Critical Care Consultants.

Family: Wife, Jan; daughter, Jessie; and son, Adam.

Favorite pastimes: Indianapolis Symphony’s Pops Series, and annual K-Love Radio cruises.

Favorite musical artists: Sidewalk Prophets and Casting Crowns.

Favorite quote: “You are never too old to set another goal or to dream a new dream.” — C.S. Lewis.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1RB6K44