The Milwaukee County Zoo plans to add two male snow leopard cubs in the next six to 12 months, after the death earlier this summer of Sossy, who had just turned a year old. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

They might be accompanied on a commercial flight, or flown in on a cargo plane. They could hail from Germany, Sweden or Russia. They might already have names.

One fact is certain: International snow leopard cubs are headed to the Milwaukee County Zoo.

After the June death of the zoo's 1-year-old snow leopard Sossy, who likely suffered a seizure before drowning in his exhibit, the arrival of a pair of male and female cubs will be the county's chance to breed more of the endangered species.

The six European cubs expected to disperse across U.S. zoos within the next six to 12 months will broaden the genetic diversity of the country's approximately 150 snow leopards, said Tim Wild, the zoo's curator of large mammals.

He said even sporadically importing small packs of animals from foreign genetic pools significantly bolsters the species' chances of long-term survival.

"We try not to bottleneck and have everybody related to each other," Wild said. "After a time you want to keep bringing in new blood."

In the past year, one Bactrian camel, two English lop rabbits, three European ferrets, a Goeldi's monkey, 11 Nigerian goats and three red kangaroos have all come to the Milwaukee County Zoo from across the globe.

This time, the acquisition, permits, transportation and initial care for the incoming snow leopards will be paid for by an undisclosed gift from the Greater Milwaukee Foundation.

"It was really serendipitous that the zoo wanted to do this," said Jeannie Fenceroy, senior program officer for the foundation, because the group had wanted for a long time to fund an addition to the zoo's animal collection.

Partly, she said, because new arrivals to the zoo often become beloved local celebrities.

A polar bear sent by FedEx from North Carolina in a large crate captured the hearts of many Milwaukeeans, according to Wild, as did Pat the Jaguar, a cat who went from killing livestock in Belize to having his own children's book.

"The community really gets attached to these kind of stories," Fenceroy said.

Zoo staff are also eager for new arrivals, especially after an unexpected death like Sossy's. In 2012, Mahal, a young orangutan, died from a tapeworm infection, and a 5-year-old gorilla named Kassiu and a jaguar cub also died at the zoo last year.

"It refocuses your energy," said zookeeper Amanda Ista.

She said she can't tell whether Sossy's mother, Tomiris, is still grieving for her son.

But Ista said she thinks about Sossy often, especially his manner of acting tough until his sweet side won over and he'd rub up against the mesh in his enclosure for her attention.

"He'd give us a little grump, and then if we'd go to leave he'd be like, 'no, wait, don't go,'" she said.

Like domestic cats, snow leopards can be aloof, Ista said. Part of being a zookeeper is feeling out each cat's personality and working to gain their trust so that they can play chase or give the cats back scratches.

While it's ecologically invaluable for the animals to start breeding at the zoo — potentially within the year they arrive — Ista said she's looking more forward to making new acquaintances.

"We're just randomly putting these animals together based on genetics," she said. "That's the thing. You never know what's going to happen when you get new animals."