Call me old-fashioned — I’ve been called worse — but I’m a big fan of Thanksgiving. It’s a holiday dedicated to gratitude, and as you know, being grateful for what you have is one of the core practices at the University of Well-Being, where Thanksgiving is celebrated by releasing a flock of wild turkeys into the night.

If you’re hungry for a healthier, happier, less stressful, more meaningful way to celebrate this Thanksgiving holiday, I have some ideas to share:

■ First, a gut check.

How do you know if Thanksgiving is a stressful time for you? Listen to your gut, seat of great wisdom. If thinking about Turkey Day makes you feel anxious instead of enthusiastic, something is wrong. Maybe you feel the pressure to do everything perfectly. (I call that the Martha Stewart syndrome.) Maybe you’d rather be a guest than a host. Sit calmly, and meditate on where the stress is coming from. Write down your insights, without judging, without censoring.

■ Take action. Once you’ve identified the stressors, have the courage to take action. It might begin with your guest list. If you can eliminate toxic people from your table, do. If you’re stuck with guests who are mean-spirited or self-absorbed, see Thanksgiving as an opportunity to practice acceptance, kindness and compassion. Be thankful you are evolved enough to handle their pathology.

And remember, you can use place cards to keep the most annoying ones two breadbaskets away.

■ Set your intention. If you want your Thanksgiving to be calmer and more satisfying, start your day by setting an intention. Do it as you light a candle, or sit in silence, or take an early morning walk. Contemplate the deeper meanings of the day: gratitude, love, appreciation of family and friends. Tell yourself, when negative emotions arise — and they will, as soon as Uncle Bob starts telling us why Obamacare is a socialist plot to overthrow free markets — you will smile and be nonreactive. Accept the day as it unfolds. If you feel yourself losing it, stop and take a few deep breaths. Consider the health benefits of red wine.

■ Be a conscious cook. This year, ban the Butterball and buy a free-range turkey raised on organic feed and Mozart. Thanksgiving is a symbolic meal, and your typical farm-factory turkey — loaded with chemicals, hormones and antibiotics — represents all that is wrong with America’s addiction to fake, tortured food. To symbolize your commitment to eating purer, unprocessed foods, bring only real food to your Thanksgiving table: fresh vegetables, wholesome grains, imaginative side dishes with seasonal ingredients.

And to relieve the stress of doing it all yourself, think of Thanksgiving as a team sport. Ask for help with cooking, serving and cleaning up. Men and children first.

■ Create a ritual. Thanksgiving didn’t start out as a holiday to celebrate acid reflux and college football. When the pilgrims and Native Americans sat down together, they were sharing a meal as a way to develop harmony and trust. This year, do your part to create a more meaningful holiday.

Use your words to establish a stress-free zone around the table: no cellphones, no small screens, no fights. Dim the lights, call for quiet, light a candle and pass it around, inviting everyone at the table to say for who or what they’re grateful. I know it sounds corny and nearly impossible to pull off, but go for it. Feel the mood in the room shift. This is what trust and harmony feel like.

■ Exercise! No matter how busy you are, take at least 30 minutes to exercise before the day takes hold. Ride your bike, dance to the Mamas and the Papas, get the yoga flow going. You’ll ease stress, burn calories and boost your resolve to make this a day of celebration.

■ Do something charitable. A foolproof way to feel good is to do good. Make a double-portion of your best holiday dish and take it to a homeless shelter, or write a check to a favorite nonprofit, or open your table to a stranger who has nowhere else to go. Generosity, like maple-glazed sweet potatoes, is a great thing to pass around.

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.