After digging out from all the lame Halloween-themed political tricks from Democrats and Republicans -- trust us, they were tricks, not treats -- we've managed to cobble together a few morning-after morsels. Here's today's candy corn-free Ohio Politics Roundup.

Ohio Republicans are not alone in their efforts to change ballot-access laws for third parties -- an effort that critics here call the John Kasich Re-election Protection Act.

Reid Wilson of GovBeat, a state and local government blog from the Washington Post, looks at the Ohio push alongside similar measures in Arizona and Montana.

In the former, Republican Gov. Jan Brewer signed a bill that will make it much tougher for Libertarian Party candidates to make congressional ballots. In the latter, voters will weigh an initiative that seems aimed at eliminating minor-party candidates in nonpartisan primaries by allowing the top two vote-getters to advance to a general election.

At least five other GOP-controlled states -- Alabama, Tennessee, North Carolina, Oklahoma and Georgia -- have "moved to raise thresholds" for minor parties, Wilson reports.

These minor parties, particularly the Libertarian Party in an age where Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky is a top-tier presidential prospect, pose a political threat to Republicans. This especially is true in Ohio for Gov. Kasich, who won narrowly in 2010 and now seeks re-election without the fervent Tea Party backing that helped him the last time.

This is why we're witnessing strange bedfellows in the Buckeye State. The Ohio Democratic Party is openly cheering on conservatives in this fight -- not necessarily because its leaders agree, but because they want Charlie Earl on the 2014 ballot.

Earl, a former Republican state lawmaker from long ago, joined the Libertarian Party in recent years and received about 5 percent of the vote in his 2010 bid for secretary of state. Earl is the Libertarian candidate for governor next year, and Democrats certainly believe his presence in the race can carry Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald to victory.

Even Earl acknowledges this. He couldn't care less. "So what?" he told me in August.

Kasich denies pushing bill

Kasich, meeting with reporters Thursday, said the third-party bill, sponsored by Republican State Sen. Bill Seitz of Cincinnati, did not come at his request. But Kasich sure sounded like a man ready to sign such legislation, as the Toledo Blade's Jim Provance reports.

“We haven’t had any law here for six or seven years,” Kasich said. “It you want to run as an independent, that’s good. Fine, you sign 2,500 signatures — or whatever it is. But if you want to be considered a major party, you ought to show you have a little scale and a little bit of mass. I think that’s reasonable. We’ll see what happens with the legislature.”

Here's Northeast Ohio Media Group's Jeremy Pelzer with a summation of the changes:

Under the changes approved by House members, minor parties would need to collect 10,000 signatures by next July to regain state recognition. In subsequent years, parties would need a number of valid signatures equal to 0.5 percent of the vote in the previous presidential or gubernatorial election – which for the 2012 presidential election was about 28,000 signatures. The House version of the bill states that minor parties would have to receive two percent of the vote in a presidential or gubernatorial election to continue to be recognized by the state for another four years. Current state law sets a five percent threshold. The bill would further push back the deadline for minor parties to submit qualification petitions from 120 days before primary election day to 125 days before the general election.



Expansion case expedited

From Northeast Ohio Media Group's Robert Higgs: "The Supreme Court announced Thursday that it has put on the fast track the lawsuit trying to reverse the Ohio Controlling Board’s decision that freed up federal money for Medicaid expansion in the state."

The court, Higgs writes, expects things to be swimming along by early December.

Meanwhile, Kasich defended his Controlling Board gambit Thursday, reports Ann Sanner of the Associated Press. Said Kasich: "It's all within the rules. We're fine."

Fudge in Akron

U.S. Rep. Marcia Fudge, the Warrensville Heights Democrat and chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus, spoke Thursday in Akron -- a new piece of her district.



Fudge called the recent government shutdown a "manufactured crisis," reports Paula Schleis of the Akron Beacon Journal. Fudge also did not attempt to defend the technological glitches that have made the rollout of President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act so frustrating for consumers. "Take a deep breath," Fudge said.

Early voting alert



Cuyahoga County will have extended voting hours this weekend, the home stretch before Election Day, reports Northeast Ohio Media Group's Andrew J. Tobias. The hours: 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Saturday; noon to 5 p.m. Sunday; 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday.

The biggest races are Cleveland Mayor Frank Jackson's re-election fight against businessman Ken Lanci and a couple closely watched council races. Key issues on the ballot include levies for the parks, port and county health and human services.