Executive Briefing | by Athena Mandros | May 14, 2015

It has been five years since the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), and we’ve made it through two open enrollment periods on the health insurance marketplace, as well as many varieties of Medicaid expansion. One less talked about provision of the PPACA, which is situated between the Marketplace and Medicaid is the Basic Health Plan.

If you are unfamiliar with the Basic Health Plan (BHP), it is a partnership between state Medicaid agencies and the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS). The focus is to cover citizens with income between 133-200% of the federal poverty level (FPL), as well as lawfully present non-citizens with income between 0-200% of the FPL. Essentially, it is a health plan for the “gap group” – individuals who make too much to qualify for Medicaid but likely not enough to afford plans offered on the health care marketplace (a situation that could be more common if the challenge to subsidies is overturned by the Supreme Court – see Will Concern For States’ Rights Win Out In Subsidies Battle? Today’s Argument In Plain English and U.S.: It Has No Fix If Court Nullifies Health Care Subsidies).

Basic health plans provide benefits that are more in line with commercial health plans than Medicaid health plans. Each state can choose what benefits to cover under the BHP, although at minimum, the plans must cover the ten essential health benefits and requires behavioral health parity. Plans can require cost sharing and premiums, but CMS has ruled that the costs to the beneficiaries cannot exceed the cost that they would have paid for a qualified plan on the marketplace. (For more on the program see Final Rule For Establishment Of The Basic Health Program And 2015 Payment Notice.)

In my work, I am asked two specific questions about BHP: One, how is the BHP financed? Two, which states have basic health plans?

To answer the first question, states receive two sources of federal funding for the BHP: advanced premium tax credits and cost-sharing reductions. Instead of individuals receiving an advanced premium tax credit to purchase insurance on the marketplace, the state receives from CMS, 95% of that tax credit, which it can put towards the cost of the BHP. Additionally, the state receives the funds that would have been used for each individual’s cost-sharing reduction (for more on the specifics of funding see Basic Health Program; Federal Funding Methodology for Program Year 2016). Like the marketplace and non-traditional Medicaid expansion, individuals who participate in the program are responsible for copayments and premiums in order to keep their coverage.

Concerning the second question, Minnesota is the only state currently operating a BHP, called MinnesotaCare, which it implemented in January 2015. As of April 2015, there were 88,274 individuals enrolled in the program. Individuals receive services through the state’s current Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs) – although for 2016 the state plans on having a separate competitive procurement for MCOs to serve the BHP population. Premiums for individuals enrolled in Minnesota’s BHP are calculated using a sliding scale based on income. Additionally, individuals have a monthly deductible of $2.85 and are subject to copayments at the time of service. Individuals are disenrolled from the program if they do not pay their premiums (see Minnesota Basic Health Plan Blueprint). But even in Minnesota, the fate of the program is in question, as the House has passed a budget that ends the program (see House Passes HHS budget, Includes Repeal Of MinnesotaCare).

While not in operation, New York’s BHP was approved in April 2015 and it has begun phasing in enrollment for lawfully present non-citizens (see NY State Of Health Announces The Expansion Of Private Health Insurance Coverage Through Innovative New Program). Citizens with income between 133-200% of the FPL will begin receiving services through the program in January 2016. Non-citizens will receive coverage through the 2015 MCOs, although the state plans to issue a competitive procurement for MCOs for the BHP population for the 2016 coverage year (see 2016 Invitation for Participation in NY State of Health). For individuals with income between 133-150% of the FPL, there are no monthly premiums for coverage, although they are subject to copayments and other cost-sharing mechanisms. For individuals with income between 150-200% of the FPL, individuals have a monthly premium of $20 as well as other cost-sharing mechanisms. Individuals will also be disenrolled from coverage if they do not pay their premiums (see New York Basic Health Plan Blueprint).

Are BHPs a trend that we expect to see in a lot of states? I suspect the answer will depend on the pending Supreme Court decision and the trajectory of the remaining states that have not expanded their Medicaid program under PPACA (for a list, see The ‘Non-Medicaid’ Medicaid Expansion). If the Supreme Court rules against the subsidies, Minnesota and New York will not be affected as each operates their own marketplace, but for states that utilize the federal marketplace, it will make implementing a BHP either impossible or extremely difficult. Additionally, in states that have expanded Medicaid, the BHP can offer a good solution for reducing “churn” for individuals moving between Medicaid and the marketplace, but in states where Medicaid has not been expanded, it’s unlikely the state would cover this higher income population in any form. I would say the fate of the BHP hangs on the Supreme Court’s ruling on subsidies and the marketplace, which we will be sure to cover for you as soon as the decision is released.