Officials with the Department of Health and Hospitals said they will give $18 million to keep the emergency room doors open to the Baton Rouge General Mid City Hospital location.

Though the hospital's emergency room will remain open for now, critics of Gov. Bobby Jindal's public/private hospital partnership plan and his refusal to accept Medicaid expansion worry the General's issues could be a symptom of a larger problem in the state's ability to provide health care to low-income patients.

The hospital considered closing the emergency room after an influx of uninsured people began using the hospital after the state closed the Earl K. Long Hospital.

DHH Chief of Staff Calder Lynch said he's been given assurances from the hospital the $18 million will be enough to keep the emergency room open. He said the money will come from existing dollars within the DHH budget.

The news came after the hospital administration announced plans Wednesday to close the emergency room on Nov. 1 because of the rising costs associated with treating uninsured patients.

"We began this day with heavy hearts, but now move forward with optimism and tremendous gratitude," Baton Rouge General President and CEO Mark Slyter said in a statement. "On behalf of the staff at Baton Rouge General, we are certainly grateful to the (Jindal) Administration and DHH for working jointly to identify a means for continuing emergency services to the citizens of our city. With a collaborative spirit, we must continue working together towards innovative solutions that solve some of healthcare's most complex challenges."

Baton Rouge General Mid City, located on Florida Boulevard, is a convenient site for many low-income patients in the area needing treatment.

Under the state's public/private hospital partnership, Our Lady of the Lake was supposed to pick up uninsured patients left without a hospital when Earl K. Long closed. Our Lady of the Lake would receive more money in reimbursements for treating those uninsured people because they were a partner hospital.

However, many of those patients are finding their way to the General's Mid City location because it is geographically closer than OLOL. Because the General is not a partner hospital, it receives less money in reimbursements, meaning the hospital is eating more of the cost.

Rep. Ted James, D-Baton Rouge, said the almost-closing of the emergency room showed why the hospital partnerships do not work.

"The administration assured us in the past this wouldn't be an issue. This is what happens when you privatize health care," James said. "The dominos continue to fall from this administration's decisions."

Lynch defended the partnerships and said the General had struggled financially before the partnerships began. He also said the General was given an opportunity to become a partner hospital but decided not to participate.

The state opened an urgent care clinic near the site of the now-closed Earl K. Long Hospital. Lynch said the clinic is treating about 5,000 more patients than the hospital did, and it saved the state hundreds of millions of dollars by not rebuilding a hospital that had lived beyond its useful lifespan.

According to DHH, uncompensated care costs at the Mid City location rose from $8.3 million in September 2010 to $11.2 million in September 2012. That number spiked to $16.2 million in September 2013.

"We saw a spike in uncompensated care after the Earl K. Long closure, but those numbers were leveling off," Lynch said.

To help with the additional patients, Lynch said DHH raised the amount of uncompensated reimbursements to the hospital and gave it another $5 million.

By March, the uncompensated care costs dropped to $5 million. DHH believes this is a from people learning about the urgent care clinic and Our Lady of the Lake.

But Jan Moller, director of the Louisiana Budget Project, said the near-closure of the emergency room illustrates a flaw in the partnership system because money is sent to designated buildings, rather than the buildings patients are visiting.

"This crisis is the inevitable result of the state's insistence on maintaining a status quo, two-tier system that funnels indigent care dollars to specific hospitals rather than letting money follow patients," Moller said.

While DHH might have had the funds available now to supplement the emergency room, there's no guarantee that money will be available next year. Early projections estimate the state will face a $1.2 billion shortfall entering the next fiscal year. Lawmakers have typically cut heavily from education and hospitals to close such gaps in the past.

Lynch said DHH works through the budget process each year and will remain focused on providing care to Louisiana's citizens.

The decision to close the emergency room might have also been related to a business decision by the hospital. In March 2013, the emergency room operated at a $6.1 million loss, largely from uncompensated care. However, the Blue Bonnet Boulevard location operated at a $14 million profit.

Jindal refused to accept billions of dollars in Medicaid expansion money passed with the Affordable Care Act. He claimed the program would have been too expensive in the long run.

The voluntary provision of the act would have brought people living at or below 139 percent of the federal poverty level under the Medicaid umbrella.

James and Moller both said Medicaid expansion would have lessoned the amount of money the hospital is paying.

"We'll never know if Medicaid expansion would have kept the lights on, but we are 100 percent sure there would have been fewer uninsured people going to the emergency room had the state taken the opportunity to extend coverage to low-income adults," Moller said.

Lynch denied Medicaid expansion would have impacted the hospital. He said the state and hospitals needed to work on an education plan to help patients understand when to go to an emergency room -- where treatment is typically more expensive -- and when to go to another provider.

He points to the clinic that replaced Earl K. Long where 80 percent of the visits were for low-level care needs. If not for the clinic, those visits would have been charged an emergency room price.

Sen. Sharon Weston Broome, D-Baton Rouge, said she was thankful the situation with the hospital was resolved for now, but she leaders need to take a holistic approach to solving health care needs across the state.

"I think we have to be proactive as we move forward in the future. In the health care equation, Medicaid expansion is an integral part of the equation. The dots will be connected at some time," she said.

* * * * * * *

Cole Avery is a legislative and state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. You can reach him on Twitter @cole_avery1 or email ravery@nola.com.