Name: DeRenda Warren.

Age and occupation: 55; health care administrator, Registered Nurse, MSN

What makes you suited for this position?

As a lifelong farmer, rancher, and nurse of 35 years, I eat live and breath the most important issues for our district on a day-to-day basis. I earned my BA in molecular biology from Texas Tech, where I played basketball as a Lady Raider under Coach Marsha Sharp. In my time at Texas Tech, I developed not only the educational foundations for my profession in nursing, but also leadership and teamwork skills that led me to excel in the nursing field. After graduating from Texas Tech, I earned my nursing degree from Methodist School of Nursing and my Master’s Degree in nursing administration. In my healthcare career, I’ve dealt with over-regulation and bureaucratic red tape firsthand, I’ve negotiated contracts with insurance companies, and dedicated my life to the service of and advocacy for my patients.

What are the two most important issues facing this district?

Agriculture is the lifeblood of not only our region’s economy, but our nation’s economy and security. I will go to Washington and make sure they don’t forget that. I will forge strong alliances and a united front with the other rural members of Congress.

Obamacare has been a disaster, and is penalizing the people it was intended to help. We must reform healthcare in a way that brings all players to the table: doctors, nurses, hospitals and insurance companies. For those who still can’t afford insurance, we must get back to our roots of community healthcare clinics.

What will be your focuses in the next budget session?

Non-defense, discretionary federal spending is only about 15 percent of the total budget. In other words, 85 percent of the budget goes to our military, entitlements and interest on our deficit. My focus will be identifying and eliminating waste, fraud, and abuse — especially within the bloated government bureaucracies in Washington. I support a federal version of the Sunset Commission we have here in Texas, as well as a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution. Because the federal government will spend as much as it takes in taxes (and more, as we’ve seen), tax reform is crucial. I’m in favor of a flat tax for individuals, and cutting corporate income taxes back to an internationally competitive rate. Reducing corporate income taxes will bring jobs back from overseas and get people working again.

How big a threat is ISIS to the U.S. how do you propose handling it?

ISIS is filling a power vacuum created by Obama pulling our troops out before the mission was accomplished. ISIS is a threat to our nation by destabilizing that region and sewing the ideological seeds of radical Islamic terror that is hell-bent on destroying Christian civilization. ISIS poses a direct threat to our homeland security by infiltrating our borders, and by their online efforts aimed at radicalizing potential home-grown terrorists who are here already. Like a disease, we must isolate, contain, eliminate ISIS. I would vote to authorize the use of military force in confronting ISIS, as well as supporting any of our allies in the region, including Israel, in eliminating them.

Would you vote to repeal Obamacare? Why?

We have to dismantle Obamacare as it is currently written. There is a broad, bipartisan consensus in Congress, and more importantly, among the American people, that Obamacare isn’t working and must be either drastically reformed or replaced all together. The issues relating to pre-existing conditions aren’t what needs to go; it’s the federal mandate that led to countless people losing their existing coverage and losing their doctors. These plans on the Obamacare exchange have lumped everyone in together and are not tailored for individual needs. For example, mature women are paying for maternity coverage, when most clearly do not need it.

Are any subjects or interest of yours not being covered in the forums or in the media?

The state of our Veterans Administration is unacceptable. My veterans are reporting to me that it is taking them weeks and even months to get an appointment. In my healthcare administration career, I was able to establish a contract with the VA to provide home healthcare services to veterans in Lubbock and the surrounding 50-mile area. We must cut away the red tape that keeps our vets from getting the care they’ve earned. We have to streamline the process and reallocate existing funds to create acute care wings of our VA clinics, so that immediate health concerns can be addressed right away. As the wife of a disabled veteran and a nurse who cares for our vets, this is an issue that is central to my campaign.

What can a representative of this district do to help struggling cotton farmers?

As a representative of the 19th District, I will forge alliances with other rural members of Congress. We must tell the agricultural story so all 435 members know the importance of our industry, our culture and our way of life. I will help to strengthen the Farm Bill in supporting our farmers and ensure that our farmers get a fair price for their crops by driving a harder bargain in international trade agreements. If the USDA Secretary won’t designate cotton seed oil as a Title I commodity right away, I will work closely with Ag Committee Chairman Mike Conaway to make sure that happens on the next farm bill. Perhaps we can convince him to do sooner by using the power of the purse.

Please discuss the ways in which you separate yourself from your opponents.

Most of my opponents have only known positions where they are the person to be answered to; if someone didn’t agree or disobeyed orders, that person could be fired, or worse. As a nurse and nursing administrator, I’ve had to become much more persuasive. I’ve had to persuade both doctors and patients that I knew the best course of action. I had to do this while ultimately answering to them. I have done that by listening, keenly assessing and earning trust through demonstrated ability. I will take these underutilized and underrepresented skills to the halls chambers of Congress.

Yes/No. Respectfully decline.