Blake Street Bomber alumnus Larry Walker, 48, lives in Florida now, but he still keeps a close eye on the Rockies. He spent a week as a team consultant during spring training.

He likes what he sees from the Rockies in the early going.

"I am impressed with the pitching staff," Walker said Sunday. "Some of the guys I had never heard of before, but I noticed some of the arms during spring training. I was sitting next to (manager) Walt (Weiss) and I said, 'Holy cow, you've got some good arms!

"And, not to take away from the outfield, but this infield is pretty danged solid. I mean, there is some gold being flashed around that infield, especially with what (Nolan) Arenado can do at third."

Walker was among 15 players from the 1995 Rockies at Coors Field on Sunday to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the ballpark's grand opening April 26, 1995. Dante Bichette hit a three-run homer in the 14th inning that night to beat the Mets 11-9. Festivities to honor that memorable day, as well as the Rockies' series finale against the Giants, were washed out by a cold rain.

Bill Swift was scheduled to throw the ceremonial first pitch Sunday. The right-hander, now 53, threw the first pitch in Coors Field history against the Mets. For the record, it was a sinker that Brett Butler rapped for an infield single.

Advertisement

"Most of the time you throw a first pitch, the catcher catches it, tosses it to somebody and they store the ball away, or whatever they do with it," Swift said. "But Butler took a swing and hit the ball in the hole. (Shortstop) Walt Weiss made a diving stop, but he couldn't throw Brett out because he's so fast."

Swift ran into Butler in Arizona recently and had a question for him. "I said, 'What were you thinking? Why would you swing at the ceremonial first pitch?' " Swift said. "He said, 'I don't know, I was all hyped up.' "

As for Sunday's weather that put a damper on what would have been a special afternoon for the players and fans, Walker had the last word.

"Psychotic, crazy weather like always here," he said. "Eighty-five degrees one day, cold and rainy the next."

Rondon called up

The Rockies probably will make a roster move before Monday's game at Arizona. Right-handed reliever Jorge Rondon arrived from Triple-A Albuquerque on Sunday, ready join the 25-man roster. The move is not official yet, and the club did not announce a corresponding move to make room for Rondon. It's possible that right-handed reliever Scott Oberg will be optioned back to Triple-A.

The Rockies claimed Rondon, 27, off waivers from the Cardinals last November. This season with Albuquerque, Rondon had no record and a 1.35 ERA in five games while holding batters to a .095 average.

"I like that he throws about 98 (mph)," Weiss said. "He's one of the power arms that we brought in, in the offseason. He's been pitching well down there in Albuquerque."

Rotation update

Despite the rainout, the Rockies won't alter their starting rotation. Left-hander Tyler Matzek, who was scheduled to start Sunday, will now face the Diamondbacks on Monday at Chase Field.

Kyle Kendrick and Jordan Lyles are scheduled to start the final two games against the D-backs.

The makeup date for Sunday's game against the Giants hasn't been determined.

Footnotes

Though he was optioned to Triple-A last Wednesday, Wilin Rosario had not played in any of the Isotopes' games through Saturday. Weiss said the Rockies gave Rosario "a few days off" before he had to report there. The plan is for him to start at first base. ... Left fielder Corey Dickerson, removed from Saturday's game, was feeling better Sunday. He fouled a ball off his back leg in the fifth inning and suffered a bruised quadriceps muscle. "He's doing OK. He's sore," Weiss said. "I had him out of the lineup (Sunday), but he's doing pretty well, all things considered."