Topics: damon lindelof, Editor's Picks, giuseppe verdi, justin theroux, Lost, opera, the leftovers, TV, va pensiero, verdi, Entertainment News

The eighth episode of this season of “The Leftovers” starts with a dead man. Kevin Garvey (Justin Theroux) takes poison and collapses, convulsing, at the end of episode seven, as part of a desperate attempt to silence a voice in his brain. It looks like he died—because he did die, in that his heart stopped and he stopped breathing. In “International Assassin,” he comes to—naked and submerged in a bathtub. He surfaces, gasping, to discover that he is in a hotel room he has never seen before. If he has not died, the world is at least transformed. The TV is playing static and won’t turn off. Some of his own clothes are in the closet, under a placard that reads, “Know who you are, and then adorn yourself accordingly.” When he opens the door, the man from room service tries to kill him. And throughout, the opening bars to the unsettling, show-stopping “Va, pensiero”—composed by Giuseppe Verdi—scores Kevin’s engagement with this fraught dreamscape.

The effect is difficult to forget. In Kevin’s wild search for meaning, the music reflects the layers of confusion and clarity that come with any unpleasant awakening—whether that’s a bathtub coming-to or a spiritual epiphany. (In Kevin’s case, it’s probably both.) The music haunts him, and us, throughout the episode, to its incredible, difficult-to-explain conclusion.

“International Assassin” is an unbelievably amazing episode of television. “Va, pensiero” appears in act three of the opera “Nabucco,” and “International Assassin,” placed late in the second season, is a similar crescendo to a show-stopping number. And for me, it came unexpectedly. I did not care for season one for the show, though I was able to find merit in some episodes; season two has made me a convert. It inspires passion in its fans, because although other shows are good, “The Leftovers” is vital. It is a weekly reckoning with what it means to be a person, which often means reckoning with pain, despair, loss and meaninglessness. It’s not an easy watch, but in some ways, the difficulty of the show is what is so rewarding about it—as if, finally, there is a show that understands how awful it can feel to be a human being in the world. We don’t live in a world with “the Departure,” as the characters on “The Leftovers” call it, but we all have our losses and our burdens and our griefs. Less than trying to explain the mystery of why both terrible and wonderful things happen the way they do, “The Leftovers” tries to relate how humans deal with unanswered questions and missing pieces.

It’s done that from the start. But the second season does it much, much better. Having watched the finale in advance of its broadcast tonight, I can say confidently that this is a season of television worth investing in. But more than that, “The Leftovers” is an extraordinary case study for how to improve a show. Studios and networks have been fixated on quantity more than quality in the years since the Golden Age of Television was proclaimed to have begun. As is discussed over and over, by critics including myself, this has led to a glut of shows that are good enough, but few that are truly brilliant.

Showrunner Damon Lindelof has been quite candid about the mistakes of season one, such as in this interview with Alan Sepinwall of HitFix:

I was really depressed while writing the first season of the show … I was mainlining Cormac McCarthy’s “The Road,” and “Gimme Shelter,” and all of these post-apocalyptic stories. It’s like, “How can I take the feeling of these people scrounging for Coke cans and sardines and a burnt sky? How can I take that feeling and just put that feeling in the world that we know? Can I create an existential apocalypse?” And of course, I probably also should have been thinking, “Why would anybody want to watch that?”