On February 20, Nevada’s Democrats will hold the “First in the West” contest for the party’s presidential nominee. We moved into this early, third place slot in 2008, prompting unprecedented turnout by a wave of caucus goers from all walks of life. We are confident that Democrats will mobilize again this year, providing the first look at how our nation’s demographics will play a role in electing the president next November.

First, the racial and ethnic census data confirm that Nevada represents the nation’s diverse tableau of people. Nevada’s Hispanic population (27.8 percent) is eight times larger than New Hampshire’s and almost five times larger than Iowa’s. The state’s African American population is six times greater than New Hampshire’s. Our fast-growing Asian/Pacific Islander community is nearly four times the size of Iowa’s. And 17 percent of Nevada students in K-12 have at least one unauthorized immigrant parent.

ADVERTISEMENT

Nevada is diverse in other ways as well. It is a very urban state with the population concentrated in Las Vegas and its suburbs and in the Reno area, but we also have a number of small towns and extensive ranching, farming, and mining enterprises throughout our rural areas. We have the glittering lights of the fabulous Las Vegas Strip with 42 million visitors annually and historic ghost towns. While gaming and tourism dominate the economy, Nevada has begun to attract more high tech companies, such as UAV manufacturers and renewable energy developers, which demand a skilled work force. We are a right-to-work state but have strong unions, especially in the hospitality and building trades sectors. That’s why Nevada will provide an excellent barometer for who our Democratic nominee, and our next president, will be. As local pundit Jon Ralston says, #wematter.

The major issues of the 2016 electoral cycle favor the Democrats in Nevada. Our ethnic minorities are calling for comprehensive immigration reform while Republican candidates oppose a pathway to citizenship and offer solutions like building a wall along the border with Mexico and barring all Moslems from entering the country. Despite having made progress since being hit so hard by the Great Recession, many in Nevada are still suffering. Our service workers, a majority of whom are women, support raising the minimum wage, equal pay for equal work, and assistance with child care—policies opposed by the Republican candidates. The large number of seniors who have retired to Nevada vehemently object to Republican proposals to privatize Social Security and voucherize Medicare. As a result of Obamacare, 88,000 more Nevadans now have health insurance and thus reject Republican plans to repeal the Affordable Care Act. And our unions are outraged by Republican attempts to end collective bargaining and demonize organized labor.

While both Democratic contenders have been driving the conversation on these issues, look for Nevada to be Clinton Country in the February 20 caucuses. Hillary knows how important winning the state is and is working hard for every vote, having visited here a number of times. She has had a strong, experienced team on the ground from the outset and has locked up a number of major endorsements from political leaders and labor unions. She also has built broad grassroots support among students, pastors, and small business owners.

Hillary’s message, “I’m a progressive who gets things done,” resonates in Nevada where pragmatism and resilience characterize our political culture. Nevada loves a fighter: Our history is replete with people who were knocked down and got back up. Secretary Clinton’s policy positions also appeal to a majority of Nevada’s Democrats. Her economic plan to go after the shadow banking industry hits home in a state that had the highest unemployment, foreclosure, and bankruptcy rates in the country. Her promise to expand President Obama’s DACA and DAPA initiatives gives renewed hope to those with undocumented family members fearing deportation. And her consistent position on ending the epidemic of gun violence in this country matches efforts to expand background checks through a ballot initiative.

So America, pay close attention to what happens in the Nevada caucuses—it will be a harbinger of who will represent the Democratic Party on the ticket and who will win the presidential election. And don’t forget to come to Congressional District 1 on October 19 to attend the final debate which will be held on the campus of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. As I often say, if it’s happening at all, it’s happening in District 1.

Titus represents Nevada’s 1st Congressional District and has served in the House since 2009. She sits on the Transportation and the Veterans’ Affairs committees.