The federal government has given Massachusetts another year to comply with a provision of the Affordable Care Act that will affect insurance rates for small businesses.

However, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services denied a request by Gov. Charlie Baker to issue a permanent waiver.

"To strike a balance between providing transition relief...and promoting fair health insurance premiums...the transition period in Massachusetts must be limited," wrote Kevin Counihan, director of the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight at the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, in a letter to Massachusetts Health Connector Executive Director Louis Gutierrez.

Baker said in a statement, "Protecting small businesses from massive insurance rate hikes is essential to making sure job creators continue to thrive here and I am grateful the Obama administration granted Massachusetts this flexibility."

The issue relates to ratings factors, the factors insurers may consider when setting rates for the plans they sell to small businesses and individuals.

Massachusetts allows insurance companies to use 11 considerations, or "ratings factors" - things like age, industry, participation in a wellness plan, or the size of the group insured by the plan. The Affordable Care Act mandates that insurers use just four ratings factors. The shift would result in drops in premiums for some individuals and small businesses, but spikes in premiums for others.

The state's business lobbying groups oppose the shift to the federal system, arguing that too many small businesses will see their premium costs rise.

Former Gov. Deval Patrick and Baker had asked the federal government for a waiver from the ratings factor provision. Patrick secured a three-year transition period. Baker has now secured another year, so the state can phase out the use of its ratings factors gradually. Massachusetts does not have to come into full compliance with the federal law until Jan. 1, 2018.