America’s rapidly aging population and the projected costs of millions of people struggling with multiple chronic illnesses may spawn bipartisan legislation “sooner rather than later,” staff experts who serve the top Republican and ranking Democrat on the powerful Senate Finance Committee said Thursday.

In a national political environment in which health care and Medicare policies are assumed to divide the two parties, aides to Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch and his Democratic colleague, Sen. Ron Wyden, struck a decidedly collaborative note during a discussion hosted by RealClearHealth.

Jay Khosla, policy director and chief health counsel for the Finance Committee under Hatch, and Elizabeth Jurinka, chief health policy adviser for Wyden on the committee, told an audience near Capitol Hill that a draft bill to improve care and check Medicare spending growth “is the objective” following at least 80 meetings with stakeholders and more than 500 formal comments from interested parties since the spring.

“We’re hoping sooner rather than later we can have a discussion draft,” Khosla said during a panel discussion focused on Medicare.

Jurinka (pictured, with Carl Cannon and Jay Khosla, right) called the six-month endeavor, which is the brainchild of two seasoned senators determined to probe the complexities and vulnerabilities of chronic care programs and how they impact Medicare, “a huge opportunity for Democrats and Republicans to come together.”

Hatch and Wyden want to know how to improve quality of care for chronic medical conditions, as well as how to curb the growth in Medicare spending as aging baby boomers challenge the existing system. The task is more daunting than it appears because many so-called “coordinated care” health programs fail to overcome the many physical, financial and mental health hurdles faced by chronically ill elderly patients, according to physicians, health providers and economists.

According to federal data, 46 percent of all Medicare spending currently goes to beneficiaries diagnosed with six or more chronic health conditions. A growing population of Americans living with more than one complex condition is a seismic policy challenge. In traditional fee-for-service Medicare, supporting “volume” of care when it comes to chronic illnesses such as diabetes, heart disease, and Alzheimer’s transforms an aging America into a fiscal time bomb over the long term. Helping such a significant population of ill Americans at lower federal costs and with better wellness outcomes is the puzzle.

The political sensitivities associated with altering Medicare, and lessons derived from coordinated care initiatives already encouraged by the Affordable Care Act, are familiar to every lawmaker in Congress and to all the presidential candidates vying to succeed President Obama.

What has been gingerly percolating as a bipartisan policy exploration aimed at delivering care differently -- evolving within the collegial confines of the Finance Committee -- could easily become a political piñata as soon as a draft bill moves into the sunshine.

For that reason, Khosla and Jurinka offered scant clues about potential policy fixes their respective bosses may propose at the end of their information-gathering exercises.

“The idea is that if we kind of build it the right way, we’ll have the right outcome,” Khosla said. “It’s not really a partisan issue,” he added. “It’s a cost issue. It’s a health care issue.”

He said Washington’s policy controversies often burn hottest over “how you pay for things.” For that reason, he said Hatch believes “the whole idea of making chronic care better is not for us to spend more money, but how to make sure things are running more efficiently and you’re realizing savings from that.”

“We don’t want a bill to be a Christmas tree,” Khosla continued.

Jurinka said the committee is mindful of the requirement that the Congressional Budget Office must estimate the federal savings and costs inherent in any proposed or enacted legislation. To do that, CBO needs reliable data, not hypotheses.

“If there is just more care, that will be a challenge,” she said, pointing to CBO’s requirement to “score” the ramifications of proposed legislation on the nation’s fiscal trajectory.

Medicare, the federal health program that benefits 55 million people, consumes 14 percent of the nation’s total budget. Average annual growth in total Medicare spending was 4.1 percent from 2010 to 2014, compared with 9 percent between 2000 and 2010. The slower climb in spending was realized despite a larger population of Medicare beneficiaries and rising health care costs elsewhere during the same period.

“It puts the onus on the member offices and the stakeholder groups to say, `Yes, we know that this is evidence-based and will be better for patients,’ and at the end of the day, that’s what we’re really hoping for,” Jurinka said of the Senate process to date.