He was a kid who hung out on the couch, played video games and ate potato chips. His lone connection to football involved watching the Seattle Seahawks on television.

Zack Bailey, now a 6-6, 320-pound freshman offensive lineman at South Carolina, looks back and hardly recognizes his former self.

“Sometimes I think about it, and I question how I really got here,” said the Summerville High School graduate. “I look at the achievements that I’ve made, and I just hope to make more along the way.”

Of the four freshmen and one transfer who comprise USC’s newest class of offensive linemen, the most unlikely member might be Bailey, who had zero interest in football growing up in Seattle. He played one year of Pop Warner as a 5-year-old. “Hated it,” he said. “I didn’t like it at all. So I never went back to it.”

If he played any sports at all, they were through a video game controller. But his parents, Boeing employees who grew weary of the rainy Northwest, moved to the Lowcountry when Bailey was in eighth grade. Walking the hallways of DuBose Middle School at 6-3 and 260 pounds, Bailey couldn’t help but stand out. Principal Kenny Farrell, also a Green Wave assistant, asked if he’d come out for the football team.

Bailey said he’d try it for one day. “A day led to two days, two days led to a season,” Bailey said Sunday, when USC held its annual Media Day. “We ended up going undefeated, and I just fell in love with it after that.”

And now Bailey, who played in the Shrine Bowl and was a finalist for South Carolina’s Mr. Football award last year, is part of a prized class of linemen poised to carry USC into the future. Christian Pellage, a 6-6, 314-pound tackle from Brooksville, Fla., was the Gamecocks’ highest-rated signee in ESPN’s top 300 list, while Bailey was USC’s third-highest-rated addition. Tackle Blake Camper of Virginia Beach, Va., guard Trey Derouen of Lilburn, Ga., and junior center Cory Helms, a transfer from Wake Forest, round out the class.

Helms must sit out this season under NCAA transfer rules, but the group is already making its presence felt. “They’re the best group of young guys I’ve ever seen,” said junior guard Cody Waldrop. “They know all their plays, they’ve worked at it all summer, and they’re doing very well.”

Offensive line coach Shawn Elliott said he’s pleased with everything the newcomers have done, “more so than in the previous six years I’ve been here.” The five of them are “almost inseparable. You see one of them, you see them all,” he added.

“They trust in each other, they talk to each other. Sometimes you get offensive linemen, they come from different parts of the world, they don’t gel quite as quickly, so one doesn’t quite speak up to the next. But these guys, they’re like brothers for some reason. That’s how they are.”

That much is evident by their living arrangements. Bailey said he lives with the other three freshmen in one dorm, while Helms is in another. But “Cory doesn’t ever leave our room,” he added. “It’s like we’re all five in one room. We talk to each other every single night, we hang out every single night. It’s like we’re family. It’s like we’ve known each other forever now.”

Bailey moved to South Carolina during one of the hottest summers on record, a jarring experience coming from the temperate Northwest. “It was awful. We went to take my dog out, and my dog came right back in,” he said. But the heat also trimmed his body, and crafted a football player different from the one who had quit in Pop Warner. “I was big, but I was fat,” he said of that time.

No more. He rapidly emerged as a force on the football field, something he truly realized when Summerville coaches taught him how to pull as a sophomore. First time he tried it, “I leveled a kid,” Bailey said. “I realized I could pull, and I could pancake people.” That became his goal, to build a head of steam and flatten an opponent. “Every time I came off the ball, I wanted to hit somebody,” he said.

Head coach Steve Spurrier has often admired his new offensive linemen in practice, and said they have “excellent attitudes.” Bailey said coaches haven’t yet broached the possibility of redshirting this season, which Spurrier indicated may depend on other players staying healthy. As far as Elliott is concerned, his freshmen will play if they show they’re ready.

“This group’s got as good a chance as any that I’ve been around,” he said. “They keep working, who knows. It may be the first game, it may be the fifth game, but somebody’s going to break through. And they’re going to break through because they want it bad enough.”

For Bailey, it would be one more step in a rapid ascent. Six years ago, he wasn’t interested in football at all. Even at Summerville, he didn’t think seriously about playing in college — until USC called with a scholarship offer. “I went home and told my mom, and she was like, ‘Are you kidding me?’ ” he said. Other offers followed, but the Gamecocks were first, and closest to home.

“The decision you make isn’t for the next four years, it’s for the rest of your life,” he said. “This is your family now. This is where you’re going to grow up. The offensive linemen here now, they’re going to be at my wedding. It’s a big decision.”