A few years ago, women were usually told to get annual mammograms starting at age 40, and men were told that the PSA blood test for prostate cancer was a lifesaver. Now the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, whose advice helps set government policy on screening tests, says that women should start breast cancer screening every two years at age 50 and that men can skip the PSA test. Colon cancer tests: Get enough, but not too many.

Consumer Reports talked with experts, reviewed current research, and came up with advice on the screening tests you need and those you don’t — at least for now.

Colonoscopy saves lives, but it does pose risks, including bleeding and punctures of the colon, so the test shouldn’t be done more often than necessary. For many people, that’s once per decade.

CR’s take: People ages 50 to 75 should get screened for colorectal cancer. If a colonoscopy doesn’t find cancer or precancerous polyps, you can usually wait a decade for your next test. If one or two small polyps are found, get a repeat test in five to 10 years. If you have more-serious polyps or are at high risk, ask your doctor whether you need more-frequent tests. Also ask about alternatives: sigmoidoscopy (an exam of the lower third of the colon) every five years plus a stool test every three years; or a stool test every year.

Cervical cancer tests: It’s okay to stop after age 65.

Many men get their PSA measured despite evidence that it’s usually not necessary. (Bigstock)

In 2012, the Preventive Services Task Force and other groups, including the American Cancer Society, said that many women could go several years between Pap tests and that most could stop after age 65. A study published online in May by the journal Cancer raised questions about that advice. It found that some research had underestimated the cancer’s incidence by failing to take into account those who have had a hysterectomy that removes the cervix along with the uterus, eliminating the risk of cervical cancer. But Consumer Reports’ experts say that this finding doesn’t warrant a return to routine screening after 65.

CR’s take: Women 21 to 30 should have a Pap test every three years. Those ages 30 to 65 can go five years between tests if they have a human papillomavirus (HPV) test at the same time to check for the virus that can cause the cancer. Women older than 65 with a history of normal test results don’t need retesting.

Breast cancer tests: Know your density.

Women with dense breasts — that is, those who have relatively little fat in their breast tissue — face a greater breast cancer risk, in part because mammography is less accurate in them. That has led activists to lobby states for laws requiring that women are told whether their mammogram shows dense breasts.

But the American College of Radiology says that such possible supplemental tests as ultrasounds or MRI scans are more likely to trigger false alarms. And no good studies show that adding them or tomosynthesis (3-D mammography) saves lives.

CR’s take: Consumer Reports agrees that women have the right to know about their breast health but thinks they should also know the limitations of ultrasound and other tests. They may make most sense for women with “extremely dense” breasts, who might have about twice the risk of breast cancer compared with women with average density. In general, CR agrees with the task force that women ages 50 to 74 should have mammograms every two years and thinks women in their 40s and those 75 and older should talk with their doctor to see whether the benefits outweigh the potential harm for them.

Prostate cancer tests: They’re rarely warranted.

Many men get their PSA measured despite a growing consensus that it’s usually not necessary. For example, the American Academy of Family Physicians advises against routine screening.

CR’s take: Men should not routinely get a PSA test, especially if they are younger than 50 or older than 74.

Lung cancer tests: Only for long-term smokers.

In 2013, the task force recommended annual low-dose CT scans for certain long-term heavy smokers after a study found that such scans cut the risk of death from the disease by 16 percent in that group. Under the Affordable Care Act, most private insurers must cover tests recommended by the task force. So the news that a Medicare panel advised against it came as a surprise, especially because it meant that people might lose coverage at age 65 — when lung cancer risk increases. That prompted more than 40 groups to say that Medicare should reject the advisory panel’s advice.

CR’s take: Consumer Reports’ experts agree that Medicare should cover the test. But they stress that it should be used only for those ages 55 to 80 who smoked a pack per day for 30 years or two packs per day for 15 years, and either currently smoke or stopped within the past 15 years.

Ovarian cancer tests: Only for high-risk women.

Experts remain stymied by this cancer because use of the available tests — ultrasound and a blood test called CA-125 — have not been linked to a reduced risk of dying of the disease.

CR’s take: Women with risk factors— such as a family history of ovarian or breast cancer and those who carry the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes — could consider the tests.

Copyright 2014. Consumers Union of United States Inc.