Marguerite Gallup can see it in her mind's eye: her three children racing Big Wheels in the alley behind their red brick rowhouse, her husband at work at the nearby steel mill. She'd be in the small but serviceable kitchen where she made the family dinner every night.

Baltimore's Belair-Edison neighborhood was an idyllic place to raise a family, says Gallup, 68. But that was decades ago, and the alley behind their old Ravenwood Avenue home shows signs of decline today: rusted fences, a tattered basketball net, backyards filled with clutter.

In the 25 years since the Gallups — and hundreds like them — left for the suburbs, teams of activists have fought to defend the working-class Northeast Baltimore community against the forces that have pummeled it and others: blockbusting and white flight, predatory lending and foreclosures, a loss of blue-collar jobs, and crime.

Belair-Edison has fared better than many neighborhoods, thanks to repeated intervention by nonprofits and government, which have spent at least $15 million in the past decade or so to rejuvenate and market its housing stock. They have used creative measures to keep it a neighborhood mostly of homeowners, and one where the average Baltimore family can still afford to buy.

A place like Belair-Edison, neither wealthy nor impoverished, is "vital to the overall health and future of the city," says David Sann, a longtime neighborhood advocate with the St. Ambrose Housing Aid Center.

Belair Edison Kenneth K. Lam / Baltimore Sun Lamp posts on the front lawn of homes at the 4200 block of Parkside Drive in the Belair-Edison neighborhood. Lamp posts on the front lawn of homes at the 4200 block of Parkside Drive in the Belair-Edison neighborhood. (Kenneth K. Lam / Baltimore Sun)

To grow and be strong, Sann says, Baltimore needs neighborhoods that offer affordable housing opportunities to working- and middle-class families — people like the Gallups, who in buying their homes invest in the community, in more ways than one.

Belair-Edison saw home ownership rates of at least 80 percent for decades. Those rates have slipped since the year 2000, but at about 65 percent are still higher than the citywide average.

Today in Belair-Edison, you can buy a sturdy three-bedroom brick house with yards in the front and back for about $120,000. A fairly strong stream of people — teachers, police officers, health care workers — continue to do just that.

Whether the neighborhood can hold on is of great consequence not just to the people who live there, but to Baltimore.

A city "can't just be the top and the bottom," Sann says. "The middle has to survive and thrive. Otherwise, the city will fail."

The decline

The trouble was years in the making.

First came the loss of good-paying jobs at General Motors and Bethlehem Steel, then white flight triggered by blockbusting: Real estate speculators persuaded white homeowners to sell low, only to turn around and resell the properties, often to black families, at inflated prices. In the 1990s, the neighborhood transitioned from majority white to majority black.

As time passed and original homeowners died, investors targeted their heirs by dotting neighborhood intersections with "We pay cash for houses" signs. Some of the financiers cut the checks, rented the homes and let them fall into disrepair — causing entire blocks to slide.

In other cases, some families who saw their home values skyrocket by $100,000 during the housing bubble refinanced so they could draw cash out. But the loan terms were untenable, and backlash from the Great Recession continues. Short sales and foreclosures accounted for 57 percent of home sales in Belair-Edison last year, down from 61 percent in 2013.

With the decline has come a few boarded-up storefronts on Erdman Avenue and Belair Road, and more crime. And while the crime rate in the city's Northeast neighborhoods remains lower, per capita, than elsewhere in Baltimore, some highly publicized crimes have sullied outsiders' perceptions of Belair-Edison.

In September 2012, Peter Marvit, a National Institutes of Health researcher, was fatally shot near the front door of his Chesterfield Avenue home as he was returning from choir practice. Authorities say he had parked near the home of a witness to a series of robberies.

Chong Wan Yim, a delivery driver, was shot in the chest in June 2011 after dropping off soda and bottled water at a liquor store in the Erdman Shopping Center. Yim was killed by a convicted serial robber.

Not all of the neighborhood's crime is so sensational. Thomas Neubauer, 76, was mugged two years ago while taking a walk on a Sunday afternoon. His glasses are still bent. He was robbed once before, on his way to Mass in 1997, and his home has been broken into twice.

But Neubauer, a retired economic analyst for the state, is committed to the neighborhood where he's lived since 1941.

"I am going to stay here if I live to be 100," he says.

Advocates say they realized long ago that if Belair-Edison was to keep residents like Neubauer — and attract new ones — they needed to devise a plan of action.

"When I think of this community, if one word had to come to mind, it is 'survivor,'" says Johnette Richardson, who runs Belair-Edison Neighborhoods Inc., a nonprofit that promotes the area.

"This is a surviving community," Richardson says. "I don't know too many other communities that have been hit, just beaten down by predatory practices, and yet we manage to emerge.

"You just want to fight and fight and fight for this neighborhood."

The intervention

The intervention began in earnest some 30 years ago, when too many houses were hitting the market at the same time.

Belair-Edison's 6,700 homes were built in two waves before and after World War II. By the 1980s, many of the original homeowners from the postwar phase were getting older. They had raised their families and were making lifestyle changes. Some moved to nursing homes or left the city. Others died.

The Gallups, who bought their house about 1965, left the city around the time Joe Gallup retired from Bethlehem Steel as a general foreman. Their three kids were grown, many of their family members had moved to Baltimore County, and they wanted more space.

"We were saying we wanted a bigger yard, a bigger house, one that sat by itself," Marguerite Gallup says from a floral love seat inside their Rosedale tri-level, which is surrounded by green.

In 1990, they sold their house in Belair-Edison to a young family for $64,000.

Other houses that hit the market around that time weren't move-in-ready.

Some owned by elderly couples were outdated and in need of repairs. Speculators were ready to step in, and they were willing to pay cash. They sometimes used fear to pressure owners or their heirs to sell quickly, claiming the houses would lose value if they didn't act.

St. Ambrose and other nonprofits had an alternative plan: