Ayden Police have now released the name of the man killed in an accident Saturday evening.

Police Chief Barry Stanley says that a Honda Civic was traveling west on Highway 102 and was making a left turn into the Walmart Express -- when a Ford SUV crashed into the back of it going 55 miles per hour. Police say the passenger in the Honda, 57 year old Kenneth Earl Mozingo was pronounced dead at Vidant Medical Center.

The driver of that vehicle, Mozingo's son, 23 year old Justin Mozingo was also injured. A nursing coordinator with Vidant Medical Center says Mozingo is in good condition.

Police have charged the driver of the SUV, Omar Ridhi El-Shaer with misdemeanor death by motor vehicle, careless and reckless driving and failure to reduce speed.

--------------------

Previous story:

Ayden Police say that the single fatality that occurred Saturday night was in the Honda Civic that was rear ended.

Police Chief Barry Stanley says a Ford Expedition was traveling around 55 mph when it struck a Civic as it was making a left hand turn into the Walmart Express off of Highway 102 West.

Chief Stanley says that it appears the driver of the Ford SUV was at fault in the accident and that charges are pending.

Officials say that there was a father and son pair in both the Civic and the Expedition. Everyone involved was taken to the hospital.

Police were not ready to release the names of those involved as next of kin are still being notified.

----------------------

Previous Story:

WITN has confirmed with Ayden Police Chief Barry Stanley that there has been one fatality associated with this wreck.

Chief Stanley could provide no other details on the accident, but is in communication with the investigating officer and will provide an update later this evening.

-----------------------

Previous Story:

Rescue crews say that a father and son have been taken to the hospital with critical injuries following a car accident.

Ayden Fire & Rescue officials on scene say that a Honda Civic was pulling into the Walmart Express parking lot off of Highway 102 West when it was rear-ended by a Ford Expedition.

We're told the accident happened around 6:45 p.m. Both lanes of traffic have been blocked.

Officials say that the father and son were inside of the Honda Civic. The two were taken to Vidant Medical Center.

We’re told that Ayden Police are investigating.

WITN has a team member on scene and will bring you the latest as it becomes available.