Marin General Hospital collected more of the money owed to it by patients in 2014 due to the Affordable Care Act, but health care reform did not result in fewer patients visiting the hospital’s emergency department.

Marin General CEO Lee Domanico reported to the Marin Healthcare District board earlier this month that Marin General’s bad debt dropped from 1.1 percent of net revenue in 2013 to .5 percent in 2014.

“That’s cut in half so that is a good deal,” Domanico said.

Marin General’s bad debt dropped from $16.8 million in 2013 to $11.6 million in 2014. Revenue was higher in 2014 than 2013 so the numbers didn’t correspond with the percentage change.

“The reason it has gone down so much is more people are enrolled in insurance,” said Marin Healthcare District board member Jennifer Rienks.

Eligibility standards for Medi-Cal were broadened under the Affordable Care Act. The maximum annual income for a family of four increased from $23,550 to $31,810 and applicants may now own a house and car. According to county health officials, since enrollment in the Affordable Care Act began in October 2013, 13,959 Marin residents have filed Medi-Cal applications.

“Our Medi-Cal volume has grown year over year,” Domanico said. “I would assume that some of those folks had been without any coverage and would have been potentially bad debts or charity care write-offs.”

And Domanico said people who lacked insurance previously but couldn’t qualify for Medi-Cal were even more likely to default on their debts, “because they’re probably not candidates for charity care.”

Marin General patients who earn 400 percent of the Federal Poverty rate and have medical costs exceeding 10 percent of their family income are eligible for financial assistance. For a family of four, 400 percent of the Federal Poverty rate equates to a maximum annual income of $95,400.

Within the first 90 days after patients are discharged from Marin General, they receive three copies of their bill and at least one phone call from the hospital’s billing office. If payment arrangements are not established and no payments are made during that time, the bill is turned over to a collection agency. The hospital pays the collection agency a 12.5 percent contingency fee on whatever it collects. Marin General reported bad debt totaling $18 million in 2012 and $20 million in 2011.

But while the hospital is collecting more of its debt due to the Affordable Care Act, it is also treating more patients in its emergency department. Domanico said visits to Marin General’s emergency department increased to 36,600 in 2014, up from 34,310 in 2013.

Advertisement

ACA advocates had asserted that visits to hospital emergency departments would drop when people gained access to insurance coverage.

“They’re finding that it takes a year or two for those numbers to go down,” Rienks said. “Initially, people get coverage and in many cases there is pent up demand so they’re seeking care in the emergency room until they really get hooked in with providers in the community.”

Rienks pointed to results released last year from a study done by the UCLA Center for Health Policy Research. The study, which tracked some 182,000 Californians between 2011 and 2013, found a significant decline in the use of hospital inpatient care and in emergency room visits after one year of enrollment in a demonstration insurance program.

Dr. Jim Dietz, medical director of Marin General’s emergency department, said whether or not the ACA ultimately results in fewer visits to emergency departments will probably depend on whether there are enough primary care doctors to treat them.

“The goal of the Affordable Care Act was to keep people out of the emergency department,” Dietz said. “I don’t know that it will.”

Domanico said normally hospitals lose money when they treat Medi-Cal patients because government reimbursements fail to cover the full costs. Domanico said the situation is somewhat different in Marin, however, where Partnership HealthPlan of California, a managed care organization, contracts with the county of Marin to oversee the medical care of Marin’s Medi-Cal population.

“We get a fixed payment, so much per member per month, for the Medi-Cal eligibles who are part of the Partnership HealthPlan,” Domanico said. “If they’re in the Partnership Healthplan and we’re able to treat them on an outpatient basis without admitting them, that is good financially and good for the patient.”

In May, Marin General Hospital will add four intensive care unit beds. Domanico said the hospital’s 10-bed intensive care unit typically runs at 90 percent occupancy.

“It’s our biggest bottleneck in taking care of critically ill patients, and it backs up our emergency department,” Domanico said. “Getting these four beds is going to significantly enhance the throughput of critically injured and sick patients through the emergency department and into a bed.”