A ten-year-old Ohio boy who was born without an arm had only one Christmas wish; to make more friends.

That wish and much more were granted this weekend in Wichita all thanks to a wounded warrior. Matt Amos, a double amputee veteran with Peeple's Prosthetics heard about Austin Osner and wanted to help.

"It's just part of what I can do to pay it forward and for me, I'm just the idea guy," said Amos.

Austin traveled from Fairfield, Ohio to Wichita on a life-changing adventure. He's getting a prosthetic arm.

"I've been wanting one for maybe a year, ever since I actually knew they existed," said Austin.

Austin was born with Amniotic Band Syndrome, he's never had a right hand or forearm.

"It prevented my elbow to grow further and I was just born like that," he said.

Growing up without a right arm, Austin has had to deal with bullies at school. His mom has watched him struggle, transferring from three schools until they decided to switch to homeschooling.

"I mean it hurts, and it breaks your heart as a parent, but at the same time you have to be the strong one," said Austin's mom Kristin McGinn. "I can't let him see me break down because that's going to amplify his emotions."

Amos and Peeple's Prosthetics got ahold of Austin's family to see if he wanted a free prosthetic arm.

"I couldn't even think after I got the news I just went to another room and almost just fainted because of how excited I was," said Austin.

Amos and the team at Peeple's spread the word and in came several donations including a free flight down in a private plane, hotel, rental car, meals and even tickets to the Kansas State basketball game.

Austin says this new arm will be able to help a kid who loves sports accomplish many things.

"Maybe tie a shoe, eat normal, I might not get made fun of as much," Austin said. "They might think it's pretty cool."

Austin's not only leaving Wichita with a prosthetic arm, he's also got a brand new group of friends who plan to stay in touch.

"I've been making friends left and right," he said.