Among the most common holiday shopping cons is cybersquatting, when scammers steal or slightly alter the name or website address of a well-known company to engage in rip-offs including identity theft, credit card fraud and sale of counterfeit goods.

This holiday season, “Overstock” is certainly not being underutilized by scammers.

The Better Business Bureau warns of a “noticeable trend” of phony websites using the word “overstock” somewhere in their domain name, “hoping to fool consumers into thinking they are shopping with Overstock.com.”

Because of its popularity – and respected reputation (with an A rating from BBB) – “it’s no wonder scammers try to mimic them,” says Carrie A. Hurt of the Council of Better Business Bureaus.

>> Sign up for the AARP Money newsletter

So if the real Overstock.com is where you want to shop, understand this: “If the name is longer, or uses any additional words, or letters, if it has any words other than ‘overstock’ before the dot-com, it’s not our website,” says company official Jonathan Johnson.



However, understand that other legitimate websites may have “overstock” somewhere in a web address – usually at the very end (after the .com) to indicate a specific page where overstocked items are being sold. Expect something like this: www.samplecompany.com/overstocks.

Overstock name games aside, here are your safest bets for any online shopping:

Type the site’s address yourself, rather than clicking on links found through keyword searches. Be especially wary of links offered by strangers in emails or on social media sites.

Pay with a credit card, which offers you more protections than a debit card.

Never provide your credit card or other sensitive information on any page whose address doesn’t begin with “https://” rather than “http://”. But even with an “https://”, avoid using public Wi-Fi hotspots for online shopping or other financial transactions.

For a quick (but not foolproof) legitimacy check, visit the website’s “Contact Us” page to see if there’s a phone number and a physical address. (Avoid any site that is missing both; be wary if it’s missing either). Bogus websites are more likely to rely on fax numbers or post office boxes.

>> Get discounts on financial products and services with your AARP Member Advantages.

Also of Interest

See the AARP home page for deals, savings tips, trivia and more