If you're looking for a ticket to see Pope Francis when he visits Philadelphia next weekend, best to avoid those being sold online.

Not only would you overpay for the free tickets released to the general public, but you might be paying for phony tickets or none at all, according to consumer advocates, who anticipate ticket scams involving counterfeit, lost and stolen tickets will be popular cons during the papal visit. And that goes for next weekend's special rail tickets as well.

The ticket scam most often involves websites that are designed to skim credit card information or request wire transfers to pay for tickets and rail passes. Some of the 30,000 free tickets that were offered online to see the pope at Independence Hall, the World Meeting of Families closing ceremonies and the papal Mass were selling at online sites like Craigslist and eBay for hundreds of dollars just a few hours after the reservations closed.

As the historic visit draws near, Pennsylvania and New Jersey consumer advocates and law enforcement authorities have been watching and waiting for word about pope-related fraud schemes.

"Our agents are keeping an eye out for anything that could be suspicious," Sadie Martin, a spokeswoman with the Pennsylvania Attorney General's Bureau of Consumer Protection, said.

As of last week, Burlington County Sheriff Jean Stanfield said her office hadn't received any reports of suspected fraud related to the papal visit, but her staff is keeping an eye out and will forward any complaints to the New Jersey Department of Consumer Affairs.

Stanfield believes most fraud will involve fake tickets for papal events or online scams for phony accommodations.

“Hopefully, people are being savvy,” she added.

Events like the papal visit are often rife with scammers, Bucks County Director of Consumer Protection Michael Bannon said.

“History has it, at large events like this, the scam artist, thieves and con artists all thrive and try their best to trick unsuspecting consumers out of money or other valuable items,” Bannon said. “When someone is asked to open their wallet or purse for money to buy something, take a second to stop and think about it.”

High-pressure sales are a red flag that something might be off, the Bucks official said, adding that his office will monitor its phone lines during the weekend papal visit, Bannon added.

Other anticipated scams involve housing and parking.

Housing scams typically target outsiders who put down deposits on rental homes that are advertised online. When they arrive, they learn the house or apartment doesn’t exist or it was never available for rent — leaving out-of-town visitors without accommodations.

With parking at a premium in Philadelphia and the suburban neighborhoods near the rail stations that will be open next weekend, Bannon said he anticipates some people may set up paid parking in lots they don’t have authorization to use. Such scams could cost drivers much more than the parking fee if the lot owners have vehicles towed, Bannon said.

Montgomery County Sheriff Russell Bono said his department isn’t aware of any local scams related to the papal visit, but he’s heard of a phone scam offering front row tickets to the Sunday Mass on the Benjamin Franklin Parkway. Tickets are free — and they've already been distributed.

Older adults are expected to account for the majority of those attending events related to the pope’s visit and that is the population that organized scam artists most frequently target, authorities said.

Bono warned against providing any financial information to callers — even if the callers appear to have accurate information about the person or their plans to see the pope. Fraudsters also will also disguise caller ID — a scam called spoofing — to make it appear a legitimate organization or business is calling, Bono said.

“It’s very easy for them to get that information from multiple sources,” Bono said.

Before giving out any financial information, individuals should verify what a caller says with the business, church or other organization the caller mentions.

SEPTA initially used a lottery system for chances to buy its special Regional Rail passes for the pope’s visit, but Bannon said concern remains that scammers — using high-tech printing equipment — may attempt to duplicate the passes, which sold for $10 for each day. SEPTA isn't aware of any attempts involving fraudulent papal rail passes, spokesman Andrew Busch said. The passes do have security features, including magnetic encoding, visual reflective foil applique or a hologram, he added.

A check of Craigsist and eBay found ads selling SEPTA rail passes for the pope weekend for prices ranging from $20 to $70 per pass, per day. One seller offered 20 passes for $1,000. After SEPTA had leftover passes following its lottery, the agency switched to in-person pass sales and has encouraged people to purchase tickets directly at rail stations.

Another ticket scam Bannon and others anticipate involves people offering special passes to meet Pope Francis. Those passes don't exist, though many area parishes were given free tickets that would allow them to get closer to the pope.

“The World Meeting of Families Philadelphia 2015 will be aggressively monitoring for counterfeit/black market 'tickets,' " Archdiocese of Philadelphia spokesman Kenneth Gavin said.

Other scams consumer advocates anticipate involve souvenirs allegedly blessed or touched by the pope and price gouging for water and food.

Updated information on the World Meeting and papal events can be found at www.worldmeeting2015.org or the website of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops at www.usccb.org/about/leadership/holy-see/francis/papal-visit-2015/index.cfm.