CU holds Arizona State well below Sun Devils' season averages

CU cornerback Ken Crawley, left, knocks the ball away from Arizona State's Jaelen Strong during the second half Saturday at Folsom Field. Defensive coordinator Kent Baer said CU "did some really good things against a really, really good offense." ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Hawaii Rainbow Warriors at a glance Record: 1-2 Coach: Norm Chow, 3rd year (5-22) Vs. the Buffs: Hawaii is 2-1 against CU, but the Buffs won the only meeting in Boulder, 31-13 on Sept. 18, 2010. Offense: Through three games, Hawaii ranks among the nation's worst with 377.7 yards per game. The Warriors have been balanced, with 137 rushing attempts and 130 passes. They will be without standout running back Joey Iosefa, who injured his ankle in Week 2, but Steven Lakalaka had 124 yards in his place on Saturday. Quarterback Ikaika Woolsey has struggled. Defense: Hawaii had one of the nation's worst defenses last year, but has shown a good deal of improvement this season. Chow hired a new coordinator (Kevin Clune) in the offseason, and the Warriors so far are allowing just 373.3 yards per game — an improvement of 121.4 yards from last year. UH has been especially stout against the running, yielding just 3.3 yards per carry. Names to know: LB Julian Gener, Jr., 5-11, 235 (20 tackles, 2.5 TFL); WR Scott Harding, Sr., 5-11, 200 (9 rec., 130 yards); WR Marcus Kemp, So., 6-4, 185 (13 rec., 202 yards); RB Steven Lakalaka, So., 5-10, 215 (47 att., 173 yards, 1 TD); WR Quinton Pedroza, Jr., 6-2, 220 (20 rec., 187 yards); DB Ne'Quan Phillips, Jr., 5-9, 185 (13 tackles, 2 PBU); DB Taz Stevenson, Sr., 6-2, 200 (20 tackles); DL Kennedy Tulimasealii, So., 6-1, 280 (6 TFL, 1 sack); QB Ikaika Woolsey, So., 6-1, 210 (57-of-122, 631 yards, 1 TD, 1 INT). Advertisement Notable: Hawaii got its first win on Saturday, 27-24, at home against Northern Iowa. ... This will be Hawaii's third game against the Pac-12. The Warriors lost to Washington, 17-16, in the opener, and to Oregon State, 38-30, in Week 2. ... This will be Hawaii's first road game of the year. ... Hawaii has lost 13 consecutive road games. ... Since the start of the 2011 season, Hawaii is 2-16 away from home, with the wins coming in 2011 against Louisiana Tech and Idaho.

Considering the proliferation of offense in the Pac-12, and Colorado's constant struggle against those offenses, the Buffaloes walked away from Folsom Field on Saturday night feeling pretty good about themselves.

Although the Buffs (1-2, 0-1 Pac-12) gave up a season-high 426 yards in a 38-24 loss to Arizona State, the numbers and effort represented a significant improvement over CU's usual performances in Pac-12 games.

"I was really encouraged by the effort," CU defensive coordinator Kent Baer said. "Early in the game we didn't do some things very well, but from that point on, I thought those kids grew up a little bit more today. They started to believe in themselves and playing harder, and we did some really good things against a really, really good offense."

ASU came into the game averaging 595.5 yards and 51.5 points per game and the Sun Devils appeared to be on their way to those numbers in the early going. ASU racked up 222 yards in the first quarter, building a 17-0 lead.

"They did some things in the first quarter that we hadn't seen and we didn't adjust to it very well," Baer said. "That's my fault for not going over some stuff. After that, we just played our stuff and did it, and played it pretty well."

During the final three quarters, the Buffs held ASU to 204 yards and 21 points, although seven of those points came after a Buffs turnover, when ASU took over at the CU 9.

"Guys settled down, the nerves settled down and everyone felt that we belong — we can play with these guys," senior defensive tackle Juda Parker said. "We played assignment football and we didn't let the situation, the magnitude of the game, overtake us."

That, in itself, is a step in the right direction for CU. Since joining the Pac-12 in 2011, the Buffs have routinely been battered by their conference foes. In 28 Pac-12 games, the Buffs have allowed more than 430 yards 21 times and more than 40 points 20 times.

This year, Pac-12 offenses might be better than ever, as every team in the conference is averaging at least 429 yards per game. To enjoy success against one of the Pac-12's best offenses gave the Buffs some hope.

CU defenders Tedric Thompson, left, Chidobe Awuzie, center, and John Walker put a big hit on Arizona State running back D.J. Foster on Saturday. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"I'm very encouraged," safety Tedric Thompson said. "A lot of people have probably been down on us, but nobody realizes how hard we work. We feel like if we listen to the coaches and play as a unit, we can beat anybody we face. That's the mindset we're going to have the rest of the season."

Going into the game, there was general discouragement over CU's defense. The Buffs were physically beaten by Colorado State in the opener and then gave up 38 points to a UMass team that has been dreadful on offense for two years.

Against ASU, however, the Buffs held their own in the trenches, made several big plays in the secondary and gave CU a chance to win the game.

"It was good to see the whole team finishing and playing strong throughout the whole game," linebacker Addison Gillam said. "Compared to Week 1, it was a totally different team. It was much better effort on our end. This week, we prepared really well. We had great practices every day. It was just a different atmosphere."

Cornerback Ken Crawley said he was "proud of our effort," and cornerback/safety Chidobe Awuzie said the performance was "a big confidence builder."

Still, the Buffs know they have to get better. The Buffs lost in part because their own offense had three turnovers, and Baer and head coach Mike MacIntyre both voiced their disappointment in the defense for not forcing any turnovers.

"If we turn the ball over (on offense), we've got to match it," Baer said. "We work on it all the time; it's just something you have to keep pushing."

Saturday's performance was a step in the right direction for the Buffs, though. Now, the key is for CU to actually build upon that effort.

Hawaii comes to Boulder on Saturday, and while the Warriors haven't been that dynamic on offense, they have the potential to be explosive. Then, the Buffs get back into Pac-12 play, with high-powered offenses on the schedule week after week.

"It's a little encouraging, but that's one game," Baer said after Saturday's game. "We've got our hands full next week and then we just keep taking them one at a time.

"I think they really believe that they can play with anybody now, but that's just one game. We're only as good as the next game and our next practice, so we just have to keep working and build on the positives."

Contact BuffZone.com Writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.