Medical Director Dr. Anjali Mahoney, left, and medical assistants Monica Elias and Jose Gutierrez work on patient records at Family HealthCare Network in Visalia on Wednesday, December 3, 2014. (Photo: Ron Holman)

You might assume Frank and Debbie Moreno would be happy with their Covered California health insurance plan.

After all, before the federally-mandated insurance program took effect on Jan. 1, the Visalia couple paid $222 a month for health insurance. With subsidies because of their low income, the Morenos now pay for their Covered California plan just about a tenth of what they used to pay, a mere $24 a month.

Sure, the new insurance saves them a lot of money, but if the Morenos had their way they'd be back on their old insurance plan instead of their Covered California Anthem Blue Cross plan, and they they'd even be willing to pay the higher premiums.

That's because under their old plan, they could go to just about any doctor.

"Now we're very limited," said Debbie Moreno, noting that she saw her old doctor for more than 30 years until she was told that his practice wouldn't accept her Covered California insurance. "Many of the doctors here aren't taking it."

The Morenos were there trying to get some advice on how to sign up for a second year of coverage under Covered California.

"We want to find a doctor that would take it," Frank Moreno said.

Trying to find a doctor was difficult to do online, he said.

"Now, I look at the list and wonder where do I go," his wife added.

And paying for a private health plan is out of the question right now, said Frank Moreno, who lost his job as a full-time middle school teacher because of budget cuts more than a year ago and has been getting by on a substitute teacher's salary, while his wife is unemployed.

"My income can't do what it did before."

Unfortunately for many in Tulare County, like much of California, the Affordable Care Act — or "Obamacare" — has been a mixed bag, said Gary K. Herbst, senior vice president and chief financial officer for Visalia-based Kaweah Delta Health Care District.

"There have been some very positive aspects of the Affordable Care Act. Without a doubt, we have seen a sharp decline in the number of uninsured patients that were coming into the hospital," he said,

About 6.3 percent of Kaweah Delta patients were uninsured prior to the act taking effect in January. By the middle part of the year, that ratio declined to 2.6 percent.

"Literally cut by two thirds in just six months is pretty dramatic," Herbst said.

Today the ratio of uninsured patients is down to about 1 percent.

One of the problems before ACA was the number of uninsured people showing up at Kaweah Delta Medical Center's emergency room to be treated for minor ailments that normally should be treated by primary-care physicians because the hospital wouldn't turn patients away, even if they couldn't afford to pay for their care.

Expectations were that one ACA took effect, the number of such visits would decline, as more people would have health insurance and see doctors at their offices.

But Herbst said emergency room visits at Kaweah Delta actually went up, from about 87,000 last year to a projected 91,000 this year — about a 3 percent rise.

Officials at Tulare Regional Medical Center didn't respond to requests to discuss the effects of ACA there.

But Herbst said that from what he's heard in the industry, the jump in the number of people using emergency rooms for their primary care is jumping at hospitals across the country.

"Patients that were previously uninsured were reluctant to come to the emergency room. But now having coverage through Medi-Cal, [many] now feel comfortable coming to the [emergency department]."

ACA not only allowed for people to buy health insurance regardless of pre-existing conditions — in many cases with subsidies that reduced their premiums, like the Morenos — but changed the qualifications for Medic-Cal, so single people meeting income requirement can get covered.

In Tulare County the number of people added to the Medi-Cal rolls increased by nearly 37,000, putting the total number at more than 190,000.

"The numbers are staggering," Tulare County Chief Administrative Office Jean Rousseau said.

Those numbers speak to how many people have limited incomes that prevent them from buying private health insurance, he said. In comparison, the number of county residents who signed up for Covered California is much lower, about 9,800.

Kerry Hydash, president and chief executive officer for Visalia-based Family HealthCare Network, said that about six out of 10 of people who still are uninsured here are Hispanic.

As for why, Hydash said a part of it is that many Hispanics who are legally in this country don't trust the ACA sign-up system over concerns that information about undocumented relatives might be disclosed to immigration officials.

"It would not be," she added.

Tulare County employees are required to use the county's health insurance plans unless they can be added to their spouses' plans or if have insurance through veterans programs.

As such, the county hasn't had employees forgo the county's health plans — which many employees consider highly expensive — and sign up for Covered California plans.

Still, employers are required to pay fees to Covered California intended to help cover spikes in healthcare costs because of large numbers of people with medical conditions didn't address when they didn't have insurance entring the healthcare system.

For Tulare County, that fee added up to more than $600,000 this years, Rousseau said.

Not that the news about the first year of Covered California is all bad.

Hydash said that people who previously were uninsured and now are covered because of ACA largely feel piece of mind having coverage in the event of a medical crisis or if they need to see a specialist or be hospitalized.

And with health insurance, patients can more easily be referred to medical specialist, which is important because only a narrow number of physicians in this area would see patients who can't afford to pay for their care, she said.

At Family HealthCare Network, which has often takes on patients who can't pay, the number of uninsured patients has dropped about 6 percent over the past year, Hydash said.

The Affordable Care Act also has forced doctors to change how they treat patients, as the law requires them to provide more preventative services, she added.

"I think the Affordable Care Act is creating a model we've always had," Hydash said.

But a big issue for patients has been finding doctors who will take Affordable Care Act plans or Medi-Cal.

At Kaweah Delta, the number of Medi-Cal patients has risen by 5 percent this year, Herbst said.

"It means they still have access to barriers to care. Because there still are limited number of physicians that provide medical services," he said.

In fact, he estimated that about 70 to 80 percent of Medi-Cal patients here go to clinics, including those run by Kaweah Delta, Tulare County and Family HealthCare Network, because they can't find private-practice doctors or medical groups willing to see them.

And Covered California patients also are experiencing limits, as many doctors also aren't taking those plans.

This is particularly true of specialists, Herbst said.

Of the four Covered California plans offered in Tulare County, he knows of no specialist who have signed up with Blue Cross or Blue Shield plans, and Kaiser Permanente is signing up patients only in the northern part of the county because of the company's requirements that patients have to be in proximity to one of its medical facilities — the nearest ones being in and around Fresno.

Some specialists have told him that if they were to accept Covered California, the insurance plan would reimburse them only 40 or 50 percent of what Medi-Cal reimburses them, Herbst said.

In a letter posted online earlier this year, Visalia Medical Clinic's chief financial officer, Russ Desch, wrote that one of the reasons his medical group — the largest private medical group in the Valley — wouldn't accept Covered California insurance is that our providers would have been reimbursed less than what it costs them to provide the service.

"As a physician-owned clinic, our providers cannot operate in a system in which they lose money with every patient they see."

The reason for Anthem's decision is that the group of doctors willing to take Anthem's Covered California plan was so small this year, he explained.

"Nobody would take it last year. Nobody could get access to physician — primarily specialists, and primary care, too."

Covered California enrollment

Enrollment for Covered California health insurance will remain be open through Feb. 15. To enroll and get information on the plans, go online to www.coveredca.com.

Medical Assistant Karla Segura works on patient records at Family HealthCare Network in Visalia on Wednesday, December 3, 2014. (Photo: Ron Holman)

Read or Share this story: http://vtd-tar.co/1COTcer