SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Pro-life organization Live Action has introduced another investigative video exposing Planned Parenthood’s disturbing practice of advising young girls about dangerous sex activities such as bondage/discipline and sadomasochistic sex (BDSM).

The investigations are part of Live Action’s series titled “SexEd: Planned Parenthood’s Dangerous Sex Advice for Kids.” The latest exposé features the abortion giant’s facilities in Denver, Colorado.

In the video, counselors offer suggestions to the undercover investigators, in graphic detail, of a spectrum of sadistic sexual behaviors, including “whipping,” “tying up,” and “asphyxiation.”

As the video shows, a gruesome crime involving asphyxiation was recently in the media. In January, police discovered 16-year-old Jessica Burlew with the corpse of 43-year-old Jason Ash, whom Burlew had strangled to death and mutilated with razor blades in the midst of “a sex game.”

Live Action observes that Planned Parenthood is an ObamaCare grant recipient.

“Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains is already bragging about receiving ObamaCare grants specifically for sex education,” said Lila Rose, Live Action’s president, in a press release. “Here’s an abortion corporation, which gets 45% of its budget from the taxpayers, telling 15- and 16-year-olds not only to have sex, but also to choke each other in the process. Police should be busting down its door.”

At its Planned Parenthood Exposed site, Live Action lists a number of disturbing marketing practices and counsel from Planned Parenthood staff, including the “resource” website Go Ask Alice! which is sponsored by Columbia University. The site answers questions about sexual practices such as bondage and discipline and sado-masochistic role-playing, as well as others such as playing with feces.

A site for Planned Parenthood of Hudson Peconic also contains information about a seminar for educators called “50 Shades of Safe,” which seeks to explain “how a BDSM relationship is successfully navigated between sexual partners.”

“The Planned Parenthood-approved advice of ‘do whatever you want, but just use a safe word’ glorifies kids acting out rape scenarios,” Rose said. “It’s extremely dangerous counseling: they’re undermining and invalidating the crucially important rule of no means no.”

In the video, one Planned Parenthood counselor tells Live Action’s investigator that a young girl’s use of words like “stop” when she is uncomfortable “can get mixed up,” resulting in the male partner wondering, “Does she really mean ‘stop,’ or does she mean, you know, whatever?”

The other counselor agrees, saying, “Usually, a lot of people will say ‘stop’ even though it feels good, so that’s usually not something that is used.”

Live Action is calling on Colorado residents to contact their local officials, including school administrators.

“Parents need to get on the phone right now,” Rose said, “and ask their principals and superintendents, ‘Do you have a relationship with Planned Parenthood? Are you okay with this sort of behavior being pushed on my children?’ This won’t stop until people take action locally for their kids.”

A previous installment of “SexEd” showed the Planned Parenthood affiliate in Indianapolis giving advice to the undercover investigator on how to practice BDSM and access sex shops and pornographic websites.