ROCKVILLE, Md.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The National Health Service Corps (NHSC) Loan Repayment Program is now accepting applications through March 20, 2014. The NHSC Loan Repayment Program provides loan repayment assistance to licensed primary care medical, dental, and mental and behavioral health providers in exchange for providing health care in urban, rural, or frontier communities with limited access to care.

Award amounts may vary according to areas in greatest need as ranked by their corresponding Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) scores. Awardees in a practice area with a HPSA score of 14 and above will receive up to $50,000 in exchange for two-years of service. Similarly, awardees in a practice area with a HPSA score of 13 and below will receive up to $30,000.

To locate NHSC approved sites with eligible HPSAs, please visit: http://nhscjobs.hrsa.gov/external/search/index.seam

With historic investments from the Affordable Care Act and the Recovery Act, the NHSC has supported nearly 14,000 health care providers between 2009 and 2013. In 2013 alone, NHSC made more than 4,500 loan repayment and scholarship awards to clinicians and students.

For more information on the NHSC Loan Repayment Program, please visit www.nhsc.hrsa.gov.

About the NHSC

Established in 1970, the National Health Service Corps (NHSC) helps underserved communities across the nation receive critically needed primary medical, dental, and mental and behavioral health care. Through the Corps, primary care clinicians receive scholarships and loan repayment in return for committing to practice in areas of the country that have too few health care professionals to serve the people who live there.

With more than 80 percent of NHSC providers continuing to serve in high-need areas after they fulfill their service commitment, the Affordable Care Act investment in the National Health Service Corps helps ensure underserved communities have access to quality health care both today and in the future.

Follow NHSC

To view the mobile-friendly, self-contained unit called a Content Capsule™ for more information about National Health Service Corps (NHSC) and to access videos, articles and social media tools to share the resource, click here http://www.contentcapsule.com/admin/capsule/f5503593-5e7f-453a-b962-03fb32627d23.

The Health Resources and Services Administration is part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. HRSA is the primary federal agency responsible for improving access to health care services for people who are uninsured, isolated, or medically vulnerable.