TOP STORIES

We’re getting closer to the day when organs for transplant are delivered by drones. Wednesday, transplant products manufacturer Lung Biotechnology agreed to help drone-maker EHang Holdings customize a human-sized autonomous aircraft for just that purpose.

Realizing the vision of routine organ delivery by drone still could be 15 years away, however, the companies said. — TechCrunch

University of Rochester Medical Center has launched Parkinson’s Disease Care, New York (PDCNY), a free telemedicine program for about 500 underserved Parkinson’s patients across the state. It’s meant to be a national model for remote management of chronic diseases.

Patients with iPhones will be able to participate via URMC’s mPower app and share data over Apple’s new CareKit platform. — PR Newswire

LIFE SCIENCES

The Scripps Research Institute in San Diego has spun out a new company, iGenomX, which offers library construction technology for next-generation DNA sequencing. — Business Wire

“The world’s most expensive medicine,” a gene therapy, has been used only once commercially since being approved in 2012. — Harvard Business Review

RNAi therapeutics startup Sirnaomics, of Gaithersburg, Maryland, has raised $10 million in a Series B round. — PE Hub

Insulin delivery system-maker Valeritas raised $25 million through a reverse merger and a private placement. — MassDevice

French biopharma company Poxel is planning a U.S. IPO. — Business Wire

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

Humana is the latest big insurer to consider dropping individual plans on Affordable Care Act exchanges for 2017. — Reuters

A peer-reviewed study by the CVS Health Research Institute has shown home infusion care to be as safe and effective as treatments delivered in hospitals and clinics, for far less money. — PR Newswire

A Baltimore medmal attorney said it’s time to scrap peer-review protections in the discussion of inpatient deaths. — PR Newswire

Robert Adams, CEO of eldercare company National HealthCare Corp., will retire at the end of the year. — Nashville Business Journal

TECHNOLOGY

Although Fitbit’s revenues dipped in the first quarter to $505 million from $711 million in the fourth quarter, 40 percent of sales during the quarter came from repeat Fitbit purchasers. That’s notable because wearable producers often get criticized for having a steep drop off rate for their products as consumers lose interest. — Barrons

UnitedHealth Group’s Optum has teamed with Medecision and TriZetto to introduce what the companies are calling the first SaaS option in Medicaid management information systems. — Business Wire

Staffing and consulting firm Softworld has launched Vita Data Sciences within its life-sciences practice. — PR Newswire

Garmin is the latest consumer fitness company to build activity tracking into a fashion-forward watch, and the new vívomove is analog. — Business Wire

POLITICS

Dr. Patrick Conway, deputy administrator for innovation and quality at CMS, seems open to congressional concerns about a proposed Medicare Part B value-based drug purchasing plan. — The Hill

Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Oregon) is trying again to give CMS the power to negotiate Medicare drug prices, and this time he also wants to cap out-of-pocket costs for Medicare beneficiaries. — Portland Business Journal

California is raising the smoking age to 21 and restricting public vaping. — Los Angeles Times

The highest court in the European Union has upheld a pan-European law that standardizes cigarette packaging, bans menthol smokes and imposes tough new rules on e-cigs. — Reuters

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

American Girl keeps selling out of a diabetes care kit for its dolls. — The New York Times

Photo: Ethan Miller/Getty Images