Part 1

DEAR JOAN: Don't be a wimp. You know you are correct. Good for you for yelling.

Eventually the owners get the message or the problem is solved by a cruel death by other animals or automobiles or a trip to the pound.

As for Jeanine, good for her, she has a big yard and thinks she does the right thing. Not all of us are as lucky to have that much space. Good for her for bringing the cat inside at night. This is when they roam. They like my garden and come visit in mine or other neighbors yards where the soil is loose and inviting.

A neighbor had this problem except they chose the area next to the front door. Imagine the smell. The cat next door has a large sandy box outside that never gets cleaned. Why go in a dirty box?

This cat enjoys time spent outdoors, under supervision. (Courtesy of Barbara Sharpe)

Guess where they go.

Guess who has to clean up the mess.

Cats belong in the home with their owners. Not all indoor cats are fat and lazy, only those of owners who do not care. Be a good neighbor and keep your cats at home or at the very least bring your cats in at night.

A.M.

Concord

DEAR JOAN: I feel pretty strongly about this from personal experience. What happened to three of our beloved cats over a period of three years aren't the common missing or killed by traffic stories. I know cats love being outside, but it is so dangerous out there for them.

Advertisement

I always had indoor-outdoor, spayed and neutered cats until my young cat inhaled a fungus found in bat or pigeon droppings that is common in other parts of the U.S., but not so common here, which causes histoplasmosis fungal disease.

Young cats don't have a fully developed immune system to fight this fungus and treatment is hit and miss. It attacked his neurological system after an expensive treatment regime that didn't work. One day he swayed as he tried to stand and by that evening couldn't stand at all. The next morning, he died minutes before the vet made a house call to put him out of his misery.

The house with a pool behind us stood empty for several years. The property owners emptied the pool, but when it rained the deep end would fill with 2 to 3 feet of water. Two of my cats drowned a year apart just before Christmas because they slid on the wet fiberglass in the shallow end, probably to stalk the birds that fed on the insects attracted to the water and debris in the brown water. It broke our hearts to see the slide and claw marks where they obviously tried to get out up the steep sides of the pool and knowing they eventually succumbed to exhaustion and drowned -- a horrifying death.

That was it. No more indoor-outdoor cats. Our next rescue kitten, now 3, has never been outdoors and won't even try to run out. She's content to look out the windows, but we give her plenty of indoor stimulation, so she seems content.

I would be curious how many cats have drowned because of emptied pools during the recent foreclosure crisis. I've never seen this discussed and know it must have happened to others. Please, if you know of an emptied pool near you and you let your cats out, be sure to monitor the depth of rainwater in the deep end and take precautions. After the first cat drowned, we had set up a sump pump solution with the neighbor's permission, but didn't get the water pumped out in time after a heavy rain.

Barbara Skliba

Mountain View

DEAR JOAN: Please do not back down on the importance of keeping cats inside. Almost all of the cat conflicts mentioned in your column would be solved by owners simply would not allow their cats to roam.

I am appalled by the number of cats roaming the neighborhood and using my yard as a toilet. It is disgusting. The dangers outdoor cats are exposed to are numerous, including cars, poison, predators, human acts of cruelty, fighting with other cats, and contracting contagious diseases.

People who allow their cats out are being ignorant and inconsiderate of everyone else in the community. I like cats and own one myself, but she is inside, safe and happy.

Julie Lindsay

El Cerrito

DEAR JOAN: I'm just throwing in my two cents worth on the indoor-outdoor cat debate. I always urge cat owners to keep their pets inside, but if they are adamant about letting them out, I don't harp on it.

But even letting your cat roam your own yard is hazardous. Besides the fact that the cat can be up and over the fence in the blink of an eye, there are other considerations:

Your cat can be infected with disease or parasites by other cats coming in your yard.

In this drought we are experiencing, lots of coyotes and foxes are roaming urban areas day and night. Coyotes can easily negotiate a 6 to 7 foot fence, and foxes can manage fences up to 6 feet. You might think a fox won't attack a cat, and they usually won't, but depending on the size of the cat, the fox might attack if it is sufficiently motivated. Raccoons can and will hunt domestic cats and small dogs, and your fence is no deterrent to them.

Eagles and hawks can dive on your cat, and you probably wouldn't even have a clue until the last moments. They probably wouldn't be able to lift it out of your yard, depending on the size of the cat, but the initial strike would probably break the cats back, and their incredibly strong talons would puncture and damage internal organs. If your cat was lucky enough to survive, you could be faced with the horrible decision of monumental vet bills or euthanasia.

Our drought is definitely reducing the number of prey animals in our area. When faced with adverse environmental situations, Mother Nature reacts. Wildlife will produce smaller litters with fewer babies. This makes domestic cats and smaller dogs very inviting prey.

S. Cohl

Union City

DEAR JOAN: In response to your column on the subject I am a proponent of indoor cats. Having had cats all my life -- I'm in my 60s -- I've always kept my cats indoors with the exception of occasional visits to the outdoor deck or yard when I'm with them.

I've never owned a large piece of property where the cats could roam free and not be tempted to leave my property and I think the majority of cat owners are in the same situation. In the urban are we live in few of us are fortunate enough to have that much property.

Additionally the suburban area I live in has roads near by that would be extremely dangerous for a cat that might leave the property, frequent skunk visits, fleas and so on and so on. For me my cats are too important to me to let them out at their own will for fear something may happen to them, not to mention my indoor cats need no flea medication or annual shots.

So I am in favor of keeping cats indoors. By the way all my cats have lived beyond 17 years of age. I also believe cats live a longer life when kept indoors. Keep up the word on keeping cats indoors and the few who are lucky enough to have a large enough space for their cat to run freely can just ignore that advice realizing that the majority of cat owners in our suburban area would do better to keep their cats indoors.

Loving cat owner

Concord

DEAR JOAN: I agree with Jeanine regarding responsible indoor outdoor cat owners. While I agree it is safer to have your cats be indoor-only there are behavior challenges to confining them indoors that don't often get brought up.

While I agree that if they have never been allowed outdoors they are safer, they miss the many things my indoor-outdoor cats take for granted and sometimes the indoor cats become behavioral nightmares, knocking everything over, doing destructive scratching and overall being obnoxious because they have no way to expend their energy.

My cats love to walk with me in the neighborhood with my dogs, chase each other up trees, snuggle in the sun, chase butterflies, let the wind blow in their hair, things their indoor counterparts miss.

I clean up after my cats and their feral counterparts in my neighbors yards just like I clean up after my dogs You can be a good neighbor and have indoor-outdoor cats.

One of the rescue folks I worked with was an indoor cat fanatic, and when her house burned down, all the cats died as there was no way for them to get out, which made me incredibly sad. There are perils on both sides of the argument, but that side is rarely brought up.

I struggle each day with the challenges of letting my cats roam free, but the love the have for the outdoors and the joy it brings them outweighs the peril they can sometimes face.

Mary Enderle

Bay Area

DEAR JOAN: Poor fat and lazy cats. They're lazy because they can't move. No different from fat children.

The parent-owners are ignorant about a simple fact: calories in and calories out. Give them more than they're expending they will become obese. I know many people who have healthy and lean indoor cats. They monitor their food intake. Doesn't take a scientist to know this. We have always had indoor cats for obvious reasons: too dangerous outside. Why would we do that to our pets?

My son rented a room and bathroom with his cat. I got him a cat gym for exercise. He learned to fetch and my son watched his food intake.

Now they live with me in a two-story home. He gets lots of exercise. Of course, it helps to give cats healthy and quality food, with no fillers. A lot of the cheaper stuff causes weight gain.

Bernadine Temple

Nutritionist

DEAR JOAN: I am experiencing something for the first time in my life -- cats reaching old age.

All the years I lived with my parents in three different states, from large yards to small yards, busy and not so busy streets, I have probably had 20 cats during that time. I never had one cat reach old age.

The reason why is because they were allowed to go outside and each and everyone of them got hit by a car and died. I vowed, once I moved out on my own, I would never ever let my cats go outside and now I do not have to worry where they are at anytime of the day. They are safe and sound and living a healthy happy life. If you love your cats as much as I do please do not allow them to go outside.

Eric Gniadek

Hayward

DEAR JOAN: You were right, and she was wrong.

I don't like the way she sailed into you on your stance of keeping cats inside, which most experts advise. Sorry, owning "a large piece of property in Montclair" doesn't qualify her on the subject.

She is lucky her cat stays in her yard and doesn't roam, but many do, and end up lost or dead. My son had his cat, Fluffy, for years and she stuck close to home but disappeared one day and we never saw her again, despite searching.

Joan, please don't change or bow down to this rude woman. She should apologize for her dreadful tirade.

Ann Hoover

Bay Area

DEAR JOAN: Please stay on your soap box and remind people who allow their cats outside that their cats will not live long and healthy lives. You have saved thousands of feline lives.

Jeanine is the one who has the insane idea that cats not only belong outside, but do well. She must be living on another planet where there are no motor vehicles, predators, animal abusers, cat fights, dangers, swimming pools, etc.

There is no such thing as a "rare predator" Has she ever heard of animal abusers? Her cat may be content for now to stay on her property, but I guarantee that her cat will someday venture off the property, disappear or come back home injured and die.

It is a fact that indoor cats live much longer than outdoor cats. How can someone call themselves a caring animal lover and let their cat outside to face the many dangers that are constantly present everywhere? It is impossible to supervise a cat unless the cat is on a leash. If a cat decides to jump a 10 foot fence he will.

Can Jeanine jump a 10 foot fence and catch her cat?

I have had indoor cats for over 25 years and not one is or has been fat and lazy. I have cat trees, window seats, cat toys, and play with my cats daily. Not one has been infected with fleas, contacted FIV or FeLv or FIP, all deadly cat viruses brought about by infected outdoor cats.

I am an adoption counselor for Nine Lives Foundation in Redwood City, a no-kill shelter. This is the only animal shelter in California that I know of that takes in FIV positive and FeLv positive cats. All city and county shelters euthanize FIV positive and FeLv positive cats and kittens. Group rescues don't take them and the infected cats end up in county shelters and are euthanized.

The most common story I am told by potential adopters is that their cat was killed by a car. I have heard so many horror stories about outside cats that I don't want to adopt to a person that will let their cat outside. I don't care how attractive you make your cat's environment the cat will wonder off. That's what cat's do. They are one of the most curious creatures on this earth.

I am sick of hearing all the horror stories potential adopters tell me about their dead, injured or lost cats.

Jeanine does not have one valid point. It is for her pleasure only, not her cat's, that she lets him outside. She feels she deserves the pleasure of her cat's company when she is outside. There is absolutely no difference between Jeanine and any other irresponsible person who lets their cat outside. I invite Jeanine to spend a day with me at Nine Lives animal shelter and hear all the horror stories, see the many injured outdoorcats in the clinic, the hundreds of kittens, feral cats and pregnant mother cats, and especially the 60 FIV positive and FeLv positive cats that reside there. These cats are rarely adopted.

Ask her to spend a day at a county shelter to see how many cats and dogs are euthanized every day. Almost all are found as strays and many more are stray cats than dogs.

Yes Jeanine, enjoy watching your cat climb walls and trees, run and scratch your posts and kill the wildlife. It will be short lived.

Joan please keep preaching to those who let their cats go outside. If only one reader listens to you, you have saved a life. A cat's freedom comes with a big price.

Vanda Caturegli

San Carlos

DEAR JOAN: Regarding the Montclair woman who wrote in to disagree with people like me, I've lived with cats for all my life and 44 years of experience has taught me that for the sake of the cat, the neighbor's flower beds, and the wildlife, cats are best kept inside.

My local, online newsletter published a letter July 29 warning about a poisoned mouse in a backyard discovered in time to keep the cat safe, but my mother's cat wasn't so lucky and he succumbed to secondary poisoning.

Has she had veterinary bills patching her cat up after fights with other cats? I have. Countless numbers of cats are killed by cars including one of my cats. My neighbor's cat has the same resources that woman's cat has and he crosses the street to come to my yard and defecate and hunt because that is the feline nature. Does she have an area where her cat defecates? Why should I be expected to clean up after someone else's cat?

Any one who claims cats get fat and lazy as house cats is welcome to stop by and see my svelte female cat and pictures of my previous, now deceased, but slender cats. Obesity is caused by the cat eating too much food, not by living in a house.

My cat has a stimulating environment with windows to watch birds, places to jump, climb, scratching posts, toys and lots of attention. She never touches the furniture because positive reinforcement very easily taught her to use the scratching posts.

Opening the door and putting the cat out because you are too lazy or unwilling to attend to your cat is common and accepted, but it doesn't make it the best decision. Just because you don't like what you hear doesn't make it untrue and the Montclair woman is rationalizing and trying to justify her behavior. Cats should be kept indoors, ask any veterinarian. Enriching the indoor cat's environment to keep it content is not that difficult.

Finally, the cavalier attitude about killing wildlife is sad and more destructive than we believe. It was only after the fact I noticed my inside-outside cat had wiped out all the towhees I had previously seen feeding on the property I was renting at the time. People need to realize and acknowledge it isn't just your cat out there, cats kill millions of birds and that is not the way of nature because cats are not normally found in the wild.

Susan Patrick

San Leandro

DEAR JOAN: When I finished reading your article about the pros and cons of indoor versus outdoor cats, I have to say that the letter from Jeanine had me very angry.

I have owned several indoor-only cats for most of my life. I have had up to seven at a time. I currently have four. None of them have ever been fat or lazy. I nearly choked when I read that.

They streak around the house, climb as high as are permitted and generally behave just like your outdoor cats. There is nothing lazy about any cat I have ever owned. In fact, I would think something was wrong and take them to the vet if they were lazy.

My cats are always near my husband and me, sharing our space. They are loving, smart and act as if we were cats, too. Or they feel they are human.

Here are the pros of indoor cats:

Healthy, safe from other cats and fighting, safe from raccoons that do kill cats, safe from being run over by cars or tortured by sick people, safe from being used as dog fighting bait, safe from being attacked by dogs, getting stuck in trees or places they don't belong, being catnapped by people who think your cat is lost or a stray.

You can apply the above list to the cons of outdoor cats and add to that list; outdoor cats are trapped or poisoned when doing their business on other people's property. I personally know people who did both, and the trapped cats were taken to the animal shelter and probably put to sleep. When you wonder where your cat is, check the shelters.

What about the unaltered cats reproducing and adding to the cat population? Outdoor cats kill wildlife. They pick up diseases from sick animals. If your cat is not protected, they can get fatal illnesses.

It is a no-brainer -- indoor cats are better off and should not be outdoors unattended. Yes, build an outdoor area that they can play and get fresh air, but please keep your cats inside.

There are always cat fights at night when we are trying to sleep. It is horrendous to hear and I always feel sorry because there are always injuries. To all of the pro-outdoor cats people, please think about the things I have said. There is nothing wrong with having your feline companions around the house all day and night. I think they are more loving and affectionate by being with their people and not wandering the neighborhood.

Linda Parker-Fedak

San Leandro

Contact Joan Morris at jmorris@bayareanewsgroup.com. Follow her at Twitter. com/AskJoanMorris and read the Animal Life blog at blogs.mercurynews. com/pets.