Whether you fell asleep early, stayed out too late, or simply want to watch it again, we realize it's not always possible to get your entire "Piers Morgan Live" fix from television. As an answer to this, we offer the below labor of love – "Piers Morgan Live, Rewind" – dedicated and designed to getting you caught up and connected to the conversation.

Swearing is caring: Piers and Ricky trade curse words

On Friday evening, Piers Morgan welcomed countryman Ricky Gervais for an entirely candid, face to face, sit-down interview, which at one time consisted solely of the two Brits swearing at one another.

Morgan allowed his guest to serve up a joke as offensive as he'd like, which led to Gervais opening with "why does Piers Morgan wear a pink tie."

Asked for the punchline, the man behind the British version of "The Office" proceeded to utter a response so profane that the entire answer was bleeped out.

Laughing hysterically, the host was not to be outdone, as Morgan then noted that he normally ends interviews by telling his guests that their visit has been pleasure. However, in the case of Gervais, Morgan instead opted to share his own collection of curse words, again with the specifics inaudible thanks to CNN's censorship regulations.

Watch the clip for the full – albeit edited – exchange between the two longtime friends.

Blind gun owners? Morgan and "Crossfire" hosts debate

With the issues of gun control and firearm legislation continuing to divide the nation, a new angle to the argument has injected a fresh serving of passion into an ongoing debate.

With the gun rights of blind Americans having risen to the forefront of the conversation, on Friday evening "Piers Morgan Live" asked "Crossfire" hosts S.E. Cupp and Van Jones to share their specific perspectives.

"You're treating blind people like they're all 100 percent blind. This is a class of people, some of whom wear glasses. Some of whom may be considered legally blind but can still see, and why should they not have the opportunity to defend themselves the way every other American citizen can," asked Cupp, a noted right-wing author and commentator. "In the second amendment it does not say, 'you have the right to bear arms if you can shoot them well.' That is not part of the constitutional, the confines of the constitution."

Falling somewhere in between Morgan, who finds the notion of blind people firing guns to be absurd, and Cupp, Jones sees a reasonable scenario in which certain qualified people, despite be visually impaired, might be reasonable within the appropriate circumstances:

"Look, on first blush it does sound totally preposterous and ridiculous. However, I think what there should be is there should be a standard," said Jones. "If somebody who's been classified blind can meet that standard then I think there's no problem. I don't think we should lower the standard to make it easier."

Nick Kristof on foreign affairs: Analyzing Putin, Assad, and Obama

On the heels of last week's bizarly fascinating op-ed penned by Russian President Vladimir Putin, on Friday Piers Morgan invited Nick Kristof to share his insights and reaction.

"I think the fact that it antagonized so many people, suggests that he over-reached. I mean, you know, when he just exuded hypocrisy when he talks about the importance of avoiding force. This coming from somebody who presided over the death of 200,000 people in Chechnya, and who talks about how God created everyone alike, unless they're gay," explained the columnist for "The New York Times," the very same outlet which ran Putin's piece. "I thought it was authentic. I thought he actually wrote it, because no PR agency in the world would allow him to insult American exceptionalism."

As the civil war continues in Syria, and the perspective role of America is debated, Kristof revealed his opinion of what might be deemed a successful resolution, while also offering an evaluation of the job Barack Obama has done to this point:

"That would be a real win for international security if those chemical weapons were removed. If he [Bashar al-Assad] were deterred from using them again, yes that would be a step forward," he told Piers Morgan. "But, you know, make no mistake. I mean, I'm a fan of President Obama's foreign policy in general, but this has not been his finest hour."

Gervais on gun control: "Don't let Piers buy a gun"

In an effort to kick off the weekend with some lighter fare, while also touching upon current events and the ongoing news cycle, on Friday evening Piers Morgan invited his British mate Ricky Gervais to join him in studio.

On the backdrop of recent news out of Iowa, which centers around blind people applying for, and receiving, gun permits, Morgan asked his guest to respond.

"I learned about this through one of your tweets and I understand you, you thought this was a bad idea," laughed Gervais. "Next, they'll be saying 'blind people shouldn't drive cars,' which is the first thing I thought of. Because I think people have got to see the difference. They were talking about it, as an equality issue: aren't blind people allowed to defend themselves?"

As Morgan shared with his guests the American law which permits the buying and selling of Kinder Eggs – as the snack-toy hybrid represents a choking hazard – Gervais filed an impromptu plea:

"Dear America: Please let Piers buy a Kinder Egg. But, don't let him buy a gun."

For the next edition of "Piers Morgan Live," watch CNN every night at 9.

-

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Twitter

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Instagram