By Ryan Ekvall | Wisconsin Reporter

MADISON, Wis. — Sixteen Wisconsin community health centers will receive an extra $926,141 in 2014 to keep spreading the word about Obamacare.

That’s on top of the $1.77 million those same community health centers received in July from the federal government to hire outreach and enrollment employees to help people sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

The federal Department of Health and Human Services announced last week they’d send over another $58 million in one-time grants to community health centers across the nation. The department awarded $150 million in July, just months before the federal healthcare.gov website rolled out and promptly stalled.

DHHS said in 2013 the grants would enable community health centers to hire 40 workers to assist 26,474 Wisconsinites enroll in Obamacare. That’s about $44,250 per employee, or $66 per enrollee.

As of Nov. 30, only 5,303 people have made it through the application process and selected plans through any means – health insurance agent, navigator, at home or through a community health center.

A spokesman for Health Resources and Services Administration, the division of DHHS that administers the grant program, said the department would not know until late January how many Wisconsinites actually signed up for Obamacare through community health centers.

HRSA did say that between July 1 and Sept. 30, grants to community centers helped 230 individuals enroll into the state Medicaid program.

Ellyn McKenzie, spokeswoman for 16th Street Community Health Center in Milwaukee, said they hired three “outreach and enrollment specialists” with the original $159,419 grant and expect to bring on two more in 2014. She was unable to say how many people have signed up for health insurance, however.

“One worker is only able to help about four people a day,” she said. “Someone sits down (with an uninsured person) and helps them get through the website.”

At 20 people a week, the most an enrollment specialist — not to be confused with a licensed Obamacare navigator — could have signed up for health insurance to this point is about 220 people.

Multiply that by the 35 employees who were actually hired with federal grant money, and about 7,700 Wisconsinites should have signed up for health insurance through community health centers. But that has not happened.

“It’s entirely possible we fall short (of our enrollment goal) because of the chaotic way things have gone with the website and the BadgerCare delay,” McKenzie said. “We have paper applications. We were doing over-the-telephone application,s too. The last I heard, people are getting signed up, looking at their options and saying ‘you know I’m going to think about this. I need to decide if this is something I’m going to do.’”

Contact Ryan Ekvall at rekvall@watchdog.org, by phone at 608-257-1382 or on Twitter @Nockian.