Loveland Art Studio Tour finishes its first weekend, will return Oct. 19-20

Fran Judd, works on a canvas painting in her studio at Art Works on Sunday during the Loveland Art Studio Tour. Along with having an open studio for people to see, Judd currently has an exhibit of sandpaper paintings in collaboration with poet Lynn Kincanon at the ArtWorks. ( Lilia Munoz )

If You Go What: Fifth annual Loveland Art Studio Tour. When: 10 a.m.-5 p.m. Oct. 19-20. Where: Several artist studios throughout Loveland. Booklets with addresses and a map can be picked up at the Loveland Museum/Gallery, 503 N. Lincoln Ave., or the Lincoln Gallery, 429 N. Lincoln Ave. For more information: Go to LovelandArtStudioTour.com.

Loveland artist Dean Russell Thompson turns the unseen, everyday things into art, while Dan Sawusch captures a single moment of seen and known landscapes in vibrant colors.

The two artists are among the 38 who participated in the fifth annual Loveland Art Studio Tour Saturday and Sunday and will next weekend too.

They represented a sampling of the multiple mediums and methods for view on the tour, including oils, acrylics, watercolors, pastels, pencils, ink, mixed media, wood, stone and bronze used by painters, sculptors, potters, jewelry makers, photographers and printmakers.

The artists, who live or have studio space in Loveland, invited art enthusiasts and collectors, as well as the public, into their studios and galleries to exhibit, talk about and demonstrate their art. They gave a behind-the-scenes glimpse of their work spaces and the materials and equipment they use.

Advertisement

"You get to really see an artist in a natural environment," said Megan Tracy, event director of the studio tour, which is sponsored by the Thompson Valley Art League and the Loveland Museum/Gallery. "You can see what inspired them. You really get to see where they live and work."

The studio tour offers an opportunity to learn about the artists' processes, Tracy said.

"You get to see how the artist create their work," she said. "You don't get to see that when you're in a gallery. You see the finished piece."

Pam Clifford, left, of Loveland, buys one of Abbie Powers' hand-dyed scarves during the Loveland Art Studio Tour on Sunday at Art Works. "I love how different everyone's art is," said Clifford. Powers is one of 38 artists participating in the event. ( Lilia Munoz )

Finding the Unseen

Thompson, an artist and printmaker who creates original prints called "The Unseen Landscape," takes photographs of bridges, railroads, power lines and other infrastructure and uses old-hand methods to create prints.

"It's stuff we see every day. It never penetrates our consciousness," said Thompson, owner of Copper Plate Press, 405 Eighth St. SE, Unit 8, adding that he sees a "certain aesthetic" in the line, shape and form of the things that make society function.

The majority of Thompson's work is woodcuts, but he also does etchings and lithographs of his found infrastructure.

Thompson begins with a photograph and will do a series of manipulations, such as editing out elements or using several for a composite, to create the image he wants. He uses a series of wood plates to separate information in the photo according to color, so that each plate will have a different carving -- which he also does -- for a particular layer of color.

"I like the process whereby the image comes together," Thompson said. "You build the image up step by step. When you get to that last color, when you peel the proof off ... and it's suddenly transformed from incomplete to complete, that in and of itself is magical."

Showing the Seen

Sawusch, a photographer for 32 years, captures the seen in every color the eye processes without being limited by old school photography, the photo paper, processes and silver halide. He uses pigmented inks on canvas, metal and paper to create what some say look like paintings.

"Now, I'm effectively painting those scenes with the tools that I have," said Sawusch of Sawusch Photography, 1284 S. Grant Ave.

Sawusch said his camera serves as his paintbrush.

"I can share the emotions of what I'm doing. I couldn't do that before," he said.

Amy Vialpando, owner of AEV Fine Art, 161 12th St. SW, works in a variety of mediums, including oils, acrylics and mixed media. She recycles paper to make her own paper for some of her paintings.

"I love the idea of recycling and reusing, creating something new out of something we throw away," Vialpando said.

Vialpando shreds the paper in a blender and mixes it with water to create her new paper product, which already has enough glue to hold together, she said.

"I love the texture," she said. "I love the organic, natural sense of paper."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com.