Melissa Padulsky, of Little Hearts Big World Instruction and a Fanwood emergency medical technician, gives Tom Hurtado, Director General of the Cancun Bomberos, a look inside Ambulance 578. (Photo: Courtesy of Fanwood Rescue Squad) Story Highlights Tom Hurtado, Director General of the Cancun Bomberos, visited the Fanwood Fire Department and Rescue Squad last weekend.

Hurtado is here at the invitation of New Jersey first responders and instructors who have been to Cancun on several occasions to help train his team.

Officers and members of the Fanwood Fire Department and Rescue Squad showed Hurtado their apparatus in detail.

The Fanwood Fire Department and Rescue Squad received a visit last weekend from the fire chief of the Mexican tourist resort of Cancun.

Tom Hurtado, director general of the Cancun Bomberos, is the equivalent of a fire chief in a United States, and has been touring firehouses in Central and North Jersey. Hurtado is here at the invitation of New Jersey first responders and instructors who have been to Cancun on several occasions to help train his team.

For the past several years, this coalition of instructors, including Melissa Padulsky, owner of Little Hearts Big World CPR and First Aid Instruction based in the borough, have traveled to Cancun to donate training and equipment to Hurtado's operation, which is using gear that is up to 30 years old.

"We take our vacations down there (Cancun) and use some of the time to do this training," said Ken Smith, leader of the Maryland-based Region 4 Rescue Team of the American Power Boat Association, a group of volunteers who provide emergency medical services (EMS) at power boat races.

The city of Cancun has a population of one million and is visited by 11 million tourists per year. Building construction ranges from modern, masonry hotels to thatch houses. Despite the large population and diversity of building types, Hurtado is forced to constantly solicit donations of everything from bandages to heavy equipment to fight fires. EMS in Cancun is provided by the Red Cross, but a number of his firefighters are paramedics and he would like to acquire an ambulance to assist with EMS.

As a firefighting force, his team answers many calls that are unique to Cancun.

"We answer calls for propane fires several times a week," he said.

Many homes in Cancun use propane for heat and cooking.

"Then, there are the alligators," he added.

It's not uncommon for Hurtado's firefighters to be called to a home with an alligator lurking in the backyard.

"We take a coat and throw it over its head so it can't see, then three or four firemen jump on top of it," he said, as Fanwood Fire Chief John Piccola and Assistant Chief Dave Zawodniak listened in awe. Currently, New Jersey firefighters are not trained in alligator removal.

The cross-border relationship between the Mexican and New Jersey first responders has been beneficial for all concerned.

"This group of firefighters works hard," says Padulsky. "They do 24-hour shifts on a rotating schedule. They are so willing to learn anything we can teach them. They don't have formal training or standards like we do here in the U.S. While they don't have a lot of money or equipment, they treat us like family."

Officers and members of the Fanwood Fire Department and Rescue Squad showed Hurtado their apparatus in detail, then treated him to a ride on a fire engine before moving to his next stop in Piscataway.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1CxpN5r