In this year’s Hop the Vote competition at the Great American Beer Festival, a new brand of politics is emerging: beer populism.

The brews featured in the competition between the Colorado House and the Colorado Senate are two of the most popular styles among craft beer aficionados — an over-the-top India pale ale and a bold-flavored stout.

House lawmakers, in partnership with Broomfield’s Big Choice Brewing, crafted The Ayes Have it Aye-PA (IPA) with Maris Otter grain and huge amounts of Warrior, Mosaic, Simcoe and Amarillo hops “to make this beer a grapefruit slam-in-the-mouth tongue-splitter.” It weighs in at 7.5 percent ABV and nearly 200 IBUs.

Senate lawmakers paired with Golden’s Cannonball Creek Brewing to make Senate Shout Out Stout, a mocha stout featuring five grains and additions of dark chocolate and locally roasted coffee. This big and rich beer hits 8 percent ABV.

The two choices are built for a broad appeal among beer geeks and designed to stand out among the thousands of beers on the floor at the Colorado Convention Center. The winner is decided by GABF attendees who cast votes after tasting samples.

This year’s competition is getting more hype after the House took home a narrow win in the inaugural competition. In 2014, the House’s Representative Saison took 51.9 percent of the GABF vote compared to the 48.1 percent for the Senate’s Upper Chamber Fresh Hop ale.

Asked about whether the House is just trying to win votes with an IPA, House Speaker Pro Tem Dan Pabon pivoted in classic political fashion. “The fact that it is a popular beer style simply reflects the strong connections the House has with its Colorado constituents,” the Denver Democrat said, probably only half-joking.

The Senate also sought to amplify its game. “We found consensus for a more robust, full-flavor style than was brewed by either team last year,” said Sen. Chris Holbert, a Parker Republican who probably smirked when responding by email with a legislative pun (“consensus”).

Holbert helped the House win the title a year ago but now finds himself on the opposite team with his election to the Senate. “I have confidence in our brew, which will make it easy to encourage GABF attendees to try it and, ultimately, cast their vote for our beer,” he said.

Pabon said the House isn’t getting over-confident, despite being reigning champs. “We never take anything for granted in the House, even if the Senate is involved,” he said. “We plan to stick to our contest-winning strategy of producing the best product possible … while also espousing the bipartisan way the beer was fashioned. We know Coloradans want us to work across the aisle to produce great results. What better way to show what great work we can do when we work together?”

The competition is sponsored by the Colorado Brewers Guild and provides the state’s craft beer makers an informal opportunity to highlight the industry’s work in the state. It’s an event the lawmakers obviously enjoyed a year ago.

Holbert said the Senate beer takes its name from a GABF tradition. At the event, if someone drops a plastic tasting cup, the crowd erupts into a loud shout. “We thought it a great tie-in to the GABF atmosphere and a way to draw attention to a beer that is so good that, when you taste it, you’re apt to drop your glass and shout for joy!” Holbert said, putting plenty of spin on it. “That’s indicative of the fun that GABF attendees experience and I hope that a majority find it engaging enough to vote for the Senate brew.”

In addition to Holbert, the Senate team featured Andy Kerr, D-Lakewood, Matt Jones, D-Louisville, Tim Neville, R-Littleton, and Pat Steadman, D-Denver.

The House team included Pabon, Polly Lawrence, R-Douglas County, Jeni Arndt, D-Fort Collins,

Joann Ginal, D-Fort Collins, Paul Lundeen, R-Monument, Kim Ransom, R-Littleton, and Yuelin Willet, R-Grand Junction.