JACKSON, MI – The recent proposed partnership between the University of Michigan Health System and Jackson's Allegiance Health is the latest in a growing trend of hospital mergers across the country.

As early as mid-summer, UMHS will likely absorb Allegiance Health, according to officials from both organizations.

Existing partnerships, proximity, high referral rates, similar missions and values and the sharing of resources is why officials say the partnership is a win-win situation for both sides. The CEOs of the two hospitals signed an intent agreement Monday, Dec. 2.

"We thought about allegiance as our first partner for several reasons. We share common values, mission and purpose," said UMHS CEO Ora Pescovitz. "We recognize the kind of work that is done here, which is truly extraordinary.

Alwyn Cassil, director of public affairs at the Center for Studying Health System Change in Washington, D.C., said typically larger hospitals will acquire smaller hospitals monetarily. UMHS will control Allegiance's assets, although Allegiance will maintain its own identity.

"There's beginning to be a shift in how hospitals make money," Cassil said. "For years, hospitals made money by filling their beds with more patients. It's beginning to shift toward hospitals being responsible for more of the total costs of a patient's care, so they have some incentive to keep patients away and streamline services."

Although Allegiance officials have maintained the hospital's financial situation is not a driving force behind the partnership, the hospital lost nearly $17 million between 2007 and 2012, according to IRS 990 forms. The hospital operates with about a $400 million budget per year. The automatic 2 percent federal sequestration cut and high Medicaid population in Jackson added to the financial challenges of Allegiance, said Georgia Fojtasek, CEO of Allegiance Health. Cassil said the rising cost of patient care and the federal Affordable Care Act also contribute to the recent trend of larger facilities taking smaller, community hospitals under their arm.

Allegiance Board Chairman Larry Schultz said Allegiance considered many potential partners and retained “very high paid advisers.” Neither entity would say who reached out first.

“It became clear to us in the beginning that the University of Michigan was the right choice, not due to the past (partnerships) but due to what the future could bring,” Schultz said, adding that Allegiance wanted a partner that would respect the role the community plays in leading the local health system.

After holding steady through much of the 2000s, the number of mergers nationally between hospitals jumped from 52 in 2009 to 105 in 2012, according to a report from healthcare research firm Irving Levin Associates.

Laura Appel, vice president of federal policy and advocacy at the Michigan Health & Hospital Association, said in a statement the majority of Michigan hospitals are now part of a larger organization.

"In the 1980s, more than 200 nonprofit hospitals operated in Michigan and nearly all were independent organizations," she said. "Today, most Michigan hospitals are part of a larger system, either through outright ownership or affiliation."

Appel said the mergers are a result of a number of factors.

"A drop in inpatient utilization and a shift toward outpatient services, the impact of federal healthcare reform, and increasing costs of uncompensated care (result in mergers across the state)," she said. "Generally, these agreements develop because hospitals and health systems realize if they are not proactive, patients and communities will feel the effects."

Cassil said the partnership between Allegiance and U-M can be mutually beneficial like other mergers for a number of reasons, including increasing the effectiveness of care and having a larger footprint which creates a stronger bargaining chip in negotiating with insurers and medical suppliers.

"Certainly by partnering with U-M they can streamline services and cut costs," Cassil said.

Contact Will Forgrave at wforgrav@mlive.com or 517-262-7554. Follow him on Twitter at @WillForgrave.