Have a health-related question? Submit it here and veteran reporter Deb Pressey will chase down an answer ...

Q: My question is about insurance. I am a veteran who was not disabled, but was able to receive health coverage from the VA, called veterans benefits. On Feb. 7, 2016, I received a letter saying I was qualified for benefits. On Feb. 17, 2016, I received another letter from the VA that stated the federal government had lowered the maximum amount to be earned, and I no longer qualify for benefits, thus my insurance coverage was cancelled at that point because I will make too much money this year. No 30 day notice. I have heart disease and vascular disease and was left with no medication, and no doctor.

I applied for insurance at my workplace at that point for a life-changing event. Federal guidelines state a life-changing event is losing your health coverage involuntarily, without canceling the policy or the plan not being discontinued, of which I qualify.

However, my employer stated the loss of VA benefits does not qualify as a life change. It’s not loss of benefits, it’s loss of insurance. But said I should qualify for Obamacare. I am filing bankruptcy. I can afford the $89 for work insurance but not the $380 for Obamacare. If private insurance has to give you 30 days notice, why doesn’t the U.S. government and why am I being discriminated against because I lost government insurance vs. private insurance? Really upset, kinda being shot by friendly fire from both sides.

A: David Gobber, health system specialist for the VA Illiana Health Care System, Danville, said veterans are tracked by social security number and their income is subject to audit. When an audit shows a veteran’s income is over the threshold (based on a means test by geographic area) he or she gets a letter that states income must be verified within 45 days. No response places that veteran in “priority 8G status, ineligible for VA benefits, he said. Gobber also said the 45 days to respond can put a veteran on notice that benefits may be changing.

Veterans enrolled for benefits before Jan. 16, 2003 aren’t required to provide proof of income at any time and aren’t subject to audits, and those enrolled after that date are, he said.

While loss of coverage is one of the life changing events that can qualify you for special enrollment after the federal deadline in an Obamacare health plan, it sounds as though what you want at this point is for your employer to add you to your company health plan after its own open enrollment has ended — since that’s the less expensive coverage route. And your employer doesn’t seem to want to do that, and has directed you to go the pricier Obamacare route.

Not knowing all the details, and without having seen your employer plan, here’s what Bruce Elliott, manager of compensation and benefits at SHRM (Society for Human Resource Management) has to say:

Most employer health plans provide for qualifying life events to change your enrollment status outside the open enrollment period, and a loss of other coverage is one of them, along with such changes as death of a spouse or marriage. You can ask your employer if your health plan has a gain/loss provision, or better yet, ask to see a summary of the plan description yourself and see if it’s in there. If it is, and you lost your VA coverage through no fault of your own and notified your employer of that within 30 days, you can say, “now please enroll me,” Elliott said.

If you are still denied, you might want to consider appealing that decision, documenting everything you can, and as a final step, consulting a lawyer, he said.