A survey finds about the same share of employers are offering coverage in 2014 as last year. Employer insurance levels steady

The Affordable Care Act so far has had little impact on the insurance people get through their jobs— countering dire predictions by Obamacare critics that employers would dump coverage and steer workers toward the new insurance exchanges.

And premiums rose just 3 percent, according to a respected annual survey released Wednesday.

Story Continued Below

It’s only year one of the Obamacare exchanges, and the findings won’t quell the debate about how businesses will respond in the coming years to new requirements and more regulatory and economic changes to the health industry.

But the steady availability of employer-sponsored coverage and the “extraordinarily modest” premium rise indicate that predictions that “the sky would fall” under Obamacare have not come to pass, said Drew Altman, president of the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation, which conducted the study with the Health Research and Education Trust.

( Also on POLITICO: Full appeals court to rehear Obamacare case)

While the survey found that about the same share of employers are offering coverage in 2014 as last year, it didn’t detect evidence that more workers are taking up insurance at work, even though the individual mandate now requires most people to get covered or face a penalty. That rate held steady at 80 percent.

Deductibles crept higher to an average of $1,217, only slightly more than in 2013 but a big spike from $826 in 2009. That’s part of a several-year trend to put more consumer “skin in the game,” and is reinforced by the design of Obamacare plans. The average deductible on a mid-level “silver” exchange plan is $2,300, Altman said.

But other out of pocket costs such as co-pays stayed about the same as in 2013.

While the ACA has drawn much attention to the market for people who buy their own insurance, almost seven times as many — 153 million — get coverage through the workplace. What happens to those benefits is “really important for employers and working people,” Altman said.

( Also on POLITICO: GOP chorus attacks Obamacare over Healthcare.gov hack)

The evidence to date suggests the picture hasn’t changed dramatically under Obamacare, even as long-term trends in health care spending and insurance design continue to gobble up an ever larger portion of business and family budgets.

The vast majority of employers with at least 50 full-time employees — 92 percent — offer insurance to at least some employees, and just over half, 52 percent, of smaller firms do. Overall, 55 percent of firms are offering coverage this year, similar to the 57 percent recorded last year.

That is likely to change among some small businesses that have been hard pressed to pay for insurance, said Gary Claxton, a Kaiser vice president and the lead researcher on the report. Many small businesses were allowed to renew their non-Obamacare compliant 2013 plans for this year and many may be waiting to see how the exchanges play out before sending their workers there, he said.

Conservative critics said the negative effects will build over time.

“If the exchanges do sort themselves out and operate more smoothly and a larger number of people are in them, you’re going to see more and more small firms shutting down or not starting to offer coverage,” predicted Stuart Butler, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. He expected the shift to start next year, beginning with the smaller companies and with people who change jobs frequently.

( Also on POLITICO: Health care spending growth remains modest)

Doug Holtz-Eakin, president of the American Action Forum and a harsh critic of Obamacare, said he’s “not surprised” that the impact on the employer insurance market is limited — so far.

“The things that matter are all going to show up once the exchanges are more stable, people understand their functioning and what the pricing looks like,” Holtz-Eakin said.

Authors: