New Jersey hospitals learned Friday how each will be individually impacted by the $148 million cut to charity care funding in Gov. Chris Christie's 2016 proposed budget, which includes a total of $796 million in hospital funding.

Suzanne Ianni, president of the Hospital Alliance of New Jersey, whose hospitals provide most of the state’s charity or uncompensated care, said the cuts will take a heavy toll.

“Our 17 member safety net hospitals represent 25 percent of New Jersey’s acute care hospitals, but are being asked to absorb 50 percent of the total cuts,” when both charity care and funding for graduate medical education are considered, Ianni said.

In the budget statement last week, the Christie administration pointed to the success of the Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act, saying it has increased the state’s NJFamilyCare (Medicaid) enrollment by 390,000, and reduced the need for hospitals to deliver uncompensated, or charity care. Another 252,000 New Jerseyans have purchased health plans online via HealthCare.gov under the ACA, where most get subsidies to defray the costs.

“While we acknowledge that the number of uninsured has decreased in New Jersey, an important consideration has been missing in this debate,” Ianni said. “While Medicaid expansion is a good thing for patients in New Jersey, it increases the financial burden on safety net hospitals.”

She said that’s because Medicaid reimburses hospitals about 70 percent of the costs for each patient claim, and Medicaid patients are more likely to access hospital services when they have a Medicaid card versus when they were uninsured.

Last week, five hospital groups issued a joint statement saying that New Jersey still has about 1 million uninsured residents and Christie’s budget “doesn't recognize the ongoing challenges hospitals face as they provide excellent care for all.”

Christie increased funding for graduate medical education, the hospital residency programs where doctors are trained, by $27.3 million to $127.3 million and reduced charity care to a total of $502 million.

New Jersey Hospital Association spokeswoman Kerry McKean Kelly said the Christie Administration “notes the infusion of Medicaid dollars into the overall health care funding proposal, but we haven’t seen details regarding those Medicaid dollars and their distribution among the hospitals. We need time to look at all of those numbers, in the entirety of this budget, to see how they balance out and to determine the full impact on hospitals and their patients.

“There are obviously significant reductions to New Jersey hospitals contained in this new information, and we need to ensure that the overall dollars (charity care, graduate medical education, Delivery System Reform Incentive Payment program and Medicaid) are adequate to support the important missions of our hospitals to provide care to all, regardless of their ability to pay.”

In a statement, Barry H. Ostrowsky, chief executive of the state’s largest hospital system, Barnabas Health, said, “We are appreciative of Gov. Christie’s recognition of the importance of hospitals in the state of New Jersey during these challenging financial times for the state, as demonstrated in the fiscal year 2016 proposed budget which is supportive of graduate medical education and teaching hospitals.”

The combined impact of charity care and GME funding varied widely throughout the state.

St. Joseph’s Medical Center in Paterson, one of the largest providers of charity care in the state, saw roughly $10 million in charity care reductions, from $73.1 million this year to $63.3 million for the 2016 fiscal year that begins July 1. However, St. Joseph’s will also see an increase in GME from $9.2 million to $12.3 million.

Among the hospitals getting less charity care is Jersey City Medical Center, with a $9.3 million reduction; however, its GME will increase, for a net reduction of $7.9 million.

Newark Beth Israel Medical Center will see charity care reduced by $7.9 million to $28 million while GME increases $2.7 million to $16.2 million.

University Hospital, which is owned and operated by the state and is the teaching hospital of the Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, will see a $12.7 million cut in charity care, to $54.5 million, while GME will rise $3 million to $19.2.

Cooper University Hospital in Camden will see a $3.2 million charity care reduction, to $34.1 million, while GME will increase by $2 million to $14.3 million.

In a statement, New Jersey Health Commissioner Mary E. O’Dowd said, "Nationally our health care system is going through a fundamental transformation with the driving factors being payment methodology changes, emphasis on value, reduced cost and wellness. The results include less need for inpatient services and increased need for outpatient services and wellness initiatives."

O’Dowd said the state "is using this budget to support the transformation of the health care system to better serve our communities and buy more of what we want."



She said the increase in GME “reflects the governor's ongoing commitment to the growth of New Jersey's medical schools and the expansion of hospital-based teaching programs.

" The health department said that since the beginning of this administration, Christie has more than doubled the amount of funding dedicated to GME, from $60 million to $127.3 million. The number of hospitals receiving this funding has also grown to 42, up from 22 hospitals. In the proposed budget, Christie also increases by $45 million funding to physicians who treat Medicaid patients, providing greater access to care for the Medicaid population.

O’Dowd said, "Providing $502 million in charity care funding will allow for a reasonable transition for hospitals while also giving the state the opportunity to invest in other programs such as the future of our health care workforce, which is necessary to support the changing healthcare landscape."



Ianni of the Hospital Alliance of New Jersey pointed out that charity care is funded by both the state and the federal government; hence the $148 million cut to charity care will cost the state $74 million.



“And while it is a positive to add more funding for Graduate Medical Education and specialty physicians, Graduate Medical Education funding is for future doctors, while Charity Care funding is for current patients.”