Spring break at Panama City Beach, Florida (Photo: USA Today)

Soon, college kids across the country will take a break from binge-drinking and having random, casual sex on campus to go binge-drink and have random, casual sex in popular Spring Break spots like Cancun and Panama City. They need a break from the pressures of getting up at noon, skipping classes and hooking up.

Now, of course, I'm not talking about all college students. Because it would be wrong to stereotype a whole class of people based on the behavior of just a few million of them.

Still, every time I hear one of my friends say he doesn't think he'll be able to save enough for Junior and Missy's college tuition, I wonder why they are bothering. How much are Junior and Missy saving for their college tuition? If they're not saving, why is Dad? How hard is Junior trying to get a full-ride scholarship if Daddy's paying for everything? How hard is Missy studying for those SATs?

It's natural; they want the kids to have all the advantages they didn't have. Like the advantage of spending $50,000 a year to take courses like "How to Talk Like a Pirate," "Will Ferrell: An Appreciation" or "Pop Culture From Madonna to Now." Or even worse, political science. Calling politics a science is like calling competitive hot dog eating a sport.

Really, really rich kids can take courses like that because they're going to end up working for Daddy anyway. Your kid, probably not so much. But it does present an easy way to see if college is working for your child. Ask yourself this question after the first semester: Would I hire my own son or daughter to work where I work? If not, stop donating money to their institution of lower learning. If you keep on paying them, it only encourages them to do more of the same.

Instead of bogus courses, colleges could offer degrees like Master of Fine Plumbing and BAs in HVAC Installation, as well as doctorates in Automobile Repair. Real Life 101 stuff. It would certainly be more prestigious than a degree in Poli Sci, and the money would be better. And unlike politics, it's honest work and usually in demand.

We all know plenty of underemployed college grads, but not many underemployed plumbers. Some people still think, "If only all those plumbers and electricians had fancy degrees in Middle English or Romantic Poetry, they could have made something of themselves." But those are the people who run $50,000-a-year universities.

I'm all for learning for learning's sake, and if you want the degree in Romantic Poetry, be my guest. If you want to study the difference between Greek and Roman temples, good on you. But if that's how you spent your tuition and now you're behind the counter at Mickey D's, don't tell me you're over-educated. You were wrongly educated. And I'm thinking that if Mummy and Daddy hadn't paid all the bills, you might have taken practical courses instead of self-indulgent ones.

You can study all the arts all you want, after you graduate. You can get another degree if you feel like it, because you will be able to make the money to pay for it. There's a worth and satisfaction to that, all by itself. Besides, it will make you a well-rounded person who can talk about something other than repaying your crushing college debt.

If Junior had to pay the bills himself, he'd be learning every computer language and taking every app- and game-design course he could find. Missy would drop out during her junior year to join a high-tech startup that just got a billion dollars from some Silicon Valley venture capitalist.

Either that, or maybe one of them will marry some rich Poli Sci scion. Let them burn through their money, not Daddy's.

Read or Share this story: http://htrne.ws/1Dsf8du