by John Gibson

Follow on twitter, Facebook and listen free and live on the FOX News Radio app.

Courtesy rollcall.com Courtesy rollcall.com





The map from Congressional Quarterly depicting races for the House of Representatives shows Democrat America according to Tuesday’s voting: isolated Fort Apache enclaves, and a Red America squeeze of the Blue into narrow coastal corridors.

Nobody believes President Obama’s statement yesterday (“I hear you”), so perhaps someone should show him the map and ask if he “sees you.”

There are certainly other ways for the President to get the message, but he seems to be battened down in his bunker, blinders in place, and noise canceling headphones firmly clamped over his floppy ears.

In yesterday’s astonishing news conference, the President said he heard the two thirds of voters who didn’t vote. What those voters were saying was “we’re disappointed, disheartened, disinterested”. Instead the President seemed to hear something else: hey, we’re behind you 100%, take our silence as full support!

It was no such thing.

For a very long time the President has been convinced that he knows more, and knows better, than anyone else. He’s said it about his advisers, and now he’s saying it about the voters.

He uses excuses, of course: my voters didn’t show up, it was a map that favored Republicans, I’m getting blamed for things I can’t really control (Ebola, ISIS, etc.), these things happen in a two-termer’s last election.

But none of those excuses are really relevant. There were issues of judgment, policy, and competence in this election.

Every Republican running for a Senate seat who won made Obamacare an issue, and the health care takeover took up one third of their political ads. Republicans ran against Obama. Democrats ran away. Big Blue states Illinois, Massachussets, and Maryland went Red.

At his news conference, on the same day ISIS was tweeting more massacres from the country formerly known as Iraq, the President was asked if we are winning against ISIS. He said something and took some time saying it, but the answer was not “Yes.”

Ebola might have been on the minds of voters. New York City reported today that it is not monitoring 357 people for signs of the disease. That is up from the previous number by 300%. And the President promised that U.S. uniformed personnel in Africa would not be treating Ebola patients. Now it turns out that’s not true.

In one sense, the President is entirely to blame. It’s the Thin Blue Line that gives him the adoring support which buttresses his arrogance. He governs for them, not for that vast area between those blue dots and coastal stripes.

If the blue dots/stripes want to isolate themselves and their President in this remaining two years, well, OK, go ahead.

The resulting backlash will hit the next Democrat running for the White House in 2016.