Christie once told police officers: “The notion that I would eliminate, change, or alter your pension is not only a lie, but cannot be further from the truth. Your pension and benefits will be protected when I am elected governor."

Buy Photo Chris Christie (left) with Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones in a file photo. Christie said a January radio interview he didn’t have “any influence or knowledge of who was going to run the concessions at World Trade Center 1.’’ But the Port Authority in 2013 said Christie endorsed “the award of a contract to Legends to bring a world-class observation deck to what will be the tallest building in the Western Hemisphere.’’ (file photo) (Photo: (file photo))Buy Photo

TRENTON – Chris Christie, like most people, says he forgets things, but critics say New Jersey’s Republican governor has been claiming forgetfulness a lot more since he began thinking about being president. Here are five examples:

1. "The issue which has energized me to get into this race is the recent attempt by certain Republican legislators to repeal NJ's ban on assault weapons.’’

That quote attributed to Christie -- contained in the biography “Chris Christie: The Inside Story of His Rise to Power’’ -- is from April 1993 when Christie announced that he would challenge incumbent state Sen.r John Dorsey in the Republican primary. Christie in an interview on Fox News Tuesday night said he couldn’t recall it, telling "Special Report" host Brett Baier, "I don't remember saying that...so, we'll see." Christie continued, “"That's ... 22 years ago? I don't remember. I could've ... it doesn't sound like me."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share NJ Governor Chris Christie responds to a question regarding ammunition magazine legislation at the town hall meeting held at the YMCA in Mount Laurel.

2. “I do not remember that, and so it's not something that was part of my recollection. I think if it had happened, I would remember it, but, you know, there could be things I forget, too."

Christie said that to reporters on the campaign trail in New Hampshire Sunday when asked for his reaction to Donald Trump’s comments that he saw “thousands and thousands” of people in New Jersey, referring to Arab and Muslim Americans, cheering as the World Trade Center came down on 9/11. Christie was offered the job of U.S. Attorney for New Jersey the day before the attacks.

3. “When he got the contract, I knew nothing about it. I didn’t know him. I had no relationship with him. Nor did I have any influence or knowledge of who was going to run the concessions at World Trade Center 1, nor quite frankly, do I care.’’

This one is about Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones. Christie said this in a radio interview on Jan. 15 during the storm over the gifts he received from Jones after Legends Hospitality, co-owned by Jones, had been awarded a World Trade Center concessions contract by the Port Authority. A 2013 Port Authority press release on the contract stated: “The Board’s vote followed yesterday’s call from Governors Cuomo and Christie to endorse the award of a contract to Legends to bring a world-class observation deck to what will be the tallest building in the Western Hemisphere.’’

4. “The notion that I would eliminate, change, or alter your pension is not only a lie, but cannot be further from the truth. Your pension and benefits will be protected when I am elected governor."

Christie said that in a 2009 letter to law enforcement officers during his first campaign for governor. Patrick Colligan, the head of the state’s police union, said earlier this month, "We would appreciate Gov. Christie holding to the sacred trust promise he made when he was a candidate for governor in 2009 and meeting his obligation to fully fund the pension system."

5. "We just won a major court decision supporting the pension reforms that we put into place in 2011."

Christie said that in an ABC News interview in June. But the court ‘s finding was that the reforms were unconstitutional. Christie’s lawyers argued the state couldn’t be held to making payments promised under the 2011 law.

Bob Jordan 609-984-4343, bjordan@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1jjFg3K