By of the

Green Bay - Before he came out of the unnel to the roar of a packed crowd one more time, Brett Favre had a flashback he wasn't expecting.

After arriving on a flight from Los Angeles, Favre came over to Lambeau Field and took part in a get together on the playing field with former coaches, players and executives. There was no crowd, no music, no television cameras.

But boy did it get familiar fast.

"We got in late, went right up and got to see all these guys," Favre said during a Lambeau Field press conference hours before he was to be inducted into the Packers Hall of Fame and have his number retired. "It really didn’t hit me. It was great to see them, but I didn’t have that ‘Oh, I’m back where it started’ type until I walked into the tunnel.

"I walked in coming in from the field, up the tunnel, took a left, went into the double doors, it was like I never left. It was a great feeling. It was kind of weird because I had been here for a couple of hours and just walked off of Lambeau. It’s kind of funny how things are triggered.

"And then it was kind of a sigh of relief almost. Staying at the Radisson, lord knows how many times we’ve done that. I almost felt like ordering me a cheeseburger and fries as I did before every game. It started kind of settling back in as being normal again."

For someone who was estranged from the Packers organization for almost seven years and hadn't walked out onto Lambeau Field since 2010 as a member of the Minnesota Vikings, it's not surprising a reconnection occurred so quickly. For 16 years, walking on and off Lambeau Field was part of his being.

Favre appeared slightly nervous addressing an auditorium full of television, radio and newspaper reporters, but he was never overmatched. Before he stepped to the microphones, he was doused in platitudes from Packers president Mark Murphy, former Packers president Bob Harlan, former general manager Ron Wolf, former Packers coach Mike Holmgren and former center Frank Winters.

There might have been a time that Favre was afraid his return to Lambeau Field would incite a negative response from a lot of Packers fans angry over his divorce with the organization, but having the stadium bowl sell out in a matter of hours simply to watch the induction ceremony on video boards said a lot.

There might be some who still hold grudge over the way he forced the Packers' hand back in the summer of 2008, but for the most part it appears all is forgiven. Outside, the parking lots were about to open so 67,000 people could tailgate and party and then go see Brett Favre, just the way they had done during his 16-year Packers career.

"I think there was really a connection," Favre said of the fans. "I think at this point we all believe there was definitely a connection. We saw that with ticket sales. We see that today, there’s a game atmosphere. There was a connection and I think the players and other people who have been part of this organization can honestly say there’s a connection you can’t get elsewhere.

"And look I’ve played elsewhere. It was an awesome feeling to come back here as an opponent and witness what this is like for the other team. I had a new-found respect, which is hard because I had a lot of respect for this place anyway, to see it from that perspective. Even though I was shaking in my boots when I came out of the tunnel, part of me was like, ‘Damn, this is impressive. Tough, but impressive.’ And it is."

Favre was asked what he thought it was that endeared him to Packers fans for so long. He thinks he knows, but he said he would be curious to hear how the fans would answer if asked the same question.

He thinks it was because what you see of Brett Favre is what you get.

"I know we’re here because of football," he said. "I understand that. I think what I did was pretty good. I think it was fun to watch. It wasn’t always great, but it was fun to watch. But a good man, who has definitely made a lot of mistakes. I think what people relate to me is the genuineness and just (being) real. I’d like to think that when they look at my career or watch me play that they thought, ‘That’s the way I would do it. If I could play, I would do it that way.’ And ‘he’s not polished in his interviews, but you know what, I wouldn’t be polished either.'

"And he’s not polished in the way he plays. I don’t want to say I took pride in that, that’s just the way I was. And I wish we would have won more games, I wish we would have won more Super Bowls, but you know what? I did all I could possibly do.

"And it wasn’t great all the time, but I know it was everything (I had). And I don’t look back and hold any regrets from that end because I know I did all I could do, I just wish it would have been a little bit more. But it was all I could do and I think people genuinely appreciate that."

Favre said he will probably tell a few stories more than give a traditional induction speech. He wasn't sure if he would get emotional. That could happen when he walked out onto Lambeau Field to address the crowd before the actual induction ceremony.

It could happen later.

Either way, Favre appeared happy to be back here again.

"I think it’s more a celebration," he said. "Driving over here just now, it had a feel like we were playing a game. And I think it will have that feel to it throughout the night as we celebrate – a celebration for not just me but for all of us.

"Because these guys behind me definitely had a hand in, a big hand in, my success. To me its about all of us. I don’t see any sad moments. I mean, this is, I’m – I’m ready to tee it up! I’d much rather do that than wear this (dress shirt and slacks) trust me. And I think these guys feel the same way.

"I’m just going to have fun with the night I really am. I hope I don’t boo hoo and cry – I hope I don’t. But if I do, to heck with it. So be it."

main player to use in blogs, scaleable