Topics: Bernie Sanders, Democratic Socialism, Economics, Elections 2016, History, Socialism, The Republican Party, News, Politics News

What is it with conservatives never understanding the lessons of fairytales? A couple of years ago, political watchers found out that while Ted Cruz is a great fan of Dr. Seuss’s “Green Eggs and Ham,” multiple readings had apparently not been enough for him to absorb its real lesson. Now in the upcoming presidential election, the GOP could get a hard lesson from “The Boy Who Cried Wolf.” Maybe despite their sneering advice to college students to forego liberal arts educations, at least some of them should have majored in literature.

Let us savor the irony. The simple moral of “The Boy Who Cried Wolf,” as stated at the end of the Greek version of the fable, goes like so: “This shows how liars are rewarded. Even if they tell the truth, no one believes them.” After decades of crying wolf over various Democrats trying to turn America into a socialist dystopia, Republicans might finally face a self-described socialist in a presidential election at the exact moment that fear of socialism is at its lowest ebb in decades.

Much of the right-wing angst about a socialist takeover by the left goes back to the Cold War and the upheaval of the 1960s. So when Bill Clinton ran for the presidency in 1992, conservatives made much of his allegedly radical left-wing politics because he had protested the Vietnam War in the 1960s and later tried to dodge the draft. In 2008, the right tried to make President Obama out as a wild-eyed, radical socialist by suggesting his by-all-appearances-casual acquaintanceship with Bill Ayers and Bernardine Dohrn, who had been leaders of far-left groups Students for a Democratic Society and the Weather Underground in the 1960s, nearly 30 years before they met the future president.

The silly “socialism” smear was also thrown around for most of the policy proposals from the Clinton and Obama White Houses. Republicans damned First Lady Hillary Clinton’s healthcare reform plan as modern-day socialism even though “Hillarycare” in no way resembled a government takeover of America’s healthcare system. They later resurrected the critique for Obamacare, accusing this centrist, technocratic option of being the first step in turning American healthcare into something resembling that of the Soviet Union. Or worse, Sweden’s.

The net effect of all this outsized fearmongering, combined with the economic and social buffeting the United States has gone through over the last couple of decades, is that the word “socialism” has been denuded of the negative associations that scares the crap out of Fox News viewers. Polling over the last few years has shown Americans are much more receptive to some of what socialism has to offer and will not wet themselves in fear when they hear the word. This is particularly true of younger people who were in grade school when the Soviet Union collapsed. In 2011, a Pew Research Center poll found that 49 percent of 18-to-29-year-olds had a positive view of socialism. Considering the enthusiasm of that age group for Bernie Sanders, it seems safe to assume that number has at the very least remained stable, if not gone up.