Today's top stories:

A verdict was reached today in the sentencing phase of Colorado theater killer James Holmes' murder trial, and the decision will be read at 7 p.m. EST. (ABC News)

Typhoon Soudelor is expected to slam into Taiwan's eastern coast at around 8 p.m. EST, bringing fierce winds and torrential rain. (CNN News)

President Obama suffered a notable setback in his all-out campaign to secure Democratic support for the Iran nuclear deal when the leading Jewish Democrat in the Senate – Chuck Schumer of New York - announced his opposition. (Associated Press)

National news:

An "unprecedented" agreement between the Chicago Police Department and the American Civil Liberties Union will allow independent evaluations of the department's controversial "stop and frisk" program. (Christian Science Monitor)

Carly Fiorina hopes her well-reviewed debate performance Thursday will vault her up the list of Republican presidential candidates (and into the next main debate). (cleveland.com)(USA Today)

University of Minnesota athletics director Norwood Teague announced he's leaving his post today, amid two sexual harassment incidents. (NBC News Minneapolis-St. Paul)

The Affordable Care Act's birth control exemption for religious groups goes far enough to relieve the burden on their religious freedom, a federal appeals court in New York ruled today, overturning a lower court's decision. (Politico)

Police just outside Atlanta say the deaths of a young couple found shot in their car weren't random, but officials haven't said who killed them. (Associated Press)

A Michigan state representative reportedly tried to conceal an extramarital relationship with a fellow lawmaker by orchestrating the distribution of a bogus email -- claiming he had sex with a male prostitute. (Fox News)

Fliers took to social media with images of flames coming from a Delta Connection flight this morning at Nashville International Airport, but it looked worse than it actually was. (USA Today)

International news:

The Islamic State of Iraq and Greater Syria (ISIS) captured 230 residents, including dozens of Christians, from a densely populated town in Syria, activists reported today. (TIME)

Two massive attacks in Kabul today, one near a government and military complex in a residential area and the other a suicide bombing outside a police academy, killed at least 35 people. (Associated Press)

A Russian citizen is being held inside a hotel captured by suspected Islamist militants in central Mali, the Russian Embassy in the capital Bamako said today. (Reuters)

A friend of Niloy Neel, a blogger murdered in Bangladesh, says Islamists in the country and even the country's government "want the atheists to be silenced." (BBC News)

The U.N. Security Council unanimously passed a U.S.-drafted resolution today laying the groundwork for an inquiry that would assign blame for chemical weapons attacks in Syria's civil war. (Reuters)

North Korea will switch to a new time zone to mark its liberation from the Japanese at the end of World War II, says state media. (BBC News)