Rebecca Weirda is co-owner and president of Leigh’s, a clothing shop in Grand Rapids, Mich. (AP Photo/Adam Bird) The mandate packaged into the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act required a wider range of employers to offer health insurance coverage, and although many smaller employers satisfied that requirement by signing up for a plan on the Small Business Health Options Program Marketplace, others have been seeking different ways to provide employees with health insurance. One variation of a self-funded insurance plan, a multiple-employer welfare arrangement, is a potential solution for employers who’d prefer to seek options outside of the government-run health insurance exchanges, and Dawn Wright, vice president of insurance services at QualCare, and who’s been working with MEWAs for more than a dozen years. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

“Some states don’t allow MEWAs at all,” Wright says. “Some have significant regulations for MEWAs, and others are very MEWA-friendly, so the first thing we do is look at the state where the association or group of employers is located. “It’s a good thing when a state regulates a MEWA to prevent the inappropriate use of this option – as long as they don’t over-regulate,” Wright continues. “It gives members the assurance that someone is looking out for them.”