Campaign platforms take shape for Mills, Nolan

BRAINERD, Minn. — With the race between incumbent Democrat U.S. Rep. Rick Nolan and GOP challenger Stewart Mills officially on, both are trying out rhetoric that may carry them through the upcoming election.

Candidates are dusting off issues that were mainstays in their prior matchup in 2014, like Obamacare and America's foreign policy in the Middle East. However, they're also adopting new ideas in order to capitalize on public outcry from recent controversies.

For Mills, this involves channeling uproar sparked with recently released anti-abortion videos that purport to show Planned Parenthood's sale of fetal tissue for research.

"Rick Nolan not only received money from Planned Parenthood, Rick Nolan still wants to send money to Planned Parenthood," Mills said.

Mills said his social issue is being pro-life, although he added it wasn't one of his main motivators for running.

"I'm very, very strongly against federal funding — our tax dollars — going to any abortion provider," he said.

Mills acknowledged there's already a law prohibiting federal funding from going directly to abortion, "but it's a shell game" he said.

"Let's look at this way," Mills said, "Planned Parenthood says that only 3 percent of their services are abortion-related. Well, you can't fund one arm that then supports the other. If Planned Parenthood really is serious about providing women's services, they should, in an instant, stop providing abortions."

The "core mission" of Planned Parenthood is still abortion, Mills said.

"It's accounting gimmicks and it's semantics, but at the end of the day, through Planned Parenthood, our tax dollars are going to fund abortions, and I am against that," he said.

For his part, Nolan said he supported Planned Parenthood for its essential services like cancer screening, sexually transmitted disease care, and birth control. The law says taxpayer dollars can't go to abortion, he said.

"There's been some very misleading arguments out there about Planned Parenthood, arguing that the money is going for abortion services," Nolan said. "That's not what this is about, this is not about abortion services. The birth control part of it is about preventing abortions and unwanted children. The health service is about saving lives."

Nolan taps into populism through a new degree of emphasis on gun control following a spate of mass shootings across the nation. The most recent shooting to be widely publicized was at a community college in Roseburg, Ore.

While Mills makes a practice of highlighting that Nolan is F-rated by the National Rifle Association, Nolan derided Mills as a "gun salesman" in an interview.

Nolan said while he supports the Second Amendment, there can be a balance between that and gun safety.

"I've been hunting since I was a kid, I believe people have a right to guns for hunting, for sports shooting, for self protection," Nolan said. "But that doesn't mean we have to send all of our kids to school with an assault rifle. That doesn't mean we can't have background checks for terrorists and violent criminals and the mentally ill. We've always, always in this country, embraced gun safety legislation. And you can have that without taking away people's fundamental right to gun ownership. We don't want to turn this country into Syria and Afghanistan and Iraq, where everyone who can carry a gun has one, and they're out in the fields shooting and killing each other all day long."

Mills said the 2016 election "isn't going be about guns."

"The gun component of it - I think we've established who's A-rated, and who's F-rated," Mills said.

There's also an interesting turn in the their debate over Obamacare, which was a focal point in the 2014 campaign.

"I'm still very much against Obamacare," Mills said. "Rick Nolan is for Obamacare as a good first step to single payer. "

Rather than shying away from the idea of a government-run healthcare system, Nolan embraced single-payer as means of making healthcare more equitable for all. He used an argument similar to the one presidential candidate Bernie Sanders employed during the first Democratic debate on Tuesday.

"There were quite a number of good things that were accomplished with the Affordable Care Act, but there's so much more to be done," he said. "Single payer is what all the other developed industrialized nations of the world do. Our current system spends up to 30 percent just in administering health care. Under single payer, Medicare runs 3, 4 percent. The beauty of single payer is that everybody has the same program, the same coverage, everybody pays the same, and everybody pays. Last but not least, all your health care dollars go into health care, not to insurance company executive salaries and ridiculous administrative costs."

Mills criticised Nolan for his support of the recently negotiated Iran deal, which Mills said paves the way for the rogue nation to get its hands on a weaponized nuclear device.

"It's not a matter of 'if' they get a nuclear weapon, it's a matter of 'when'," Mills said.

Mills predicted other nuclear programs popping up in countries near Iran as a result of the deal. Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Turkey will make their own initiatives to obtaining a nuclear weapon, he said.

"We will have an arms race and nuclear proliferation on the Arab Strait," he said.

There was one final issue, one final spectre from 2014 that may yet come back to haunt the 2016 race: Mills' (formerly) long, flowing hair.

Nolan claimed it was Republicans who originally emphasized Mills' hair as an attribute, and then only "whined" that it was a superficial issue when Democrats turned it against him.

"Get this down," he said. "Long hair, short hair, no hair, it doesn't matter. It's what's underneath, it's what's inside, and it's what you stand for that matters."