The regional crises gripping the Middle East these days are hardly the result of “superpowers” withdrawing from the region. The U.S., for one, is not distancing itself from the region. If anything, U.S. subsidization of so many of the participants and direct interventions since its withdrawal from Iraq in 2010 speaks to the primacy of the Persian Gulf and surrounding areas in the U.S’s military and diplomatic posture.

What is different is how the U.S. is not directly exercising its capacity to intervene, and that it is looking for a new partner to pick up part of the tab since no other world power – China, Russia or the European Union – is capable or willing to. Particularly in the war against the Islamic State group, this de facto partner is the Islamic Republic of Iran, and so the U.S. is giving ground in some areas to Tehran, but asserting it in others. That it can deal with both camps of the Gulf Cold War – one led by Iran, the other by Saudi Arabia – speaks to its continued outsized role there.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Middle East]

During the Cold War, the U.S. rarely intervened directly against Soviet clients or states that challenged American primacy in the region, the Marines’ short-lived deployment to Lebanon during the 1980s being an exception. Claims of “disengagement” confuse a lack of direct military action for a lack of meddling. Historically, such measures were left to Britain, and after 1971, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Anwar Sadat’s Egypt and imperial Iran.

Fighting between two or more regional blocs without direct U.S. participation is nothing new to the area. Yemen is the most recent, but not necessarily most important, example of this type of proxy war. The U.S. had pursued a counterterrorism campaign there, and it also subsidized a counterinsurgency carried out by regional partners. Whatever success these efforts brought evaporated after the counterinsurgents failed to offer the Yemeni people anything of substance. Rather than further embroil itself in the crisis there – where a former American ally, President Ali Abdullah Saleh, is now on the side of pro-Iranian insurgents, the Houthis – the U.S. is leaving it to the coalition put together by Saudi Arabia to roll back Tehran and contain al-Qaida. A major counterinsurgency operation in the Middle East will apparently be left largely to the Gulf States that frequently demand the U.S. resolve such matters for them.



[MORE: Political Cartoons on Iran]

The proxy war in Yemen has not come without costs to U.S. influence. Although the U.S. remains the top arms supplier for countries across the region, Arab (and the Israeli) governments are even less willing to accept coaching on “democracy promotion” or human rights. The U.S. does not lack influence in these countries, but it does allow its influence to sit on a shelf gathering dust as it shields these countries from the consequences of their actions.

The overriding issue is the unspoken American desire to bring Iran, once a trusted enforcer in the region before the 1979 revolution, back in from the cold. Ostensibly, the U.S. is willing to deal with Iran in order to forestall a preventive war launched by Israel that was meant to set back Iran’s nuclear program.



[READ: Leave the Middle East Be]

The U.S. has opted for more engagement because it believes Iran can do things the Arab powers cannot. The Saudis cannot take decisive action in Iraq against the Islamic State. And they or other Gulf Cooperation Council members cannot hope to bring the Syrian regime to the negotiating table with their current level of support for the rebels. The U.S. will not directly involve itself in either of these conflicts after more than a decade of foreign occupations. Iran, for the White House, is the logical security partner here. As The Atlantic put it, “Iran is trying to keep the post-Saddam [Hussein] order together,” even if maintaining that order causes just as many problems as solutions.

Therein lies the problem with this detente with the Islamic Republic. What remains to be seen is if and how this engagement affects Iranian foreign policy, which, while hegemonic, is no longer “revolutionary” in any meaningful sense of the word, and is still often adversarial to the interests of the U.S. Because the nuclear deal (which is set to be finalized in June) does not take Iran’s doings in the region into account, it will most likely have no effect on Iran’s behavior.