Wednesday, U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz picked up the endorsement of one of his Senate colleagues. ( Reuters photo )

Wednesday, U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) picked up the endorsement of one of his Senate colleagues.

Sen. Cory Gardner (R-Colo.), in his endorsement, said Cruz has always been a "fierce defender of the Constitution" and a "tireless advocate for conservative principles." He also noted the Texas senator has spent his entire career fighting for the men and women of the U.S. and "pushing back against the special interests" in Washington, D.C.

"Ted is the only candidate who will change the way Washington works and restore the balance of power back to the American people," he said. "It's time for Republicans to rally behind this campaign in order to put forth the best candidate to stop Hillary Clinton in November. I am confident Ted Cruz is that person and I'm thrilled to endorse him for president."

Before joining the Senate, Gardner was elected to the Colorado House of Representatives in 2005, and became Minority Whip in 2006. He was then elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 2010.

"Cory has spent his time in Congress focused on improving the economy, creating jobs, and fighting for the people of Colorado," Cruz said. "He has stood up and been a strong advocate for conservative principles like stopping the train wreck that is Obamacare and this dangerous deal the Obama administration struck with Iran. I am honored to have Cory's support and look forward to working together to continue to coalesce Republicans around this campaign."

Draw closer to God. Experience the presence of the Holy Spirit every month as you read Charisma magazine. Sign up now to get Charisma for as low as $1 per issue.

Has God called you to be a leader? Ministry Today magazine is the source that Christian leaders who want to serve with passion and purpose turn to. Subscribe now and receive a free leadership book.

-

See an error in this article? This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.