PRESS RELEASE: The following content has been reprinted in whole or part from a company-supplied press release.

Crawford & Co. announced that it has opened a New York office in midtown Manhattan for its Global Markets business unit and hired Cole Russo and Kirsten Early.

Global Markets is responsible for managing the multinational relationship with Crawford’s major clients globally and providing a range of consulting services to design comprehensive claims solutions leveraging the company’s worldwide expertise.

As a senior vice president of global market sales, Russo will develop and define executive relationships with managed clients in Global Markets to leverage and grow those accounts, and will be responsible for selling products and services to significant international accounts.

In her role as a vice president of global market sales, Early is responsible for identifying, managing and securing new business and growth opportunities in the multinational insurance market environment, particularly in the TPA field.

“Cole and Kirsten bring nearly 30 years of combined sales, account management and strategic global claims experience to Crawford, and I look forward to drawing on their guidance and expertise as we continue to grow our Global Markets team,” said Mike Reeves, executive vice president, Global Markets. “New York and the Northeast are hubs for major insurance operations. This geographic expansion is a strategic move designed to establish a crucial Global Markets presence in the New York market.”

Russo comes to Crawford having spent more than 15 years as president and founder of Cole Russo & Co. LLC, a specialized insurance broking and risk management consulting firm focused on mergers and acquisitions, private equity and corporations. He holds a Juris Doctorate from the Seton Hall University School of Law, with an emphasis in insurance law and litigation, in addition to earning a Bachelor of Arts degree from Villanova University, with an emphasis in business administration.

Early has held previous positions in the industry where she was responsible for developing and overseeing global claims initiatives for multinational carriers and brokers as well as developing and implementing risk management strategies for global corporate clients. She holds a Master of Business Administration degree from the Drexel University LeBow School of Business and a Juris Doctorate degree from the Seton Hall University School of Law.

Furthermore, the Global Markets team in the Americas added Jennifer Turner, currently senior vice president, Business Relationship Development at Risk Sciences Group in Lake Zurich, whose role is extended into the international field. Most recently, Turner served as a senior vice president and managing director responsible for sales, marketing and global product management for Aon’s eSolutions, which includes risk management systems. Prior to joining Aon, Turner spent eight years at Kemper Services/Broadspire.

Emanuel Lauria, executive vice president, Global Client and Business Development, said the addition of new staff is intended to “grow our presence in this sector as part of our overall sales transformation effort.”