Suppose President Paul Ryan announces in 2017 that he has instructed his Department of Justice not to prosecute anyone who fails to pay taxes on capital gains. The tax is still on the books, but, in an exercise of prosecutorial discretion, his administration will not pursue anyone for failing to pay it.

President Obama’s health care law, the Affordable Care Act, also imposes a tax. The Supreme Court decided so. President Obama has chosen not to collect that tax from at least three groups: employers before 2015, individuals who had their policies canceled whose insurers reoffer them for a year, and employers who promise they won’t fire anyone to get below the 50-employee threshold, until 2016.

If these Obama administration examples of “prosecutorial discretion” are permissible, why not the hypothetical President Ryan’s decision not to prosecute those who don’t pay their capital-gains tax? Or how about a President Ryan not prosecuting those who pay only 90 percent of their income tax – resulting in a de facto 10 percent tax cut by the president’s action alone?

President Obama, in the view of some Republicans, has violated his constitutional obligation to “take care that the laws be faithfully executed.” Some Democrats defend him, claiming that all presidents have the right of prosecutorial discretion, to choose which law violations to pursue and which to let pass.

A prosecutor’s decision not to go after petty crimes because scarce enforcement dollars should be used for major crimes, or because enforcement would be highly inefficient in some contexts, is defensible. It is not an attempt to change the law. For example, President Obama is within his rights not to prosecute marijuana possession in those states that have legalized it, and not to deport children whose parents brought them across our borders illegally. Immigration enforcement should be directed first against border crossings, or visa overstaying, by adults, which violations will increase in the absence of enforcement. And drug law enforcement will be less effective in states that have explicitly legalized the activity in question, so prosecutors should use the enforcement dollars they have more effectively elsewhere.

The President Ryan example, however, is over the line. If he took this action, he’d be effectively altering the tax laws. President Obama’s actions on health care are also over the line. He’s attempting to change the underlying law to make it less onerous.

Separating true prosecutorial discretion from attempting to change the law by the executive branch alone requires discernment that might not always be easy. A neutral arbitrator is needed in a dispute between the Congress that wants to preserve its prerogative to make the laws, and the president, who wants to enforce the laws in an efficient manner. In our three-branch system of government, that arbitrator is the judiciary.

Under existing judicial opinions, however, it is very hard to get a case like this heard. Courts have dodged deciding disputes between the president and Congress, to avoid alienating the branch that creates and funds courts (the Congress) or the branch that appoints or promotes judges (the president).

This dereliction of duty by the courts, however, does not result in a fair policy fight between the other branches. Rather, it results in the president winning. Congress can't force the president to prosecute anyone.

Can a court? If a court rules that the president lacks the power to exempt an entire class of violations of law because it is a policy change, not an exercise of enforcement efficiency, what can that court do about it? A court injunction works to order someone to stop doing something, not to start. Whom would a court order the president to prosecute for non-payment of tax? Whom would it order ICE to deport from our country?

The answer is that courts have authority to make declaratory judgments, announcing what the law is, without ordering any particular action. That happens in many intergovernmental disputes, where one state is suing another, for instance, over ownership of natural resources or cross-border pollution. The federal court makes clear what the law is; and the parties respond accordingly.

A court could readily issue a declaratory judgment that President Obama lacks the authority to exempt whole classes of parties from the ACA. Such a decision can be appealed to the Supreme Court. If the president loses, but continues to apply his self-made exemptions, he would be acting in clear defiance of the Constitution’s separation of powers, and the Supreme Court’s authority “to say what the law is,” in the words of Chief Justice John Marshall.

Even President Richard Nixon eventually relented when forced with such a decision involving the Watergate tapes. It was, eventually, the threat of impeachment for violating the separation of powers in our Constitution, when unambiguously announced by the federal courts, that led to Nixon’s capitulation. Would President Obama want to outdo President Nixon in executive branch arrogation of power? The courts should take a case from Congress and rule.

Tom Campbell is the dean of the Dale E. Fowler School of Law at Chapman University, and the author of a book on the separation of powers. He served five terms in Congress. These views are his own.