LAS VEGAS (AP) - Billionaire casino CEO and chairman Sheldon Adelson knew what the lawyer questioning him was getting at, and he was having none of it Tuesday in a Clark County courtroom where he spent all day answering questions related to a wrongful termination lawsuit, offering comic relief, meandering answers and sharp words for the man suing him.

Attorneys representing fired Sands China CEO Steven Jacobs are hoping to tie that company, based in China and on the Hong Kong stock exchange, to Las Vegas Sands Corp. operations and executives such as Adelson in order to keep the case in Clark County.

The 81-year-old chairman of both Las Vegas Sands and Sands China sipped a delivered Starbucks coffee from the witness stand as he said he was adamant he doesn’t oversee day-to-day business of the companies, and instead offers strategic management and delegates to senior executives.

“It’s 8,000 miles away, your honor,” he told Judge Elizabeth Gonzalez, adding it would be impossible to direct from Las Vegas staffs of tens of thousands who work in Macau.

But attorney James Pisanelli, representing Jacobs, argued Adelson decided everything from firing to stock bonuses to seating inside his Macau casino’s restaurants.

When Adelson would say one thing, Pisanelli retrieved testimony Adelson gave in a 2012 deposition for the case that usually indicated the opposite.

Jacobs’ wrongful termination claim hasn’t been heard yet. A Nevada Supreme Court decision stopped it until jurisdiction - whether the case should stay in Clark County or not - is determined.

Adelson’s appearance followed several days of testimony to make such a determination.

His was often spent offering unprompted asides about his hard-scrabble upbringing, his advice to Pisanelli and, particularly, his low opinion of Jacobs. Adelson’s chatty responses that didn’t always answer the question at hand even caused his own lawyer, Russell Jones, to jump up objecting.

Throughout, Adelson sprinkled tidbits about himself and his life: He has full-focal lenses embedded in his eyes, but they weren’t working so well Tuesday necessitating the use of a magnifying glass; he was a court reporter early on; his 18-year-old son is an award-winning moot court competitor; and he prefers doing business by phone, not email.

“I recently told my secretary that I need to get, like, a Gmail,” he said as an aside after being asked about his work email accounts. He needed privacy, he said.

At another moment, the Republican donor who recently hosted possible presidential candidates in Vegas for the weekend related something he read in The New York Times.

“I do read the Times,” he said, knowing there might be skeptics in the room, adding that he even subscribes.

“Come on now,” Pisanelli said with mock shock.

It was clear Adelson knew the legal lingo often responding to questions from Pisanelli with “asked and answered” and protesting that questions were “overreach” as well as refusing to speculate, “this is a court of law based on facts, not a court of hypothesis,” he said.

The judge later told Adelson he could in fact answer a hypothetical question.

When Adelson would go on a tangent, typically accusing Jacobs of being delusional or incompetent, Pisanelli would ask if he was finished.

“For the time being,” Adelson said once, with a slight smile.

Adelson is expected to return to the stand on Friday morning.