Topics: Barack Obama, Dick Cheney, frank bruni, George W. Bush, Iraq war, isis, Media Criticism, New York Times, Paul Krugman, Politics News

Frank Bruni is mad. The New York Times columnist thinks it’s high time that Obama’s defenders stopped blaming George W. Bush for all the problems in the world. Sure, Bush made a mess of things, but that was like six or seven whole years ago. “Whenever Barack Obama seems in danger of falling, do we have to hear that George W. Bush made the cliff?” Bruni complains. And to be honest, he’s sort of got a point — though not the one he thinks.

Here’s how Bruni puts it:

It happened with the economy. For the president’s staunchest defenders, legitimate questions about whether the stimulus was wisely crafted and whether Obamacare was rushed took a back seat to lamentations over the damage that his predecessor had done. Obama wasn’t perfect, but at least he wasn’t Bush.

But the real problem here was not that Obama supporters attacked Bush. It was that Obama himself did not.

The stimulus was poorly crafted — more than a third of it was composed of tax cuts (the ill-considered be-all and end-all of Bush’s earlier $170 billion stimulus program), which delivered far less bang for the buck than additional spending would — and a prime reason for that was Obama’s desire to partner with Republicans, rather than blaming them for the disaster he’d inherited from Bush. A fat lot of good that did him: He got zero votes from House Republicans in return.

An even worse problem was that the stimulus was too small — about half the size that it needed to be, as Paul Krugman noted at the time. But Obama was not about to blast Republicans like Susan Collins and Olympia Snowe for demanding that the slightly larger Democratic House-passed package be scaled back. He praised them for their bipartisanship! And why not? Even as the economy was worsening week by week before he took office, Obama was preoccupied with plans for a “fiscal responsibility summit” to strike a “grand bargain,” cutting Medicare and Social Security in return for modest tax increases — something totally at odds with how he had run for office. There were multiple signals from the very start that Republicans weren’t going to cooperate on anything, but still Obama refused to place blame where it unmistakably belonged.

When it comes to Obamacare, Bruni’s sense of the problems involved is even further off the mark. Obamacare wasn’t rushed, it was nearly stalled to death by bad-faith Republican negotiations in the Senate. Obamacare’s origins trace back to the Heritage Foundation, including the individual mandate. It was modeled more specifically on RomneyCare. The bill itself included hundreds of GOP proposals, and Obama bailed on the key Democratic proposal, the public option, falsely claiming he’d never campaigned on it. There was absolutely nothing of a partisan rush job about it.

Nothing about healthcare reform had much of anything to do with Bush, of course. But that’s no reason to let Bruni’s myths go unrefuted. More to the point, it underscores the broader problem with Obama: He repeatedly bends over backward searching for “common ground” with Republicans, only to get the rug pulled out from under him. Once again, it’s not that Obama’s supporters criticize Republicans too much; it’s that Obama himself criticizes them far too little.

Of course, what’s got Bruni really steamed at this point isn’t domestic policy:

And with the Middle East, those defenders sometimes turn Bush’s epic mistakes into Obama’s hall pass. Perhaps he hasn’t figured out what’s right, but he isn’t guilty of the original wrong, which is constantly being litigated anew, as if a fresh verdict on the events of 2003 could alter the challenges and stakes of 2014. On Tuesday there was another spasm of this. As Congress debated the escalation of airstrikes against Islamic extremists, Rep. Lloyd Doggett, D-Texas, digressed to inveigh against “the wholly unnecessary Bush-Cheney invasion of Iraq,” a bell that was rung 111/2 years ago and can’t be un-rung now.