Fourteen years ago, Rebecca Vogel-Pitts sent this photo to friends with a birth announcement for her son, Jackson. Kiera Pitts is seen holding her brother Jackson in the photo. The photo washed up on the banks of the St. Vrain River after the recent flood. (Courtesy photo) ( Picasa )

LONGMONT -- Despite being evacuated from their home during the recent floods, Rebecca Vogel-Pitts said her family was fortunate not to have any damage from the floodwaters. But a photograph makes her think a family friend might not have been as lucky.

Longmont resident Hal Morrison discovered a photograph of Vogel-Pitts' children on the north bank of the St. Vrain River just downstream from Hover Street.

"Our house didn't get flooded, so it's probably not ours," she said. "My son's birth announcement was sent out with that photo in the envelope 14 years ago, so it probably belongs to someone we sent that to who still had it in their home during the flooding."

A photo that washed up in a yard at the south end of Twin Peaks Circle in The Greens, in Longmont, contained photos of a funeral from 1978. One of those photos was of a sign with the name William Lewandowski. (Courtesy photo) ( Picasa )

The photograph is of Niwot High School junior Kiera Pitts, now 16, when she was a toddler. She is holding her infant brother, Jackson Pitts, now 14 and an eighth-grader at Sunset Middle School.

Vogel-Pitts said she couldn't think of any family friends who lived near along the river near Sunset Street, where the photo was found, but a lot can change in 14 years.

"It's a mystery whose it could be," Vogel-Pitts said. "I'm racking my brain trying to figure it out, and so far I have no idea."

"Either way, it's nice that someone found it in the mess," she said.

Times-Call readers submitted details and photographs of other debris they found washed up near their homes after the floods.

Advertisement

"We found a photo album in my parents' yard. They live at the south end of Twin Peaks Circle in The Greens. It is full of professional photos of a funeral from 1978, including several 8x10s of the decedent in his casket. The name on the sign is William Lewandowski."

Megan Goodman-Arndt, Longmont

"This sweet framed photo of a mom and her child washed up on our yard (on Emerald Drive). We had no idea where it came from, so my daughter brushed it off and left it out on the drive, hoping its owner would spot it. Two days later it was taken so we assume it found it's home."

Elise Miller, Boulder

"My mother, Harolyn Gumeson Villyard, a resident of Champion Greens, bent over to retrieve what she thought was a silver coin in the grass. Ironically, it was a tiny Noah's Ark charm."

Cassie Anderson, Longmont

"Hundreds of unfired shotshell wads, used to reload shotgun shells, washed up at First and Main at the height of the flooding."

Mike Mullin, Longmont

"I am a teacher, and one of my co-workers lives near the Greens and her basement was completely flooded. She lost so many memories. On Thursday when we returned to school a student came up to her and said, 'Look what we found.' They handed her an old teacher ID badge that had washed far away. It was a badge from years ago when she worked at a different school. She was so touched and shared the story with the rest of the staff that day. She is an art teacher, and she lost all of her own art as her studio was in the basement-- all of her samples to show students, all her own art, it is all gone."

Diana Austin, Music teacher SVVSD

"My daughter, Lainey, found lots of dead fish in the yard and surprisingly one that was still alive in a small puddle."

This photo album was found after the flood at the south end of Twin Peaks Circle in The Greens, in Longmont. It is full of professional photos of a funeral from 1978, including several 8-by-10s of the decedent in his casket. (Courtesy photo) ( Picasa )

Vanessa Crossley, Firestone

"I'm actually from the McConnell Drive subdivision in Laporte, where we got flooded out hard by the Poudre River and were evacuated in the middle of the night. But what had us laughing, even at the sight of such heartbreak when we were able to come home the next day, was at the edge of the water three-quarters of the way up my lawn -- a small, plastic, orange child's toy boat, upright floating in inches of water, like it was docked up on the bank of a giant lake or river with the 21/2 feet of water rushing past our house. We also were given the gift of a turtle sandbox, empty with no sand (with) the lid just a couple doors down. Our backyard was hit the worst with about two feet of water that we came home to, and the neighbor who received the lid thought it was from our own turtle sandbox and brought the lid home. So the empty sandbox with lid is sitting in the backyard for someone to come claim it as we have a chain link fence and it is visible from the road.

Thanks for reminding me of the things that gave me something to smile and laugh about during such a time of devastation and heartbreak. I grew up in Longmont ... and four years ago moved away for the first time. But I will always call Longmont home, and seeing the devastation that occurred in my community was heart-wrenching, especially since all the roads were closed and I couldn't get to my own family that needed help there. Seeing everyone come together as a strong community makes me proud to call Longmont my home and brag that it truly is the all-American city.

Emily Rodriguez-Ebel, Laporte

If you are the owner of any of these objects, or believe that you know the owner, call Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or email news@times-call.com and wbryen@times-call.com. Put the words "flood debris" in the subject line.