M.Scott Mahaskey/POLITICO House files Obamacare lawsuit

The House of Representatives filed a long-awaited lawsuit Friday, alleging that the Obama administration ignored key aspects of its health care reform law when implementing the sweeping new government program.

The litigation, authorized by the House in July, addresses only the Affordable Care Act and makes no mention of immigration. However, the filing of the suit the morning after Obama unveiled his major executive actions on immigration was clearly intended to underscore GOP lawmakers’ desire to paint the president as a chief executive intent on overstepping his legal bounds.

Story Continued Below

“Time after time, the president has chosen to ignore the will of the American people and rewrite federal law on his own without a vote of Congress. That’s not the way our system of government was designed to work,” House Speaker John Boehner said in a statement. “If this president can get away with making his own laws, future presidents will have the ability to as well. The House has an obligation to stand up for the Constitution, and that is exactly why we are pursuing this course of action.”

President Barack Obama is not named as a defendant; the lawsuit, filed in U.S. District Court in Washington, names as defendants Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell, Treasury Secretary Jack Lew and their departments.

The White House dismissed the lawsuit Friday as meritless and as a waste of money.

“Instead of passing legislation to help expand the middle class and grow the economy, Speaker Boehner and House Republicans are spending hundreds of thousands of taxpayer dollars pursuing a lawsuit that is without any sound legal basis,” White House spokeswoman Brandi Hoffine said.

The new lawsuit claims that two specific aspects of implementation of the Obamacare law violated the terms of the legislation.

First, the suit complains about repeated delays of the employer mandate, which was supposed to kick in in January of this year. The administration delayed the requirement until next year for some employers and until 2016 for others.

Second, the litigation challenges payments to insurance companies under a cost-sharing provision that the suit argues was never authorized by law. Such “offset” payments amounted to $3 billion in 2014 and could total $175 billion over 10 years, the House claims.

“The administration is instead unlawfully and unconstitutionally using funds from a separate Treasury Department account — authorized for other purposes — to pay insurance companies and thereby unilaterally altering the structure of the health care law,” Boehner’s office said.

The suit was filed for the House by George Washington University law professor Jonathan Turley. The liberal critic of Obama’s alleged executive overreach is the third attorney to handle the matter for the House. It was assigned to Judge Rosemary Collyer, who was appointed to the bench by President George W. Bush.

Two conservative litigators, David Rivkin of BakerHostetler and Bill Burck of Quinn Emanuel, were retained to handle the case earlier in the year. However, House aides say both backed out after being pressured by other clients to drop the litigation.

Democrats have widely dismissed the lawsuit as a political stunt. Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi accused the Republicans of playing into the interests of “impeachment-hungry extremists.”

“The fact is, this lawsuit is a bald-faced attempt to achieve what Republicans have been unable to achieve through the political process. The legislative branch cannot sue simply because they disagree with the way a law passed by a different Congress has been implemented,” the California Democrat said. “It is clear, as one leading legal scholar put it, that this lawsuit is ‘an embarrassing loser.’”

Pelosi’s office posted Turley’s contract online Friday. The constitutional law expert is receiving $500 an hour to represent the House but the contract tops out at $350,000.

The contract also bars Turley from discussing the case with the media, though law students from George Washington University can work on the lawsuit.

The contract ends on Jan. 3, 2015, or when the U.S. District Court rules on the lawsuit.

Jake Sherman contributed to this report.