There are back-to-back NFL games playing on television Sunday.

John Elway, Joe Ellis and Gary Kubiak plan on hanging out in Houston and watching some football.

Whether they fit in their scheduled head coaching interview before, after or between plays of the NFC and AFC championship games probably doesn’t matter.

Elway, the Broncos’ general manager, seemingly had his heart set on hiring Kubiak, the Baltimore Ravens’ offensive coordinator, early in the process.

It’s telling that after two other candidates, Teryl Austin and Doug Marrone, cancelled their scheduled head coach interviews at Dove Valley, the Broncos didn’t bother replacing them. No more head coach interviews are scheduled. Why waste anybody’s time when the entire NFL world believes Kubiak is the choice?

After spending nine years with the Broncos as Elway’s backup quarterback from 1983-91 and 11 more years as the Broncos’ offensive coordinator from 1995-2005 (including four seasons coaching Elway), Kubiak was an easy choice.

“Those guys have spent countless hours together on bus rides, plane trips, dorm rooms in training camp,” said former Broncos quarterback Jake Plummer, who had Kubiak as his offensive coordinator from 2003-05. “I don’t see how it couldn’t work. I think for the future of that organization, Kube is the guy. Everybody talks about him meshing with (Peyton) Manning. But they can make it work.”

It figures the Broncos will have to make a final determination on Kubiak by Tuesday because that’s when the Ravens’ coaching staff heads to Phoenix for the Pro Bowl.

Baltimore coaches are replacing the Broncos’ at the Pro Bowl because Denver’s staff is now split up following head coach John Fox’s departure Monday and arrival Friday in Chicago as the Bears’ new coach.

Just because Kubiak was Elway’s choice from the start, though, doesn’t mean there aren’t concerns. Kubiak’s offense not only features the zone blocking, one-cut rushing style, but a passing game heavy on play-action bootleg passes.

That doesn’t seem like an ideal fit for Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning, whose immobility became more pronounced this season.

The root of Kubiak’s offense, though, is similar to what Manning operated for years with the Indianapolis Colts.

“Good coaches can coach anybody,” Plummer said. “Manning was highly successful running it for most of his career. If Manning can do some of it — he doesn’t have to do all of it. You don’t have him boot left six times a game and throw 25-yard comebacks. Let’s be realistic. But he can play-fake, boot out, turn his shoulders and throw a flat route to the fullback or tight end. They’ll find a way to make it work.”

If Kubiak becomes the head coach as expected, he and Elway in short order will work to improve a Broncos roster that won another AFC West Division title last year but was one-and-done in the postseason.

The Broncos are expected to first look for a right tackle and one more guard with the type of agility and athleticism that can get to the second level in Kubiak’s zone-blocking rushing system.

Left tackle Ryan Clady is the only Broncos’ offensive lineman who was originally drafted to play in this system.

To help teach Kubiak’s system, he is expected to bring along Ravens quarterbacks coach Rick Dennison to again serve as Broncos’ offensive coordinator, as he did from 2006-08.

On defense, the Broncos are expected to look at acquiring help at middle linebacker and safety, as Nate Irving and Rahim Moore are free agents, and possibly defensive tackle if free agent Terrance Knighton isn’t re-signed.

Elway did interview Broncos offensive coordinator Adam Gase for the head coach position on Thursday and Cincinnati Bengals defensive backs coach Vance Joseph on Friday.

Both are considered fallback candidates. Gase has been talking with other teams in need of offensive coordinators. He does have an interview set up with the Jacksonville Jaguars, according to an NFL source.

The Jaguars make sense because they drafted quarterback Blake Bortles with the No. 3 overall pick last year. His rookie season proved he can use some Gase-caliber coaching after Bortles threw 11 touchdowns against 17 interceptions.

Joseph figures to have a better chance at becoming the Broncos’ new defensive coordinator, as he was Kubiak’s secondary coach for three seasons in Houston.