Action Points Note that this study was published as an abstract and presented at a conference. These data and conclusions should be considered to be preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

In a cross-sectional analysis, hypertension control improved over time in patients with private or public health insurance but was unchanged among uninsured adults.

NEW YORK CITY -- Uninsured adults do not appear to be reaping the gains made in hypertension control over the past few decades, researchers found.

In 1988-1994, only about a quarter of adults younger than 65 who had hypertension had their blood pressure controlled to a level below 140/90 mm Hg, with no difference between insured and uninsured individuals, according to Brent Egan, MD, of the University of South Carolina's Care Coordination Institute in Greenville.

But over the next 2 decades, the rate of control increased to about 50% for insured adults while remaining stagnant for those without insurance, opening up a wide divide, he reported at the American Society of Hypertension meeting here.

"That gap is growing. It's not going to get better unless we take intentional action because we're perfectly designed for the results we're getting, and they're going in the wrong direction," Egan said, paraphrasing a well-known saying attributed to management expert W. Edwards Deming.

The good news, he said, is that there were some modifiable factors associated with a greater likelihood of having controlled blood pressure -- statin use, having at least two doctor visits each year, and having insurance -- that could help close the gap.

"The key, I think, is insurance," he said, noting that the study showed gains in blood pressure control in patients who had either public or private insurance coverage. "In terms of the national debate -- public versus private -- to me, I don't think it makes a great deal of difference."

Increased access to insurance through the Affordable Care Act may help stop the gap in hypertension control from widening, but it's not the ultimate solution, Egan said, pointing to a pre-rollout estimate from the Congressional Budget Office that 31 million adults would remain uninsured even after Obamacare was implemented.

"Yes, I think it will help," he said, "but I think we have to be very intentional and not just say we've done something when it still leaves us with such a high proportion of uninsured adults."

Egan and his colleagues evaluated trends in hypertension control according to insured status using data on U.S. adults ages 18 to 64 who participated in the the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from 1988 to 2010. The study included 1,563 uninsured and 6,067 insured individuals.

Some concerning trends emerged, including an increase in the percentage of patients with hypertension who did not have insurance from 12.3% in 1988-1994 to 17.5% in 2005-2010.

Also, the proportion of patients who had fewer than two doctor visits per year fell over time in the insured patients (from 33.1% to 20.3%, P<0.001) but remained high and relatively unchanged over time in the uninsured patients (52.5% in the earlier time period and 45.6% in the later time period, P=NS).

"In general, what you find is individuals who are seen less than two times a year are much less likely to have their high blood pressure diagnosed, treated, and controlled," Egan said. He added, however, that even after adjustment for visit frequency, lack of insurance remained a predictor of poor hypertension control.

In terms of the proportion of patients who had their blood pressure controlled, there was no difference between the insured and uninsured patients in 1988-1994 (28.5% versus 25.6%, P=0.45). But a significant separation became apparent by 1999-2004 (P<0.001) and widened by 2005-2010. At the end of the study period, 52.5% of insured individuals had controlled blood pressure compared with only 29.8% of uninsured individuals (P<0.001).

The results of a multivariate analysis suggested that providing insurance coverage, giving patients statins, and getting patients in for a visit at least twice a year could help address that disparity.

Egan pointed out that there is not a high cost to treating hypertension because effective blood-pressure-lowering medications are relatively inexpensive. Plus, he said, the prevention of potentially costly downstream effects makes it worth it from an economic standpoint.

John Bisognano, MD, PhD, director of outpatient cardiology services at the University of Rochester Medical Center and president-elect of the American Society of Hypertension, agreed.

"Hypertension treatment always translates into less stroke, less heart failure, less kidney disease, less dialysis, less kidney transplantation," which represent a drain on the healthcare system, he told MedPage Today. "So just having any level of insurance that can provide these fairly inexpensive medications to these patients can have a huge effect on getting more patients to goal."

"We are really in the golden age of hypertension treatment where most of the great medications that were developed in the '80s and '90s are now generic, so it doesn't even really have to be expensive," Bisognano said. "And the vast majority of patients can be treated with these generic medications. It's just a matter of identifying these patients and bringing them in and treating them."

From the American Heart Association:

Egan disclosed grant support from the CDC, the NIH, the Department of Defense, Medtronic, and Quintiles and other relationships with Daiichi Sankyo, Medtronic, the University of Iowa, UpToDate, the International Society on Hypertension in Blacks, the American Society of Hypertension, and the University of South Carolina.

Reviewed by Zalman S. Agus, MD Emeritus Professor, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania and Dorothy Caputo, MA, BSN, RN, Nurse Planner