Stagnant tuition prices, increasing scholarship fund credited with lowering debt load

Average student loan debt for University of Colorado Law School graduates dropped 8 percent this year, thanks to steady tuition prices and increased scholarship funding, officials say.

The average debt among graduates who borrowed some money dropped from $116,000 in 2014 to $107,080 in 2015, according to new numbers.

Though it's still a "scary" amount of debt, Phil Weiser, the law school dean, said CU's averaged indebtedness is considered "reasonable" when compared to other law schools.

According to U.S. News & World Report, students at some law schools graduate with nearly $175,000 in debt. Across the country, between 70 and 95 percent of law students borrow money.

Around 71 percent of 2015 CU law graduates took out loans. In recent years, between 77 and 86 percent of CU law students have borrowed money.

The law school hasn't raised tuition in four years (though some university-wide fees did go up) and it upped its scholarship pool from $2.5 million in 2010-2011 to more than $5 million this year, Weiser said.

The law school also bolstered its loan repayment assistance program, which provides grants to students with careers in the public sector and underserved communities. The $6.5 million endowed fund will provide $6,500 grants to 40 graduates this spring.

Chip Hennessy, a first year law student at CU, said he chose CU's law school because tuition is lower than at private schools, there's good financial assistance and out-of-state students can qualify for in-state tuition their second year.

Advertisement

Plus, he said, he liked knowing that the loan repayment assistance program could be an option if he decides to go into the public sector.

"I factored it all in," he said. "This was the best education at the best value."

Second year law student Marcus Degen said CU's tuition rate felt more fair than what's charged by other law schools, noting his financial aid package was "front loaded" for the first year.

"It felt like a gesture of good faith," he said.

Still, he said, looming student loan debt is a major issue for law students.

"The biggest hurdle for me in deciding to go to law school was if I was willing to take the risk of going into this much debt," he said.

Around 93.5 percent of CU's graduates last year were employed 10 months after completing their degree, a number the school hopes to increase to 95 percent. Weiser said the high job placement rate, coupled with the school's collaborative atmosphere and steady tuition, contributed to a 22 percent increase in first-year students who enrolled this fall.

"Students are seeing us as providing a high value proposition," he said. "The indebtedness is relatively reasonable and people are feeling encouraged about the opportunities on the other end."

CU doesn't have school-specific loan default rates, but the campus's overall default rate was 2.7 percent in 2012, according to the most recent data available. For CU undergraduates, the average student loan debt of students who borrowed some money was $25,362 in 2014.

The university system as a whole has increased institutional financial aid from $21 million in 2005 to $85.3 million in 2015.

Camera staff writer Amy Bounds contributed to this report.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta