Cookies on sale for $4 per box through March 2

Girl Scouts Rachel Metcalf, 10, left, and Maddie Metcalf, 14, right, walk together with their mother Robyn Metcalf while going door-to-door selling Girl Scout cookies Wednesday in north Loveland. ( Steve Stoner )

Rachel Metcalf doesn't mind rejection, or the houses where no one is home, or chasing down escapee puppies with her sister, Maddie.

Rachel, 10, and Maddie, 14, started selling Girl Scout cookies when sales opened on Jan. 26.

Rachel is a junior scout in troop 71106 and her mother, Robyn, is troop leader. And Maddie is a senior scout in troop 73819. Robyn is involved there, too, as troop treasurer.

They went door to door in their old neighborhood in Loveland Jan. 26 and sold a lot of boxes.

"One house there bought 24 packages," Robyn said.

If You Go What: Girl Scout cookie sales. When: Sold until Sunday, March 2. Where: Visit girlscouts.org to find out when and where Girl Scout cookie booths are located. Cost: $4 a box. Info: The Girl Scouts this year are selling five varieties: Tagalongs, Thin Mints, Samoas, Trefoils and Savannah Smiles.

"And there were three people in this one house that each bought eight boxes," Rachel chimed in.

Cookies are $4 a box now instead of $3.50 like they used to be.

Robyn said this makes it easier when going door-to-door, because they don't have to carry as much change.

Advertisement

The young ladies learn about interacting with people, decision making, money management, business ethics and other life skills through selling Girl Scout cookies every year. Visit girlscouts.org for details about the program.

The girls hit a snag Jan. 27 when it wouldn't stop snowing, but were back at it Wednesday, walking through the neighborhood while their mother, Robyn Metcalf, pulled a red wagon full of boxes with the five flavors of Girl Scout cookies.

"It's easier in town. Here is a little more sporadic. We're learning how to walk further, aren't we girls?" Robyn said Wednesday.

The family moved to a home in north Loveland a year ago. They stayed in a hotel while in transition in 2013, so Robyn said they tried to cut back on selling cookies. They sold 750 instead of the almost 1,000 cookies they sold the year before, which was still substantial.

Before Wednesday, the girls had sold around 100 boxes to neighborhoods, teachers and their bus driver, who bought 15 boxes.

The sisters agree that it's pretty easy to sell the cookies, and they are straightforward in their sales pitch.

Rachel said, "When I go to the door, I say, 'Would you like to buy some Girl Scout cookies?' They say yes or no. If they say yes, we say, 'They're $4 a box,'" she said.

The girls get cookie credits depending on the number of boxes they sell, which helps fund educational summer camps. And now they get slightly more per box since the price has gone up.

They are also participating in Hometown Heroes programs, where they try to raise enough money to send boxes of cookies to the National Guard, in Rachel's case, and a Fort Collins homeless shelter, in Maddie's case.

Maddie and her troop have been making meals periodically at a shelter for more than a year. They are excited to be able to bring them dessert this time.

"When you started doing Girl Scouts, you wouldn't have been able to talk to her like this, you would have hidden," Robyn said to Rachel Wednesday evening as they walked down the street.

Rachel was very shy before she joined the troop.

"My first year of Daisies I'd probably be hiding behind my mom right now," Rachel agreed.

Now, she skips up to the door, stands shoulder to shoulder with her sister and does a little dance jig while waiting for a potential patron to answer.

And she and her sister are not afraid to chase after the puppy that escapes from one home and books it down the street.

Jessica Benes can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 530, or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaBenes. Read her blog at jessicabenes.com.