Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

LONDON (AP) — Just like old times.

Used to be that a match involving Miss Williams vs. Miss Williams, as they like to say at the All England Club, was a regular occurrence at the latter stages of the most prestigious tennis tournaments in the world.

During a span of eight majors from the U.S. Open in 2001 to Wimbledon in 2003, Serena and Venus Williams participated in six all-in-the-family Grand Slam finals. Think about it this way: Before that stretch, the only previous major title match between sisters came when Maud Watson beat her younger sibling, Lillian, in the very first Wimbledon women’s final in 1884.

There would be two more all-Williams Grand Slam finals, both at Wimbledon, in 2008 and 2009. But since then, they have not met in any round at any Slam. Until now. No. 1-seeded Serena and No. 16-seeded Venus will reprise their unique rivalry on Monday in the fourth round at Wimbledon.

“We just don’t know what can happen there. We’ve all seen, a million times, them play. And we’ve seen different results, especially at Wimbledon. You just have no clue,” said Venus’ coach, David Witt. “We’ve seen good matches. We’ve seen bad matches.”

This will be their 26th showdown on tour (Serena leads 14-11), their 13th at a major (Serena leads 7-5), and their sixth at Wimbledon (Serena leads 3-2).

It comes 17 years after their first professional matchup, in the second round of the 1998 Australian Open.

And it comes 15 years after their first encounter at the All England Club, in the 2000 semifinals

“I think we’re both more mature. Still as tenacious,” said Venus, who won that one en route to the first of her seven career Grand Slam titles, five at Wimbledon. “I mean, back then, we were definitely fun to watch. I think we still are.”

Serena also has won five trophies at the grass-court tournament, part of her collection of 20 major singles championships.

Her narrow escape in the third round Friday against Britain’s Heather Watson — after trailing by two breaks at 3-0 in the third set, then twice standing two points from defeat at 5-4 — extended Serena’s Grand Slam winning streak to 24 matches. She is aiming for a fourth consecutive major title, a self-styled “Serena Slam,” and trying to get the third leg of a calendar-year Grand Slam.