Paramount/Everett

Toy makers have some good news to counter concerns about holiday sales in the U.S.: International consumers.

The two largest toy makers — Hasbro and Mattel — in recent days have posted positive sales surprises in their third-quarters, showing that sales in international markets are growing fast enough to pick up slack demand out of the U.S.

Hasbro today said U.S. sales were down 5%, while international sales grew 11%, thanks to brand-hungry consumers in Latin America, Russia and Turkey. Mattel last week said international were up 9%, compared with a rise of 3% in North America.

“The two toughest areas around the world I’d say from a consumer sentiment continue to be Australia and the U.S.,” Hasbro Chief Executive Brian Goldner said on Monday’s conference call to discuss a 17% jump in profit. “We’re seeing enthusiasm in Latin America and major areas of Europe particularly in Russia and Turkey.”

The indicators suggest that sales from outside of the U.S. can offset weak domestic demand heading into the holidays, the most critical time of the year for toy makers, when they ring up more than 50% of their sales.

The U.S. will be the closest watched market, given it is the largest and most-profitable for toy makers, and retailers are approaching the period with caution, mimicking the sentiment in the broader economy. Forecasts for the November and December holiday season suggest sales growth of 2.4% below last year’s 3%, according to ShopperTrak estimates.

Mattel

Hasbro and Mattel have spent more than a year planning for the 2013 holidays, and have several toys, like Hasbro’s latest Elmo doll that gives hugs and Mattel’s Barbie Dreamhouse to try to give a boost to the iconic doll, dotting various hot lists from retailers and others. Now it’s time to execute during the fiercely competitive time and make sure their toys are on shelves and that people are buying them.

Hasbro’s shares are up Monday in a bit of a relief rally following better than expected results, as sales for its games business rose 6% due to its Magic: The Gathering franchise, while My Little Ponies helped girls toys rise 29%.

Boys toys continued to struggle, with sales down 17%, as the Marvel-branded items continue to have a hard time topping last year’s success from toys tied to The Avengers movie from last year.

Needham & Co. analsyst Sean McGowan thinks the boys business is bound to turn around. Hasbro will be making toys for movies like Transformers and Spider-Man in 2014 and Star Wars the year after that. Monday’s results, where the results of the games business was the key surprise, “gives you greater confidence that you don’t have to wait for things to get better,” Mr. McGowan said.