Pam Arterburn of Rancho Cucamonga, left, and Randy Vidaurri of Fontana stand in front of the Hobby Lobby in Rancho Cucamonga on Saturday in protest against the Supreme Court’s decision that family owned businesses such as Hobby Lobby can use the owners’ personal religious views as a reason not to cover certain forms of birth control Photo by James Carbone

RANCHO CUCAMONGA >> A handful of protesters, signs in hand, gathered in front of the Hobby Lobby Store here Saturday to protest the recent U.S. Supreme Court ruling involving the national craft store chain and its policy on contraceptives.

Some of the protesters saw the ruling as one with far-reaching repercussions.

“I see this as an infringement not just on women’s rights but on workers’ rights,” said protest organizer Randy Vidaurri of Fontana.

Attempts to reach a representatives of Hobby Lobby on Saturday were unsuccessful.

The high court ruled Monday that some companies with religious objections, such as Hobby Lobby, can avoid providing certain contraceptive coverage required under the Affordable Care Act. This is the first time the Supreme Court has declared businesses can hold religious views under federal law.

Protester Pam Arterburn of Rancho Cucamonga said she’s concerned about the effect the decision has on women.

“It’s restricting women’s health,” she said, adding an employer’s beliefs are infringing on a woman’s decision about her health in addition to overriding her own beliefs and values..

“Who’s religion counts? Just the company owners? Shouldn’t the employee’s religion count?” Arterburn asked.

Vidaurri said the head of the family-owned company opposes the use of certain types of contraceptives including some intrauterine devices, or IUDs. Yet the company sells a large quantity of merchandise that’s manufactured in China, a country where abortion and IUDs help couples meet the government’s policy of one child per family.

If David Green, the company’s chief executive officer and founder, feels so strongly about the use of IUDs “why would he do business with (China) and get all his products from this country?” Vidaurri asked.

Mike Tait of Rancho Cucamonga disagreed with some of the protesters’ points of view and stopped to debate the matter.

“I don’t think attacking religious freedom is what we should be doing in our country,” he said after talking with protesters.

The company is a privately held business, Tait said, and it would be different if it were a publicly held company.

“If this is the company owner’s position to object to these methods of contraception, then that’s his moral right,” he said. “That’s what this country is about, to be able to run their company based on their moral convictions.”

Advertisement

Hobby Lobby’s website carried a statement about the court’s ruling.

“Our family is overjoyed by the Supreme Court’s decision,” Barbara Green, co-founder of Hobby Lobby said in the statement. On Monday “the nation’s highest court has re-affirmed the vital importance of religious liberty as one of our country’s founding principles. The Court’s decision is a victory, not just for our family business, but for all who seek to live out their faith. We are grateful to God and to those who have supported us on this difficult journey.”