Salinas >> A pilot health program for Monterey County residents ineligible for expanded health coverage under the Affordable Care Act, mostly because they are in the country illegally, is finally ready for review by the Board of Supervisors.

On Tuesday, county supervisors are set to consider approving the pilot program aimed at improving health outcomes for the estimated 50,000 uninsured county residents, and allocating $500,000 in general fund money to cover pharmacy, laboratory and radiology services for eligible patients.

The program is designed to offer the services to uninsured county residents who qualify for restricted Medi-Cal coverage and seek acute care through the county’s federally qualified health clinics and Natividad Medical Center clinics but don’t qualify for coverage of subsequent pharmaceutical, diagnostic and treatment services.

While the health department will track health outcome and cost data to assess the program’s effectiveness, county health department director Ray Bullick said the real benefit is making sure uninsured patients get follow-up care they can’t currently afford and help them avoid developing more serious illnesses that end up costing the county health care system much more in the long run.

“Leave the money out of the equation and this is the right thing to do,” Bullick said. “We should be spending money on the front end.”

Bullick said state legislators, such as state Sen. Bill Monning, D-Carmel, will be tracking the program and its data to see if it can serve as a statewide model for providing care and improving health outcomes for the state’s remaining uninsured. While other California counties are engaged in similar programs, Bullick said Monterey County’s program is unique, including because it is aimed at the largest percentage of undocumented residents in the state.

If the program is approved by the supervisors, it would begin in October and offer a closed provider network, including lab and radiology services through Natividad under an agreement with the health department, and discounted pharmaceuticals through specific local Walgreens stores.

Once the $500,000 is spent, the program ends, Bullick said, though he said county health officials are hoping local employers step up with additional funding and will seek other funding sources to extend the program. The department is in line for a Blue Shield of California Foundation grant to help pay for administration of the program.

Advertisement

The program is a collaboration between the county health department, Natividad Medical Center and the social justice organization Communities Organized for Relational Power in Action (COPA), which has pushed health coverage for uninsured illegal residents for years.

On Tuesday, COPA is planning to hold a press conference on the County Government Center campus to respond to the supervisors’ vote on the pilot program.

Also Tuesday, the supervisors are set to consider a contract with newly appointed Natividad CEO Dr. Gary Gray that would pay him $418,184.85 annually. The board announced last week it had chosen Gray as the county-owned hospital’s top administrator after a national search.

The proposed contract represents a $12,000 raise for Gray, the hospital’s chief medical officer who has also served as interim CEO since February. He replaced Dr. Kelly O’Keefe, a member of the hospital board who served as interim CEO since shortly after former CEO Harry Weis abruptly left last summer following a pay dispute with county officials.

Weis, Gray and Chief Financial Officer Daniel Leon were all involved in the dispute, which centered on contract bonuses tied to the hospital’s bottom line. Neither Gray nor Leon qualify for bonuses anymore after renegotiating their contracts.

Jim Johnson can be reached at 726-4348.