The Kenosha County Department of Human Services is over budget on mental health by $2.1 million, and now the County Board is getting involved.

Supervisor Terry Rose, chairman of the Finance/Administration Committee, called for a special meeting to discuss the overage.

“It was a big surprise to everyone,” Rose said. “We can’t just keep paying, paying and paying and the budget going up, up and up.”

Laurie Staves, chief financial officer for the Kenosha County Human Services Department, said the second quarter numbers don’t show the whole picture.

“(With) savings in other mental health and Alcohol and Other Drug Addiction areas, we come down to $1.2 million,” she said. “Under the division, we’re only going to be $250,000 short for the year because we are bringing in more than $1 million in Medicaid revenue.”

John Jansen, director of the Department of Human Services, said a number of things contributed to the situation, including a shortage of beds for the seriously mentally ill, demand forcing patients to be seen in more expensive state institutions, and a shortage of psychiatrists locally.

Shortage of beds

For Kenosha’s overnight mental health needs, Jansen said the department looks to Wheaton Franciscan St. Luke’s in Racine.

“It’s generally short term to get them back on track,” Jansen said. “Anytime someone is having a mental health crisis and ends up in the hospital emergency room, our crisis workers are involved and law enforcement is involved. These are folks where the decision has already been made that they need hospitalization.”

Jansen said the supply is outpacing demand.

“They (St. Luke’s) have reduced their beds. They went from a 48-bed hospitalization down to 26 or 27 beds. They had three psychiatrists who resigned or retired,” Jansen said.

“If they are full, we have to look at other options, like state institutions, and their rates are quite a bit more expensive,” Jansen said.

The average cost per day in Racine is $519 but can be as high as $1,142 per day in state institutes, according to Jansen.

Inpatient care for psychiatric emergencies and medical detoxification are a significant portion of the division’s budget. Last year the division funded 558 hospital admissions, according to its annual report.

Shortage of psychiatrists

Meanwhile, the shortage of psychiatrists is a nationwide problem, according to Sita Diehl, director of state policy and advocacy at the National Alliance on Mental Illness.

And with more people insured by the Affordable Care Act, the demand for services increases.

“People have been toughing it out with their major depression, bipolar disorder or anxiety disorder, and once they get insured, then they go for services,” Diehl said.

Wisconsin meets just 20 percent of all need for mental health care, according to an analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation based on a comparison of psychiatrists and the overall population.

Dr. Ashok Shah, a private Kenosha psychiatrist, said the shortage is not likely to change quickly.

“We see depression, anxiety, substance and alcohol abuse and psychosis. The need for psychiatrists is definitely there,” Shah said. “There are not enough physicians that want to work in inpatient settings. It’s a busy field, and the reimbursement is not sustainable for physicians to continue.”

Diehl said one problem is that psychiatrists typically spend 50 minutes with each patient “where a regular physician will spend just a couple of minutes.”

“Those who dedicate themselves to service through the county clinics are heroes,” Diehl said. “They are there because they really care — not because they want to make a doctor’s salary.”

A 2014 assessment by the Wisconsin Department of Health Services estimated 49 percent of people with mental illness in Wisconsin did not receive treatment in 2011 and in children the number was closer to 46 percent.

Seeking a solution

Supervisor Dayvin Hallmon, chairman of the Human Services Committee, is trying to look ahead to solutions without increasing the budget.

“It gives us a chance to have that conversation and find some answers and take the lead on fixing this,” he said. “It is a statewide and national problem, but I think we are positioned very neatly to take the lead on this in an interesting way.”

Hallmon hopes to get the state and federal officials involved in a solution.

Jansen is preparing a presentation to the County Board at the Committee of the Whole scheduled for 7 p.m. Wednesday in the County Administration Building, 1010 56th St.

“The purpose of Wednesday’s meeting is to say, ‘Here is what we’ve discovered; here is where lies the problem; here’s some things that we know as a community we have to really take a look at.”