Please enable Javascript to watch this video

EAST STROUDSBURG -- A major medical merger is in the works in the Poconos. Pocono Medical Center is merging with the Lehigh Valley Health Network.

Employees at Pocono Medical Center found out Thursday morning that their employer signed a letter of intent to merge with Lehigh Valley Health Network.

This could mean better care for patients and more jobs in the Poconos.

A mass email to employees at Pocono Medical center quickly spread the news of the merger.

It's a deal hospital officials say has been in the works for a few years.

"We recognized with the changes in population health management, affordable care act, that we were going to need to look at ways to deliver lower cost health care and better quality care," said Pocono Health System board chairman Andy Worthington.

The news came as a big surprise to the more than 200 doctors and more than 1,800 staff at Pocono Medical Center, including medical technician Maria Menegus who's worked there for 35 years.

"Big surprise," she said.

Workers say the merger will provide opportunities for better patient care and a wider network of specialists.

"Patients will probably see improved care, not that we're not giving them quality care, but state of the art," Menegus said.

"I think it's a great opportunity for us, for everybody. And with Lehigh Valley, a very reputable institution, so very excited," said medical technologist Lucy Cabardo .

Gil James of Stroudsburg learned of the news on his way into the hospital to pay a bill.

"I think they're trying to expand and compete with others that may be expanding also," James said.

St Luke's just broke ground on a hospital in Bartonsville in April that is expected to open in the fall of 2016.

With this latest merger, Pocono Medical Center says they could possibly still expand and build another hospital in Monroe County, too, and no jobs are in jeopardy.

"There's no plans for any sort of cutbacks. In fact one of the discussions we've had with Lehigh Valley preliminarily is about expansion," Worthington added.

This is only the first step in the merger process. Officials say we can expect to see this finalized sometime in the first half of 2016.