Republican Charles Baker, center, and his wife, Lauren, approach a microphone before a news conference at his home in Swampscott on Thursday. Baker, who lost the 2010 gubernatorial race to Democratic incumbent Deval Patrick, announced Wednesday that he's planning to take another run at the state's top political office. (AP Photo/Steven Senne)

By Matt Murphy

State House News Service

SWAMPSCOTT -- Republican Charlie Baker called for the repeal of two new tax laws in his first appearance as a 2014 candidate for governor, but said he did not want to be hamstrung as he was in 2010 by a pledge to never to raise taxes as he expressed a willingness to reconsider some of the positions carved out during his first statewide campaign.

A day after formally announcing his campaign online with a video, Baker stood on the lawn of his Swampscott home just a short stroll from the ocean with his wife, Lauren, to answer questions about his decision to mount a second campaign for governor after losing to incumbent Gov. Deval Patrick four years ago.

Though he said many policy specifics will be rolled out over time during the campaign, Baker weighed in quickly on the controversial new sales tax on computer and software design services, saying it should be repealed. He also called for the repeal of another law change incorporate in the recent transportation financing plan that linked future increases in the gas tax to inflation.

Speaking on the tech tax, Baker said: "It's exactly the wrong message at the wrong time to the wrong part of the economy." He said state officials should be able to find revenues in the $35 billion annual budget to make up for $161 million in lost revenues by rolling back the new tax policies if transportation is their priority.

Advertisement

During his last campaign, Baker took a pledge not to raise taxes and warned voters that Patrick, if re-elected, would likely push to increase the income tax to pay for his policy initiatives, which Patrick did this year. Baker, however, said he would be signing no tax pledges this time around.

"I'm a reform before revenue guy and I'm going to be the taxpayers' best friend on that whole question, but one of the things that I learned with respect to the pledge is that if you take the pledge you're basically singing up for the status quo," Baker told reporters.

Calling the tax code "extremely messy," he continued, "I would hate to put myself in a position where if we actually came up with a way to simplify and make the tax code more sensible and more business and consumer and people friendly that somehow I would have a pledge in place that would make it impossible for me to go ahead and execute on that."

He also said he would not be reprising so-called "5-5-5 plan" to lower the tax rates on corporations, income and sales to 5 percent across the board.

The Republican candidate's decision to hold the press conference at his home in Swampscott reflected the campaigns decision to pursue a more positive tone in his messaging, and highlight the personal side of the candidate that was missing in his first bid for the Corner Office.

Baker stood outside on the well-manicured lawn of his Swampscott home with his wife at his side, and his dog Lucy mingling among reporters. "This was a race that meant something to us and we wanted to take another run at this, and I'm in the race because I believe Massachusetts is a great state. I believe it's filled with great people with big ideas and big dreams and while we are doing fine, we can do better," Baker said.

His wife, Lauren, was quiet for much of the press conference, but did say that as she discussed a second campaign with her husband the potential impact on their family, "I keep coming back to the fact that it is an amazing experience to be in a campaign."

The 2014 race for Baker is also, in part, a chance to redeem himself in eyes of those close to him. After talking with friends, family and colleagues after the 2010 defeat, Baker said they told him they didn't recognize the man they watched on the campaign trail, and he wants a second chance to set the record right.

"That guy, that goofy family guy, that really enthusiastic, hard charging, set the bar high, let's go get it type leader, people just never though they saw him. And for us, when we talked about doing this again, we said if nothing else whatever happens in November 2014 we do not want the people who know me best to come up to us afterward and say, 'Where were you?'" Baker said.

Baker's entrance to the race this week was greeted by familiar attacks from state Democrats as party chairman John Walsh dusted off the 2010 playbook and rekindled questions about Baker's role as former Gov. William Weld's budget chief in crafting the financing plan for the Big Dig that led to large amounts of state debt as the project ran over budget.

"If the Democrats want to blame me for everything that went wrong over the 30-year life of the Big Dig, I certainly hope they're going to give me credit for everything that gone right over the 30-year life of the Big Dig as well," he said, suggesting the financing model was crafted in a bipartisan fashion and replicated by the Patrick administration to finance its accelerated bridge repair program.

Baker said the complex borrowing strategies helped sustain the central artery project, and some of the benefits are just now being seen in places like the Seaport District on the South Boston waterfront.

"I think the fact that people are bringing it up now in this political context is just an indicator that they really don't have much to say about where we ought to be going in the future," he said.

Baker said his campaign will be focused on improving the business climate to grow jobs, closing the educational achievement gap and "changing the relationship" between the state and cities and towns to foster better partnerships.

Baker also said he supports the Legislature's decision to require Gov. Patrick to seek a waiver from certain requirements under the Affordable Care Act, and believes the state needs to "get aggressive" in addressing the cost of health care, permitting and energy to improve the business climate.

On South Coast rail -- a project he opposed in 2010 -- Baker said he was willing to listen to new data and wanted to talk with residents of the region before making a final decision, but added that his concerns about the environmental permitting and $2 billion price tag remain.