MUMBAI, June 17, 2015 /PRNewswire/ --

The U.S. weight loss market has entered a new phase of flat to low growth, constrained by a strong shift to do-it-yourself plans, the proliferation of free apps for smartphones, and more healthy eating by consumers. Yet, some competitors are doing well, and many untapped niches exist.

The Affordable Care Act has strengthened the value proposition of medically supervised diet programs and small-mid-sized chains are growing rapidly via franchising. The market is moving in two directions: medical and retail. Report discusses the implications of the ACA's $1,625 Preventative Health Benefit and why it gives medical weight loss programs the edge and momentum over commercial programs.

This is a completely new analysis of the $7.8 billion U.S. medical weight loss market.

Covered… dollar value & growth of the medical weight loss market segment (early 1980s to 2014, 2015 and 2019 forecasts), latest market trends and developments, growth of the retail drugstore mini-clinics diet programs, status reports for: weight loss surgery, MD-based programs, hospital and clinic-based programs, Rx diet drugs, bariatricians, VLCD programs. Franchising of medical programs, costs, avg. consumer cost of programs, avg. annual revenues per medical centers, and P&L statement.

Contains 17 in-depth competitor profiles for:

Physicians Weight Loss

HMR

Optifast

Lindora Clinics

Smart For Life

Medi-Weightloss

Centers for Medical Weight Loss

Nuviva

Let's Lose

Dr. G's Weight Loss

JumpStartMD

Thinique

Medical Weight Loss of Michigan

CVS Health

Rite-Aid

Wal-Mart, and more.

To order this report and request for sample page:

https://www.bharatbook.com/healthcare-market-research-reports-565656/medical-weight-loss-programs.html

Table of Content

Executive Overview: Major Findings 1-11

Discussion of total weight loss market: diet market mega-trends: shift from diet products to services, medical programs gain momentum under ACA, what's wrong with commercial chains, importance of counselors, franchising pros & cons, consumer clean eating trend, move to retail outlets

Outlook for 2105 diet season, discussion of rise of MLM firms, DIY trends, company programs, competition from apps.

Types of medical weight loss providers - list

Tables:

2013-2014 $ value of diet products vs. services

Market revenues $ size, by segment: 2011-2015

Forecasted growth rates for market segments: 2015-2019.

Retail Drugstore Chain Mini-Clinics 12-18

Discussion of the growth of in-store mini-clinics at drugstore chains, why the demand

Staffing by Nurses, Physicians Assistants, typical start-up costs, logistics

Growth prospects/forecasts by merchant Medicine, others

Why weight loss programs are a good complement to their services and revenues.

Company Profiles

CVS Minute Clinics

RediClinics

Rite-Aid Weigh Forward Program

Walgreens

Wal-Mart Clinics

Hospital & Clinic Chains Weight Loss Programs 19-56

Types of plans offered (low-cost, moderate-cost plans, estd. no. of hospitals providing each, typical cost), Medicare new coverage

Physician-based diet programs: diet drugs/other methods used, consumer attitudes, limitations, estd. no. MDs with a weight loss program - independents vs. affiliated with chains, meds used, typical cost of MD programs

How Obamacare has provided a game-changing opportunity for MDs to add weight loss & counseling services via PAs, RDs, Nurses

Profiles of a hospital-based weight loss program: Johns Hopkins

Major Medical Chains: Lindora Clinics, Centers for Medical Weight Loss, Smart for Life, Medi-Weightloss+ Clinics, Medical Weight Loss of Michigan , new chains: Nuviva, Thinique, Dr. G's, Let's Lose, JumpstartMD (in-depth company descriptions, plan costs, estimated revenues, no. of centers, franchising growth strategies, etc.)

, new chains: Nuviva, Thinique, Dr. G's, Let's Lose, JumpstartMD (in-depth company descriptions, plan costs, estimated revenues, no. of centers, franchising growth strategies, etc.) Tables: Avg. revenues per site, avg. plan cost to patient, avg. income statement, start-up Costs for top 8 medical weight loss chains/franchises/licensors.

The Diet Drugs Market 57-77

Discussion of viewing obesity as a disease, major obesity medications used today, FDA position, role of MDs, commercial chains' involvement with diet drugs, why it's tougher than thought to develop anti-obesity drugs that are effective and with minimal side effects.

Status Report: Contrave, Qsymia & Belviq sales & outlooks, FDA rejections of: Acomplia, Taranabant, other Rx diet drugs

Other new obesity drugs in development: Saxenda, Beloranib, Mirabegron

Existing drugs used (Xenical, Phentermine) - descriptions

Tables - prescriptions written and $ sales for: Meridia, Xenical, Phentermine, 12 other anti-obesity drugs (2003-2014), historical sales 1995-2000

Marketdata's 2015 and 2019 outlooks for prescription diet drugs, effect of new drugs on mkt. Size, discussion of this market's potential vs. drawbacks, overcoming MD and consumer attitudes, side effects, effectiveness. Moderate weight loss not enough for most dieters.

Bariatrician Programs 78-86

Status report of profession, ASBP survey results (MDs by: age, income, size practice), how they're trained, number practicing, certification by ASBP, use of diet drugs, treatment methods used, plan effectiveness/cost, business is up due to more surgeries, less surgeries - opinions of industry consultant.

The Bariatric Surgery Market 87-110

Discussion of gastric bypass & lapband procedures, why demand grew strongly to 2007, status report, 2014 estimated surgeries, 2015 & 2019 forecasts, costs per surgery by type payor, pros/cons, who qualifies, effect of Obamacare on coverage by 25 state exchanges

Surgery mkt. smaller than thought - better data from government/AHRQ data proves 2009-2012 decline, revisions of prior estimates based on ASMBS estimates

Surgery utilization and outcomes, mean cost per surgery

Major insurers' coverage today, status report, Medicare position, role of liaison firms (The Wish Centers, Barix Clinics, Liv-Lite, Journey Lite - addresses), avg. cost of surgery.

Types of surgery: Roux-en-Y, lap banding, minigastric bypass, sleeve, consumer pros/cons

Table: No. of bariatric surgeries performed: 1992-2015

Table: $ value of the market: 1992-2019 F, outlook under Obamacare - Associations: ASBS, Obesity Action Coalition, increased lobbying efforts.

VLCD/LCD Fasting Supplement Programs 111-132

Status report of low-calorie modified fasting programs in 2013-2014, effect of bariatric surgeries, outlooks by mgmt. at HMR, strong demand from hospitals for tunkey programs characterizing the mkt. (price, programs, no. of sites, increased direct-tocustomer sales)

Historical nature of market - development from 1970s-1990s, enrollments, dropout/ completion rates, problem on insurance coverage, market indicators, positive & negative trends/factors.

Table: Marketdata estimates of VLCD enrollments for 1995-2015 (new vs. repeat patients, fasting vs. maintenance), $ value of mkt. for 1984-2019 F.

Company Profiles: Detailed descriptions of companies/plans, program revenues: Health Management Resources, Optifast (Nestle)

Table: VLCD enrollments, $ mkt. value: Marketdata estimates: 2007-2014.

Reference Directory of Weight Loss Information Sources 133-137

Industry & government trade associations, journals, newsletters, magazines, consultants

Related Reports

About Bharat Book Bureau

Bharat Book Bureau is the leading market research information aggregator that provides market research reports, industry analysis, company profiles, business reports, country reports, newsletters and online databases. Our clients include Corporate, Consulting firms, and Academic Institutions and Government departments across the globe. Bharat Book Bureau provides over a million reports from more than 400 publishers around the globe. The market research reports we provide, help global companies examine the different markets before setting up a business or expanding into different countries across the world. They give a complete perspective on the current market scenario, trends, segments and future outlook.

Contact Details :

Poonam

Bharat Book Bureau

India: +91-22-27810772, 27810773

Blog: https://www.bharatbook.com/blog/

W: https://www.bharatbook.com/

E: poonam@bharatbook.com



SOURCE Bharat Book Bureau