Cervantes Fundación Hispanoamericana de Arte selected Kenner resident Edgar Bernard and Bianca San Martin as its King and Queen of Mardi Gras Mambo 2015. The king and queen are chosen based on their merits and contributions to the New Orleans community as well as to the Hispanic community.

Cervantes Fundación Hispanoamericana de Arte was created in 1982. Formed to promote modern and classical Hispanic arts and cultural tradition, their mission focuses on music, dance, literature, fine arts, and culinary arts, among others.

The Mardi Gras Mambo event strives to incorporate the various styles of Carnival celebrated around the world, and to fuse that variety with New Orleans Mardi Gras beats. Entertainment will include performance highlighting the rhythms of Carnival in Latin America and New Orleans, including conga, samba, punta and second-line dancing.

The carnival ball will be held on Feb. 7 at Club Silhouette in Metairie. Pre-sale Patron tickets are $25 per person and include the Patron Party from 7 p.m. – 9 p.m., a walk on the red carpet, food and a champagne toast. General admission after 9 p.m. is $15 per person. Cervantes is a 501 (c) (3) tax-exempt organization so; your tickets may be tax deductible.

Formal dress is suggested and masks are encouraged.

For information regarding sponsorship opportunities for Mardi Gras Mambo, patron or general tickets, call Javier Olondo at 504.905.6925, Brenda Melara at Diverse Marketing Group 504.615.9070, or email Brenda@DMGadagency.com.

Mardi Gras Mambo 2015 King Edgar Bernard

King Edgar Bernard, known to his family and friends as Kango Komic, was born in New Orleans and later moved to Kenner and attended Kenner Junior High. Bernard graduated from St. Augustine. He then graduated from UNO with a bachelor's in political science and a master's in rrban development.

Bernard was a director with the city of Kenner for 16 years and was instrumental in the start of the first Hispanic after-school program, as well as organizing several latin festivals for the city of Kenner. He is presently a manager with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Bernard enjoys Latin dancing, as well as volunteering with Cervantes and the community.

Mardi Gras Mambo 2015 Queen Bianca San Martin

Queen Bianca San Martin was born and raised in Metairie. She graduated from St. Mary's Dominican High School and received a bachelor's degree in Interdisciplinary Studies from UNO, with a concentration in business and urban studies.

San Martin is dedicated to volunteering with nonprofit organizations, including Cervantes and other community agencies. She is of Honduran and Puerto Rican decent and well respected in the latin community as a salsa dancer, instructor, and performer, along with a continued focus on helping the dance scene grow.

Louisiana Philharmonic Orchestra

Rafael Shabetai has been selected as the narrator at the Historic New Orleans Collection and Louisiana Philharmonic Orchestra concert. Shabetai is a Kenner resident and professional announcer.

This free event will be held Feb. 4 at 7:30 p.m. at St. Louis Cathedral and will focus on the Spanish influence in the arts and music of Louisiana.

Conducted by maestro Carlos Miguel Prieto, the LPO will play the Overture to Sylvain by Andre Gretry. Gretry premiered in New Orleans in 1769. There will also be music by Zarzuela composer Francisco Asenjo Barbieri, Mexican Fernando Chueca, El Choclo (the corn) Argentine Tango by Angel Villoldo, and much more.

Our Lady of Perpetual Help's St. Joseph Altar

Our Lady of Perpetual Help, located at 1908 Short Street in Kenner, invites volunteers to help bake cookies for their St. Joseph's Altar.

The baking will be held in the OLPH cafeteria on Feb. 7, 8, 14, and 15 at 9 a.m. – 3 p.m. and cookie baking will be held in the OLPH LaRose Center on Feb. 23 – 27 and March 2 – 6 from 8 a.m. – noon, with the exception of Wednesdays during these weeks only.

If you would like to volunteer, contact either Dolores Plaia or Bertha Marino, Co-Chairpersons St. Joseph Altar at 504.464.0361.

AARP Tax-Aide assists seniors with tax preparation for individuals

AARP Tax-Aide is offering free income tax preparation to senior citizen taxpayers of low and moderate income.

Volunteers of the country's largest volunteer program will begin preparing 2014 income tax returns during the first week of February and will continue until April 15.

Taxpayers must provide a picture ID, social security card, 2013 income tax return, applicable 2014 tax forms and associated receipts, their homeowners insurance declaration page and the new Affordable Care Act Marketplace form 1095-A, and any Marketplace exemption documents.

There are several sites in across the city and two in Kenner including the Pavilion at Kenner City Park, located at 3800 Loyola Drive in Kenner. The schedule is Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays from 9 a.m. – 1 p.m. This site is closed on Monday, March 3 and Tuesday, March 4 for the Mardi Gras holidays.

To find the site closest to you or to volunteer your services, call AARP at 1.888.687.2277 or visit www.aarp.org/taxaide.

Triness Kuhn writes about people and events of community interest in the South Kenner area. Triness can be reached at (504)377-8168 or trinessk@gmail.com.