In New York's North Country congressional race, Social Security and Medicare have been central issues, with Democrat Aaron Woolf and Republican Elise Stefanik sparring over the future of those highly popular programs.

But also simmering in the background is the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. That more controversial program passed Congress in 2009, thanks in large part to the "Yes" vote of Plattsburgh Democrat Congressman Bill Owens.

Since then the ACA has been a political football, even as thousands of people here in our region have come to rely on the program for insurance coverage.

Woolf prompted to talk about Obamacare

Last month when Aaron Woolf made a whistle stop in Malone, Obamacare wasn’t part of his stump speech. Like a lot of Democrats across the country Woolf prefers talking about other stuff; jobs, taxes, infrastructure.

"The Affordable Care Act reduces the risk particularly on young, poor workers," Sherwin argued.

But one of the Democrats on-hand, a former N.Y. State Senate candidate named Boyce Sherwin, gave Woolf a nudge, calling the ACA "vital."

Woolf responded with what has become the go-to Democratic talking point about the hot potato Affordable Care Act throughout this political season. He said Congress should reform the law, not repeal it. "I'm glad you brought that up," Woolf said, before describing Obamacare as "a flawed piece of legislation." Woolf argued the United States "cannot go back to a time when pre-existing conditions would not be covered" and insurance companies could implement lifetime caps on coverage payouts.

Stefanik: repeal and replace

Figuring out just how to talk about Obamacare isn’t much easier for Republican Elise Stefanik. Here in New York, the healthcare marketplace has functioned pretty well and there just haven’t been the huge disruptions talked about in the national media.

Overall, experts say the ACA has dramatically cut the number of America’s uninsured, by as much as half in some states in a single year. Despite that complicated reality, Stefanik’s baseline argument about the law has stayed mostly the same. "Repealing and replacing Obamacare with common sense healthcare solutions," she argued, speaking in Glens Falls earlier this summer after winning the G.O.P. primary.

Stefanik has made opposition to the Affordable Care Act a major part of her campaign from the start, arguing the law had been a major problem for her family’s Albany-based lumber business. In an advertisement released by her campaing, Stefanik called President Obama's assurance that people could keep their existing insurance coverage plans "the lie of the year."

Acknowledging that Obamacare might be tweaked

Since winning the Republican primary however, Stefanik has shifted her position in meaningful ways. Just last week, her campaign released a series of specific proposals for how she would like to see the healthcare system reformed if Obamacare is repealed, including support for interstate competition among insurance companies and reform to medical malpractice laws.

In a major shift, Stefanik also embraced making immediate bipartisan changes to Obamacare itself, an idea that many staunch conservatives fiercely oppose. They see any tweaks of Obamacare as a sign of compromise with a law that they see as toxic and un-American. Stefanik said she would support eliminating a medical device tax that manufacturers here in the North Country dislike. She also wants to repeal the program’s employer insurance mandate and elimination of an advisory panel that helps determine Medicare reimbursement rates.

Green Party candidate wants single-payer

This give and take over Obamacare frustrates Green Party candidate Matt Funiciello, who says Democrats and Republicans are talking around the problem.

Funiciello describes the debate over Obamacare as a kind of symbol of the disfunction of the two party system, where bad ideas turn into toxic, dead-end debates. "I look at Vermont all the time as a great example of what happens when people do what makes sense. Their single-payer system on a healthcare level is a great example of this."

But is single-payer a realistic option?

But here again the situation is more complex than at first glance. Vermont doesn’t have a single payer healthcare system. Governor Peter Shumlin is pushing for creation of that kind of program, and the legislature has approved developing a single-payer program by 2017.

But Shumlin still hasn’t clarified how he’ll pay for the program and his administration still faces fierce blowback from Vermont’s bungled and controversial rollout of Obamacare. Still, Funiciello says single-payer is the future for New York, Vermont, and the United States. "It's half the price, it's a better result always, it's time for us to implement it here."

But pushing a single-payer plan through the U.S. Congress that barely approved the Affordable Care Act would be a political impossibility anytime soon.

Meanwhile, Funiciello says his own business, a bakery he runs in Glens Falls, doesn’t offer a health insurance program for himself or his workers.