Buy Photo At left, Patrick Kelley, 43 and Larry Tortes, 32, talk about their rehabilitation from drugs and alcohol at the The Ranch Recovery Center, a residential substance abuse treatment center in Desert Hot Springs. (Photo: Omar Ornelas/The Desert Sun )Buy Photo

At the foot of dusty, scrub-covered hills in Desert Hot Springs, dormitories of recovering addicts tell their stories: trinkets bearing marks for sober days, an odd photo or letter to family or friends, a serenity prayer pinned to a corkboard.

A counseling office sits in the middle of the modest Ranch Recovery Center, once a saloon, that has been offering treatment to valley patients since 1972.

Patients of all ages mill about the fire pit.

“It provides access to a lot of men, women and families who don’t have the ability to access treatment in more expensive facilities,” said the facility’s president and CEO Rick Mesa.

But Mesa and his staff worry that could all change with new Affordable Care Act requirements that may jeopardize funding for treatment centers with more than 16 beds. The Ranch Recovery Center currently has 46 beds; fewer would not make fiscal sense for the low-income group they serve, they said.

A nonprofit, the center treats 400 to 500 patients annually and relies on donors. About 47 percent of the clients’ stays are paid for through funds from Riverside County for indigent, low-income patients. And the money doesn’t usually cover all of their stay, so the center ends up typically giving away about 4,000 bed days a year with no reimbursement – worth roughly $300,000.

“Those monies are slowly but surely going to be taken away,” Mesa said. “It has a ripple effect throughout the system.”

The changes date back in part to a 1965 federal statute limiting Medicaid coverage to treatment centers with more than 16 beds, part of a movement to de-institutionalize long-term psychiatric hospitals where patients were overwarehoused and drugged, experts say.

This was meant to usher in a shift toward recovery, integration and community-based services.

But the Affordable Care Act, aimed at improving health access across the board, has made insurance mandatory and expanded Medi-Cal to those living below 138 percent of the federal poverty level, making about 30,000 new valley residents insurance-eligible.

Although this theoretically could improve substance-abuse treatment, since it’s an essential health benefit, some treatment facilities are also stuck with a rule that might prevent them from doing so, said David Peters, director of external affairs for the California Association of Addiction Recovery Resources.

The glitch has left treatment centers statewide in a bind, he said.

“What’s happening now with substance abuse disorder treatment programs is we’re in the wrong definition,” Peters said. “We’re not a long-term care place.”

Most sober-living facilities offer a maximum of 90 days of residential treatment.

“This is a big problem,” he said. “The early requirement was every treatment in program in California – if you want any money, you’ve got to go get Medi-Cal certified. But then all of a sudden you can’t get Medi-Cal certification if you’re a residential treatment. It’s a mess.”

The state of California is filing a waiver to the federal government to ask for an exemption or workaround, but it is unknown yet if it will be successful.

Mesa said the funding shift toward Medi-Cal puts their 30-year county contracts at risk.

“I don’t know where this is going to go, but this is troubling,” Mesa said.

Patrick Kelley, 43, laughs when he’s asked if he would have been able to seek treatment for a serious methamphetamine problem if it hadn’t been free to him.

Larry Tortes, 32, highly doubts it; he just didn’t have the money.

“I would’ve rolled with the punches and taken a couple bruises and seen where I came out and ended up,” he said.

At Ranch Recovery, the two share a room — and stories of the cards their addictions have dealt them.

Kelley is in for a 90-day program, after he relapsed while on parole following decades-long stints in prison.

Tortes is in the last week of a 60-day program. He voluntarily checked himself in after going on another week-long alcohol binge and more than a decade of battling a drinking problem.

The son of a working-class man who worked in shipyards and boiler rooms in Long Beach, Kelley was one of 13 children and said he endured abuse “at all angles.”

“Once drugs and alcohol entered the picture it was game on for me, because it just was something I could completely feel sociable with; I could get away from the pain that was hurting me,” Kelley said.

But it led to 23 years in prison and frayed relationships with two daughters he fathered along the way. They are both teenagers now.

“My thing is sticking to this program, working the steps, having a sponsor and trying to be responsible and show (my daughter) that drugs and alcohol are not important to me… (not as much) as trying to be in the capacity of her life as a loving figure and hopefully one day father figure,” he said. “Hopefully some day she’ll see me as that.”

Kelley has been taking anger management classes, turning to faith, experimenting with cognitive behavior therapy and trying to face his demons head-on. He still has urges to use – but that’s why he’s staying put in treatment and is learning to “babysit” his feelings.

“It’s been working,” he said. “It’s kept me clean, out of jail, away from crime — bringing about change, positive change.”

Tortes, a member of the Torres-Martinez tribe based in Thermal, wonders if his drinking habit is genetic. He said his mother died at age 47 from alcohol-related illnesses. Other relatives also used alcohol, heroin, meth.

He started drinking around age 15 and was arrested for alcohol at 17. By his early 20s he was using continuously.

“It was just something that grasped ahold of me,” Tortes said. “I cant really pinpoint why – if it’s guilt, shame or trying to take away certain things of growing up poor, resentments as we learn in the program towards people.”

He went in and out of jail. This is his first time in residential rehab.

“My life was just a big problem, but I’ve heard once every problem is an opportunity in disguise,” he said. “So I’ve got to use all that to build myself to a better tomorrow.”

He finds hope remembering his children and family members who are still there for him and believe in him despite his problems.

Mesa said that it could be anywhere from six months to a year and a half until the funding changes take place, depending on the waiver.

But he worries that if they lose money to care for everyone, patients like Torres or Kelley could lose their chance at sobriety, hope and direction in life.

“Bottom line is we’re going to be cutting a lot of services when those effects come into play,” he said.

Desert Sun Healthcare Reporter Victoria Pelham can be reached at (760) 778-4649, Victoria.Pelham@desertsun.com and on Twitter @vpelham.

Services at Ranch Recovery Center

• Detoxification

• Primary treatment: 12-step programs, individualized treatment planning, group and individual counseling, alcohol and drug education services, recreational services, social activities and tasks such as gardening, peer involvement, referrals

• Transitional/sober living

• Aftercare and extended care

If you need help for substance abuse

• Ranch Recovery Center: 800-955-2924, ranchrecovery.org

• Toll-free Drug Abuse Helpline from the Coalition against Drug Abuse, open at all times: (888) 858-6629

• Alcoholics Anonymous in the Coachella Valley: www.aainthedesert.org, (760) 324-4880

• Alcoholics Anonymous for LGBT Coachella Valley residents: www.gayaainthedesert.org

• ABC Recovery Center, Indio: 760-342-6616

• Betty Ford Center, Rancho Mirage: 888-739-0781

• Michael's House, Palm Springs: 877-345-8494

• Narcotics Anonymous in the Coachella Valley local helpline: (760)346-5800, (800) 834-9303

• Soroptomist House of Hope, Desert Hot Springs: 760-329-4673

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1jQWxkv