A man takes photos of a car that is completely inundated by snow and ice that have accumulated from recent storms in Manhattan. Reuters

There’s no break for those weary of winter in Greater New York: another storm is set to blanket the region with more wet, heavy snow on Tuesday.

Two areas of low pressure, one moving in from the midwest and one developing just offshore, create the region’s next winter storm. Snow will begin late on Monday night and last through most of Tuesday.

A Winter Weather Advisory is in effect from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Tuesday for western Suffolk County and southern Connecticut, and from 4 a.m. to 4 p.m. almost everywhere else in the area. most elsewhere.

Although the storm will result in accumulations of less than half a foot in most areas, the timing will cause headaches for morning commuters. The heaviest snowfall will occur during the first half of the day; a southeast wind at around 10 mph will limit visibility and create treacherous travel conditions.

Warmer air flowing into the area will push Tuesday’s high temperatures into the middle and upper 30s, causing snow to change to rain along the coast by late morning. Inland areas will see just snow for much of the morning, with a changeover to rain in the afternoon.

Precipitation should wrap up as the sun goes down, leaving accumulations of three to five inches in New York City, northeast New Jersey and western Long Island. Interior zones could pick up a few more inches, while eastern Long Island and coastal Connecticut will receive two to four inches of new snow.

Thankfully, warmer days are ahead. Wednesday and Thursday’s high temperatures will climb into the lower and middle 40s; Friday’s high could reach into the lower 50s.

Tuesday’s Greater New York forecast roundup:

WSJ Headquarters in Manhattan:

Actual High: 40; RealFeel High: 32

Actual Low: 24; RealFeel Low: 23

Weather: A little snow and a lot of wind

Brooklyn: 40/30

Queens: 40/32

Bronx: 39/33

Staten Island: 38/30

Poughkeepsie, N.Y.: 34/20

Trenton, N.J.: 38/24

Islip, Long Island: 39/28

New Haven, Conn.: 36/26

Rebecca Fowler is a science writer at Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory.