GREENVILLE, S.C.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Span-America Medical Systems, Inc. (NASDAQ: SPAN) announced today that it expects lower consumer bedding sales during the remainder of fiscal 2016 and the first half of fiscal 2017 based on recent competitive changes and an increased emphasis on the Company’s medical products segment.

The Company expects to transition its largest retail account for consumer bedding products to Sinomax USA, its current distributor for the same account. The account is expected to move to Sinomax in May 2016 and involves the same retail customer that was previously lost in fiscal 2014 and then regained during fiscal 2015. The transition follows Sinomax’s announcement of plans to open a new domestic manufacturing plant for consumer bedding products, and its intent to manufacture these products and sell directly to existing accounts, including the large retail customer.

The loss of this business to Sinomax is expected to be partially offset by new business from another major retail consumer bedding customer, which is scheduled to begin shipping in May 2016. The new business will include regular day-to-day products as well as back-to-school promotions. Span-America’s sales to the new retail customer are expected to offset approximately 60% of the lost Sinomax business during the last half of fiscal 2016 and approximately 30% of the lost Sinomax business during the first half of fiscal 2017. All of Span-America’s sales of consumer bedding products, except for the Sinomax account, are handled through its marketing and distribution partner, Hollander Sleep Products.

“We are disappointed to lose the Sinomax business, but it provides Span-America with the opportunity to refocus our management’s time and corporate resources on our core medical business that has a more stable long-term growth record,” stated Jim Ferguson, President and CEO of Span-America Medical Systems. “We recently announced a major contract with the City of Toronto to provide medical bed frames, therapeutic support surfaces and related services to the City’s Long Term Care Homes and Services Division. We believe this shift in our business to the higher margin products in our medical segment will enhance our long-term opportunities to build shareholder value.”

Sales to Sinomax for the large retail customer totaled $6.6 million, or 10% of total sales in fiscal 2015. Span-America expects sales of approximately $4.0 million to Sinomax in the first half of fiscal 2016, representing approximately 11% of total sales.

In an unrelated event, we recently learned that we will not provide consumer bedding products for this year’s fall seasonal promotion to the large retail customer that we previously supplied during the first quarters of fiscal years 2013, 2014 and 2016. The customer has notified us that they do not currently plan to include a mattress overlay in the product line-up for this year’s fall seasonal promotion. Although this seasonal business has been a positive contributor to our sales and earnings in the past, profit margins for this business have declined, especially for the most recent promotion.

“We will continue to actively pursue new consumer business, but we will be more selective in order to improve our profitability and reduce large swings in sales volume from this segment,” stated Mr. Ferguson. “Our long-term focus remains squarely on our core medical business, which is more predictable, has better profit margins and more growth potential. We have an excellent track record of growing this part of our business, and we plan to continue dedicating the large majority of our management’s time and capital resources toward creating opportunities to expand our medical sales.”

Forward-Looking Statements

We have made forward-looking statements in this release regarding, among other things, our expectations for future sales performance. We wish to caution the reader that these statements are only predictions. These forward-looking statements may be generally identified by the use of forward-looking words and phrases such as “will,” “intends,” “may,” “believes,” “anticipates,” “should” and “expects,” and are based on the company’s current expectations or beliefs concerning future events that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual events or results may differ materially as a result of risks and uncertainties facing the company, including: (a) the inability to achieve anticipated sales growth in the medical and custom products segments, (b) the possibility of a loss of a key customer or distributor for our products, (c) risks related to international operations and foreign currency exchange associated with our Canadian subsidiary, (d) the possibility of having material uncollectible receivables from one or more key customers or distributors, (e) the potential for volatile pricing conditions in the market for polyurethane foam, (f) raw material cost increases, (g) the possibility that some or all of our medical products could be determined to be subject to the 2.3% medical device excise tax imposed by the Affordable Care Act, (h) the potential for lost sales due to competition from low-cost foreign imports, (i) changes in relationships with large customers or key suppliers, (j) uncertainty about whether or not we will continue to be awarded one-time seasonal promotions with major retailers, which can have a large impact on annual revenues and earnings, (k) the impact of competitive products and pricing, (l) government reimbursement changes in the medical market, (m) FDA and Health Canada regulation of medical device manufacturing and (n) other risks referenced from time to time in our Securities and Exchange Commission filings. We disclaim any obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. We are not responsible for changes made to this document by wire services or Internet services.

About Span-America Medical Systems, Inc.

Span-America manufactures and markets a comprehensive selection of pressure management products for the medical market, including Geo-Matt®, PressureGuard®, Geo-Mattress®, Custom Care®, Span+Aids®, Isch-Dish®, Risk Manager® and Selan® products. We also supply custom foam and packaging products to the consumer and industrial markets. Through our wholly-owned subsidiary Span Medical Products Canada Inc., we manufacture and market the M.C. Healthcare Products brands of Encore®, Advantage and Rexx beds as well as related in-room furnishing products for the long-term care market. Span-America’s stock is traded on The NASDAQ Global Market under the symbol “SPAN.” For more information, visit www.spanamerica.com and www.mchealthcare.com.