Oskar Blues is expanding in a few ways this year.

Nationally, the brewery is kicking off 2015 with the launch of the Iowa, Nebraska, Maine, Vermont and downstate Illinois markets, filling in distribution of the brewery's craft beers in the Midwest and Northeast. This expansion will put Oskar Blues beers in 40 U.S. states, with more to be announced soon.

In Longmont, Oskar Blues is planning a bowling alley and pizzeria. Until just a few days ago, those plans were centered at the Tasty Weasel at 1800 Pike Road. The company recently acquired an additional 60,000 square feet at that location. Those plans changed last week, but rest assured there will be Oskar Blues bowling and pizza coming soon.

We spoke with Chad Melis, marketing director for Oskar Blues, about bowling, pizza and ... fitness.

1. Your brewery and tasting room here in Longmont are adding a bowling alley. But I hear those plans have changed just a bit?

Yes. We were able to acquire 60,000 square feet to go along with the 40,000 square feet we've had since 2008 that has the Tasty Weasel taproom. As we've been able to grow over the years it's been a capacity issue to be able to make enough beer to meet the demand. It was a real gem to be able to find 60,000 square feet here, already attached to our building as Creative Foam outgrew that space. Initially the plans were to grow capacity and have a six-lane Brunswick bowling alley called the Glory Bowl, and wood-fired pizzas as well. But as opportunities continue to come and we're looking at long-term capacity, we think we may have found another location here in Longmont that might be a better home for that and continue to keep space open here where we can focus on brewing beer.

2. Do you think that Longmont residents will see that bowling alley before the end of 2015?

I'm not exactly sure on the timeframe, but we're jumping on this pretty early. At Oskar Blues we like to move pretty quickly. I'd hope so, yeah.

3. You mentioned as you gave me the tour that you also have a gym, batting cages, a wellness center, and that might move into some of the space that was originally earmarked for bowling?

Yes, absolutely. We have a gym and batting cages, we like to call it employee wellness, and that's right next door. The 15,000 square feet that was going to be a bowling alley is going to allow that employee wellness to grow; the gym is really full right now. We have a good program going there and people are really engaging. Bringing that in-house as well instead of the building next door is going to help engagement in that program as well.

4. Did you mention that you have the equivalent of a full-time fitness instructor?

Yes, Chum. She does a great job. We have five days of classes. She also runs her non-Oskar Blues classes out of that facility. We've always been an active, outdoorsy company, and we want to make sure we keep people engaged and working out. The quality of life is a huge factor here at Oskar Blues.

Chad Melis of Oskar Blues Brewery in Longmont. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

5. The last question will be the most challenging. You've been selected to be on the first manned mission to Mars. You won't be allowed to bring any beer, or have any beer on the mission. So here you are the night before you leave and you have to choose one last pint to have. What's it going to be?

Man, I am extraordinarily biased. I am through and through a Dale's Pale Ale drinker. If I was stuck with one last beer to drink ... Dale's Pale Ale is my answer.

Vince Winkel, Longmont Times-Call business writer