Raven Ziegler from Minneapolis protests the name nickname of the Washington Redskins outside before the game between the Minnesota Vikings and the Washington Redskins on November 7, 2013 at Mall of America Field at the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in Minneapolis, Minnesota. (Photo by Hannah Foslien/Getty Images) Getty Images

Democratic lawmakers praised the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office’s decision to cancel the Washington Redskins trademark registration on Wednesday, and urged the National Football League to force the team to change its name.

Speaking on the Senate floor Wednesday morning, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) criticized the team name as offensive to Native Americans. “Every time they hear this name, it is a sad reminder of a long tradition of racism and bigotry,” he said. “The writing is on the wall. It’s on the wall in giant, blinking neon lights. The name will change.”

Referring to the team’s owner, Mr. Reid added: “Daniel Snyder may be the last person in the world to realize this, but it’s just a matter of time before he’s forced to do the right thing and change the name.”

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) said in a statement that “slurs have no right to trademark protections.” “The team that represents our nation’s capital should be a source of pride to all Americans,” she added. “It’s long past time for the Washington football team to choose a new name.”

Sen. Maria Cantwell (D., Wash.) also took to the Senate floor to praise the decision. “We’re so excited to know that finally people are recognizing that this issue can no longer be a business case for the NFL to use this patent,” she said. The patent office’s decision puts a “big dent” in the NFL’s business case, she added.

Last month, Ms. Cantwell led an effort by 50 Democratic lawmakers to sign a letter calling on the NFL to “remove the racial slur from the name of one of its marquee franchises.”

Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.) said the patent office “got it exactly right.” In a statement, he called the team name “derogatory and offensive” and said a change was long overdue. “The NFL should take this decision to heart and force the team to change its name,” he said. Mr. Waxman last month threatened to hold a hearing on the NFL’s use of the term “Redskins,” citing the National Basketball Association’s removal of Los Angeles Clippers owner Donald Sterling over racist remarks.

While the patent office’s ruling delivers a symbolic blow to the team, it may not have an immediate or significant real-world impact. The team may still have ways to enforce its trademark rights, and is not required to change its name. The team also can appeal the ruling in federal court.

Other lawmakers have not been as enthusiastic about the ruling. Rep. Howard Coble (R., N.C.), chairman of the House Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property and the Internet, said Wednesday the panel would consider holding a hearing on the patent office’s decision once the appeals process is over.

The Redskins in May retained McGuireWoods Consulting to lobby Congress on the team’s behalf. The firm’s Ronald Platt, who lobbies for the Redskins, said Wednesday that he hadn’t read the Patent Office decision and declined to discuss the issue.

Democratic lawmakers also took to Twitter to hail the Patent Office ruling. Here’s a sample of their tweets:

Today’s great actions by the @USPTO show that slurs have no right to trademark protections. The DC football team must choose a new name. — Nancy Pelosi (@NancyPelosi) June 18, 2014

Decision to cancel trademark of DC’s football team is a victory for Native Americans and dignity of all communities #ChangeTheName — Rep. Keith Ellison (@keithellison) June 18, 2014

It’s only a matter of time until Daniel Snyder is forced to do the right thing and change the name. — Senator Harry Reid (@SenatorReid) June 18, 2014

Cantwell: This is a name ‘we need to change.’ #ChangeTheMascot — Sen. Maria Cantwell (@CantwellPress) June 18, 2014

–Reid J. Epstein and Brent Kendall contributed to this article.

Get more news about Congress, first thing in the morning, by signing up for the Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter: on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup.