Buy Photo Dr. Charles Bauberger talks with physician assistant Lisa Bonin at the Partnership Health Center for employees of the Toms River School District. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

TOMS RIVER - Obamacare's Cadillac tax looms on the horizon, leaving employers with two choices: absorb a whopping tax on their generous health insurance plan or have employees shoulder more of the cost of their own care.

But if Doug Forrester had his way, there would be a third option that quite literally is pain free. Live a healthier life.

"The only way to reduce health costs is to produce better health outcomes," Forrester said.

Forrester is trying to prove his point. The one-time Republican candidate for Senate and governor is president of Integrity Health, a company that manages health benefits for employers including the Toms River and Long Branch school districts. And he says the program helps them cut down on the cost of care, saving taxpayers millions by improving their employees' health.

But his strategy is about to be put to the test. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is scheduled in 2018 to put an excise tax – the so-called "Cadillac tax" – of 40 percent on health insurance plans that are considered expensive – namely, those with premiums and health savings accounts worth at least $10,200 for an individual employee and $27,500 for a family.

Buy Photo Doug Forrester, president of Integrity Health, talks about the Partnership Health Center in Toms River, including the physical therapy room. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)

Union opposition

To avoid it, employers can choose plans that require employees to pay for more of their own care through higher deductibles and copayments and tighten the network of providers employees can see, experts said.

But union officials whose members have good benefits don't sound like they are ready to cede ground.

"I wouldn’t call (the choice for employers) obvious at all," said Steve Baker, spokesman for the New Jersey Education Association, the state's teachers' union. "This is a tax on the employer and health insurance plan and is subject to collective bargaining."

Forrester managed New Jersey's pension and health benefits system before starting Integrity Health. The Princeton-based company was hired by Toms River Regional Schools in 2009 to administer its health program.

Among its features: Integrity opened the Partnership Health Center on Washington Street, where the district's 2,000 employees and their dependents can go for routine checkups, blood work, X-rays, physical therapy and prescription drugs.

Behind the scenes, three health care coordinators follow up with patients, making sure they are taking their medicine and making it to appointments.

Buy Photo Phlebotomist Jessica Szpila works in the lab at Partnership Health Center for employees of the Toms River School District. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)

Efficient health care

The goal, Forrester said, is to make sure consumers are treated efficiently. For example, they go to the health center instead of an expensive hospital emergency room. Or they see a doctor who helps them in one office visit instead of lots of followups.

Toms River school officials think it's working. The district's annual budget for employee health and prescription costs is $45.9 million. Its health costs have risen on average 5.8 percent a year for the past four years. By comparison, the state's health benefit plan has increased on average 9.2 percent a year during that time. It amounts to savings of $1.5 million a year, said William Doering, business administrator for Toms River schools.

"We do believe we are saving significant dollars," Doering said.

The pressure is on to save even more. The Cadillac tax is on the horizon. And it is steep.

Many health economists say there is good reason for it. Obamacare wants to slow down health care costs that were growing so fast that they consumed 17 percent of the nation's economy.

Buy Photo Doug Forrester, president of Integrity Health, talks about the Partnership Health Center in Toms River with Dr. Charles Bauberger. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)

Paying for services, not outcomes

It was fueled in part, they say, by a system that rewarded health care providers for delivering as many services as they could, regardless of the patients' outcomes. And consumers had little idea of how much their visit cost; their insurance was provided through their employer, their bill was paid by someone else.

One way to change that: tax expensive insurance plans, forcing employers to pay either a huge price or shift more of the burden onto employees. Consumers then would need to think twice about, say, visiting the doctor for a cold instead of simply buying over-the-counter medicine.

"Many people think the current tax (system) makes people over-consume health care relative to other goods," said Katherine Hempstead, director of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, a research group based in Plainsboro.

The tax stokes one of Obamacare's biggest complaints. Employers are shifting more of the cost of health care onto their workers during a time when workers' pay hasn't been rising. It can create more financial hardship. And workers might avoid seeing a doctor when they should.

Employers facing the Cadillac tax "are going to do what we’re already seeing happening – decreasing the quality of coverage they provide,” said Jim O'Connor, the Wall-based chief executive officer of CBIZ Employee Services Organization, a consulting firm.

Buy Photo Dr. Charles Bauberger talks with physician assistant Lisa Bonin at the Partnership Health Center for employees of the Toms River School District. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)

Political fight

Will the Cadillac tax make it to 2018? Another Obamacare fight looms, only this time the law is facing a challenge not only from conservatives, but also from some of President Barack Obama's supporters – labor unions.

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton has called on Congress to repeal the tax. But it isn't clear how Congress would make up for the estimated $87 billion that it was expected to raise.

In New Jersey, where property taxes are the nation's highest, there is an added issue. Can school districts afford to pay the 40 percent excise tax?

"We are concerned, but are interested to see how it is rolled out, if and when it is," Doering said. "And whether the thresholds established a few years ago will remain the same or not."

The plan for Toms River school employees isn't free. They, like other school employees statewide, have been paying increasingly more for their premiums the past four years. But in the eyes of the Cadillac tax, it doesn't matter who pays for the premiums, the employer or the employee. All that matters is the total.

Forrester said he has begun to look at ways to get Toms River schools under the current threshold, but he declined to elaborate. Nonetheless, he thinks there is only one way out. Prevent consumers from getting sick. And when they do get sick, make them healthy as quickly as possible.

If he were in charge of the state's pension and benefits program again, "I would say, look, there just isn’t any way we can protect the public purse over time unless we deal with health outcomes," he said.

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

DO YOU HAVE A "CADILLAC" PLAN?

You should check with your employer.

An estimated 16 percent of employers have at least one plan that would be subject to the tax, according to Kaiser Family Foundation, a research group.

The average individual premium in New Jersey was $5,678 in 2013, Kaiser said. And the maximum individual contribution for health savings accounts in 2015 is $3,350. Together, it amounts to $9,028, which is below the $10,200 threshold.

But health care inflation likely will put more employers at risk. Kaiser estimates 22 percent of employers will be above the limit in 2023 and 36 percent in 2028.

Buy Photo Phlebotomist Jessica Szpila works in the lab at the Partnership Health Center in Toms River. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1jbn7ot