A new study shows that an anti-trans ballot initiative out of Washington could potentially cost the state over $4.5 billion in federal funding.

The study was conducted by the Williams Institute at UCLA and demonstrates that I-1515, the proposed initiative, which seeks to repeal non-discrimination protections for trans people, would cause the state to lose a tremendous amount of funding because it violates seven federal laws in which protections on the basis of gender identity have been in place for well over a decade.

These laws include Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Executive Order 13672, the Workforce Innovation and Opportunities Act, the Violence Against Women Act, the Affordable Care Act, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Housing Act of 1949.

“The non-discrimination requirements in these federal laws protect transgender people from discrimination, including by allowing them to use restrooms and other facilities that correspond to their gender identity,” said Amira Hasenbush, Jim Kepner Law and Policy Fellow at the Williams Institute.

“Federal agencies that enforce these laws are authorized to suspend or terminate funds if recipients violate the non-discrimination requirements.”

How these funds would be terminated is as yet to be determined, but the study predicts a $1 billion loss to K-12 school funding, up to $3.3 billion in student loan and college funding, $65 million lost in workforce training, $2.5 million lost in federal grants under the Violence Against Women Act and costly litigation for public schools.

The loss of funding would be catastrophic for Washington and would certainly become a reality should the initiative be put on a ballot and passed in November. North Carolina, which saw the passing of anti-trans HB 2 last month, has received an ultimatum from the Department of Justice saying that if they don’t repeal the law, they will lose $861 million in federal education funding.

Aside from the loss of federal funds, there would also be a significant negative economic impact on business and tourism in Washington, as is currently being experienced in North Carolina.

The study makes it clear: I-1515 is a heinous measure, one that aims to strip trans people of their rights and would greatly damage Washington’s economy in the process.