When thinking of healthful routines, using a store-bought facial cleanser, taking vitamin supplements, and moisturizing your skin daily might come to mind. Then, there are those people who take things a step further. In more than one instance, for example, people have claimed that drinking urine will keep you slim, energized, and looking young. But before you go judging these people for being weird and crazy, look at these four celebrities who also practiced, at one point or another, out-of-the-ordinary health routines — of course, they too might just be weird crazy people.

Catherine Zeta-Jones’ Hoppy Conditioner

A little conditioner, some coconut oil maybe. These are the products most people would turn to for hair care. For Catherine Zeta-Jones, though, beer does the trick, too. In a 2009 interview, she said that she washed her hair with beer and honey, according to the Daily Mail. “I do condition my hair with honey and beer,” she said at the time. “I smell like the bottom of a beer barrel for days afterward, but it’s very good for the hair.”

The UK-born actress is most famous for her roles in Ocean’s Twelve, Chicago, and Entrapment, as well as being married to Michael Douglas — speculation that Douglas got throat cancer from human papilloma virus through Zeta-Jones might have caused them to split.

While it may sound strange, there are actual benefits to using beer in hair. In fact, there are benefits to using it on skin and in baths, too. Its low acidity tightens hair follicles, and removes dirt and grease, while the yeast within helps fight acne. As a hair conditioner, mix one cup of warm beer — might want to try a better quality one, at that — and one teaspoon of jojoba oil. Use it after your normal shampoo. Also, look here for more beer beauty tips.

Teri Hatcher’s Crimson Baths

Sticking to the subject of using alcohol for more than putting it in our stomachs, Teri Hatcher, famous for her roles in Desperate Houswives, Coraline, and 007: Tomorrow Never Dies, pours one out for softer skin. Rather than a bubble bath, she takes a wine bath. “Teri Hatcher is one of an increasing number who has started pouring a glass of wine into her bath every day,” a source told the Daily Telegraph, according to Star Pulse. “She would never drink it, but she claims bathing in it keeps her skin soft.”

Red wine has antioxidants that certainly benefit the body, as well as tartaric acid, “an alpha hydroxyl agent that can exfoliate,” Lezandra Berchik, an esthetician at Bliss Spa in Los Angeles, told Women’s Health magazine. But anyone who wants to try it should take caution as it will not only take more than a few baths to start seeing benefits, but the wine may also irritate small scratches on the skin.

Snooki’s Cat Obsession Goes Too Far

Though some may scoff at the thought of Nicole “Snooki” Polizzi — and for almost every reason — it looks like she’s matured a lot since her binge-drinking, drunken days on MTV’s loved-to-be-hated (and vice-versa) Jersey Shore. For some people though, she’ll always be a joke, and the fact that she uses cat litter as an exfoliant doesn’t help her case.

During an interview with Conan O’Brien, she talks about her book Confessions of a Guidette, in which she claims to use “clean” cat litter to exfoliate her skin as an alternative to other more expensive facial cleansers. “Some exfoliants have rocks in them, and it makes your skin really smooth,” she said. “Cat litter is like a substitute for that.” When O’Brien asks her if she’s actually tried it, she says she has, and that the fact she hasn’t “broken out” yet has to mean it works.

Berchik told Women’s Health, however, that it’s probably best not to use cat litter. Although the texture might be similar to that of a mud mask, they are too large for using on skin. “These particles can cause micro scratches, which can lead to inflammation and blotchiness,” she said. Additionally, the silica that absorbs moisture in the litter will do the same on the skin, causing dehydration. She suggests using plain baking soda instead.