TALLAHASSEE — The Democratic candidates for attorney general strongly back two high-visibility issues that are supported by a majority of Floridians heading into the fall elections.

Former Department of Children and Families Secretary George Sheldon and state Rep. Perry Thurston, D-Fort Lauderdale, have been outspoken in their advocacy for a medical marijuana initiative on the November ballot, and for allowing same-sex marriages.

The primary winner’s eventual opponent, Attorney General Pam Bondi, has been the polar opposite. Bondi opposes the medical marijuana constitutional amendment and fought its placement on the November ballot. A recent poll shows nearly nine out of 10 voters support the measure.

Bondi has aggressively defended the state’s ban on same-sex marriages, although similar provisions have been overturned in more than two dozen courts across the nation, including judges in Miami-Dade and Monroe counties in the last few weeks.

Despite their positioning on those popular issues, Thurston and Sheldon — who face each other in the Aug. 26 Democratic primary — have a daunting task in taking on Bondi, a former Tampa Bay prosecutor who was first elected in 2010.

The defeat of incumbent Cabinet members is rare; the last such event occurred two decades ago in 1994.

Additionally, the Cabinet races — including less competitive contests for agriculture commissioner and chief financial officer — are “down ballot” contests that will struggle to draw attention from voters who are likely to be overwhelmed by the high-stakes, big-money governor’s race.

And with the backing of the Republican establishment that controls Tallahassee, Bondi has already been able to raise a substantial campaign fund, including some $2.4 million in cash and in-kind services in her standard account and some $1.8 million in other political committees through mid-July.

Sheldon and Thurston have raised less than $500,000 between them, with Sheldon at just over $300,000 and Thurston with about $190,000.

That means Bondi will be in a much stronger position to make her case to voters through television advertising and other efforts to get her supporters to the polls.

Meanwhile, Thurston and Sheldon are waging primary campaigns that will tax their already limited resources. Neither has the ability to run major television advertising, although Sheldon has launched a radio ad criticizing Bondi for not intervening in a Public Service Commission case where the state's major electric utility companies are seeking to reduce their energy conservation programs.

They face an uncertain late-summer primary electorate, where the only certainty is that fewer than one out of every four voters — a 21.4 percent turnout average over the last decade — are likely to show up at the polls.

The Democratic voters that make to the polls will have to draw a distinction between Sheldon and Thurston, who have refrained from criticizing each other and are in agreement on major issues including marijuana, marriage equality, gun control and civil rights.

For his part, Sheldon, 67, who is also a former state legislator and former deputy attorney general and who recently served as a top administrator at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, has emphasized his management experience and legal background.

“I think he and I are very similar on a lot of issues," Sheldon said about Thurston. “But I've been deputy attorney general. I’ve managed parts of that office. I managed 13,000 employees at the Department of Children and Families. I had a $50 billion budget at HHS.”

“Part of this is the ability to get the job done, not just about taking positions,” Sheldon added.

Sheldon’s campaign has been boosted by support from his former boss, Bob Buttterworth, the state’s longest serving attorney general.

Butterworth said Sheldon might have the best set of qualifications of any candidate “in recent memory” who has sought the attorney general’s job.

As another former head of DCF, Butterworth said managing the state’s chief social services agency is an even more challenging task than the Cabinet office.

“Everyone likes George Sheldon,” Butterworth said. “He’s very, very competent. He understands the issues. He not only has a good resume, he has the experience.”

Thurston, 53, is highlighting the fact that, as the leader of the House Democrats for the last two years, he has stood toe to toe with Bondi and Gov. Rick Scott on many major issues, including pushing for changes in Florida's controversial “stand your ground” law and expanding Medicaid, which Bondi has opposed.

Thurston cited the example of his criticizing Rep. Charles Van Zant, R-Keystone Heights, who suggested that the controversial Common Core education standards could lead to children becoming homosexuals.

“This kind of ignorance and intolerance has no place in our state’s discourse. Unfortunately, it is far too commonplace in one faction of the Republican Party,” Thurston said.

“Rick Scott has spoken out against gay adoption and, right now, Pam Bondi is going to court to deny LGBT citizens their rights. As your attorney general, I promise to stand up for the rights of all Floridians.”

Bondi’s campaign dismissed the Democrats’ charges that she is out of touch with voters and is pushing a political agenda that trumps policy. “It is never on the wrong side to perform your constitutional duty and to be an advocate and watchdog for the people of Florida,” said Pablo Diaz, Bondi’s campaign manager.

“Pam Bondi has a nationally recognized record for shutting down pill mills, waging war against human traffickers and protecting consumers.”

“We look forward to comparing General Bondi’s substantive record of fighting for the citizens of this state against the tired, empty rhetoric of the Democrats in the coming months,” Diaz said.

Thurston’s campaign has been bolstered by support by major Democratic leaders, including U.S. Reps. Alcee Hastings and Frederica Wilson, who help solidify Thurston’s support among African-American voters in Southeast Florida.

Additionally, many of Thurston’s House colleagues are backing his bid, including St. Petersburg Mayor Rick Kriseman, a former House member.

Kriseman said Thurston will battle for “the middle class.”

“I was proud to stand with him in the Legislature to expand Medicaid, raise the minimum wage and protect education,” Kriseman said. “As attorney general, I know he’ll put consumers ahead of special interests and citizens’ interests ahead of political interests.”

Butterworth, who ran four successful statewide campaigns for attorney general, said it was “hard to say” whether the primary would hurt or help the candidate that emerges with the party’s nomination. But Butterworth stressed both Sheldon and Thurston would remain united regardless of the outcome.

“There’s only one target and that’s Pam,” Butterworth said.