Four Pasco County men were arrested Monday morning for kidnapping a 15-year-old New Port Richey boy, according to the Pasco Sheriff’s Office.

Michael Joseph Keenan, 18, Bojan Jesic, 18, Fernando Ramos, 19, and Jehmar Apel-Selassie Stewart, 20, were arrested in connection with the incident.

The victim told deputies he was in front of his Port Richey home about 10:45 p.m. Sunday when he was approached by Keenan, punched in the face and forced into a dark colored car driven by Jesic, an arrest report said.

The foursome drove the teen to Keenan’s home at 7435 Fairfax Drive in Port Richey, according to an arrest report.

Once they arrived at the Fairfax drive location, the 15 year old was punched, kicked and pistol-whipped, deputies said.

The teen was then taken to an apartment complex on Port Richey Boulevard where Jesic placed a shotgun to his head and threatened to kill him, deputies said.

A deputy was patrolling the area when he was approached by someone and told of a fight taking place in the parking lot of a Port Richey Boulevard apartment. When the deputy approached the area, the four men fled, according to Pasco Sheriff’s Office spokesman Kevin Doll.

The teen, who suffered injuries to his face, mouth, neck, chest and back, was treated at Medical Center Bayonet Point in Hudson. He identified the attackers while at the hospital, Doll said.

The motive for the attack stems from a previous incident in which Keenan got in trouble for possible drug use, Doll said. Keenan told deputies he believed the teen was the one to get him in trouble.

During the investigation, 637 grams of marijuana, as well as Alprazolam and Hydrocodone in pill form, a digital scale, and baggies with residue were found in the car used to kidnap the boy, deputies said.

A loaded Winchester shotgun as well as a loaded .44-caliber Smith and Wesson revolver was recovered

Keenan is charged with kidnapping to inflict bodily harm or terrorizing a victim. He remains in the Land O’ Lakes Jail with a $150,000 bond.

Jesic, 7305 San Miguel Drive, Port Richey, is charged with possession of marijuana with intent to sell, manufacture or deliver, trafficking illegal drugs, two counts of possession of a controlled substance without a prescription, kidnapping to inflict bodily harm or terrorizing a victim, and aggravated battery with a deadly weapon. He remains in jail with a $119,000 bond.

Ramos, 7342 Skyview Avenue New Port Richey, is charged with possession of marijuana with intent to sell, manufacture or deliver, trafficking a controlled substance, two counts of possession of a controlled substance without a prescription, and kidnapping to commit a felony. He remains in the Land O’ Lakes Jail with a $209,000 bond.

Stewart, 20, 7342 Skyview Avenue New Port Richey, remains in custody on a charge of kidnapping to inflict bodily harm or terrorize a victim. His bail is set at $150,000.