Hospitals among 11 to get U.S. grant

DANBURY -- The great majority of Americans don't spend much on medical care.

People with chronic illnesses, like diabetes and cardiac disease, have to if they are going to stay alive.

So the goal of medicine and hospitals should be to keep people in the first category from joining the second.

"It's great to say we have an operation that can save you if you get colon cancer," Dr. John Murphy. president and chief executive officer of Western Connecticut Health Network, said Monday. "Wouldn't it be better to help people not get colon cancer?"

On Friday the network, which manages Danbury and New Milford hospitals, announced an important step towards emphasizing wellness across the board.

It's received more than $1.5 million from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to create a preventive medicine and public health residency training program.

Dr. Ramin Ahmadi, the hospital's director medical education and research, said the network is only one of 11 hospital in the U.S. to receive the federal grant.

Under it, young doctors training in internal medicine will be able, if they wish, to concentrate on preventive medicine and community health issues.

Rather than concentrating on individual patients with a chronic illness like diabetes, Ahmadi said, they'll be able to look at many patients and design community programs to help them.

Ahmadi also said once the program gets underway all the medical students at the hospital will get training in preventive medicine, as well as learning about global health issues.

They'll also get training in in-house prevention -- how to reduce medical errors in the two hospitals.

"That way they will be well-rounded," Ahmadi said.

The program will also work in partnership with the Greater Danbury Community Health Center, the federally funded center that treats people who have no health insurance, are under-insured or on Medicaid.

The center and the health network are already collaborating on training primary care physicians -- doctors who are the front line of serving the public.

James Maloney, president of the Connecticut Institute for Communities, which runs the health center, said when the hospital asked the center to collaborate on preventive care, it agreed almost instantly.

"We said, who else?" Maloney said.

U.S. Rep Elizabeth Esty, who helped the network secure the federal grant, said training a new generation in primary care and preventive medicine is a necessary part of the health-care reform that includes the Affordable Care Act.

Esty said currently 75 percent of U.S. health care expenditures are for people with two or more chronic diseases.

"If we got a handle on them, we'd get our health care costs down," she said.

bmiller@newstimes.com; 203-731-3345