If you purchased your health insurance last year with the help of a federal subsidy courtesy of the Affordable Care Act, it's time to settle up.

One potential issue with the subsidy is the amount you received depends on how much you predicted you'd make at the time you applied on healthcare.gov.

If you were too optimistic about your income and ended up earning less, you then received too small of a subsidy and will be in the enviable situation of getting a larger tax credit.

But if you had a good year in the job market and earned more than you predicted at the time you applied to healthcare.gov, you'll have to give some of that subsidy back.

And if you continued to go without health insurance altogether, you'll have to pay a fine for that. (Or "individual shared responsibility provision," as the Affordable Care Act calls it.)

It's a simple concept, right? Get too much subsidy last year, pay some of it back; get too little, get a bit more to make up for that.

Yet calculating which category you're in can plunge low-earning taxpayers - who typically are less likely to itemize deductions - deep into the weeds of bewildering tax forms.

In this case, it's Form 8962. Roughly 80 percent of the 162,000 New Jerseyans who purchased policies through the the healthcare.gov marketplace will have to fill it out.

The folks at H&R Block offered the following tips:

— Take a deep breath and consider filing for an extension. Because the feds messed up and sent erroneous forms to 800,000 taxpayers, they're waiving the usual penalty for late payment of taxes, said Lindsey Buchholz, principal tax research analyst at The Tax Institute at H&R Block in Kansas City.

You still have to file an extension by April 15th - that requirement isn't waived - and make a good faith effort to pay what you think you may owe. But if you don't have the right documents or if you think your documents wrong and you want time to correct them, go for the extension.

— Before you start, make sure you have Form 1095-A, which the government should have sent you earlier in the year. It lists how much you received in subsidies last year, month by month. If you're one of the taxpayers who received an incorrect form, you were most likely notified by telephone call and by mail, and should have received a corrected form by now.

— Consider using tax prep software or a tax preparer. Yes, that's an indirect plug for outfits like H&R Block, but Buchholz points out software automatically calculates the answer from instructions such as, "Divide line 3 by line 4. Enter the result rounded to the nearest whole percentage. For example, for 1.542 enter 154." It's already bad enough you have to do your taxes; don't turn the experience into the SATs.

— Come to grips with the notion that your "tax family" is not your "health insurance family." Buchholz points out that parents can now provide coverage to their young adult children through the parent's policy. That's not the same as being able to claim them as an overall dependent, though. "Those two things do not always line up one to one," she said. "A lot of people don't understand that those two things are different."

— If you had a change in family circumstances last year, brace yourself for some rough sledding. Let's say you thought your children would be your dependents, but they ended up living with an ex-spouse. Or let's say your college-age son ended up getting a full-time job with benefits.

"People in those situations were particularly confused," Buchholz said.

— Finally, don't try to fudge it. When it comes to health insurance subsidies, the IRS has real-time - as in "right now" - data on how much you received in subsidies, as well as what you indicated was your family size and likely income. If you submit a tax return that varies substantially from that, an IRS computer somewhere will spit your return into the pile that deserves an extra look, Buchholz said. Even if your return is scrupulously accurate, this will slow down its processing.

"They can double-check your facts and figures pretty easily on this one," she said. "There's no human interaction. It's just looking to see if things line up. They can pretty quickly determine if your return is not remotely looking like it should."

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com, or at (732) 902-4557. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.