There may be a dearth of large buyouts in the market, but private equity firms have found a number of willing buyers to take jumbo-sized companies off their hands.

Three of the top ten largest private equity exits on record have happened in the past 12 months according to data provider Dealogic. The latest of these- the merger of NXP Semiconductors and Freescale Semiconductor Ltd. – ranks as the fifth largest exit via merger or acquisition of a financial sponsor-backed company to date.

The sales of Biomet Inc. and Alliance Boots GmbH helped drive exit volume globally to $428 billion in 2014, the highest amount on record according to data provider Preqin.

The NXP merger doesn’t represent a complete exit for Freescale’s buyout owners. Private equity firms will hold roughly 19.1%, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, though an exact ownership breakdown wasn’t disclosed.

Blackstone Group, Carlyle Group, TPG and Permira took the Austin, Texas-based semiconductor maker private in a $17.6 billion deal in 2006.

NXP Semiconductors NV’s decision to merge with Freescale Semiconductor Ltd. is a poetic twist in one of the largest and arguably most challenging tech buyouts of all time, which Bloomberg Businessweek chronicled extensively in 2008.

As the buyer group led by Blackstone finalized its offer for Freescale, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., Bain Capital, Apax Partners and Silver Lake Partners, the former private equity owners of NXP, swooped in with a competing proposal, driving the offer up to $40 per share- a 33% premium to where the chip maker had been trading.

Freescale’s then Chief Executive Michael Mayer was dismissive of a tie-up at the time, saying that Philips NV, NXP’s former parent, “had been trying to offload NXP for a while, and that he had passed on it,” Bloomberg reported at the time.

NXP’s former buyout owners won’t get to reap any rewards from the newly combined company, however. The firms sold their stakes after taking the company public in 2010.

Write to Hillary Canada at hillary.canada@wsj.com