New York City’s Gracie Mansion The Associated Press

Gracie Mansion, the centuries-old home of Mayor Bill de Blasio and his family and one of Manhattan’s oldest structures, is scheduled to undergo millions of dollars in roof repairs and asbestos cleanup, New York City officials said Thursday.

Asbestos was discovered by city Department of Building inspectors last month in multiple locations in the home’s roofing, said Peter Kadushin, a mayoral spokesman.

The roof will undergo several months of repair, in which masonry will be dismantled and a crumbling chimney will be replaced, officials said. The new roof will be made of a thick asphalt shingle and new material to protect it from leaks will be installed, Mr. Kadushin said.

The total cost to replace the roof is estimated at $3.4 million and repairs won’t be finished until at least October, the city said. An original estimate to replace the roof, commissioned by the Bloomberg administration in 2012, was $2.1 million but that project wasn’t finished, city officials said.

On Thursday, Mr. de Blasio said he has “definitely seen the leaks” and said he hoped the reconstruction effort would be swift.

“The asbestos situation was discovered in the context of trying to figure out how to shore up the roof in general, so here we’ll hopefully have a long term solution that will fix the roof, but also get the asbestos out,” Mr. de Blasio said during an unrelated news conference.

Gracie Mansion was built in 1799 by Archibald Gracie, a wealthy New York merchant, on a bend overlooking the East River. But financial problems forced Mr. Gracie to sell the house in 1823 and the city took ownership in 1896.

For decades, the mansion was used as a concession stand and as restrooms for a nearby park. It eventually became the first home for the Museum of the City of New York before it became the official mayoral residence in 1942.

Michael Bloomberg, the billionaire former mayor, never lived at Gracie Mansion during his 12 years in office and the de Blasios considered staying in their native Brooklyn before moving into the 216-year-old home after Mr. de Blasio’s inauguration last year.