Environmental issues recognized during Earth Day 0 April 24, 2015

04/24/2015 Stephanie Bachman Staff Writer S.L.Bachman2@iup.edu

Although the Indiana University of Pennsylvania’s ECO Club’s 2015 Earth Day celebrations got cancelled due to weather Wednesday, the holiday was still recognized internationally.

Demonstrations in support of environmental protection have been taking place worldwide April 22 every year since 1970.

This year was no exception, and activists and ordinary citizens alike took to the streets around the globe to help raise awareness about different issues and promote change in order to protect the Earth.

However, Mother Nature played a cruel trick this year by delivering a mix of rain and snow Wednesday and temperatures in the 30s on the event’s Thursday rain date.

This caused IUP’s main Earth Day event to be cancelled. However, some students still helped maintain the Heritage Garden outside of the Northern Suites Wednesday.

The predominant campus-wide demonstrations in support of Earth Day at IUP have been hosted by ECO Club for the past several years. The club has hosted the event while inviting other on-campus and off-campus organizations to come and participate as well.

These include various organizations such as the Strategies for Ecology, Education, Diversity, and Sustainability Club, the Geology Club and Indiana Community Gardens.

The unpredictable Indiana weather has caused difficulties for Earth Day celebrations in the past.

Last year, the actual day of the event saw unseasonably cold temperatures and a light rain that did not cause a cancellation but did have a negative impact on attendance from both the vendors and the students.

This year’s planned events, along with those from past years, have included activities and displays like a bike that generates electricity, a book swap, free seed samples, free food, a yoga demonstration, music and creating a sustainability wall.

Although the events did not go as planned, Cassandra Leso (sophomore, nursing), the ECO Club president, explained the importance of the holiday and why people should celebrate Earth Day.

“We [all] live on this Earth,” Leso said. “We should celebrate it, and that’s what Earth Day does for us.

“We get to be thankful for what it gives us and enjoy a day outside learning about important issues to be aware of to better take care of it, and overall just have a great day,” she said.

Some of the important environmental issues that people should be thinking about this upcoming Earth Day include “the spreading of pesticides, GMOs, pollution and recycling more,” Leso said.

While these are important environmental issues, they are only a few of the large number of concerns facing our planet today.