Bill Maher doesn’t give equal time on “Real Time.” The politically minded comedian’s Friday night HBO talk show might include panelists from the right side of the political spectrum, but the unabashedly outspoken host, an unapologetic liberal with pre-Rand Paul Libertarian leanings, generally reserves the last word for himself -- even more so when he takes his stand-up comedy act on the road.

Maher and I spoke by phone recently to preview his upcoming Nov. 16 show at the Saenger Theatre in New Orleans. Early in the conversation, he did a credible Rodney Dangerfield impersonation. I compared him to Rich Little, the impressionist who frequented “The Tonight Show” when Maher’s idol Johnny Carson hosted. Little is an outspoken conservative these days.

“He’s said some nasty things about me in the press,” Maher said. “I’ve upset Rich Little -- my work is done here.”

Compared to a year ago, are you more or less optimistic about the state of the world in general?

Maher: I’m a little more optimistic, despite the fact that it’s been a horrible month for liberals, with the roll-out of the Obamacare website and all those self-inflicted wounds.

But one story that’s lost in all that is that four polls showed Obamacare is more popular than ever, even with all the (screw)-ups. People are getting it: “Hey, we can go to a doctor now. That’s good.” And of course, that’s what the Republicans feared, that people would actually like being able to do that.

The other thing that’s probably positive is that the Tea Party is taking the Republican Party down with it. Virginia is probably one of those states that the Republicans probably could have, and should have, won (in the recent statewide election), but they nominated somebody way too far to the right. Just the way they lost Delaware when my old sparring partner Christine O’Donnell was the (Republican Senate) candidate in 2010.

She was the witch?

Maher: The witch! I was the one who exposed her as the witch. I had all the old tape from (his former show) “Politically Incorrect” where she said, “Yes, I used to be a witch.”

People forget that videotape doesn’t just degrade.

Maher: What astounds me is that they make statements as if it doesn’t exist ... The Republicans in Congress do it all the time. “We have you just six months ago saying we should not go into Syria, and now you’re saying we should?”

Whatever Obama does, they have to do the opposite. That’s what I call “black-tracking.” It is the act of changing your mind because you have found that Obama has agreed with you, and of course, if you agree with him, you get Kenya cooties.

All that said, you still count yourself as slightly more optimistic than a year ago?

Maher: A year ago, I was scared to death that Mitt Romney was going to be president. I was a million dollars scared. When I look back, it’s, “Really? Mitt Romney? The cure for common charisma as the President of the United States?” It doesn’t seem possible, but of course it was possible.

I feel like the country is actually way more liberal than it seems. If you added in all the people who can’t vote for various reasons, and the people who don’t vote because they’re so discouraged, most of those people would probably vote a progressive point of view.

And when you see a state like Virginia, part of the Old South, a very conservative state, turning off to somebody like this Ken Cuccinelli guy (the Republican attorney general and failed gubernatorial candidate), you realize that the country is changing.

And that’s what’s driving them crazy. That’s why, after Obama had been in office for 10 minutes, the first thing he heard was, “We want our country back.” As if it had gone somewhere.

It’s the whole montage in their minds: a black president, gay marriage is now legal in a third of the country, two states have voted to legalize marijuana. It’s this whole idea of black, and gay, and drugs, this whole ‘60s dorm room that they are so afraid of, coming to life. And that’s why they get all (excited) about issues like gay marriage that actually have nothing to do with their life.

Did it surprise you how quickly marijuana was legalized in Colorado and Washington?

Maher: Quickly? I’ve been waiting for it to happen since 1974!

But from where the conversation was a few years ago …

Maher: It’s sort of the same thing with gay marriage. It’s a tipping point. It’s slow, slow, slow, like a roller coaster, and then when it gets to the top, boom, it goes down quickly.

BILL MAHER What: The unabashedly liberal comedian and host of HBO’s “Real Time with Bill Maher” brings his stand-up comedy show to New Orleans. When: Saturday, Nov. 16, 8 p.m. Where: Saenger Theatre, 1111 Canal St., 504.287.0351. Tickets: $48.75 to $78.75 plus service charges through Ticketmaster.

As soon as gay marriage hit 51 percent approval in the polls, you saw a lot of Democratic politicians very quickly “evolve.” There was a lot of “evolving” when it hit 51. They all used that same excuse: “Well, my kids have gay friends. And they came over to dinner, and they didn’t try to leap over the table and have sex with me, so it must be cool.”

You’re seeing the same thing with marijuana. Tick, tick, tick, and then boom. But what took you so long? I remember having discussions in the dorm room in the ‘70s, saying, “We know pot is cool. When we get a little older, things will change.”

Well, it took until I was 57. I thought it would be a little sooner than that.

I take it you have your own medical marijuana card in California.

Maher: Absolutely. I have a card to take care of whatever it is I tell them I have.

Your job is stressful.

Maher: That’s right. That’s what it is. I’ve been trying to nail that down. It’s stress. That’s why I need it.

How did the government shutdown affect you personally?

Maher: I don’t think it did. I don’t visit national parks. I’m lucky enough not to be on assistance. So I was one of the many millions of Americans that it did not really affect. But it did affect tens of millions of Americans in a very real way.

And this is one of those parts of why I’m a little optimistic. I think the American people finally noticed whose fault it was. When the results came back from polling, there was like a 20-point gap in who they blamed, the Republicans versus Obama. That’s the beginning of maybe electing a Congress that is more workable for Obama, as opposed to the House we have now, which is where all progress goes to die.

What is your primary source of news?

Maher: I try to be an omnivore about that. We get the L.A. Times and USA Today and the New York Times. And then I’ll go online and read blogs and the Huffington Post. Anything that I can surf around, click on from one thing to the next. I can spend hours doing that.

And sometimes, like everybody else, you want to know, “What did fall out of Kim Kardashian’s dress?”

Who is your go-to guest on “Real Time”?

Maher: I’ve learned not to answer that question, because then somebody else who I didn’t mention will say, “I thought I was your favorite guest.” I don’t talk about guests.

Because of the delicate egos.

Maher: Oh, man, you wouldn’t believe how delicate.

I mostly interview musicians, so I do have some inkling.

Maher: They’re in the biggest bubble of all. Really. It’s close between models and athletes, but musicians, as far as people who live in their own world, they take the cake.

You still get a charge out of doing stand-up, even without the back-and-forth debates of your TV show.

Maher: It’s so much fun. I wouldn’t do it if I didn’t have a great time doing it. It’s pure, first of all. The television show is a hybrid. It’s funny, hopefully, and serious at times. There’s a panel, and guests.

Stand-up, it’s just you and the audience and jokes. The whole point is just to make them laugh very hard for 90 minutes, and then leave to a standing ovation. If you’re not doing that, you’re not doing it right.

The areas that are of interest to me would be familiar to people who watch the “Real Time” show on HBO. But the format is different. Stand-up is about hard, hard laughs. If you’re not doing that, then you’re not a comedian. You’re a humorist, or a commentator, or a professor, or a lecturer, or a speech-giver.

I’m not interested in any of those things. I started as a comedian. And at some point, they will put me out to pasture, as far as TV goes. They do it to everybody. They’re doing it to Leno now. They did it to Carson when he was the biggest star on television. And they’ll do it to me.

I’ve had a 20-year run, which is fantastic, but it’s not going to last forever. And when it ends, I will still have stand-up.

I spoke with Jerry Seinfeld in September, prior to his show at the Saenger Theatre. He’s also way into the craft and art of stand-up. Obviously he doesn’t need the money.

Maher: Well, I do need the money. I’ve got to pay back that million dollars I gave to Obama (during the 2012 campaign, Maher donated $1 million to a pro-Obama SuperPAC). I call this my Making My Million Back Tour.

Unlike Seinfeld’s observational-style show, yours is mostly topical.

Maher: To me, that’s the most fun thing about the kind of stand-up I do. It’s always changing, because the news is always changing.

When I was a younger comedian, I was much more of an observational type, talking about evergreen things. That is very hard, because so much of that material has been picked over by the many thousands of comedians who have come before me.

But politics is always changing. The news is never the same. Whatever I’m talking about in my act today, I can almost guarantee you wasn’t in my act a year ago. People didn’t know who Ted Cruz was a year ago.

If you see me on a Saturday night and then a Sunday night, it’s going to be basically the same show. But people who have seen me a month or two later will say, “Wow, that was a lot of new stuff.” And I’m like, “Yeah, because a lot happened.”

I generally allow two or three years (between shows in the same city) because I don’t want people to see the same act. I want them to see something completely new.

Keith Spera can be reached at kspera@nola.com or 504.826.3470. Follow him on Twitter @KeithSpera.