Visiting scholar shares thoughts on economy

Chancellor Phil DiStefano of the University of Colorado Boulder delivers remarks to a crowd of community leaders and CU supporters in Sterling Thursday. ( Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

A presentation by Brian Domitrovic, visiting scholar in conservative thought and policy at the University of Colorado Boulder, was part of a visit by several of the university's leadership to Sterling Thursday.

CU Alumni Association Executive Director Ryan Chreist welcomed community leaders, local alumni, parents of students and fans to a lunch session inside the former Sterling City Hall on Poplar Street. He said the university's main goal is, "as a Colorado institution, we want to educate our Colorado students," he said. "We want our Colorado students to stay here, stay in state, because we know if we keep them here, they're going to stay here. And we want our best and brightest to remain in the state of Colorado."

Brian Domitrovic, Visiting Scholar in Conservative Thought and Policy at the University of Colorado Boulder, shares his thoughts on the U.S. economy at an outreach event the college hosted in downtown Sterling Thursday. (Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Chreist talked about the alumni association's focus on building a statewide community of CU supporters by visiting communities across the state. "If there's ways that we can help contribute to that community, our ears are open," he said. "We are a state institution here for the state of Colorado."

Chreist then introduced Regent Sue Sharkey, who represents District 4. He said she is "an advocate for her district, and she's also an advocate for CU."

Sharkey said she feels it is important to advocate for CU because "CU has an impact on all of us... CU impacts every person in the state of Colorado whether we're aware of it or not."

Advertisement

She introduced Chancellor Phil DiStefano, who has been at CU for 42 years. He began his career in education as a high school English teacher in Ohio. He joined the CU Boulder faculty in 1974 as an assistant professor of education, and held several positions before becoming chancellor in 2009.

DiStefano talked about the student population at CU, which includes a growing number of veterans and represents "a geographic diversity," with students from all 50 states and dozens of countries around the world. He feels that the diversity "really enhances the education of all of our students," he said.

There are about 220 CU alumni in the Sterling area, and another 120 in the Fort Morgan area, according to DiStefano.

He spoke about some outreach programs CU has held in northeast Colorado. One was an Aerospace Day held at Revere High School, which exposed seventh through 12th grade students to various career ideas and pathways in aviation, aerospace and space sciences. They had over 350 students from 12 school districts participate in the day, which was led by three CU professors, including a former NASA astronaut, and 10 CU students. Lt. Gov. Joe Garcia also attended the event.

CU also hosted a Science Discovery teacher workshop at Northeastern Junior College. The teachers were asked to bring a few of their students to see how they would respond to the content and activities that were presented.

Students and faculty from CU's environmental design program also spent 10 months working with the town of Haxtun to create a Master Plan.

After his remarks, DiStefano introduced Domitrovic, who is the third visiting scholar to be part of the annual program. DiStefano explained that the guest professors teach courses, present programs with fellows from around the U.S., and participate in outreach visits during their year with the Boulder campus. "It really enriches the intellectual life and discourse at the University of Colorado Boulder," he said. "The Visiting Scholar of Conservative Thought adds breadth to the education that students get."

Domitrovic is an historian and economist, coming from Sam Houston State University. He writes a weekly column for Forbes.com, and authored a book on supply-side economics.

He called himself "a historian of the Reagan revolution in economic policy," and that has been his main topic of presentation during his time at CU. "But I also like to represent how broad and extensive and deeply civilized the conservative movement is," he said.

He explained that conservatism was born out of a response to the Enlightenment and the French Revolution, following the Lisbon earthquake of 1755. "It's not just polemical stuff... but in general, the conservative movement is a rich movement across culture, religion, politics, economics, you name it, for two and a half centuries." He has reached out to experts across a variety of disciplines who can speak about that tradition at CU.

But Domitrovic is also using his platform to bring in those involved in conservative politicking of today. He mentioned a number of experts who will speak on supply-side economics and related topics, then shared some of his own thoughts about today's economy.

He said he and Larry Kudlow of CNBC-TV, his co-author on a forthcoming book about the John F. Kennedy tax cuts, like to write together because they have a similar attitude about economic growth and American prosperity. "We love economic growth and mass prosperity in the United States," he said. "We're talking about 10s of millions of people who are living like kings. That's what the American dream is."

He said the only way for that to happen is with significant economic growth every year. However, since 2000 growth has been under 2 percent. "That's completely in contradiction to 237 years of American history," he said, noting that except for the Great Depression, and the 1970s, the nation has traditionally seen 4-5 percent growth each year.

"You solve all your problems with economic growth," he said. "America is just not America — it's just not in the DNA of America to be slow and sluggish... That's just not America being America."

After his presentation, Domitrovic took a few questions from the audience about his thoughts on the role of education in the economy and workforce, the Affordable Care Act, and recovery from the Great Recession.

Sara Waite: 970-526-9310, swaite@journal-advocate.com