A Eustis Democrat hoping to challenge Republican incumbent Dan Webster for a congressional seat in November says he would push for drastic changes in the tax law to curb carbon emissions.

Bill Ferree, 70, president of a company that installs electric car charging stations, said he would cut income tax by a third and replace a majority of the lost revenue by increasing federal taxes on gasoline by 50 cents per gallon.

The proposal would do two things, Ferree said, increase the income of workers across the country while giving an incentive to move away from fossil fuels, which he describes as his most important issue.

“It’s a revenue-neutral proposal that goes to the bottom 80 percent of the workforce,” Ferree said. “That 80 percent spends their money. It’s kind of a way to really stimulate demand, which is really what has been lacking as the economy has slowly recovered.”

Ferree also said it would force a switch to alternative fuels faster than current federal policy. He doesn’t accept arguments that assert a higher gas tax could be harder on the working Americans he wants to help with his income tax changes.

“It’s because people have a choice about how much gas they use,” he said. “You can easily transfer to a vehicle that uses less gasoline. “To me, that is an argument that is frequently used (but isn’t valid.)”

Ferree Spent 30 years as a pilot with Delta Airlines, retiring in 2003. From 2005 to 2008, he ran A Third Place in Eustis, an eatery formerly known as Ferran’s Moonlight Grill.

After closing the restaurant, Ferree helped found and served as president of a bootstrap volunteer-run environmental technology business incubator, his website states. Out of it came the start-up company WattNext, a company that installs electric car charging stations.

Ferree also served on the city commission from 2009-12.

He is one of three candidates in the Aug. 26 Democratic primary who are vying for the chance to challenge Webster, who lives in Winter Garden, in the November general election. Democrats Shayan Modarres of Orlando and Michael McKenna of Davenport are also running in the district that won’t exist for long with its current boundaries.

Modarres is a civil rights lawyer from Orlando who has practiced for three years, and was one of five attorneys who represented the parents of Trayvon Martin after the boy was shot in killed in Sanford in February 2012. If elected, Modarres said, he will fight for equal rights for women and the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered community, support the Affordable Care Act and work across the aisle if it can be done.

McKenna works the night shift as a supervisor of security at Walt Disney World. He has made tax and spending reform leading to a balanced federal budget his top priority. McKenna also supports gay marriage and strongly backs civil rights, especially for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered citizens, he said.

First elected in 1980, Webster served for 28 years in the state legislature, leaving in 2008 because of term limits. He was elected to Congress in 2010 and defeated former Orlando Police Chief Val Demings to secure re-election in 2012.