By MICHAEL TORTORELLO

The New York Times

Here is a truth about children with autism: They grow up to become adults with autism. Advocates estimate that over the next decade some 500,000 such individuals will come of age in the United States.

No one can say for sure what adulthood will hold for them. To start, where will everyone live and work? A 2008 Easter Seals study found that 79 percent of young adults with autism spectrum disorders continue to reside with their parents. A solid majority of them have never looked for a job.

And yet the life expectancy of people with autism is more or less average. Here is another truth, then, about children with autism: They can’t stay at home forever.

This realization — as obvious as it is worrying — has recently stirred the beginnings of a response from researchers, architects and, not least, parents. In 2009, a pair of academics, Kim Steele and Sherry Ahrentzen, collaborated on “Advancing Full Spectrum Housing,” a comprehensive design guideline for housing adults with autism.

Perhaps the first development to closely follow their template is Sweetwater Spectrum, a residence for 16 adults whose abilities and disabilities span the full range of autism. The innovative $10.4 million project opened in January in the heart of California wine country, and its founding families and board hope to make Sweetwater a model for like-minded experiments across the country.

“You hear about different organizations planning to do these things,” said Ahrentzen, a professor in the Shimberg Center for Housing Studies at the University of Florida, in Gainesville. But “it takes time to get all these different funding sources in place.”

Steele said: “Did it become fashionable? All of a sudden there are a lot more.”

The pair ran off a list of new and prospective housing projects on Cape Cod, Mass., and in the Catskills of New York, as well as Phoenix and suburban Minnesota.

One of the most promising efforts, Ahrentzen said, is Airmount Woods, in Ramsey, N.J., which will welcome tenants in November.

But it would be hard for any of these campuses to look as “visually stunning as Sweetwater on the outside,” Steele said, with its 3,250-square-foot, four-bedroom, five-bathroom houses near a picturesque downtown.

It’s easy to plan a pleasant day at Sweetwater. Start off the morning with 30 minutes on the elliptical trainer in the exercise room. For breakfast, how about collecting a few fresh eggs from the chicken coop to cook in the community kitchen? Sow a tray of tomato seeds in the expansive greenhouse, shoot a few baskets on the outdoor hoop. And if it’s Friday, why not drop by activity night in the social hall?

These amenities are central to the enterprise, said Sweetwater’s chief executive and executive director, Deirdre Sheerin, 53. The public image of living with autism is one of lethargy and social isolation, she said. Picture someone “sitting on a Barcalounger with a video game, eating weird foods.”

By contrast, everything about Sweetwater exists to inspire a “life with purpose.” To start, residents have chosen to move here; they have chosen their housemates, too. Similarly, families contract for their own care, be it round-the-clock support or drop-in help. In one sense, Sheerin said, Sweetwater is a glorified landlord: each tenant signs a 12-month lease and pays rent ($650) and an association fee ($2,600) every month.

At the same time, Sweetwater’s mission statement lays out some ambitious principles. Residents will be able to age in place. The community should “accommodate a broad financial spectrum,” subsidizing residency for a quarter of its tenants. And attendants (who are not Sweetwater employees) should be offered incentives to encourage stable, long-term care relationships.

George Uberti, a 28-year-old personal attendant, likes the idea of helping clients in a community that belongs to them.

“But the real difference is the resources,” he said. “We have a pool here that’s just outside. We have a library. We have a farm. Normally, a big part of supportive living is we have to manage behaviors within certain settings. We have to ride the bus.”

Here is what it looked like on a Saturday evening at the end of summer, when two dozen residents, families and caregivers gathered outside the rec center for a cookout.

Ashley Pease, 25, was giggling and hopping to the Xbox game “Dance Central.” Her party outfit included a black bridle helmet and a stuffed elephant. John Edmonston, 25, was drinking a juice box on the floor, although this was hard to see. He had positioned a giant beanbag over his head and trunk to promote a sense of calm.

The mustering of residents was no small accomplishment in itself, Uberti said. “We tried to do one of these when we first moved in, and it did not go well. We could barely talk the residents into coming into the kitchen.” Indeed, Pease’s housemate, Chris Jackson, had shifted from the edge of “Funkytown” to the kitchen, then to the patio, before retreating across the courtyard. He had barely checked in with his mother, Patty Jackson, 54, which worried her not a bit.

Chris is hardly the only 22-year-old in America to ignore his mom in public. Plus, she remembered the alternative.

Before moving into Sweetwater, he spent 10 years at a residential school in Boston. Every month, his parents would make a three-day cross-country trek from their home outside San Francisco. Leaving at the end of those visits was wrenching.

Sweetwater is an open campus, and a host of attendants and parents are watchful all the time.

“Now we take him into town for ice cream,” Jackson said, “kiss him on the cheek and say, ‘I’ll see you next week.'” Patty Jackson had prepared a bag of snacks for her son and another for Edmonston, whenever he emerged from his beanbag shelter.

“Johnny is gluten-free,” she said. “I brought some gluten-free brownies.”

It was parents who founded Sweetwater, and the place has taken the shape of what Mark Jackson called “an extended family.” Maris Buesser was interrogating her housemate’s mother about the car she had parked in the lot. (“Does the Mercedes CLK have buttons on the steering wheel?")

Nearby, Buesser’s mother was trying to arrange a duet between her daughter, who plays flute, and another resident, Christopher Kite, who plays piano. Soon, Buesser, 23, and Kite, 28, were discussing Mercedes-Benzes.

Buesser’s mother, Stephanie Ozer, 57, looked on approvingly. “That may not sound like much,” she said later. “But that type of interaction and back and forth? That is something I’ve dreamed of.”