The mother of three children who went missing from their Glendale apartment for nine hours Saturday was booked into jail on one count of felony child abuse, Glendale police said.

The children were found safe and in good condition. Their mother was initially arrested on unrelated outstanding warrants for theft and disorderly conduct.

The day-long search for the children had been focused around the Del Sol apartment complex, located at 6525 W. Montebello.

Police say a mother, now identified as 25-year-old Shawntaye Beavers, left her 4- and 2-year-old daughters with her 8-year-old son while she ran an errand Saturday around noon. When she returned home, all three kids were missing and there was no sign of forced entry. Beavers called 911 around 1 p.m.

According to Glendale police, "detectives believe the mother left the children in the home unsupervised and alone for what appears to be a longer period of time than originally reported."

All afternoon and through the evening, Glendale police went door-to-door and searched cars coming and going from the neighborhood.

But after a nine-hour search, the 8-year-old, Christian Schoonover, the 4-year-old, Lydia Zamora, and the 2-year-old, LillyAnna Zamora, have all been found safe with a grandmother. Police said a relative came by the apartment and took the kids out of concern after realizing they had been left alone.

The father of the two young girls lives at the apartment as well but was at work when the kids were left alone, according to police.

Police said the apartment is filthy and has feces on the floors. According to Glendale police, "Officers and detectives found the home to be unsanitary. Detectives described it as unkempt and dirty with fecal matter found inside the home."

The Department of Child Safety is also involved and the children are with a child advocate for the night.

In addition, family members will continue to be interviewed by detectives.

FOUND: 3 missing children from 6525 W. Montebello Avenue have been located in good condition! — Glendale Police (@GlendaleAZPD) March 27, 2016

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.