OWENSBORO, Ky. (AP) - If the Birddog Club was just starting out, its members probably would not be eating breakfast together every Friday morning. There is a good bet that instead of meeting in person, they would be connecting electronically.

Forty-seven years ago, the Birddogs were young pups starting their business careers and meeting weekly to discuss what was going on in Owensboro and how they could be a part of it. The only change in their almost half-century together is their meeting places.

The group said they finally hit on a stable place to meet. In their 47 years, the Birddogs closed down several eateries.

“We started out at O’Henry’s,” said David Leeper, president of Leeper Heating & Cooling Service. When that closed, they met at Gabe’s until it closed and then they closed down the Days Inn restaurant. He joked that they warned Cracker Barrel of their record.

All of the Birddogs are members of the business community. Five of the members sat at a round table Friday morning at the Barrel to discuss the week’s local, national and global news. Areas represented at Friday’s table included building, heating and cooling; insurance; real estate; restaurants; and bluegrass music.

By 8 a.m., they had covered the potential closing of Century Aluminum in Hawesville and its effect on the surrounding area.

Gordon Barnett, a real estate professorial with Real Living, Home Realty, had worked in the aluminum industry and said Russian and Chinese imports are part of Century’s problem.

When they talked of Owensboro, they didn’t bring up anything negative about their city. The group applauds the work at Smothers Park and the growth on Kentucky 54.

Others at the morning meeting were Bill Jones, a partner in Lake Forest Community LLC; David Edds Sr., insurance agent; and Ross Leazenby, who is former owner of Little Caesar’s Pizza restaurant franchises.

Since Leazenby’s retirement, he has been involved with the International Bluegrass Music Museum, including serving as board chairman.

The former restaurateur, who is a native of Michigan, told his wife upon his retirement that he was going to give back to the community that helped make him successful.

Jones has been in the building business for more than 40 years. One of his projects is Lake Forest Town (retail) Center on Kentucky 54. When asked what he thought about the latest news on Towne Square Mall’s foreclosure he replied, “I think (our) new mall will do well.

“All but one space is filled,” Jones said.

Jones, a Daviess County native, was instrumental in bringing Scott Paper, now Kimberly-Clark, to town in the early ‘90s. He was chairman of the 110 Percent For Scott Paper Committee.

The men talk politics, but not for public consumption. Edds did share a story about former Mayor David C. Adkisson.

“He passed by our table and stopped and asked if he should run for mayor,” Edds said.

“We told him it was a great idea, and he said he would since he had the endorsement of the Birddogs,” Edds said. Adkisson was elected mayor twice.

Before local elections, the Birddogs take a straw vote, Edds said. The friends are almost always in agreement and right about who got into office.

Barnett said Edds likes telling stories that they’ve all heard before. “He starts out by saying, ‘I’ve told this story before, but I like hearing myself tell it, so I’m going to tell it again,’ ” Barnett said.

“I look forward to this every week,” Edds said.

___

Information from: Owensboro Messenger-Inquirer, http://www.messenger-inquirer.com