Acknowledgment from the podium. It’s one of the most powerful public tools available to any American politician. And it’s free.

Thank their good friend so-and-so in front of a large crowd. It’s a predictable staple of Barack Obama’s repetitive rhetoric nowadays.

In fact, next to telling his audience to be seated and mentioning himself a few dozen times, uttering an endless list of acknowledgments is how the former Real Good Talker begins most speeches–mayors, Congress members, principals, a local organizer he never met until two minutes before.

So, it was unusually revealing Tuesday afternoon that an ebullient Obama launched his ObamaCare ‘enrollment’ victory lap in the White House Rose Garden with not one single acknowledgment. He was not going to share this self-congratulatory moment with anyone.

“Four-score and seven years ago,” the Democrat began. No, not really. But he used the same construction. “Six months ago today, a big part of the Affordable Care Act kicked in as healthcare.gov and state insurance marketplaces went live,” Obama intoned. (Scroll down for C-SPAN video of the full remarks.)

Obviously, Obama did not describe exactly how six months ago the healthcare.gov website went live–by dropping dead. But he announced to the properly enthusiastic crowd of staffers that 7.1 million people had enrolled. (Applause)

The photo op was added to Obama’s daily schedule only after assurances that his namesake legislative program had reached the goal his Secretary of Health and Human Services, Kathleen Sebelius, had naively set back in September. Imagine how heroic Obama could have appeared now if she’d low-balled estimates by saying they hoped to enroll maybe four million, five max.

Still unrevealed by this most transparent administration in history is what these 7.1 million people have done and who they are: How many have really enrolled by paying? How many were previously uninsured? How many are merely grabbing at ObamaCare because their previous satisfactory plans were canceled?

Obama declared ObamaCare is here to stay, dismissing rising premiums as normal, although he promised they’d decline, and criticism of the law’s flaws as the normal mess of democracy. This law, said the president, who’s exempt, “is working.”

About two-thirds of the way through his 2,200-words Obama apparently had second thoughts about taking all the credit.

He thanked “all the members of Congress who are here today.” He thanked “countless Americans who fought tirelessly to pass this law, and who organized like crazy these past few months to help their fellow citizens just get the information they needed.”

Then, Obama thanked two — and only two — people by name — ex-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who said we’d have to pass the bill to learn what was in it. And he thanked Dick Durbin, the No. 2 Democrat in the Senate. Strangely, Obama did not thank the Senate’s top Democrat, Harry Reid, who runs that place for the moment.

Even more striking, however, Obama did not even mention Sebelius, the face of this long, painful implementation struggle. Not one word, though she was sitting right in front of him.

In his best-seller “The Amateur” (that’s what Bill Clinton called Obama in private), Edward Klein describes Obama’s legendary lack of gratitude among fellow Democrats and donors back in Chicago, where the president travels today to accept more campaign money.

Sebelius knows how this game of politics can be played. Her father, John Gilligan, was a one-term governor of Ohio, and she was governor of Kansas for six years until Obama plucked her from Topeka to try to run the cumbersome HHS. She’s been with him every loyal step of these endless 1,897 days.

Sebelius has absorbed tons of congressional abuse, including Sen. Max Baucus, an ObamaCare architect covering his own caboose, predicting to her face that the healthcare program’s roll-out would be “a huge train wreck.”

Sebelius has endured mocking and audience laughter on ‘The Daily Show.’ She took the fall for Obama during the doomed roll-out by professing to a CNN reporter that Obama knew nothing of the malfunctioning website for days after Oct. 1. Seriously? The cabinet secretary didn’t mention to her boss the unfolding disaster that would make him a serial liar?

Sure, she made some gaffes, as all public officials do. With TV cameras rolling at a Florida photo op, Sebelius cheerily asked one ObamaCare navigator what she was doing. The worker’s reply: She couldn’t anything because the healthcare.gov website had crashed again.

Asked if she was going to resign in those anguishing days early last October, Sebelius told reporters the people she worked for were quite satisfied with her job performance. Later, she apologetically explained that she knew she really works for the American people.

If Washington was the Kremlin, Pyongyang or Chicago, such a glaring public omission of praise for a senior aide by the supreme leader would be a sure sign she was on the way out the door of the office or airplane. We’ll soon see.

Meanwhile, Obama unintentionally added a moment of humor to his self-celebration of how easily ObamaCare allegedly reached 7.1 million enrollment: “We didn’t make a hard sell.”

RELATED:

Here’s why ObamaCare’s ‘enrollment’ number is meaningless

Despite Obama promises, thousands of vets die awaiting benefits

Why both jobs and the economy grow better under GOP governors

Who you gonna believe about their Vatican meeting, Obama or the Pope?

Video courtesy of C-SPAN.org