Landlords in Hutchinson are protesting a new program that lets city employees inspect rental units without the tenants' consent.

As of this past week, Hutchinson renters could receive a knock on their door from city inspectors ready to take a peak inside. This ordinance comes with mixed reaction from those it affects.

"I don't really like that, because you don't really know the person you don't know if they can come in your place and just take whatever they want," said apartment tenant Natasha Tacy.

"I don't have no problem with it because I'm paying rent and everything," said renter Cheriquita Flenoid. "I want it to be up to code and safe for me and my kids."

This process was passed by the city last April and started the first of the year, but the grace period to comply ended on Thursday, March 31. Before then, these inspections were volunteer or complaint based only. Now there's a mandatory registration and inspection every three years for each rental unit.

"It's for a matter of safety and health," said Hutch city councilman Steve Dechant. "There are landlords that do not keep up their property as they should so there are people living in substandard housing."

While Dechant says this will hold landlords accountable, many are protesting saying this violates tenants' fourth amendment right, which protects against unreasonable searches and seizures.

"If there is something that needs to be challenged in the courts then they'll certainly have the opportunity to do that if they wish," said Dechant.

Hutch landlords were given until the end of March to pay a $25 registration fee for rental units. If they have not paid, there is a $50 fee per month for each unit.

Previous Story

Several landlords in Hutchinson are protesting a program that allows city workers to inspect rental units without the tenants' consent.

The registration process started in January but landlords were given until Thursday to pay a $25 annual registration fee for rental units. If they missed the deadline, rental owners would pay a $50 fee per month per unit.

The Hutchinson News reports that some landlords who turned in registrations included about 20 sheets of paper signed by those who said they were paying the rental registration fees under protest.

The opponents say the program violates the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which protects against unreasonable searches and seizures.

The program requires most registered units to be inspected about every three years and upon change of ownership.