Sen. Glenn Grothman (left) will challenge Republican congressman Tom Petri. Credit: Journal Sentinel files

All Politics Blog From Milwaukee, Madison and beyond, a daily dose of political news and glimpses behind the scenes SHARE Election 2014

Visit our election section for complete coverage of the 2014 spring and fall elections.

By of the

Sen. Glenn Grothman (R-West Bend) announced Thursday he will challenge longtime Republican congressman Tom Petri in the 6th Congressional District.

Grothman made the announcement on Charlie Sykes' morning talk-show on WTMJ-AM (620). Asked if he was running, Grothman replied, "Absolutely."

Grothman conceded he did not currently live within district boundaries, but said he planned to move to Campbellsport in Fond du Lac County. "I don't think it's going to be an issue," he said.

He also said he expected the state's Republican congressional delegation to back Petri.

"There is apparently a deal between Wisconsin Republican congressmen that they come to the aid of each other," he said. "They come to bat for each other no matter what."

Asked last month about the growing number of Republicans considering a challenge, a Petri spokesman said his boss is up for the race.

"Congressman Petri is running for re-election," said Petri staffer Lee Brooks on March 21. "He plans on circulating his nomination papers soon."

But one Republican leader, who asked not to be named, said Petri has been rattled by this talk of a possible GOP primary. The source put the odds at only 50-50 that the 73-year-old incumbent will run this fall.

Among other Republicans considering a possible bid are state Rep. Duey Stroebel (R-Cedarburg) and businessman John Hiller, a longtime adviser to Gov. Scott Walker. Sources said state Sen. Joe Leibham (R-Sheboygan) would consider running only if Petri retires.

On Thursday, Grothman said he would conduct an issue-oriented campaign. He said he would campaign against the Affordable Care Act, and said Petri, who voted against the legislation, "implied he didn't mind a bigger government role in health care."

Grothman said Petri also backed No Child Left Behind, which Grothman characterized as a massive expansion of federal control of schools.

In a statement released later Thursday, Grothman said: “Like all Americans, I am frustrated by a federal government that seems to be out of control at a time when by many standards our great country is in a state of decline. When looking at a federal debt that has risen to $17.5 trillion and an overall federal budget that has gone up by 68% since 2000. I, like others, am troubled about our country’s future.

“I am even more concerned about the massive trend towards government dependency. The number of people on FoodShare has gone from 17 million as recently as 2001 to 47 million today. The number of people on disability has risen from five million people to almost nine million people in the last thirteen years, all while job safety has improved greatly.

“This rush towards government reliance has lead to the well-documented destruction of the American nuclear family, which will have severe, negative consequences for the next generation."

Grothman, a former West Bend attorney, is currently the assistant majority leader of the Senate, and has represented the 20th Senate district since 2005. He represented the 58th Assembly district from 1993 through 2004.

Petri has been a congressman since 1979. He is currently a member of both the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee and the Committee on Education and the Workforce (formerly Education and Labor).

Daniel Bice of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.