Although President Barack Obama just signed this past a short-term spending bill funding the government until December, he warned the Republican controlled Congress there will be no more continuing resolutions. President Obama held a press conference on Friday afternoon, Oct. 2, 2015 where warned Republicans against creating anymore financial crises and that includes not raising the debt ceiling, which Obama has called non-negotiable. The president reiterated that message in his weekly address released on Saturday morning, Oct. 3, 2015.

Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

At his press conference, President Obama spoke about the ongoing budget crisis and the Republican Congress always finding an issue in order to make a threat of government shutdown or actually shut it down like they did in 2013. Then it was funding Obamacare, now it was funding the reproductive health organization Planned Parenthood, after videos surfaced of them selling fetal organ and tissues from abortions for research. Now at the last minute a crisis was averted, because Speaker of the House John Boehner, R-OH chose instead to resign and pass a clean spending bill rather that bow to the GOP Freedom Caucus in the House, defund Planned Parenthood and lead the country to the second government shutdown in two years.

Although, President Obama signed the short-term spending bill the Senate and House passed on Tuesday afternoon, Sept. 30, 2015, he would not sign another one, even though Congress had seen them as option. When Obama signed the bill, Press Secretary Josh Earnest relayed the same message to Congress about the president wanting a long-term solution. Obama said at the press conference, "I want to be very clear, I will not sign another shortsighted spending bill like the one Congress sent me this week. We purchased ourselves 10 additional weeks. We need to use them effectively."

Obama urged Congress to pass a long-term budget, for the next two fiscal years 2016 and 2017, which is what has been discussing with Republican leadership, he also wants an end to the sequester spending cuts, that have put caps on spending across the board. Obama pointed out the sequester cuts had a purpose when the economy was still in trouble and needed to recover, but now that it has they need to be undone. Obama said, "We can't cut our way to prosperity. Other countries have tried it and it does not work…. These cuts that have been maintained have been keeping our economy from growing faster. It's time to undo them. The bottom line is that Congress has to do its job."

President Obama also warned conservatives against using revenge tactics to not pass a budget or raise the debt-ceiling limit. Obama said there other methods of passing legislation to get their conservative agenda, "They want to defund Planned Parenthood, there's a way to do it, pass a law, override my veto." Obama told the Republicans, "You can't have an issue like that potentially wreck the entire U.S. economy, any more than I should hold the entire budget hostage to my desire to do something about gun violence. I feel just as strongly about that, and I think I've got better evidence too."

Afterwards, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell's (R-Ky.) spokesman Don Stewart responded, "The President just said he won't sign any more short-term funding bills. Maybe he can tell his party to stop their filibusters of the long-term bills we've been trying to pass."

The president also warned Congress about not raising the debt ceiling, which Treasury Secretary Jack Lew said would hit the limit by Nov. 5. If the debt ceiling is not raised the country faces defaulting on its loans. Currently the nation has an 18.1 trillion-debt limit. Lew sent a letter to Congress on Thursday, Oct. 1 saying, "We anticipate that our remaining cash would be depleted quickly. Without sufficient cash, it would be impossible for the United States of America to meet all its obligations for the first time in our history."

At his press conference, Obama urged Congress to raise the limit, because it is "a way for the U.S. to maintain its good credibility." The president also warned of the consequences of not raising it, saying, "If it gets messed with, it would have profound impact for the global economy and put our financial system in tailspin." President Obama also acknowledged that Boehner's departure in the middle of negotiations on Oct. 30 "will complicate the negotiations, but when it comes to the debt ceiling, we're not going back there."

In his weekly address entitled, "Congress Should Do its Job and Pass a Serious Budget," President Obama warned Republicans not to "flirt with another shutdown." Obama chided Republicans about their way of governing. "Look, that's not the way America should operate. It just kicks the can down the road without solving any problems or doing any long-term planning for the future. And that's why I will not sign another shortsighted, short-term spending bill like the one Congress sent me this week."

Republican leaders Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-KY and outgoing Speaker of the House Boehner both plan to meet with Obama to discuss the budgets for 2016 and 2017. At the heart of the debate breaking existing budget caps, the sequester cuts, Republicans want an increase in defense spending, Democratic want to increase domestic programs spending, and conservatives do not want to increase spending at all. A budget agreement now will ensure there is no threat of another government shutdown in September 2016; it would also be a major victory for Obama before his term ends.