Randall Debler had grown up on a farm and knew he wanted to get into agriculture, but had to get creative when it came to finding a way to finance that dream.

The family farm wasn’t large enough for him to return to after graduating college, and buying enough land and animals to start the cattle operation he wanted would have cost more than $700,000, Debler said. He began working with Paul and Nancy Miller, a couple with that type of operation and no one positioned to take it over. The Millers decided to convert the farm, Rock Hill Ranch, into a corporation, enabling Debler and his wife Erin to gradually buy parts of it instead of coming up with a large enough sum to buy the whole operation at once.

“My wife and I are buying shares a little at a time,” he said. “The amount of capital to get started at that size is almost impossible to come by out of college.”

Nationwide, other young farmers have expressed similar concerns. A 2011 survey from the National Young Farmer’s Coalition found 68 percent of the 1,000 farmers who responded said access to land was a large challenge.

Money also was a challenge: 78 percent said they struggled with a lack of capital, and 40 percent said they had trouble with access to credit. The U.S. Department of Agriculture does make loans to new farmers, but they can be difficult to obtain and the $300,000 limit may not go far in areas with high land prices, according to the coalition’s commentary on its findings.

Agriculture, as a profession, is aging. The average farmer’s age is 57, and for every farmer younger than 35 there are now six older than 65, according to the National Young Farmer’s Coalition.

Debler said he has seen plenty of interest in farming among young people when he speaks to animal science classes, but the barriers to entry can be difficult. He suggested working for an older farmer, or setting up a small side operation while working another job. If young farmers show they can do good work, established ones will take note, he said.

“I think there’s more interest now than there are positions to get in,” he said.

Jeff Sutton, director of marketing, business partnerships and leadership development for the Kansas Farm Bureau, said agriculture is a promising field for young people because of the need to feed a growing population, but if they don’t have a family farm they may need to start out working for an older farmer or make an arrangement to gradually take over as the owner moves into retirement. KFB has a committee that represents young farmers’ interests to the state and federal government and provides education on topics like finances, water issues and how to manage intergenerational tensions on a family farm.

“There’s no lack of interest among young people to get into farming,” he said.

Angela Britt, who runs Britt’s Farm near Manhattan with her husband Richard, said they were able to get into agriculture because Richard’s parents sold them the family farm in 2006. They were both in college at the time and had to get loans from the USDA and a local bank to buy the land for $600,000 and the equipment for $100,000, she said.

“That was the hardest part,” she said. “We talked to bank after bank that just blew us off.”

They have about 200 acres and mostly grow vegetables and corn, Britt said, though they also do a bit of agritourism with a pick-your-own-pumpkin patch and a corn maze. He does most of the field work and she manages the business side, including handling the logistics of shipping a semitrailer full of produce to Kansas City-area grocery stores six days per week.

Britt said most farmers in their area are in their 60s or older, which sometimes caused friction when she and her husband wanted to change how something was done or to raise their prices.

“You just have to be hard-headed about it,” she said.