Step into a specially furnished room at one Sarasota retirement community, and you may have trouble deciding whether you’re at a 1970s rock concert or a high-end spa.

Lavender, cloves and cinnamon scent the air, and from a screen in front of two side-by-side recliners come the sights and sounds of ocean waves, or snowfall on pines, or butterflies riffling the petals of flowers. Around the room are mind-bending LED light installations that make the walls appear to undulate. Suddenly, every perceptive opening into your brain is working overtime — and the counterintuitive effect is to make you relax and enjoy it.

The Kobernick-Anchin retirement community has brought to Southwest Florida this new intervention for its memory care residents and others, based on a therapy developed in the Netherlands in the 1970s for children with disabilities. The multisensory room, which officially opened on Monday, is designed to soothe anxieties and lift depression for elders whose mind-body connections can benefit from its gentle forms of stimulation.

Kobernick-Anchin-Benderson was established in 1993 by the Sarasota Manatee Jewish Housing Council as a not-for-profit campus of elder living options ranging from independent apartments to memory care. Like other continuing-care retirement communities across the nation, it faces the challenge of more residents being afflicted by dementia as they live into their late 80s and beyond.

Some 5 million people in the U.S. are estimated to have Alzheimer’s disease, the most common form of dementia, and the number is expected to more than double by 2050. Cures and prevention remain elusive goals, but as more is learned about what parts of the brain are most impaired, behavioral therapies are developing that can help improve quality of life and slow the disease’s progression.

In March, Kobernick-Anchin opened a 1950s-style kitchen in its memory unit, which helps residents connect to long-term memories of starting adult life in the post-World War II era.

PHOTO GALLERY: Click here to see more images

This new and even more elaborate installation, supported by grants, has been a goal for community CEO Darlene Arbeit, and came together after two years of research, says April Moschini, activity director at the Anchin Pavilion. The plan is to study the therapies’ effects on residents with cognitive or emotional issues, eventually expanding their benefit to all residents and even to the public.

The interactive environment of experiences and playthings that make all five senses work together is known as Snoezelen (SNOO-zelen) therapy, from the blending of two Dutch words that mean “relax” and “explore.” In this country, the technique is most often used for children with autism. But experiments with older adults — especially those with some form of dementia — are beginning to spread to the United States from Europe.

Each Kobernick-Anchin resident who uses the room with a therapist will receive an individualized “sensory diet” based on clinical needs and personal desires, explains Elyse Gordon, director of rehab.







“How you might feel on a roller coaster is very different from what I might feel,” she says. “And to you, the smell of lavender may be noxious, or calming and soothing.”

Some people may prefer the scent of cedar to lavender, or a free-floating swing to a cozy recliner with massage pillows. Or they might respond best to a single stimulation, like a darkened room with a starry night sky projected on the ceiling while crickets chirp from the sound system.

“The beauty of this room is that it’s all-inclusive, and there’s thought behind each thing placed in here,” Gordon says, holding in both hands a glowing plastic egg that changes colors. For elders who no longer perform routine tasks like washing dishes, she says, the natural ability to use two hands in concert can fade over time.

“With this egg, just being able to use both hands together, it’s crossing the midline in your brain and causing the pathways to regenerate,” she says. “It’s amazing that something like this makes you want to hold it with both hands, and neurologically that’s a good thing.”

Although the Snoezelen paraphernalia — from bubble lights to glowing fiberoptic strands — are based on proven sensory therapies, “when it comes to dementia care, it’s really new and cutting-edge,” says Moschini. “We would like to collect data so we can report on what works for us.”

It is not known how many elder communities or nursing homes have installed multisensory rooms in the United States, but one chain — ACTS Retirement-Life Communities, is adding the therapy to more campuses after commissioning a study at its location in Southampton, Pa.

Rochelle Robbins, dean of the school of arts and sciences at Holy Family University, helped conduct the study, based on the home’s regular 90-day assessments for agitation and depression. Fourteen out of 15 subjects selected for the study showed measurable improvements in mood and social interaction over the three-month period, the researchers reported in the journal Long-Term Living.

“There’s not a lot of research out there about helping dementia patients,” says Robbins, a psychologist. “In my field, especially, they don’t want to touch it; it’s a hot potato. But here, we’re not talking about fixing dementia; we’re talking about quality of life.”

Robbins was struck by the way certain images — like tropical fish swimming across the wall — could evoke memories in patients who rarely spoke outside the room. One woman, she said, would braid and unbraid the strands of fiberoptic cable, talking as she worked.

“Depression scores went down, and we found these residents needed fewer medications,” Robbins said. “We also found it wasn’t for everybody. There were some people who refused to even walk in there.”

In pre-testing the room at Kobernick-Anchin, Moschini and Gordon have seen similar results.

“We have a resident in our memory support unit who calls out a great deal,” says Moschini. “We were able to bring her in here, and she gravitated toward this projection on the wall — it was an ocean scene or a waterfall. For the whole time she was here, there was no calling out. This occupied her brain enough that she didn’t feel the need.”

Gordon says images in the room can evoke pleasant memories — of holidays or beach vacations, say — and evoke conversation in people who have become withdrawn. And, as with the woman entranced by the nature scene, just being able to pay attention helps orient a person who has daily difficulty finding a place in the world.

“I believe she calls out because she wants to make sure that there are people or things around her,” Gordon says. “When she saw all this, she was at peace with everything.”