COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo., September 28, 2014 — Dick Morris newest book, Power Grab: Obama’s Dangerous Plan for a One-Party Nation is perhaps his most important book on the subject to date. Morris’ proposition is simple: Obama’s actions, which may be seen as dangerous in their individual pieces, are even more so when brought together.

The president is going beyond what previous presidents have done in exercising their executive powers. He is aiming at nothing less than the transformation of our democratic republic into a one-party state.

Let that sink in for a minute.

The checks and balances that you learned about in civics class are being sidelined. The Executive Branch is taking on the powers delegated by the Constitution to the Legislative Branch.

The Judicial Branch, described by Alexander Hamilton in the Federalist Papers as the branch of the federal government least dangerous to liberty, is being packed with activist judges who will support Obama’s every act.

The Legislative branch itself, with the Senate still in the hands of Democrat Sen. Harry Reid, goes along with the president’s wishes and blocks literally hundreds of House bills. The Republican House impotently tries to sue in the federal courts.

Stalemate in the Congress suits the president’s agenda.

Choosing which laws to enforce

Bypassing Congress through executive order

Changing immigration laws

Challenging voter fraud laws

Intimidating the opposition through regulatory agencies such as the IRS

Expanding entitlement programs

Ignoring Senate rules on appointments

Intimidating the media

Rigging union elections

Eliminating the Electoral College

In the introduction, Morris brings together ten strands of policy that he says form the plan. In short, they are:

The book’s introduction explains these points briefly then explains in detail the many examples of each before describing how the federal bureaucracy is being used to accomplish these goals in the areas of health care, energy, environment, education, communications and welfare.

No rule, precedent, tradition, or even fundamental precept of our democracy is to be allowed to stand in the path of their march toward one-party rule. – Dick Morris, Power Grab

Morris says that the plan began after the 2010 election when the Democrats lost control of the House and with it, the ability to pass any law at will. At that point, Morris says, the president decided to do an end-run around Congress.

Morris is really setting out a theory to explain the actions of the president in a coherent, comprehensive, unifying way. It’s an inductive theory, guessing at a unifying goal behind all the disparate actions.

The test of any good theory is its explanatory power.

We believe in Newton’s theory of gravity, for example, because in every observable instance it works. Likewise, the breath of Morris’ evidence for the general theory of Obama’s goal of single-party rule is persuasive.

READ ALSO: Andrew McCarthy: Faithless Execution

Take, of example, the actions of the various federal departments. Congress appropriates the funds for all of them and it used to be that the department heads would go to Congress to justify their budgets and to answer to Congress for their actions.

Department secretaries thus had divided loyalties: to the president as head of the Executive Branch and to the Congress as well.

But today those departments do not respond to Congress. Instead, they stonewall Congress. Their funding comes through “continuing resolution,” a tactic that avoids the deadlock set up by the Senate who refuse to pass any budget other than the one the president shaped in 2009. Any attempt at fiscal responsibility results in a “shutdown” of the federal government with all of the departments playing their role in making it as painful as possible for the American people.

Those roles are orchestrated through the “czars” in the White House—people mostly not confirmed by the Senate.

Morris tends to use the terms one-party nation, one-party state and one-party rule interchangeably. What he means is a system in which the president rules by fiat, with no checks and balances.

There’s no need for a Congress except for form’s sake—very much as was the case with the Roman Imperial Senate or the Congress of the Soviet Union. The judiciary exists only to enforce the rule of the president.

Elections have foregone conclusions.

The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these States. — The Declaration of Independence

There would still be a token opposition in the Republican Party but that party would never be able to elect a president. There would still be a Congress, but it would be impotent. There would still be a Constitution, but it would mean whatever the president, supported by his courts, said it meant.

People would still have rights—but they would be rights granted by government, not natural rights protected by government.

Such is the plan for the fundamental transformation of the United States of America. Such is the meaning of “Hope ‘n’ Change.”

Voter apathy in the 2014 Mid-Terms, a stalemated Congress for the next two years, and another Democratic president in 2016 is the recipe for Morris’ predictions to come true.

Read Power Grab: Obama’s Dangerous Plan for a One-Party Nation. Then vote in the November election.