By Donna Cohen and Joe Purkey

We appreciate Oregonian reporter Laura Frazier's highlighting of the poorly designed and very inequitable STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) workspace in the Roosevelt High School remodel plan ("Civil-rights complaint challenges design of Roosevelt High School STEM," Oct 30). STEM provides hands-on experience designing and building projects that incorporate science, math and engineering principles. STEM promotes college readiness and is a foundation for many good-paying jobs — from the trades to high-tech science and math careers. STEM's project-based approach to learning improves graduation rates, attracts students who have been under-represented in science and math and diminishes achievement gaps.

But the potential rewards of STEM are not being distributed fairly in Portland Public Schools. A good STEM program requires a large workspace where all the resources necessary to creative and challenging project design and construction are close at hand. As for any other subject area, all learning resources need to be co-located. It is just common sense and "best practice" in the scholarship on the issue.

Portland Public Schools split the STEM workspace into two areas in different parts of the school building. Neither STEM space in the RHS remodel design is large enough for a proper STEM program. The larger space is 3,500 square feet. The remodel design for Franklin High School is a co-located 9,000 square feet. Enrollments at both schools will be equalized under these new designs. Roosevelt's student body is, overall, lower-income and more diverse than Franklin's. This is the very definition of inequity under federal Department of Education, Office of Civil Rights guidelines.

This happened because the PPS planning team had no STEM curriculum to plan space for, no STEM technology-engineering teacher expertise, or even the knowledge on the part of school leaders as to the existence of this educational discipline, which is half of the STEM program. Technology-engineering educators are the specialists in project-based education, facilities and equipment. The result for Roosevelt is a fatally flawed design that runs counter to the fundamentals of STEM — connectedness and collaboration.

Lack of technology-engineering educational expertise in planning on both the teacher and leadership levels and a substandard STEM workspace design for a school with 70 percent students of color — while the remodel design for Franklin High School, a majority-white school, has none of these problems — is illegal and the basis for our civil rights complaint.

Civil rights laws are tools for citizens to use in combating inequitable circumstances. We spent months attempting to reason with Portland Public Schools, educating the district as to the expertise required to properly create a STEM workspace, providing school, district and school board members expert sources and professional research on best practices in STEM. No adequate responses were proffered. Now it is in the hands of the federal Department of Education.

We feel confident that the deficiencies in the RHS planning process for STEM violate the civil rights of current and future generations of Roosevelt students.

•

Donna Cohen is a former technology educator, and Joe Purkey is a Portland Public Schools parent and member of the Roosevelt High School Campus Improvement Committee.