The most important unelected job in Florida just came open. The elected officials who will fill that opening must do better for Floridians than they did a year ago.

Kevin McCarty has been commissioner of the Office of Insurance Regulation since 2003. He announced this week that he will resign in May. Florida once elected the state's top insurance regulator. Because of a voter-approved change, Gov. Rick Scott and the Florida Cabinet — Attorney General Pam Bondi, Chief Financial Officer Jeff Atwater and Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam — will choose McCarty's replacement.

The key players, though, will be Scott and Atwater. The commissioner must get three votes, but two must come from the governor and chief financial officer. Scott has shown little regard for consumers. He dislikes regulation in general and opposed McCarty's plan to reduce fraud. Atwater has proclaimed himself to be consumer-friendly.

To back up that claim, Atwater can insist at the Jan. 23 Cabinet meeting on an open, national search for McCarty's replacement. There should be public interviews of all applicants.

None of that happened in January 2015, when Scott dumped the state's top law enforcement officer for the governor's preferred replacement. Aides to the governor worked out the switch in private with aides to Bondi, Atwater and Putnam, who were happy to be clueless.

In theory, the McCarty hiring should be different. After Scott's power play, news organizations sued, alleging violations of the open-meetings law. The resulting settlement and court order require more open searches for Cabinet hires, for meetings of Cabinet aides — the next one is Wednesday — to be recorded and for those aides to follow the Sunshine Law when discussing matters related to decision-making.

Still, Scott was ready a year ago to replace McCarty, along with the state's top financial regulator and bookkeeper. The governor wanted "fresh ideas," but his candidate for insurance commissioner was someone from Louisiana whom an insurance lobbyist recommended. Scott's chief of staff is from Louisiana.

Though the insurance industry no doubt will push for a candidate who would regulate lightly, consumers deserve better. Floridians have seen no significant drop in homeowner premiums, a decade after the last bad hurricane season. Floridians pay disproportionately high auto rates.

By changing from an elected to an appointed commissioner, voters replaced one set of politics with another. Insurance companies can't bankroll a candidate, but the commissioner can't act independently. The job depends on pleasing politicians.

McCarty's best moments, for example, came when Charlie Crist — much less of an industry friend than Jeb Bush — was governor. McCarty took on Allstate and State Farm, once the dominant private carriers, when they asked for excessive homeowner rate increases.

Under Scott, however, McCarty's decisions have aligned with the governor's ideology. Scott opposes the Affordable Care Act. McCarty turned down federal money to help implement the law. He did not object in 2013 when the Legislature prevented him for two years from negotiating rates for new health care plans offered through the Affordable Care Act marketplace. Indeed, McCarty's office wrongly implied that the law was driving up rates.

Nor has McCarty offered any ideas that would shake up the industry in Florida. Example: Requiring companies that write lucrative auto insurance also to offer homeowner coverage. Florida is the hardest state in which to bundle coverage, and thus save money, because national companies have cut homeowner coverage, and new, state-based homeowner carriers don't offer auto coverage.

McCarty also has complied with Scott's and the Legislature's wish to shrink Citizens Property, the state-run insurer. The company's coverage is down roughly 1 million, to about 500,000 policies.

Many of those policies, however, have gone to small companies that never have gone through a storm. Last year, the office conducted a "stress test," like that for banks, to see if they could withstand a financial crisis. McCarty said the test showed that companies could pay claims from a season like 2004, when four hurricanes hit Florida.

Having declined to run for the Senate this year, Atwater has announced no plans for when his term ends in 2018, with Scott's. Even if he doesn't run for another office, Atwater can help Floridians for years by persuading the governor to hire an insurance commissioner who puts consumers first.

Randy Schultz is the former editorial page editor of The Palm Beach Post. He also blogs for Boca Raton Magazine.