HOLLIS, N.H. — Gov. Chris Christie became the third Republican presidential candidate to sign a pledge to cut taxes and spending, joining two rivals for the Republican presidential nomination, businessman Donald Trump and U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky.

Christie affixed his signature to the Thomson Tax Pledge, named for former Republican Gov. Meldrim Thomson. In a state whose motto is, "Live free or die," opposing state income and general sales taxes is an article of faith; gubernatorial candidates of both parties take that pledge.

"I wanted to carry that legacy forward that my father left this state. To reduce taxes, that was his driving force," said his son, Tom, who first began asking presidential candidates to sign their own tax-cutting pledge during the 2012 primary. Eight Republicans agreed, including the New Hampshire primary winner and eventual GOP nominee, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney.

Christie's action came at a town hall meeting in Peterborough, at the end of the second day of his four-day, nine-city bus trip across the first-in-the-nation primary state. Christie's chances of winning the GOP nomination depend on being a top finisher in the Feb. 9 primary.

The pledge also committed the candidate to cut spending, reduce the federal debt, secure the borders, make the U.S. energy independent during the first term, uphold the Constitution, and repeal the Affordable Care Act, which has provided millions of Americans with health insurance.

He signed it next to a giant axe emblazoned, "Cut taxes, cut spending, cut government."

Christie has embraced many of those positions on the campaign trail, including a tax-cutting plan that also eliminated most deductions, most notably the break for state and local taxes that is used disproportionately by residents of New Jersey. While he has expanded Medicaid coverage to poorer residents under the Affordable Care Act, he also has supported doing away with the law. More than 170,000 residents in New Jersey receive federal subsidies to buy insurance under the act.

Earlier on his New Hampshire trip, Christie called for a six-month moratorium on new federal regulations while his administration reviewed those already in place.

His was the third signature on the petition, behind Paul, who he has clashed with over allowing the National Security Agency to continue collecting Americans' phone records in bulk, and Trump, who he has tweaked on this trip by telling New Hampshire voters, "We're not picking an entertainer-in-chief."

Thomson said he sent copies of the petition to all of the Republican and Democratic presidential candidates, and when Christie agreed to sign it, drove the 2 1/2 hours from his home in Orford, N.H., to officiate at the ceremony.

Christie's fiscal conservative bonafides have been questioned by a Washington-based anti-tax group, the Club for Growth, which left both him and Trump off a fundraising appeal seeking donations for other Republican candidates, including Paul.

In August, he signed Americans for Tax Reform's Taxpayer Protection Pledge, agreeing to oppose any tax increases while in office. The group is led by anti-tax advocate Grover Norquist. Of the 14 GOP presidential candidates, only Trump, U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush are not listed as signatories.

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.