WASHINGTON, Feb. 2, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Groom Law Group, Chartered, a Washington, D.C. law firm that focuses exclusively on employee benefits, health and retirement law, announced that Lisa Lowenstein and Joel Wood have joined the firm's Health and Welfare Practice Group.

Prior to joining Groom, Lisa Lowenstein was the Special Assistant/Legislative Advisor to the Deputy Director at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO). In her role, she provided strategic advice to the CCIIO Deputy Director of Policy and Regulation regarding the development of policy and regulations related to the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Prior to being Special Assistant, she was a Health Insurance Specialist at HHS where she drafted regulations, sub regulatory guidance, and policy papers regarding provisions of ACA, including the 2014 market rules, rate review, and medical loss ratio. Lisa joins the firm's extensive list of attorneys with government experience, including at key federal agencies that regulate health care and retirement plans. Immediately prior to joining Groom, Lisa was a Senior Manager at Avalere Health, where she advised health insurers and others on policy and regulatory issues related to ACA implementation and developed strategies to engage regulators regarding health reform priorities.

Lisa is joined by Joel Wood, a seasoned practitioner, with years of experience advising clients on planning and compliance issues with respect to employer-sponsored health and welfare arrangements. He has extensive experience counseling clients on various issues, including those arising under the ACA, ERISA, and the Internal Revenue Code. He is also a recognized expert on federal and state mental health parity issues. Prior to joining Groom, Joel was a prominent member of the nationally-recognized health care group at his previous law firm.

"Groom is committed to continuing to be the best when it comes to assisting our clients on navigating the Affordable Care Act, and the myriad of other laws that affect health insurers and employers. Our singular focus in this regard, as well as our strong connections with the agencies here in Washington, D.C., have allowed us to attract talented lawyers from the federal government as well as the broader legal marketplace," said Michael Prame, Executive Principal of the firm.

"We are so excited to be joined by Lisa and Joel. The firm is committed to providing the best Washington-facing health regulatory counsel for our employer, health insurer and industry association clients -- and Lisa and Joel's arrival will further position us in this regard," added Seth Perretta, Co-Head of the firm's Health & Welfare Practice.

"I am thrilled to have joined such a great firm and established health practice. I can't wait to start working with my new colleagues on our clients' important health work," said Lowenstein.

Wood added, "I have long admired Groom's practice from afar and I can't imagine a better place to practice law. The firm's health and ERISA practice is top-notch and I'm excited to be a part of it."

The attorneys in Groom's Health and Welfare Group provide an array of services to managed care organizations, insurance companies, employers, benefit funds, trade associations, benefits consulting firms, and others on a broad range of health and welfare matters. The group is playing a major role helping clients meet the challenges posed by the ACA as well as the myriad of other federal and state laws.

About Groom Law Group

Groom Law Group, Chartered (www.groom.com) is the premier law firm in the United States with 80 attorneys dedicated solely to the practice of employee benefits, retirement and health insurance law.

Media Contact:

Yena Lee

(202) 861-2603

ylee@groom.com

SOURCE Groom Law Group, Chartered