Burke Powers & Harty

Insurance exists for your financial stability and protection, and who advises you is just as important as who insures you. Through integrity and experience we are actively dedicated in helping people just like you find increased value and savings with insurance costs without just exposing you to the possibility of financial loss beyond your means or interests. And in today's world... that's really saying something. When you trust Burke, Powers & Harty for your insurance needs, you're trusting the best. In the insurance business for over 125 years, we have the experience and professionalism you rely on. We've always been located in the Tri-Cities, so we understand the unique needs of our region. We take the time to learn your personal or business insurance needs and know just what services will be best suited to you. Choose Burke, Powers & Harty for your insurance coverage, and we'll guarantee that you're making the right choices for your future. BP&H is a Multi-State, Multi-Lines, Tennessee based Independent Insurance Agency serving families, individuals and businesses throughout our region. We are Professionally Licensed in the following State: Tennessee Commercial Umbrella Liability A commercial umbrella policy protects your business assets from large settlements or judgments arising from liability claims. With increased limits over and above your primary liability policies, your insurance will help you recover if a covered catastrophic loss occurs. Key Person Life Key Man Insurance is critical for companies that depend on a few “Key People” to generate a large portion of the company’s revenue. The absence of one of these individuals usually results in the death of the company. Employment Practices Liability Even though you are an honest and fair employer, one accusation of unfair employment practices could cost you thousands of dollars. Charges ranging from age or sex discrimination to wrongful termination, even unfounded charges, can hurt or destroy a business.