Value, convenience are top priorities of Highmark, new CEO Holmberg says

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

David Holmberg doesn't like to spend a lot of time in the office.

That's a good thing for the CEO of Highmark Health, who was promoted to the top job at one of the nation's largest integrated health care companies five months ago and has had to get up to speed with a nearly $16 billion company that employs 37,000 people.

Holmberg, 56, isn't starting from scratch, however. He has been with Highmark Inc. since 2007 and most recently was president of its for-profit businesses in dental, vision and re-insurance.

But he was based in San Antonio. Western Pennsylvania is the epicenter of its fight with hospital giant UPMC. In 2015, Highmark's individual and employer-group members in Pittsburgh for the first time won't have full, in-network access to many UPMC hospitals and doctors.

It's also where Highmark is working to turn around a handful of hospitals and make Allegheny Health Network a full-scale medical provider that can serve the needs of millions of its subscribers.

And on top of it all, Highmark is dealing with the Affordable Care Act and the myriad changes that a sweeping federal overhaul is bringing to the nation's health system.

Any one of those tasks would be a significant challenge. But Holmberg, who was hired for his experience engaging with consumers, said he has a unifying vision that will guide Highmark to success: “If we do the right things for the community, then it will be right for us,” he said during a recent interview with the Trib at Highmark's headquarters, Downtown.

Here are edited excerpts.

Trib: Why should customers stick with Highmark when you're not going to be able to offer them full access to UPMC starting on Jan. 1?

Holmberg: First of all, if you look at what consumers are asking for, they're asking for high-quality care. They're asking for it in the most consumer-friendly, convenient setting. And they're asking that it be affordable. So Highmark has a real value position for the consumer. Allegheny Health Network has a very high-quality solution for people. And Highmark has 75 years of experience ensuring that people have access to care. So from my perspective, I think there is excellent choice in the community. ... We believe the value we create between Highmark the insurance company and Allegheny Health Network, the community hospitals and the thousands of doctors who participate is pretty effective.

Trib: What's the biggest change you've made at Highmark since you became CEO?

Holmberg: I think we've rededicated ourselves to the consumer, to the member. We've re-emphasized that our mission here is to keep people healthy and help make sure they have affordable health care and access to care. And that it's done in a way that is consumer-driven. I would say the biggest change I've made is to get everyone focused back on the consumer.

Trib: What are the biggest ways that the Affordable Care Act is changing Highmark's insurance and hospital businesses?

Holmberg: Expanded access and expanding the number of people with availability to care, which obviously is very important. It's also helped us realize that individuals are going to be asked to make more choices. The Affordable Care Act set up the exchanges and provided access, but it didn't necessarily prepare people for how do you make a decision as to what level of health care do you want with benefits. That's where we believe our long history of consumer engagement is paying off. And that's where my background comes in. We're going to try to make it simple for people so that they're able to understand the choices they're going to make. We're going to make it transparent so that people understand the value that they're getting. And we're going to try to make it as consumer friendly as possible.

Trib: Has the law and all the changes it's brought been all positive for Highmark?

Holmberg: It's expanded the number of people covered. It's certainly brought new people into the health care system, people who may not have been getting the treatment that they needed. We're seeing them as patients now, there's no question about that. But what it's also bringing is a level of complexity that has to be figured out and created a new set of challenges as you go from a marketplace where an employer might have made a decision to one where you've got a thousand employees trying to figure out their way.

Trib: What does the Allegheny Health Network most need to effectively compete with UPMC?

Holmberg: We just need to tell our story. There's a great story there and certainly a great heritage. I'm not sure everyone in the market understands that. We see a lot of internal research, and one of the things I looked at very early on were the satisfaction rates of people using the Allegheny Health Network. And they're off the charts; they're very positive.

I've also looked at the outcomes that we're getting and the feedback on that, and the service people are getting, and it's exceptionally good. So our opportunity is to tell that story, and I think that's what's been lost over the last several years. ... We believe the capability in the community at Allegheny Health Network is phenomenal. It's best of class, and we're going to build on it.

Trib: What's your favorite place in Pittsburgh so far?

Holmberg: Market Square. I love wandering around over there, having dinner and talking to people. ... I love Downtown Pittsburgh. I really enjoy it. I find it vibrant.

Alex Nixon is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.