FRESNO, Calif. (AP) - For a lot of people, camping is off limits. Tents and gear are expensive, and then there’s the thought of sleeping outside on the ground.

A group formed by the state to help revamp California’s 280 state parks wants to open up their natural beauty to a wider array of people than typical campers.

Parks Forward envisions putting in simple - yet eye-catching - cabins that sleep four or more on some of the 15,000 camping spaces at parks throughout the state. The idea is that people who have never camped will suddenly find it alluring.

“This is one step above sleeping on the ground,” said Lance Conn, co-chair of Parks Forward. “It’s rustic. It’s got a door. It’s clean and comfortable, but not the Four Seasons.”

Parks Forward was created in the fallout of a 2012 scandal that bruised the reputation of the California Department of Parks and Recreation when $54 million was found hidden in secret accounts while budget cuts were threatening to close 70 state parks.

The independent commission was asked to find ways of modernizing the parks, an entryway to California’s stunning coastline, towering redwoods and historic Gold Rush sites.

The group will present its blueprint to lawmakers later this year for keeping state parks relevant for generations. That includes a new twist on the age-old concept of cabins.

For the designs, Conn turned to a class of architecture students at Cal Poly Pomona. They came up with four, including one that looks like a curvy and colorful surfer’s hut and another that’s woodsy and wedge-shaped. Each is bare-bones with no plumbing or electricity.

Juintow Lin, an architecture professor who led the graduate course, said her students designed them to be small, affordable and movable.

Lin said another goal is for visitors to feel an urge to take selfies in front of their cabin and post them on Facebook, saying, “Hey, look at where I stayed!”

So far, one cabin has been built - a model called The Wedge - and displayed at the California State Fair. The Los Angeles County Fair is its next stop.

It’s unclear when mass production begins, Conn said. He envisions finding private lenders to kick-start the project with $10 million to build and install the first 500 cabins, each costing up to $20,000. He sees campers paying $50 to $75 a night, which he says will pay off the loan and put no burden on the state.

Conn said he hopes officials will embrace the concept that promises to draw more visitors.

“They’re designed to be turn-key,” he said, adding that the state won’t have to take the financial risk, allowing parks officials to do what they do best to ensure the mission is respected.

State officials recognized the need to attract a more diverse crowd. A 2011 study found that most people camping at the parks are white and 35 to 54 years old.

Today, the park system offers 171 cabins, tent-cabins, yurts, cottages and even some floating campsites in Lake Oroville.

Vicky Waters, a spokeswoman for the department, said officials are waiting for lawmakers to see Parks Forward’s recommendations before taking action. Waters added that the department shares the desire to expand camping choices.

“We’re very much open to opportunities for improving the parks system,” Waters said. “Why wouldn’t we be?”

The cabins won approval from San Francisco architect Steve Chaitow, a principal at Bohlin Cywinski Jackson, a firm that designs homes, civic buildings and nature centers that strive to complement the surrounding landscape.

Contacted by The Associated Press, Chaitow said he appreciates how The Wedge is made of simple materials yet contains features found in refined homes he has designed. The cabin satisfies a basic human need to feel safe with solid walls on two sides yet allows outside views on both ends, he said.

“If you’ve done well with your architecture, you’ve really connected with your place,” Chaitow said. “You’ve created a place that draws an emotional response with people.”