Let's look at all the things carriers and employers have done over the last 40 years to try to curb the increase in both health care costs and utilization. They include (but are not limited to):

1) The creation of networks

2) Implementing deductibles

3) Various forms and severity of medical management

4) Wellness programs

And when those didn't work, the carriers and employers (and their consultants) had the following bright ideas:

1) Narrower networks

2) Higher deductibles

3) Increased medical management and intervention

4) More wellness

And these continue to be the same strategies implemented today, some at an even more rapid pace.

Einstein once said "We cannot solve our problems with the same thinking we used when we created them.” Nowhere is this more true than in health care and health insurance.

So if what we have done isn't working, wouldn't it hold true that we must either do something different? I propose that all of these strategies were put in place with (mostly) good intentions, but a very important step was missed that would make all these strategies more effective.

We often talk about "consumerism" and "consumer driven health plans," but the only thing the consumer is driving is continued cost and volume increases. Before any of these can ideas change behavior, I believe there needs to be a fundamental shift in how we think about health care and health insurance.

First, we need to understand that those two terms describe very separate and distinct things. The first is how we consume and interact with the health care system; the second is simply how we pay for it. And we think about the latter completely different than we do any other kind of insurance.

Allow me to provide a few examples. Have you ever been in a small fender bender where you were at fault? Let's say you have $1,000 worth of damage and your deductible is $500. Would you ever consider just paying the full repair instead of making a claim on your auto insurance for fear of your rates going up or the carrier possibly dropping you? Most would at least consider the option. But how many of you have ever said, "It's just a cardiologist appointment. I'll pay the $250 instead of making a claim because I don't want my health insurance company knowing I may have heart disease"?

Another example is when we have employees from our employer partners call our office to complain. After happily paying a $10-$15 copay for a generic drug, one day they realize it has been on the Walmart $4 list all along and, had they paid cash, they would have paid less. Yes, they get mad at their insurance company, because the pharmacy charges more when using insurance. Where else do we get mad at someone paying the bill for us because the vendor charged us more, simply because they know someone else is footing the bill?