The political world took a brief break this week from Trump-mania and the lead-up to "Trump: The Debate" to gawk in outrage or wonderment at the latest verbal misstep from Jeb Bush.

The former Florida governor, in case you missed it, was speaking at Baptist convention on Tuesday when he paused in the middle of a requisite (and ill-informed) denunciation of Planned Parenthood to opine that "I'm not sure we need half a billion dollars for women's health issues." The seriousness of this gaffe can be measured in the mere hours it took for the campaign to clarify that he "misspoke" (as compared, for example, to the days it took Bush to articulate his indignation about Donald Trump's comments about Mexican immigrants).

[PHOTOS: The GOP's Hopefuls]

The Bush gaffe-train threatens to undermine the central conceit of his candidacy: electability, a traditionally Bush-ian effort to present a – take your pick – kinder, gentler and more compassionately conservative GOP, the kind that can induce swing voters to return the Grand Old Party to the White House. Jeb Bush runs vowing to eschew tea party anger, but in the age of Obama the extent to which Republican partisans are ready to give up indignation in exchange for victory remains an open question. Bush is, as National Review's Rich Lowry argued last December, a pre-Obama conservative with an entire "epoch" in GOP politics having passed since he last ran for office. As a result, while his substantive credentials are largely solid he is (self-consciously) mismatched to the tone of the present day GOP.

But more broadly Jeb is using a playbook that has been handed down in his family for generations. The liberal historian Sean Wilentz aptly described it in a 1999 New York Times op-ed about George W. Bush which could easily be about today's Jeb. Wilentz argued that Bush's campaign is "in keeping with the long arc of the Bush family's politics over the past three generations. Bushism is a way of positioning oneself through the successive watering down of what used to be called modern Republicanism." The "modern Republicanism" to which Wilentz refers was first articulated by Thomas Dewey in the early 1940s when he broke with party orthodoxy to accept the legitimacy of the New Deal's activist government. It was, in short, an effort to reposition the party to meet the changed and changing desires of an electorate that had embraced big government. "No Republican," Wilentz wrote, "embodied the spirit of Deweyism more than Senator Prescott Bush of Connecticut," George W. and Jeb's grandfather. When Prescott's son, George H. W. Bush, sought his party's nomination in 1988, he ran as Ronald Reagan's heir but raised true believer hackles when in accepting it he nodded to his father's Deweyist roots by calling for a "kinder and gentler nation." ("Kinder than who?" Nancy Reagan asked when she heard the line.)

The Republican Party's drift to the hard right has made the Bush family's Deweyism more of a pose than a substantive challenge to the bulk of the party's standard platform. So the strategy encompassed by Jeb Bush's "right to rise" slogan could have come straight from a 1999 George W. "compassionate conservative" campaign memo: Triangulate on issues like education and immigration while slapping a smile and some inclusivity paint on the rest of what is a fairly standard conservative agenda.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Donald Trump]

But putting aside the baggage the surname brings, can warmed-over Bushism succeed in the 2016 GOP? In 1988 the first President Bush won election on the strength of Reagan's popularity. And in 2000 George W. was able to cruise to the party's nomination despite his big-government-conservative rhetoric ("Too often, my party has confused the need for limited government with a disdain for government itself.") because eight years of getting beaten by Clinton had left the GOP hungry for a winner and ideological details were of secondary importance. He could define himself apart from the GOP Congress without ruffling the base because GOP voters understood that's what it would take to win. They were literally and figuratively looking less for Mr. Right than for Mr. Right Now (not unheard of in political history – think the GOP's turn back to Nixon after Goldwater's 1964 thrashing and the rise of the New Democrats in the wake of a dozen years of Reagan-Bush).

But where George W. Bush ascended at a time when his party could grasp that its failures were at least in part self-inflicted (think Gingrichian overreach) and understand the need for course-correction, much of today's angry GOP isn't interested in accommodation. (Think the Trump infatuation.) So, for example, the idea of shutting down the government – seen in 1999 as politically suicidal – is gaining currency ... again. And more broadly the conservative sense that Barack Obama is not a legitimate president – that he's a pretender who snuck in on the strength of abnormally high minority votes or because of insufficiently truculent GOP attacks – has undercut any perception in the movement that the GOP needs to adjust. Why would the party need a Bushian course correction if Obama's victories can be attributed to reasons other than the GOP's departure from the mainstream? This isn't a party that's feeling desperate enough to look for Mr. Electable when Mr. Right might still be in the room. And as the Maddow Blog's Steve Benen noted this week, multiple polls in fact show that Republican voters overwhelmingly prefer ideological purity to electability. This is not a party in the mood to accommodate.