American Express

"I have to tell you, while I think American Express is short-term overvalued, the stock is loved to death and I think it will stay that way in 2014," Cramer said. Looking at how high American Express may trade Cramer added, "I think the average multiple for stocks this year will gravitate toward 17 times earnings as the economy expands. That should make American Express a $100 stock."

AT&T

"I am not a huge fan of AT&T," Cramer admitted. "The company is trying to embrace social media, mobile and the cloud, what I call the holy trinity of new tech, but Verizon is chasing that exact same theme, and unlike AT&T, Verizon has real momentum." However, Cramer isn't entirely bearish on the stock, either. He believes it's entirely possible for shares to rally "even if the company does absolutely nothing thanks to the general improvement in business conditions."

Boeing

Boeing ended 2013 as the best performing stock in the Dow and Cramer thinks "it could have another phenomenal year. The company is really only in the second year of a new plane cycle with the 787 Dreamliner, and as that cycle goes on, Boeing should be able to build these planes faster and cheaper. I expect to see earnings leverage galore."

Caterpillar

Cramer believes that 2014 is the year the laggard Caterpillar "turns into a beautiful butterfly." Not only does Cramer think that global growth will drive an advance he also thinks that because it underperformed in 2013 expectations are quite low. "If China hangs in there at all and Europe keeps stabilizing, I think Caterpillar will deliver by the fourth quarter of this year, sending the stock to $110."

Chevron

Although Cramer is bullish on the energy revolution underway in North America – he doesn't think Chevron is the best way to play it. "The smaller independent oil producers have more exposure to this theme and therefore more upside," Cramer said. "Without a big run in oil, something I don't expect, I just can't see the stock rallying more than five or six bucks." There is a caveat however, Cramer added that "if Chevron splits off its chemicals, refining and marketing businesses, that would promptly take this stock to $140."

Cisco

Cramer thinks there are better places to put money to work than Cisco. "The company has reported progressively weak numbers quarter after quarter, and I see no end to the deterioration in sight, with Cisco's competitors currently cutting it to pieces," Cramer said. "Although I think the stock can make its way back to $25, where it was before the most recent shortfall that's not a move I'd stick around for."

Coca-Cola

Cramer is concerned that Coke could lose some fizz. "Carbonated soft drinks, both diet and regular, are declining at an alarming pace," he said. However, if the company becomes less dependent on soda, "via a a big restructuring coupled with a change in management, then I could see Coca-Cola going to $45." There is one caveat here. Because Warren Buffett is so widely followed, Cramer says "if he were to sell some of his stake, the stock could easily sink to $35."

Disney

Even after a 50% advance year to date in 2013, Cramer sees more upside for Disney. "As we get to the end of this year, I expect the hype over the new Star Wars film will be rife, and I think Disney will get a much higher price to earnings multiple as people realize that its earnings aren't going down as interest rates rise. In short, I see the stock heading to $86 without much trouble given the pending Star Wars rollout."

DuPont

Cramer thinks DuPont potentially ends 2014 among the best performers in the Dow. That's because DuPont intends to spin off its titanium dioxide business, "something that I think should immediately give DuPont a higher multiple," Cramer said. "I think the stock could trade to $80 a share."

Exxon Mobil

"Exxon could go as high as $115, a huge move for this $100 stock" Cramer said. Largely, the "Mad Money" host sees two major catalysts. "Exxon is now hitting paydirt on a myriad of projects and should grow consistently," Cramer explained. "And Warren Buffett bought a big position and his buys carry enormous weight."