Buy Photo Andrea Froehlich, a registered nurse at Vassar Brothers Medical Center in Poughkeepsie for 15 years, works in one of the 15 emergency room bays in the new 7,000-square-foot north annex of the Charles E. and Mabel E. Conklin Center for Emergency Care. The hospital now has a total of 57 bays available for emergency care. (Photo: Spencer Ainsley/Poughkeepsie Journal )Buy Photo

More beds. More space. Better service.

That's what they're saying at the Vassar Brothers Medical Center emergency department, where a new annex is opening this week.

A new wing has been quickly added that puts 15 new bays to work at the City of Poughkeepsie hospital. They expect to start using it for patients Wednesday. The expansion comes amid increasing emergency services locally and state and federal pressure to reduce emergency visits, when possible.

The previous emergency department was designed for about 55,000 visits annually. Laura Bazarnick, vice president of the emergency department, said the department takes in an average of 175 patients per day and expects to treat about 68,000 visitors during this year.

"This is a big deal for us because we are busy, busy, busy," said Bazarnick.

The facility, which treats everything from breathing difficulties to broken bones, will now have 57 beds.

The $2 million expansion is a modular unit that sits on what was formerly parking space right next to the existing ER. Vassar plans to renovate the old space next.

Sarah Curran, RN, tells reporters about some of the equipment in the newly expanded emergency department at Vassar Brothers Medical Center in Poughkeepsie Monday. The new annex will likely be opening for patients Wednesday. (Photo: Craig Wolf / Pougkeepsie Journal )

The space expansion does not add any jobs, but it provides a better experience for patients and makes it easier for staff to do their work, Bazarnick said.

"We needed the space," Bazarnick said. "We frequently had patients in hallways."

Dr. Keyur Ajbani, director of emergency services, said serious planning to remedy the space issue began in the February-March period to design "what we wanted to provide for the community, and this is the way we decided to go."

The 7,000-square-foot addition is a pre-fab setup. "This was put up in about four weeks," said John Nelson, spokesman for Health Quest, parent company of the hospital.

Vassar's Emergency Department has 126 workers, from nurses and technicians to clerical and support staff, plus seven doctors. It is housed in the Charles E. and Mabel E. Conklin Center for Emergency Care.

Buy Photo The new $2 million, 7,000 square-foot, 15 bay north annex to the Charles E. and Mabel E. Conklin Center for Emergency Care at Vassar Brothers Medical Center, pictured at bottom with metal roof, raises the total number of emergency care bays to 57 at the hospital. (Photo: Spencer Ainsley/Poughkeepsie Journal )

The growth in usage occurs against a background of public policy that seeks to reduce emergency room usage by people who should be going to their own doctors or other less costly places. The federal Affordable Care Act is part of that movement in that it has gotten many people into health insurance.

Bazarnick said that it's possible that usage of emergency facilities could back down, but she said expansion is needed for what's going on now at Vassar. "It's always better to do that than not have enough," she said.

Even as hospitals expand emergency care, changes in health care policy are designed to reduce visits. A review by the state Department of Health examined trends in potentially preventable emergency visits. It found that statewide, about 23.5 percent of ER visits in 2012 were avoidable. Dutchess came in at 22.8 percent, a slight improvement from 2011. That data was not broken out by hospital.

Well over 50 percent of people admitted to the hospital come to the emergency room first, and about one in five people who come to the ER are admitted, Vassar Brothers President Robert Friedberg said in June when the expansion was announced.

Once the new wing is fully up and running, the staff will make space in the older emergency room spaces to allow for renovations. This will include new equipment, mounted computers, new flooring, ceilings, counters and repainting. All services will remain operational during the renovations.

Vassar is also opening a new cafeteria this week, part of its overall capital projects, and has introduced valet parking.

Emergency help in Dutchess County is on an upgrade curve. Vassar's expansion follows by three months the enlargement of emergency facilities at MidHudson Regional Hospital of Westchester Medical Center. That hospital, in the Town of Poughkeepsie, opened an expanded and renovated Brinn Center, which is the psychiatric part of its Emergency Department. That $1 million overhaul allowed overall expanded capacity in the entire department, better flow and reduced wait times, its officials said in June.

Spokesman David Billig said the project added 10 rooms to the MidHudson Regional department.

Craig Wolf: 845-437-4815; cwolf@poughkeepsiejournal.com; Twitter: @craigwolfPJ

EMERGENCY ROOM NUMBERS

15

New bays

57

Total ER beds

$2 million

Expansion cost

7,000

Square feet of space added

68,000

ER visitors expected this year

Read or Share this story: http://www.poughkeepsiejournal.com/story/news/2014/09/15/vassar-expands-emergency-facilities/15678803/