Topics: Editor's Picks, Election 2014, faction, GOP, GOP Civil War, national party, New Deal, New Hampshire, Ralph Reed, Tea Party, The New York Times, Media News, News, Politics News

There have been plenty of contenders, Lord knows, but a recent New York Times article on how Republicans have used xenophobia to their advantage in 2014 may offer the best example yet of just how weak the Republican Party’s so-called establishment has become: Ralph Reed, the Christianist grifter who spent much of the ’90s hustling with Jack Abramoff and pushing GOPers ever more to the right, is now acting as the GOP’s voice of reason.

“[T]he overwhelming desire to gain control of the Senate has…so fixated the party’s strategic brain trust that trying to get a hearing on long-term strategic issues doesn’t seem to be possible,” Reed says in the Times, bemoaning how the GOP’s midterm myopia, along with demographics and geography (the Latino portion of the electorate for this year’s Senate tossup races is disproportionately small), has blinded it to the long-term perils of alienating the United States’ growing Latino vote.

Like many Republican supporters of immigration reform, including most members of the GOP establishment, Reed tries to sidestep the xenophobia issue and make his case instead in pragmatic, self-interested terms. If the party wants to be competitive in the 21st century, Reed and his fellow-travelers argue, it’ll have to appeal to at least some Latino voters. Allowing immigration reform to pass the GOP-controlled House is not about helping them (immigrants), the pro-reform wing claims, it’s about saving us (Republicans).

Keeping in mind how limiting was the choice to ignore the Tea Party’s xenophobia, the establishment’s argument is pretty decent. But as it should have learned after its failed 2013 rebrand attempt, the establishment strategy of citing the party’s future as reason to countenance reform in the present will always fail to persuade the Tea Party. Not because the strategy is wrong, but because it assumes, incorrectly, that Tea Partyers care if the GOP is competitive on the national level, and seek influence beyond the borders of their respective states.

In American politics, it can be hard to specify exactly how you tell the difference between a national party and one with a more parochial vision. The U.S. system has always primarily been a contest between two large, shifting coalitions; and for more than 150 years, American politics has orbited around the twin behemoths of the Democratic Party (which is arguably the oldest political party in the world) and the GOP. This means that on paper, at least, the big two are always national parties in their nature.

The historical record, however, shows things have been considerably more fluid. For much of the century separating the Civil War and the civil rights movement, for example, the so-called Solid South was a major reality of American politics, one that functioned as a blessing and a curse for the Democratic Party. The blessing was the near-guarantee that the party’s control over the region’s many de facto dictatorships would give it influence in many states and the House. The curse was that this power came at a heavy price, requiring as it did that the party defend apartheid.