THE OVERVIEW

Here we go again. Every few years Florida politics are roiled by the contentious question of whether to expand gambling.

Statewide referendums to allow new casinos failed in 1978, 1986 and 1994. Two years ago the legislature considered, but ultimately decided against, a proposal for “destination resort” casinos in South Florida. Now that plan is back and it has some strong legislative allies.

The casino bill is expected to get a full hearing in the Senate and leaders in the more conservative House say they are open to the idea. Gambling promoters and opponents are hiring dozens of lobbyists and contributing millions to political campaigns in an effort to steer the debate. Even Mickey Mouse is getting involved.

Here’s everything you need to know about what promises to be a major political brouhaha.

THE PLAYERS

Florida’s gambling debate is a special interest food fight, with various factions battling to protect their economic turf.

Casino Moguls – From a Las Vegas billionaire to “Malaysia’s leading corporation,” gambling giants from around the world are jockeying to open casinos in Florida. Conservative billionaire Sheldon Adelson, who controls the Las Vegas Sands casino company, is active in pushing the issue. Malaysian casino giant Genting already has purchased property in downtown Miami.

Seminole Tribe – The Seminoles are fighting to keep a near monopoly on casino gambling in Florida. The state could lose hundreds of millions in revenue if lawmakers break their compact with the Tribe, which is paying the state $1 billion over five years in exchange for exclusive rights to offer card games such as blackjack, and allow destination resort casinos or an expansion of gambling at pari-mutuel facilities.

Pari-mutuels - Florida's nearly three dozen dog tracks, horse tracks and jai-alai frontons want a lower tax rate and the right to offer the same games as the Seminoles and any proposed "destination resort" casinos. They also want to offer fewer races, if any, and focus more on other forms of gambling.

Animal breeders – Horse and greyhound breeders are concerned about losing business if the state reduces the number of races required at pari-mutuel facilities. The breeders have support among lawmakers in certain rural districts.

Disney – Florida’s signature tourist attraction could lose convention business to Miami and other parts of the state if destination casinos are approved. Casinos also don’t mesh well with the wholesome Mickey Mouse image Disney is trying to project. The company has a powerful ally in the Florida Chamber of Commerce, one of the most influential lobbying groups in the state capital.

Arcade operators – A law passed last year that outlawed simulated slot machine parlors known as “Internet Sweepstakes Cafes” angered other businesses that offer various forms of prize-winning “amusement machines.” The owners are lobbying for clearer rules.

Anti-gambling groups - While not as powerful as they once were, social conservatives who oppose gambling still wield considerable influence in the Legislature. They are aligned with the Florida Chamber of Commerce, Disney and groups like Orlando-based “No Casinos” in fighting any expansion of gambling.

THE KEY LAWMAKERS

A handful of lawmakers wield enormous influence over whether gambling is allowed to expand in Florida.

Will Weatherford – Possibly the single most important person in the

gambling debate, the House speaker has been leery of expanding casino gambling in the past but recently said he is open to the idea under certain conditions.

Rick Scott – The governor has veto power over any gambling expansion. He has not been outspoken on the issue, but is not considered fundamentally opposed. He likely will carefully weigh the political ramifications in an election year.

Garrett Richter – The Naples Republican chairs the Senate gaming committee that is crafting a comprehensive bill. Richter’s skill in navigating competing interests and creating a final product that all sides can live with will be critical to the legislation’s success.

Andy Gardiner – A staunch social conservative, Gardiner criticisms of gambling carry special weight with colleagues because he will become Senate president next year. He also will have considerable influence as a member of the Senate gaming committee.

THE PROPOSALS

The Senate gaming committee is still developing a comprehensive gambling package, but a rough sketch has already begun to emerge. House leaders also have conditions.

Senate proposal so far:

Destination resorts – The early talks call for two large “destination resort”

casinos, one in Miami-Dade County and one in Broward County. Gambling companies would bid for the permits, which would require a minimum investment. Some lawmakers want more than just two casinos.

Pari-mutuel changes – Lawmakers are still debating whether to allow more gambling options or other benefits for horse and dog tracks and jai-alai frontons. The industry has many supporters in the Legislature, but efforts to expand the types of games permitted undoubtedly will run into opposition from lawmakers worried about allowing dozens of new full-blown casinos.

Gambling Control Board – Lawmakers want to create a five-member board appointed by the governor that will regulate gambling going forward. The plan is fraught with political and ethical concerns.

Tweaking arcade rules – Clearer rules are being floated for arcades and other businesses operating “amusement machines,” including removing a requirement that certain machines be coin operated, increasing prize values from a maximum of 75 cents per game and developing a certification process that would allow law enforcement to distinguish between legitimate games and simulated slot machines.

Clean up pari-mutuel licensing – A number of dormant pari-mutuel facilities exist around the state, and there are concerns they could reactivate if new types of gambling are allowed. There also have been questions about the validity of some active pari-mutuel permits. Lawmakers want to consolidate old permits and clarify the rules surrounding existing permits.

House Speaker Will Weatherford’s conditions: * Any deal to allow new casinos must incorporate a Constitutional amendment that says voters must approve all gambling expansions in the future. Casinos could not open unless the amendment is approved in November.

*The governor must renegotiate the revenue-sharing compact with the Seminole Indians this year.

THE MONEY

Gambling is already big business in Florida. Here is a breakdown of the major players.

Indian Casinos – The seven Seminole Indian casinos and one operated by the Miccosukee tribe took in $2.16 billion in 2011 according to an annual study by Alan Meister, one of the nation’s top Indian gambling experts.

Pari-mutuels – The state’s horse and dog tracks and jai alai frontons made $872 million from wagering on competitions last year, $436 million from slot machines and $133 million from poker, or more than $1.4 billion total, according to the state Division of Pari-mutuel Wagering. The Sarasota Kennel Club took in $7.4 million from greyhound racing and $5 million from poker.

Lottery – The largest gambling business in Florida is actually run by the state. The Florida lottery collected more than $5 billion in total revenue in 2013.

THE LOCAL IMPACT

While Sarasota and Manatee counties are unlikely to be included among the Florida communities authorized for new destination resort casinos, the Sarasota Kennel Club’s future could be impacted by a comprehensive gambling bill up for debate in the Legislature this year.

The Kennel Club collects bets on greyhound races and offers a poker room, but is not authorized to have slot machines like other pari-mutuel facilities across the state. Currently, that requires a local referendum and legislative approval. How that process will work in the future likely will be part of any new gambling bill, with some lawmakers arguing that pari-mutuels without slots still should have a path to obtaining them.