Meeting News Coverage

SEATTLE – Optometry’s Meeting attendees had a unique opportunity to present questions directly to the entire American Optometric Association Board of Trustees and hear the board’s stance on issues ranging from the future of private practice to the Affordable Care Act to the profession’s demographic shift.

AOA President Steven A. Loomis, OD, then president-elect, addressed a question on the future of private independent optometry from an attendee at the session, “A Conversation With the AOA Board.”

“It will look differently in 15 to 20 years,” Loomis told the audience. “Over 80% of MDs now don’t work independently; they work for a hospital system. Optometry has a long history of independent practice. What we will see in the future is more group practices.

“The cost of one doctor running a practice and seeing just a handful of patients a day is not sustainable with reimbursements the way they are,” he continued. “I think it’s important to always be a part of the larger system. It’s important for optometry to affiliate with Accountable Care Organizations and recognize their role as a primary eye care professional.”

Steven Loomis

Loomis said the number of ophthalmologists is decreasing. “It will be more critical for optometry to step in and take care of the needs of the population,” he said. “The difficulty is being sure we continue to integrate into the system.”

Trustee Robert C. Layman, OD, said AOA Excel provides tools to equip optometrists to remain independent if they so choose.

Another attendee pointed to the difficulty today’s new graduates encounter paying off their student debt.

Samuel D. Pierce, OD, current secretary-treasurer, also pointed to AOA Excel’s career center that matches students seeking opportunities with doctors needing associates.

“AOA Excel has a program that will assist new graduates in financing a practice purchase,” he said.

AOA Federal Relations Committee chair Roger Jordan, OD, added from the audience that pending federal legislation involving the National Health Service Corps will allow students to serve for a few years and have loans forgiven.

Newly elected vice president Christopher J. Quinn, OD, added: “It’s very important for everyone, the senior practitioner as well as the student, to recognize the investment they have made in their education and translate that to the value of services they provide. Be careful about accepting payment that is less than the value of your services. Low reimbursement is only a function of what you’re willing to take.

“Comprehensive eye exams are a good value to the health care system; we save money in the long run,” he added. “We have to get that message out to the payers.”

President-elect Andrea P. Thau, OD, said: “You can’t help patients if you go out of business. Some of my colleagues have dropped some of the lower paying plans and they say they’re working less and making more money now.”

“You have to be a good business person,” trustee William T. Reynolds, OD, said. “It will be different for every insurance and office.”

Loomis noted that AOA members, on average, have a higher income than non-AOA members – $37,000 a year for practice owners, he said.

Quinn said the AOA MORE (Measures and Outcomes Registry) “will be an important tool allowing you as a provider and us as a profession to demonstrate value to get reimbursement. In 2019 the new reimbursement system will be the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MBIPS), and PQRS and meaningful use will all be integrated into MBIPS.

“The system will allow payment bonuses of 9% to 12%,” he continued. “For every provider who’s getting a bonus, there will be a provider getting a penalty. The registry will allow us to collect PQRS and meaningful use data.”

Quinn said the development of the registry has been “an expensive undertaking but a tremendous benefit” that is included with AOA membership. Non-members pay $1,800 per year, and the AOA hopes “it will be a member recruitment tool – once they do the math,” he said.

Quinn added: “We have a stunning statistic; when there’s evidence to support a new technique or procedure or clinical care, it takes 17 years for providers to fully adopt and incorporate that technology or technique into their practice. I think the registry will accelerate that process.”

Committee member Jordan added from the audience that the registry will provide a large amount of evidence-based data to support its advocacy efforts.