Topics: dogs, Human Nose, Nose, Rockefeller University, Sense of Smell, Smithsonian.com, Life News

This article originally appeared on Smithsonian.com

You may have heard this one before: Humans, especially compared to animals such as dogs, have a remarkably weak sense of smell. Over and over again, it’s reported that we can only distinguish between about 10,000 different scents—a large number, but one that’s easily dwarfed by that of dogs, estimated to have a sense of smell that’s 1,000 to 10,000 times more sensitive than ours.

It may be indisputable that dogs do have a superior sense of smell, but new research suggests that our own isn’t too shabby either. And it turns out that the “10,000 different scents” figure, concocted in the 1920s, was a theoretical estimate, not based on any hard data.

When a group of researchers from the Rockefeller University sought to rigorously figure out for the first time how many scents we can distinguish, they showed the 1920s figure to be a dramatic underestimate. In a study published today in Science, they show that—at least among the 26 participants in their study—the human nose is actually capable of distinguishing between something on the order of a trillion different scents.

“The message here is that we have more sensitivity in our sense of smell than for which we give ourselves credit,” Andreas Keller, an olfactory researcher at Rockefeller and lead author of the study, said in a press statement. “We just don’t pay attention to it and don’t use it in everyday life.”

A big part of the reason it took so long to accurately gauge our scent sensitivity is that it’s much more difficult to do so than, say, test the range of wavelengths of light the human eye can perceive, or the range of soundwaves the human ear can hear. But the researchers had a hunch that the real number was far greater than 10,000, because it was previously documented that humans have upwards of 400 different smell receptors which work in concert. For comparison, the three light receptors in the human eye allow us to see an estimated 10 million colors.

Noting that the vast majority of real-world scents are the result of many molecules mixed together—the smell of a rose, for instance, is the result of 275 unique molecules in combination—the researchers developed a method to test their hunch. They worked with a diverse set of 128 different molecules that act as odorants, mixing them in unique combinations. Although many familiar scents—such as orange, anise and spearmint—are the results of molecules used in the study, the odorants were deliberately mixed to produce unfamiliar smells (combinations that were often, the researchers note, rather “nasty and weird”).