The Public Policy Forum is looking at financing strategies to keep cultural institutions such as the Milwaukee County Zoo operating and thriving. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

The nonpartisan Public Policy Forum is looking beyond Milwaukee for ideas as it helps community leaders think about ways to address the funding needs of the area's major public and private institutions.

The forum, a trusted resource celebrating its 100th year of research and analysis, has set its sights on Oklahoma City, Pittsburgh, St. Louis, Denver and Cleveland and what financing strategies were employed to keep cultural and artistic institutions operating and thriving.

To that end, forum researchers plan to give members of the newly formed Cultural and Entertainment Capital Needs Task Force a report by early March that will provide four different financing models Milwaukee County might consider to raise revenue for its major institutions.

The five communities the forum is focusing employ some form of tax to raise revenue. While no specific financing plan — including a sales tax similar to the one funding Miller Park — has emerged in Milwaukee, the county boards in Ozaukee, Waukesha and Racine counties have already gone on record opposing any form of regional taxation.

Rob Henken, the forum's president, emphasized that his organization does not have a preference for a financing model that best fits Milwaukee County. Its job is research, not advocacy.

"I am concerned people will get the message that one of these models is right for Milwaukee," he said last week after the group's annual meeting. "But these communities provide interesting contrasts. A sin tax, a sales tax and a property tax. They each have interesting ways to approach the issue."

Henken said one model would look at a temporary sales tax Oklahoma City has used for years to fund its community needs. Another model will be a hybrid of sales tax plans used by Allegheny County (Pittsburgh) and the Denver metropolitan area. A third will look at a sin tax in place in Cuyahoga County (Cleveland). And a fourth will examine a property tax model used to support cultural facilities in St. Louis.

"The reason we are modeling is we want to provide additional information," Henken said. "What would it look like in Milwaukee County? The intent is to provide additional insight."

The forum's initial report, released late last year, found that for the next five years, the capital needs for county-owned facilities such as the Milwaukee County Zoo, Milwaukee Public Museum and the parks system totaled $246 million. Counting all county and privately funded institutions with ongoing capital needs, the total is $310 million.

And that doesn't count potential funding for a new arena and an expanded convention center.

Here is a rundown of how the five other regions fund improvements to major cultural and artistic institutions:

Oklahoma City. The Metropolitan Area Projects (MAPS) began in 1993. It is funded by a limited term, 1-cent sales tax and has been used for a variety of capital projects and educational improvements. The most recent MAPS initiative began in April 2010 and ends in December 2017. It is expected to raise $777 million. All the projects are built on a pay-as-you-go basis.

Some Milwaukee community leaders have favored this approach and have visited Oklahoma City to see the results.

Pittsburgh. The Allegheny County (Pa.) Regional Asset District, created in 1993, supports and finances regional assets in the areas of libraries, parks and recreation, and cultural, sports and civic facilities in the greater Pittsburgh area. The district receives one-half of the proceeds from the 1% Allegheny County sales and use tax and the other half is paid directly to the county and municipal governments by the state treasurer. For 2014, the district adopted a $91.2 million budget serving 91 regional assets. Libraries received the largest share.

Denver. The Scientific and Cultural Facilities District has since 1989 distributed revenue from a one-tenth of 1% sales tax to cultural facilities in a seven-county area. As the district's name suggests, the money is earmarked for cultural and scientific facilities operated by local governments and nonprofits. In 2012, the tax raised $45.6 million.

Cleveland. Through the Cuyahoga Arts & Culture, smokers in Cuyahoga County pay a 34.5 cents per pack tax. Thirty cents of the cigarette tax funds arts and cultural organizations. A separate tax of 4.5 cents per pack goes to professional sports facilities in Cleveland. The tax took effect in 2007 and is scheduled to expire in 2017. Since 2007, the group has invested more than $112 million in 237 arts and cultural organizations.

St. Louis. Through the Metropolitan Zoological Park and Museum District in St. Louis and St. Louis County, residents in 2013 paid 27.97 cents per $100 of assessed value to the district to support the Zoo, Art Museum, Science Center, Botanical Garden and History Museum.

During its 40 years of operation, the district's annual net tax revenue has increased from $3.89 million in 1972 to more than $74 million in 2012.