Rams burned again by the deep ball

FORT COLLINS -- Boise State is not quite ready to give up the top spot. Not yet. Not to Colorado State.

Not even with a backup quarterback making his second career start.

While Colorado State felt it was ready for the moment, Grant Hedrick was more than ready for his.

Starting in place of the injured Joe Southwick for the second straight week, he picked on Colorado State's passive secondary for five touchdown passes and rushed for another as the Broncos rolled to a 42-30 win Saturday night at Lubick Field at Hughes Stadium.

"We knew we needed to take shots on them and threaten them deep," Hedrick said. "So that was what we kind of came in looking at."

Advertisement

Then again, who doesn't. Two of Hedrick's passes covered 42 yards or more, making it 10 this year of that length the Rams' secondary has allowed, 25 in all. It's a sore spot for McElwain, for sure. Asked about his secondary after the game, his voice raised as he answered it and walked off the podium.

Boise State wide receiver Matt Miller catches a pass in front of Colorado State safety Jasen Oden in the second quarter of Saturday s game. The Broncos scored 21 points in the frame en route to the Mountain West victory. (Steve Stoner)

"Just keep working. Just keep working on fundamentals," McElwain started. "Understand whent he ball is in the air, don't panic. I'm not giving up on those guys. You keep working. We work fundamentals every single day, and we just keep working on them. And when they're in position, they make plays. There comes a point where you look yourself in the mirror and say, 'look, I'm going to go compete.' That's the bottom line."

The Rams (4-5, 2-2 Mountain West) entered the night with dreams of taking down Boise State and making a charge for the Mountain West division crown and the berth in the championship game that comes with it.

For the first quarter, and a bit into the second, the Rams seemed poised for a run, jumping out 10-7, then leading 17-14.

Then Hedrick really heated up for the Broncos (6-3, 4-1).

He threw three of his touchdown passes in the second quarter, turning a 10-7 deficit after one into a 28-17 lead at the break. He connected with Geraldo Boldewijn, Shane Williams-Rhodes and Matt Miller in the second frame, then came back to Miller to open the third.

In short, the Broncos scored on four straight possessions and took complete control of the game. Early in the fourth, Hedrick connected with Aaron Burks for 42-yards out.

Hedrick finished 19-of-27 for 305 yards, with another 30 on the ground.

"I think we needed to establish a good pass game to help the run game out," Hedrick added. "They loaded up the box and we got a few over the top."

It was a good sign for a Boise State team that is looking to get a rematch with Fresno State in the MW Championship game on Dec. 7. Southwick is out for a few more weeks, at least.

"He's getting more and more confident," BSU coach Chris Petersen said. "He's a weapon with his feet, he's more accurate. The more he sees different blitzes and coverages, the more comfortable he'll be."

Colorado State used a 14-play drive that took 5:50 off the clock to start the game, resulting in Jared Roberts' 29-yard field goal to grab the initial lead.

On the next play, Hedrick pulled a handoff out of the gut of Jay Ajayi, but lost the grip. Shaquil Barrett pounced on the ball, setting up the Rams on the BSU 18.

Six plays later, Kapri Bibbs broke through from 3 yards out on a third-down play, giving the Rams a 10-0 lead with 6:33 in the first. But a drive later, the Rams went for it on fourth down and failed. Pushing the envelope would be a trend, as the Rams went for it on fourth down six times, converting four of them.

Grayson said McElwain had said all week that this was the time to pull out all the stops. They tried, even lining up for a field goal, switching formation and having Joe Hansley run and pick up the first down. That led to Grayson's 7-yard touchdown pass to Charles Lovett.

"He did. He had our back," Grayson said. "We've just got to come out and finish."

Too often the Rams didn't. They had a season-best 626 yards of total offense, but the only second-half scoring came in the final 9 minutes after the Broncos built a 42-17 lead. Grayson, who finished 36-of-52 for a career-best 397 yards, threw one interception after the Rams recovered an onside kick and fumbled once in the game. Jared Roberts missed a 47-yard field goal to end the first half after a high snap, hitting the crossbar. Grayson added 48 yards on the ground, giving him a school-record 448 yards of total offense in the game, breaking the mark of 416 held by Bradlee Van Pelt. Van Pelt witnessed it, as he was in the crowd as part of CSU's Hall of Fame class this year that was honored at halftime.

Too many drives went for naught, as 11 times the Rams entered Boise territory, five producing scores.

"It was tough," said Lovett, who had seven catches for 103 yards. "We went in at halftime and regrouped a little bit and played a little bit better, but I mean, we've got to work on our offense and not stall out like that. It was kind of how we did in the Hawaii game."Hedrick put Boise State on the board first with a 2-yard run, then let his arm do the talking. Poised in the pocket, he took a hard shot on the pass he completed to Williams-Rhodes, but it resulted in a 68-yard score.

Colorado State has seen that too many times this year, and safety Trent Matthews, who was beaten on that play, said most of it is just mental.

"It might be mostly mental, because the game is more of a mental game," Matthews said. "I see us being better than we were last year, and we have the same guys. I feel it was more mental. They gave us more routes we haven't seen, so we just have to fix it and play the next down as a secondary."

Bibbs added two late touchdowns (of 1 and 3 yards), giving him three in a game for the third straight week, four times this season. He now has 15 on the year, the fourth-best single-season total at CSU.

Mike Brohard can be reached at 635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and @mbrohard