KRASNAYA POLYANA, Russia — The camera atop Eva Samkova’s helmet didn’t catch much more than a blur of snow on Sunday in the Rosa Khutor Extreme Park’s harrowing snowboard cross course.

The camera missed the tangled crashes and the gladiator jostling because the 20-year-old from the Czech Republic led all four of her seeding, semifinals and final races, earning the three-time junior world champion her first Olympic gold medal.

“It’s just because of my whole team,” said Samkova, the Czech Republic’s only female snowboard cross athlete in the Sochi Olympics. “We just wanted to be the best. Every movement on the course we wanted to be perfect.”

Samkova, who paints a mustache on her upper lip “for good luck” during every race, said she grew up watching the Olympics on television and aspired to someday join the show.

“Now I am also Olympic. Yeah it’s crazy,” she said.

Pumping her arms in a kneeling, Tebow-esque celebration, Samkova joined Canada’s Dominique Maltais (silver) and France’s 19-year-old Chloe Trespeuch (bronze) on the podium.

Maltais, a firefighter from Montreal, won bronze at the Torino Winter Games in 2006, but stumbled in the Vancouver Winter Olympics in 2010. She rededicated herself to her sport in 2010, committing to four years of intense training with an eye on the podium in Sochi.

“The last four years have been like I was on a mission,” said the 33-year-old. “Everything … was to get faster on that course. Like I said, hard work pays off and I think that it did today.”

Salt Lake City’s Fay Gulini finished fourth after battling through seeding, quarterfinals, semifinals and finals.

“On this course, it kind of seemed like just staying on your feet was important and I was able to do that pretty consistently,” said the 21-year-old, who finished 12th at the 2010 Winter Olympics and 6th last month at Aspen’s X Games. Gulini said the Russian cross course was “the toughest all season.”

The carnage was spectacular, with crashes every race and three women leaving the course in a rescue sled. American Jackie Hernandez viciously slammed her head in a crash and slid horrifyingly lifeless down a landing during her seeding run. She suffered a concussion, but was on hand to cheer her teammates in the final.

“I’ve got a bit of a headache,” she said. “Thanks for asking.”

The course scared a lot of the women, Gulini said, for one because of so much time in the air.

“This is a great course but it’s intimidating,” she said. “We don’t usually have courses that are this big. It’s so much fun, but it will get in your head. I don’t think it’s that the girls don’t have the capability of hitting those huge jumps, but it will get in your head, and I think that’s what it was for a lot of people. It was a mental thing.”

The mental aspect definitely hit medal favorite Lindsey Jacobellis, who posted the second-fasted time in seeding and won her first quarterfinal. In her semifinal she was alone and leading when she crashed on a banked turn. It was reminiscent her finish in the 2006 Winter Olympics, when she was leading through the final jump but an ill-advised, showboating trick made her crash and she settled for silver. After falling, she won Sunday’s consolation “small final.”

Said the 28-year-old, her face draped in disappointment: “It’s just a big bummer that it didn’t work out for me and I wasn’t able to complete the course. I was riding really well.”

Jason Blevins: jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasontblevims