By of the

Veteran market watcher Doug Ramsey does not hesitate to share his opinion about stocks.

"We're negative on the market," said Ramsey, chief investment officer at the Leuthold Group, a Minneapolis investment firm that provides research to many Wisconsin money managers.

In fact, Leuthold's tactical portfolios are at the lower end of their equity range, Ramsey said.

Ramsey turned bearish about two and a half months ago when the firm's Major Trend Index began showing worrying signs.

The index takes into account quantitative measures like momentum and investor psychology, along with other factors like valuation, interest rates and consumer confidence.

It has been indicating high stock valuations for some time, but Ramsey said he wasn't too concerned because stocks in most bellwether industry groups were generally still rising.

"You had cyclicals, defensive stocks, high dividend stocks, everything generally going up together," Ramsey said.

That stopped around the end of the year, when transportation stocks peaked, followed a month later by utility stocks.

"Both of those sectors have a good long track record of topping out in advance of a peak in the blue chip market indexes," Ramsey said.

The stock market is reacting — with a delay, as Ramsey anticipated — to the Federal Reserve's moves a year ago to taper its quantitative easing program, where it was buying bonds in the open market, he said.

When the bond-buying program was operating, the Fed's artificial support kept interest rates low and stocks continued going up. Now investors are expecting interest rates to rise, which has historically been bad for stocks, Ramsey said.

Also, economic numbers have been disappointing during the last four to five months, more industry groups' stocks have struggled, and the broader stock market and the economy have lost momentum, Ramsey said.

So despite the low yields cash offers, Ramsey says he is content right now to maintain his cash and short-term bond positions.

"There will be better values to be had three, six or nine months out," he said.

In terms of investments, he says he's considering emerging markets.

iShares MSCI Emerging Markets Exchange-Traded Fund (EEM, $36.29) seeks to track the investment results of an index of the same name, which contains large- and mid-capitalization emerging market equities. These shares have a 52-week trading range of $30 to $44.19.

Emerging market shares are a good value right now, but Ramsey suggests taking a cautious approach and viewing them as a three- to five-year investment.

"I'm not sure about the next 12 months," he said. "Even though emerging market stocks are much, much cheaper than U.S. stocks, they typically go down more during a bear market, regardless of valuations."

Ramsey says he would have argued a year ago that emerging markets were the cheapest pocket of the global equities market, but they have fared worse than the Standard & Poor's 500 index since then.

Emerging market shares have had a "nice bounce" in the last two weeks but are still down 21% from their September 2014 peak, he said. The S&P, meanwhile, is roughly flat during the same time period, he added.

Ramsey said he and his colleagues are just starting to consider adding to their emerging market investment position but have not yet pulled the trigger.

ABOUT THIS

The Journal Sentinel focuses on one Wisconsin money manager or analyst in this weekly feature, looking at a trend that helps investment pros make their decisions.