Stevie Benkendorf reads with her grandson Jack. Benkendorf advocates reading to children, citing benefits of building a bond and building vocabulary and knowledge. ( Jeannie Lancaster / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

When Stevie Benkendorf sits down to read and visit with her grandson, Jack, she is continuing a tradition she first experienced at the side of her father. Sadly, for many children, this type of conversation and reading experience is not a common thing.

Recognizing the importance of reading and talking with children, the American Academy of Pediatrics issued a statement in June of this year. It recommends that, "pediatric providers advise parents of young children that reading aloud and talking about pictures and words in age-appropriate books can strengthen language skills, literacy development and parent-child relationships."

"Reading is critical," said Trish Hoffman, a speech/language pathologist and Child Find coordinator with Thompson R2-J's Early Childhood Program. "I even encourage parents of newborns to have books. Read a quick book, do a nursery rhyme. Start with simple stories, building up to longer and longer stories. Talk about the pictures, 'What do you think is going to happen on the next page.'"

Benkendorf is also a strong advocate of reading to children. "It builds a bond between the reader and the child," she said. "It builds their vocabulary, their experiences with the world and their imagination. And it's fun!"

For more than 18 years, Benkendorf has served as president of Read Aloud Loveland, a local organization with over 50 volunteers, who provide oral reading in Loveland area preschools.

Advertisement

She encourages parents to find out what their children are interested in and choose books about those subjects to read together. Her own grandson loves to read about farms, so she's always on the lookout at the library for books about farms.

"We need to read to these little children," Benkendorf said.

In the late 1990s, researchers from Rice and Columbia Universities found that children from certain socio-economic groups were not being talked to (or read to) as frequently as other children. This significantly affected the children's development of vocabulary. This gap is now referred to as the Thirty Million Word gap (TMW).

Trish Stanczyk, director of Early Childhood Programs for Thompson R2-J School District, understands how this can occur. "We know that for families who aren't really sure where their next meal is coming from or where they will be living next month, it might be difficult for them to take time to focus on their child. But it's still so important that it happens."

Stanczyk stressed the need for all parents to implement the 3Ts and, "Tune In, Talk More and Take Turns" with their children. This focus is part of a national 30 Million Word Initiative.

If you go For a fun, evening story time with your child, join Read Aloud Loveland for "Pajama Night at the Library" at 6:30 p.m. Tuesday, Oct. 21. Slip on pajamas and come to the Loveland Public Library, 300 N. Adams Ave. Families are welcome; children must be with an adult. Each family will receive a free copy of the book "Bedtime for Bear" by Brett Helquist. For details, call 667-9110.

Tune In: Stanczyk notes that, "we coo or make other sounds with babies, and they respond back. It's important to continue that," she shared. "Often what happens with preschoolers is that parents start to say 'cool' or 'wow' (when a child tells them something), and they don't continue the conversation."

She encourages parents to expand the conversation. "If a child tells you that she built a tower of blocks, a parent could respond, 'So, you built a tower of blocks, tell me more. Who did you build it with? What color were the blocks?'

"Every time you respond to a child, you're helping them feel safe in their world," said Stanczyk.

Talk More: Even with hectic schedules, there are various ways to have fun together with language. When you're out grocery shopping, perhaps you could ask your child, "How many colors of peppers are there? Which one do you think is the hottest?" And so on.

When preparing dinner, carry on a simple conversation about what you're doing. "I'm going to put some oregano in the sauce. Do you know what oregano is? Do you want to smell it?"

"I always encourage parents of young children to use shorter sentences and expose them to nouns," said Hoffman. "Ask, 'What are you doing? Why are you doing it?' Have them help you problem solve, by saying something like, 'Oh gosh I just spilled the milk. I wonder what I should do.'"

Take Turns: Engage your child in conversation. Remember a conversation is two-sided, so pause to listen and then respond. "Having conversations at meal times is also important," said Hoffman. "In this day and age, we don't sit down together as much. There is research that shows that children, who have family dinners, do better in school."

Above all, make it fun, keep it age appropriate and realize that children have short attention spans.

Perhaps children's television host, Fred Rogers, said it best. "Anyone who does anything to help a child in this life is a hero to me."