Skiers rejoice! A dusting of snow fell on high mountain peaks, above timberline, overnight, as summer in the high country begins to give way to fall.

Wet, cold weather is lingering in the mountains Wednesday and areas above 12,000-feet in elevation saw snow dustings late into the morning. Precipitation above timberline will likely turn to rain on Wednesday afternoon, but there’s a chance for more snow dustings Wednesday night into Thursday morning, said Kari Bowen, a National Weather Service meteorologist.

“We’re expecting some more tonight,” Bowen said. “Just dustings, above timberline.”

The high peaks in Rocky Mountain National Park were among some of the areas that were dusted early Wednesday.

After several summers of drought and high heat, Colorado has experienced a relatively cool and wet summer in 2014.

The current weather pattern, however, is not unheard of, Bowen said.

“It’s not unusual to see snow at this time of year” above timberline, Bowen said. “It’s starting the transition into fall.”

In years past snow has dusted the high country in July, she said.

The system bringing wet, cool weather to Colorado is expected to exit the state late Wednesday or early Thursday, setting up a warmer and drier Labor Day weekend.

Before the system exits, however, thunderstorms are expected Wednesday afternoon in northeastern Colorado, including Denver and along the Front Range. Large hail and winds to 60 mph could batter the Eastern Plains, the weather service reports. Heavy rains could also cause minor flooding Wednesday in areas of northeastern Colorado.

In Denver Wednesday there’s a good chance for showers and thunderstorms after 3 p.m., the weather service reports. Skies will be mostly cloudy and the high temperature should top out at 76 degrees. The chance for precipitation is 70 percent.

On Thursday in Denver there’s a 30 percent chance of afternoon showers and thunderstorms. The high temperature in the city should hit 77 degrees under partly sunny skies.

Weekend weather in the city should be mostly sunny, with high temperatures becoming more seasonal, climbing into the upper 80s on Saturday and Sunday.

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822, knicholson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kierannicholson