In “Obama Bypasses God and Netanyahu,” CPAC darling Dr. Laurie Roth (having that title sure doesn’t make them smarter does it?) argues that if you oppose Benjamin Netanyahu, you oppose God. Oh sweet little baby Jesus, no!

The “Annie Oakley of the Airwaves” writes at Matt Barber’s BarbWire that,

Anyone or anything connected with the God of the Holy Bible will be attacked and bypassed by Obama and his progressive robots. As we all know by now Obama had no congratulations or words of any kind for Benjamin Netanyahu though BiBi won huge. Funny how all the other ‘big boy’ leaders called to congratulate him but not Obama. John Kerry saying something pathetic from afar and too late doesn’t cut the cheese folks. Obama is most certainly against Netanyahu because he represents the Jews and Israel and won’t be intimidated into giving away more land or kissing up to the Islamic agenda….which is simply — destroy Israel.

That’s quite a leap (of faith, shall we say?). Not a word here about how her pal “Bibi” came to the United States and tried to wrest control of America’s foreign policy away from the man in whom that control is vested by the United States Constitution: the President of the United States.

That would be Barack H. Obama.

It was a coup attempt, pure and simple.

A simple appeal to human nature would be enough to tell most people Obama isn’t going to rush to a phone and congratulate the man who did this to him. Who would? The worst thing that could happen for the peace process was a Netanyahu victory. It makes Obama’s job of securing a nuclear weapons-free future with Iran that much more difficult.

Now what “Doctor” Roth fails to understand is that while “Bibi” has a right to a foreign policy, so does the United States. If Roth is so eager for war, she should make sure she is first in line at the recruiting office the morning Israeli jets attack Iran.

And to automatically accuse Obama of being anti-Israel because he opposes Netanyahu is absurd. Not surprising, because the same defense was used of Bush’s attack on Iraq in 2003. If you oppose Bush you oppose the United States and if you oppose the United States you oppose God himself.

Then Roth gets all dramatic. “Let’s cut to the bottom line,” she says.

“Obama has invested, committed to and is passionate about completing his transformational plans for America,” and I guess we have to give her credit for recognizing that Congress is “behind in every area.”

She wants them to “fight Obama and his evil transformation plans” (good luck with that; they’re too busy fighting each other over how extreme they want to be):

That means, regular and thought out media statements…defunding all that Obama touches, such as Obamacare, the FCC Internet take over, amnesty for starters. “Use the power you have.”

A “thought-out” media statement? From a Republican?

Talk about not having a prayer…

So Obamacare, which gives healthcare to up to 20 million people (and incidentally, promises my son a future), is “evil and transformational.” The FCC “Internet take over” [sic] (Should be one word, ‘takeover’ Doc), which is actually just the preservation of the open Internet we’ve always had, and long overdue, is also “evil and transformational,” and amnesty! I’m not sure whatever happened to the much-vaunted Christian charity but it is nowhere in evidence at BarbWire.

But she’s not through drowning in nonsense, claiming that “Obama believes down to his bone marrow in a one world Government and that America must submit to the UN instead of our US Constitution, sovereignty and Judeo/Christian values” (she provides no evidence for this, of course).

As for Obama, well…

“His heart and mind set are all wrapped up in Communism, fascism, creating an Islamic caliphate, and Internationalism.”

She needs to plop that tinfoil hat down on her head right now. Try to wrap your head around somebody being all these things at once:

A. A communist

B. A fascist

C. A radical Islamist

D. An “internationalist”

There can be no “all of the above” so there is no choice “E.” Fascism was an early 20th century response TO communism and diametrically opposed to it, the extreme right vs. the extreme left. A theocrat, which is what a radical Islamist would have to be, is something completely different from the other two. And I’m not even sure how to response to the charge of being an “internationalist.” If it means no country is above the law, then I fail to see what her complaint is.

There follows the inevitable nonsense about being persecuted, and then come the inevitable threats:

The ‘poser’ type Christians are great. Obama loves them because they are useful idiots and pawns to manipulate around the game board to achieve his goals. Netanyahu and other patriots who understand the price of freedom and its preservation will always be hated by Obama.

What’s interesting here is the claim that Netanyahu, an Israeli, is somehow a “patriot.” He may be a patriot to Israel, but he’s no American patriot. I think Roth’s true colors are showing here. Her devotion is not to her own country, but to a foreign country.

American House and Senate, Governors in all 50 states, those running for state and federal elections and you who intend to run for President had better get in your prayer closets and take stock in who you are. What do you really stand for and are you for sale or not? We are taking on the stark face of evil and tyranny whether you want to believe it or not. Wake up America.

Oh, we’ve seen the face of tyranny clear enough. It IS for sale (in fact its bought and sold already, by the Kochs) and it’s wrapped in a flag and carrying a cross. In fact, it looks a lot like Dr. Laurie Roth.