Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Longmont police seeking suspect thought to be in Loveland

Andrew Roy (photo courtesy of Longmont police)



Around midnight, officers responded to the 1200 block of 16th Avenue in Longmont on report of a domestic violence incident, according to Longmont police.



The resident told police that a woman who lived at 1509 Gay St. had fled to escape a violent assault by her fiance, who was identified as Andrew Roy, 30. The woman was take to Longmont United Hospital for treatment and released.



While watching Roy's house, police officers saw him return in a blue, 2005 Acura four-door car, with Colorado license plate 097-VCU. Officers approached and he drove off at a high rate of speed, according to police. Police later learned that his 5-year-old daughter also was in the car.



Police believe he's hiding in the Loveland area. He's wanted on suspicion of second-degree assault, domestic violence, felony eluding, obstruction of phone services and theft.



He's described as 6-feet-8-inches tall, 215 pounds with brown hair and green eyes.



Anyone with information is asked to call the Longmont Police Department at 303-651-8501.

Advertisement









Longmont police are asking for help locating a suspect, Andrew Roy, who is believed to be in the Loveland area after fleeing from Longmont.Around midnight, officers responded to the 1200 block of 16th Avenue in Longmont on report of a domestic violence incident, according to Longmont police.The resident told police that a woman who lived at 1509 Gay St. had fled to escape a violent assault by her fiance, who was identified as Andrew Roy, 30. The woman was take to Longmont United Hospital for treatment and released.While watching Roy's house, police officers saw him return in a blue, 2005 Acura four-door car, with Colorado license plate 097-VCU. Officers approached and he drove off at a high rate of speed, according to police. Police later learned that his 5-year-old daughter also was in the car.Police believe he's hiding in the Loveland area. He's wanted on suspicion of second-degree assault, domestic violence, felony eluding, obstruction of phone services and theft.He's described as 6-feet-8-inches tall, 215 pounds with brown hair and green eyes.Anyone with information is asked to call the Longmont Police Department at 303-651-8501.