The revelation that one family in Dublin is being made homeless every day makes for grim reading.

It is a statistic that cannot be ignored any longer.

The Government must meet the growing crisis head-on to ensure even more people don’t end up living on the streets of our capital.

And that means finding money from somewhere to increase rent supplement payments to cover the cost of private accommodation.

It’s this shortfall that is leading to the homeless epidemic.

Homeless crisis: One family losing their home in the capital every single day

That and the chronic shortage of new houses being built in the Greater Dublin City area.

As there are no rent controls, landlords can charge what they want and with demand exceeding supply that is exactly what they are doing.

There is now a desperate lack of affordable, rented accommodation in the capital and other cities around

the country.

So if families want a roof over their heads they are having to find the money from somewhere to bridge the gap between the cost and what the rent supplement pays.

Despite frantically trying to do so, many can’t find the cash and sadly find themselves with nowhere to call home. It is a terrifying prospect. But with a stroke of a pen TDs, who have the luxury of sleeping in a warm bed at night, could help stricken families keep a roof over their heads.

They have to do something.

Homeless crisis soars by 25%: Charity warns €500m needed to tackle issue

A new study by the Economic and Social Research Institute shows that in the short-term the problem is going to get even worse.

The report says 54,000 new homes are needed over the next seven years in the Greater Dublin area to meet demand.

And given the total number of housing completions is currently below what is required, it has warned there will be even further shortages if the rate of builds does not rise rapidly. There is also another

major problem looming – that of accommodation for third-level students this coming term.

While landlords were falling over themselves to attract students during the tough times of recent years, that is no longer the case.

The scramble for accommodation means students are now being priced out of the market and the bottom line is that many will struggle to find a bed in the capital next month that they can afford.

So where are they going to go? Dublin is home to 80,000 students and while some will be able to commute if need be, others don’t have a choice because they live too far away.

The Government cannot continue to bury their heads in the sand and must work to find a solution.

Just stop taking the pee fellas

Twitter/AndrewMc1998 Fintan Goold relieves himself on the Croke Park pitch

Most footballers playing at Croke Park dream of making the headlines the next day.

But Cork star Fintan Goold made them for all the wrong reasons after last Sunday’s game against Mayo.

What on earth was the player thinking when he decided to pull out his tackle and urinate on the hallowed turf at Croke Park with the world and its mother watching?

Or did he just not think at all?

Pictures of the him peeing were broadcast around the world, giving viewers an unexpected and unwelcome eyeful.

There is a time and place for everything and relieving yourself on live TV is just not one of them.

Hopefully, the GAA will take measures to ensure it never happens again.

Pictured: GAA fans left shocked after Cork star Fintan Goold relieves himself on Croke Park pitch

The incident though is representative of a much wider issue regarding men and why they think it’s alright to whip out their privates in a public place in broad daylight and take a pee.

It’s not. But it’s happening more and more, filling our streets with urine and a horrible, nasty stench.

Just because men are able to do it doesn’t mean they should.

I’ve seen fellas pee up against historical buildings, shops, and even a church just because they couldn’t be bothered to find a toilet like the rest of us.

Some aren’t a bit discreet and do it even if there are kids nearby.

They should realise that urinating in a country field is a lot different to taking out your tackle on a public street or in the case of Fintan Goold on a football pitch on live television.

Scrumthing special to beat All Blacks

We haven’t had much to cheer about sports-wise this year but the Irish women’s rugby team changed all that on Tuesday night.

Their ground-breaking win against the All Blacks is what dreams are made of. Through pure grit, determination and hard work the ladies managed to get one over on their male counterparts by beating New Zealand – something the men’s team have so far failed to do. It was a joy to watch.

Women's Rugby World Cup 2014: Niamh Briggs' penalty sees Ireland beat four-time champions New Zealand in Paris

And it was lovely to see Ireland coach Joe Schmidt and star fly-half Johnny Sexton in the French stadium cheering them on.

Perhaps now the 2013 Grand Slam champions will start to get the same level of coverage as the men. They deserve nothing less.