U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson is pushing a proposal that he says would prevent future government shutdowns over partisan disputes.

Grayson, D-Orlando, is seeking co-sponsors for a "Shut Down the Shutdowns Act" to ensure stop-gap funding would continue for agencies like the Department of Homeland Security, which very nearly lost much of its funding before the House approved a continuing resolution Tuesday.

The House vote to approve funding for that department through the end of the fiscal year, Sept. 30, was seen as a defeat for House Republicans who wanted to hold up funding to force changes in President Barack Obama's executive order on immigration reform.

Grayson started floating the idea prior to the Homeland Security funding fight. He said he has talked it over with Democratic leaders and plans to talk about it with Republican leaders. On Monday he sent a letter to other Congress members inviting co-sponsors.

"Members are tired of going home and telling people in their district that Washington is broken and never doing anything about it to fix it," he told Political Pulse.

So far, there's no apparent buzz for the idea. But it's early, he said. Grayson said the Democratic leadership was "neutral but interested." He said he hasn't had a chance for any one-on-one chats with other members, the usual route to enlisting co-sponsors.

His proposal would make it so that government programs receive automatic continued funding at the previous fiscal-year funding level, until Congress votes to change the funding level up or down, or votes to end it entirely.

The government shutdown strategy has been tried only a few times in the past, notably leading to a 16-day shutdown of many federal programs in 2013 as Congressional Republicans demanded changes to the Affordable Care Act. However, it has been more frequently threatened in the past couple of Congressional sessions.

"People hate it," Grayson said of government-shutdown tactics. "In fact many members of Congress hate it. "

"I think at some point we may reach a consensus that this is not a proper way to govern," he said.

Grayson said he's not worried the act could take away a tool that the Democrats might one day want to use to stop funding of an agency with which they are not happy, or to force a policy change they want. He said the tactic has never worked for the intended political purpose.

"The shutdown tool has always failed. It has always succeeded in blowing up the people who tried to use it. I'ts not a tool. It's a suicide bomb."