Buy Photo David Domine stands in front of the Triplett House, at 1349 S. 4th Street. The home is one of the houses on the Exuberant, Elegant & Alive Old Louisville Homes Tour on May 24 to benefit the Conrad-Caldwell House Museum. The tour homes are among those in Domine's year-old book, "Old Louisville: Exuberant, Elegant & Alive." 12 May 2014 (Photo: David R. Lutman/Special to The CJ)Buy Photo

The 18-room Victorian fieldstone house at 1353 S. Fourth St. in Old Louisville was once the home of Vernon Price, co-founder of the Price and Lucas Vinegar Manufacturing Co. in the Portland neighborhood and later president of the Saturday Evening Post.

Known as the Price House, it's home today to former California residents Eva and Robert Wessels, who bought it in 2004 and operate it as Central Park Bed & Breakfast.

On a recent afternoon, the Wesselses were with a group of visitors from Murray, Ky. — members of the Prime Timers group from First United Methodist Church. They had been to Churchill Downs and the Derby Museum and were admiring the elegant woodwork and furnishings at the house, while preparing to have some lemonade on the back porch.

"We're having a blast so far," Prime Timer Kay Gupton said.

On Saturday members of the public can experience a blast from the past, too, even if they're not bed and breakfast guests, on the "Exuberant, Elegant & Alive Old Louisville Homes Tour," featuring the the Price House and nine others.

The tour, a benefit for the Conrad Caldwell House Museum on St. James Court, derives its name from the 2013 coffee-table book "Old Louisville: Exuberant, Elegant and Alive," by local author and teacher David Domine, with more than 300 photos by Franklin and Esther Schmidt.

All the homes on the tour are in the book, which not only serves as a guide to them and others but also is a history of early Louisville, complete with a timeline of events from 1765 to 1905.

Among the 1,400 or so structures in the 45-square-block neighborhood, about 250 to 300 are "grand mansions," Domine said.

Tourgoers will be able to talk to home dwellers and proprietors, and they in turn will have a chance to share their homes with the public, said Domine, who once lived in Old Louisville and now lives in the Highlands.

He also writes for magazines, teaches languages at Bellarmine University and has written other books, including "Ghosts of Old Louisville" and a newly released paperback called "True Ghost Stories and Eerie Legends from America's Most Haunted Neighborhood" about Old Louisville.

Gayle Warren, co-owner with her husband, Herb Warren, of the DuPont Mansion Bed & Breakfast and Inn at the Park Bed & Breakfast — both of which also are on Saturday's tour — says it should appeal to people who are not only interested in history but also beauty.

Domine's book showcases "some of the finest homes in Louisville," she said.

Caring for a large, 19th century home such as the Price House has been a learning experience for the Wesselses, and Robert Wessels says Domine "can point you in the right direction. He knows what's historical and what's not."

For instance, Robert Wessels said he was initially ready to pull up the sagging tile floor in the dining room, where Eva Wessels recently hosted a dinner for 20 members of the Old Louisville Gourmet Club.

After some research, Robert Wessels said he discovered that the "extremely expensive" tile was the sort used at the U.S. Capitol — with each tile costing about $250.

Needless to say, it's still there. They also restored a door they hauled up from the basement to its rightful spot, leading to the kitchen, and outfitted it with its intended hardware, which was on another door.

A favorite feature of Eva Wessels' is the split flue wooden structure with a stained glass picture of an angel above the fireplace in one of the two entrance parlors. Everything in the fireplace is original, she said.

Robert Wessels said he wants to make sure they're good stewards of the house. "This house will be here after we're gone," he said.

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

"Exuberant" Old Louisville Homes Tour

What: "Exuberant, Elegant & Alive Old Louisville Homes Tour" of 10 sites included in David Domine's book of the same name, to benefit the Conrad Caldwell House Museum.

When: Noon to 5 p.m. Saturday

Tickets: $20 in advance or $25 at the door

Information or tickets: Go to www.conrad-caldwell.org or call 636-5023.

Daily tours: For information about daily "Exuberant" Old Louisville walking tours, call 635-5244 or go to www.louisvillehistorictours.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1nb31HJ