<p>Skip Garner fills beer orders at Cherokee Distributing's warehouse facilities on Baum Dr. on Thursday, January 8, 2015. (SAUL YOUNG/NEWS SENTINEL)</p>

Will the new year be a good one for the local business community?

The News Sentinel asked entrepreneurs and community leaders about their predictions, plans and goals in 2015. Here are some of the responses; additional businesses are featured on www.knoxvillebiz.com.

George Sampson, president, Cherokee Distributing Co.

“Craft beer will continue to help drive the beer industry in 2015. Cherokee Distributing Co. stays on the cutting edge of the art of craft beers and microbrews as the company’s portfolio continues to grow, including such brands and suppliers as: Sierra Nevada, Lagunitas, Samuel Adams, Highland Brewing Company, Wolf Hills Brewing Co., Fat Bottom Brewing, Tennessee Brew Works, Smuttynose Brewing Company and more. …

One trend for 2015 will be craft beer in a can. Many of our brewery partners have installed canning facilities, and we look forward to this expansion at Highland Brewing Company next summer.

Session beers, which have an alcohol by volume, or ABV, of 5 percent or lower, will continue to grow in popularity this year. Our newest session beer is the Sierra Nevada Nooner Pilsner. India Pale Ales, or IPAs, will remain popular as people continue to enjoy hoppy, distinct flavors such as Lagunitas IPA and Lagunitas IPA Maximus.”

Bart Fricks, chief operating officer, Copper Cellar Family of Restaurants

“As the economy continues to improve, one challenge businesses will face in 2015 is identifying, hiring and retaining A-level talent. Potential employees will have more options, so recruiting the best people becomes far more competitive. The Copper Cellar Family of Restaurants has focused on recruiting and retaining the best restaurant employees for years — it’s one of the programs we are most proud of.

I also believe that the evolution of communications will be a challenge for businesses during the next 12 months. Being able to communicate directly with your customers digitally — wherever they are and whenever they want to interact — will be a focal point for successful businesses this year.

We just launched a new Calhoun’s app to better-serve our customers and make takeout ordering fast and easy, and this is the kind of thing all businesses will need to focus on as the way people communicate continues to change.”

Dave Bennett, CEO, Cherokee Millwright

“As 2014 comes to a close, and 2015 begins, it is a great time to reflect, but more importantly, plan for the future. … 2015 provides a multitude of opportunities and challenges.

With double-digit growth comes challenges with providing manpower and also supporting operations. Cherokee continues to be committed to working closely with our local school systems and Pellissippi State Community College to continue to ensure that our workforce is ready for the future.

With international operations continuing to grow in both Europe and now China, Cherokee Millwright is poising itself for a terrific future. The addition of our alloy and powder coating divisions, the expansion of our office in Morristown and the addition of the office in Cleveland, Tenn., put us in a position to continue to be that one-stop solution for our customers.”

Jack Dischner, president and co-founder, DataFlyte

“In 2014, DataFlyte moved from being a concept to being a proven, completely funded new company with a talented core staff and an effective sales and distribution process. We finished the year exactly where we had projected DataFlyte to finish 2014.

Because we have a disruptive technology, we found that many utilities (our key customer base) didn’t fully understand what DataFlyte does and how it will change the way they collect data from their customers. We anticipate that once we are fully commercialized in 2015, our business is going to grow rapidly, but we are now seeing that most of the visionary utility companies and early adopters are in other states — so most of our initial business will take place outside of our home state.”

Hazen Mirts, president and founder, Enroll Health

“I am confident that health insurance will continue to be a hot topic in 2015. At Enroll Health, we saw more than 2,000 people in the first two weeks we were open in Knoxville — and the interest in what we are doing has grown since then. When people realize that the penalty for not having health insurance will double this year, there will be an even greater need for the free services we provide as we go through the year. By the end of 2015, Enroll Health will be in a number of new markets well outside of East Tennessee.

As the political landscape changes, I believe there will be even more interest in health coverage in 2015 than there was last year. Enroll Health is committed to providing fast, easy and affordable health insurance for everyone — regardless of what goes on in political circles or under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).”

Kevin Painter, managing partner, LeConte Wealth Management

“The New Year is always a time for making resolutions. Setting those goals and realizing those goals are two entirely different things.

In the past few years, LeConte Wealth Management has grown by focusing on a niche sector of wealth management that we call ‘demystifying financial services.’ We have realized success in this area and have hired a CPA to expand our planning services. Adding principled counsel on taxation and retirement planning will help our clients not only set resolutions and goals for the coming year, but maintain focus to realize them.”

Mike Brown, president and CEO, M&M Productions

“After more than 400 event and broadcast productions last year, M&M Productions is looking forward to an even busier 2015. We’re planning to relocate our headquarters to a larger facility, move into new geographic markets and increase our staff.

We also will expand our services by opening a production rental studio for Web streaming and Internet broadcasting to address the growing need for those communication options.

We’ve also noticed some specific technological advances that will shape the future of event production. Professional audio technology is evolving to include commercial use of digital beam steering that allows sound from speakers to be directed to specific listening areas without moving the location of the speakers. Lighting also is evolving with advancements in the brightness and heat dissipation for LEDs, which make them more attractive and economical for use.”

Phil Pietrandrea, senior vice president of sales and marketing, Unitrac Railroad Materials

“Unitrac is poised to have a very good manufacturing year in 2015. We are going into the new year with a very healthy backlog and order entry remains strong. The railroad industry continues to make significant investments in their infrastructure which will continue to benefit Unitrac. Our biggest concern would be global factors that are beyond our control.”

Kenny Phillips, president, Powell Auction & Realty

“(2014) was probably the best year we ever had. And ‘15’s already started off good. So I think it should be equally as good or better. … One thing I think that’s helped the real estate auction part was conventional sales were slower, so people (were) auctioning off a lot more property because of the market time the other way.”

Bryan Daniels, CEO, Blount Partnership

“Business development has been flourishing in our area for several years and this year is shaping up to be another exceptional one. The Blount Partnership is processing over 100 company relocations or expansions for the community. In fact, an expansion announcement is scheduled for the end of January.

These job announcements and personal income growth opportunities continue to drive more commercial and residential development for our area. Through recruiting and working with our current industrial partners, more jobs have been created than lost during the recent recession, with wage rates that are higher than the national average.

Additionally, visitor traffic to the region has grown as we see an increase in business travelers who return to the area to spend leisure time as well as continuing to pursue work-related activities. Overall, area economic development is progressing well ahead of the nationwide trends.”

Ken McMillen, location manager, Alcoa Tennessee Operations

“The past two years have been exciting for Alcoa Tennessee. We celebrated 100 years of business in the community and also had the opportunity to be an integral part of Alcoa’s transformation, as the location broke ground on our automotive expansion project. In 2014, through anniversary events and our annual Month of Service, hundreds of Alcoa employees volunteered for more than 30 nonprofit organizations throughout East Tennessee, while hundreds of thousands of dollars were donated to further education and workforce development initiatives.

We look forward to completing our $300 million automotive expansion project in mid-2015 and bringing a new product — automotive aluminum — online at Tennessee Operations. At the same time, we will provide a quality product to our can sheet customers. Having the flexibility to run both products at this location puts us in a very strong position.”

Lisa Hurst, president and CEO, Boys & Girls Club of the Tennessee Valley

“This will be a milestone year for the Boys & Girls Clubs of the Tennessee Valley. After announcing the public phase of the ‘Our Kids, Our Future’ campaign in the fall, we’re continuing to work diligently to reach our fundraising goals to build new facilities at our Caswell Avenue location to serve more kids, more often, in a more meaningful way across our footprint in East Tennessee.

We plan to break ground in 2015, and we’re anxiously anticipating that tangible realization of the hard work of many volunteers and staff, the immense generosity of our donors and the promise of being able to help many more children in our community. It will be a great achievement for Knoxville and our region. In the meantime, we remain busy working toward our $14 million goal and continuing to serve hundreds of children this 2014-15 school year.”

Mary Ellen Brewington, owner, Est8te

“After our first successful holiday season as new store owners, we’re excited to kick off the New Year at Est8te by continuing to bring top-quality women’s clothing and accessory brands to Knoxville. We offer a local and personal shopping experience featuring many of the biggest names in fashion. We’ve been revving up the social media presence of the store to offer more style tips and insights, and we’re looking forward to adding even more desirable top labels for discerning Knoxville-area shoppers in 2015.

We carefully curate Est8te’s collection with our favorite looks that bring current fashion trends directly to East Tennessee. This season we are excited about denim, ranging from jeans to accessories; pops of bright color featuring orange; Bohemian-inspired skirts and leather-accented jewelry; floral and gingham prints; skate sneakers; and gold accessories.”

Mary Bogert, general manager, Knoxville Convention Center

“The Knoxville Convention Center has several new, high-profile events already lined up for 2015. In March, we welcome the largest annual gathering of printmakers at the Southern Graphics Council International Conference with representation from all 50 states, Canada, South and Central America and Europe. Next December, we look forward to Knoxville On Tap, a new public event that promises to be popular as it will showcase more than 100 new brews from America’s best craft breweries.

Through initiatives like Urban Wilderness and Outdoor Knoxville, the city has branded itself as an outdoor destination. An outdoor group is returning for its third visit to our facility in 2015 and is looking to significantly expand.

Because of the nature of our industry, we already are looking far beyond 2015 and recently booked the International Society of Arboriculture for a weeklong conference in July 2019. The Southern chapter of the organization also has booked its conference for 2016. We will also soon be announcing that a large national sports group has booked our facility for eight consecutive years through 2022.”

Lisa New, executive director, Knoxville Zoo

“This year will be a historic one for Knoxville Zoo. We are excited to embark on the implementation of a bold new strategic plan that will dramatically change the way our guests experience the zoo. We’re very much anticipating the transformation of Knoxville Zoo Drive to a beautiful entry portal for the zoo that has been made possible by the support of Knox County.

In addition, we will break ground on Tiger Forest, a Malayan tiger habitat that will play an important role in saving the species thanks to a public-private partnership between the city of Knoxville and individual donors. We’re honored Knoxvillians consider us a local treasure, and 2015 begins a new era for Knoxville Zoo to make our community proud.”

Father David Boettner, rector, Sacred Heart Cathedral

“Knoxville recently was named one of the fastest-growing areas for Catholic conversions in the entire country. As the ‘mother church’ of the Diocese of Knoxville, we had to come up with a strategy to address this growth, and a critical part of that plan is ensuring that we have adequate building space available to serve our population. As Catholics, worship drives everything we do, and it is our worship that inspires us to go out into the world and serve others. We are elated that we will soon break ground on a new cathedral, and we’re excited that 2015 will provide us with an opportunity to inspire even more Catholics to serve their community.”

Rick Laney, president and founder, Rick Laney Marketing

“We’ve been in business just three years, and we started 2014 with a client list that was mostly well-established companies that have been around for years. Last year — during what most people still described as a lackluster economy — we came very close to doubling our revenues over 2013.

The thing that was most surprising to us was the high volume of activity we had at Rick Laney Marketing in the final quarter of 2014 with well-funded startups and new companies. There is considerable activity right now in East Tennessee, and we think it will continue through 2015. We’re working with a number of exciting new companies that will change the business landscape of East Tennessee for years to come.”

Bryan Gibson, CEO, Priority Ambulance

“Priority Ambulance is the only national ambulance (company) headquartered in East Tennessee. In 2014, Priority Ambulance expanded to include 500 employees and approximately 100 ambulances in four states — Tennessee, New York, Alabama and Indiana. We closed out our first year in operation by purchasing Seals Ambulance in Indianapolis, an established company that completes more than 45,000 transports annually.

In January 2015, we were awarded our first countywide emergency contract in East Tennessee as the exclusive emergency 911 ambulance provider to Loudon County. This year, we will continue to invest in the communities we serve and actively seek new growth opportunities in East Tennessee and across the country.”

Jeff Ashin, CEO, Young-Williams Animal Center

“Caring for the abandoned animals in East Tennessee and trying to manage the pet overpopulation in the region are not easy tasks. But the numbers are starting to show that what we’re doing together with the community is working.

Our animal intake in 2014 was down 1,600 from the previous year, and we helped more than 6,500 animals find forever homes. The most effective and humane way to control the pet population is with spay or neuter surgeries. The Young-Williams Animal Center Spay/Neuter Solutions Clinic offers low-cost options and recently ran a special that sold out in two days.

We still have a lot to do, but we are making progress.”

Steve South, president, South College

“Last year was a revolutionary one for higher education in Tennessee with the launch of Tennessee Promise, and this year looks just as exciting. With a record enrollment of more than 1,250, more students chose South College in 2014 than ever before.

We graduated our inaugural class from the School of Pharmacy, and the online Master of Business Administration began in June. As a participant in the Tennessee Promise program and with a commitment to the Drive to 55 initiative, we also have implemented a supplemental scholarship for future high school graduates attending South College in eligible programs that covers any additional tuition and fees while they remain eligible for the Tennessee Promise program.

We are excited to continue our mission to offer a variety of educational opportunities in business, legal, education and health professions.”

Jack Brundige, director of sales, U.S. Cellular in Tennessee

“Wireless technology is ever-changing, and 2015 will be an exciting year for our industry.

We’re predicting five trends to take off this year. We’re expecting continued growth of wirelessly monitoring health with wearable fitness trackers and increased tablet use in more formal settings, such as the classroom and business meetings.

This year, mobile technology will play a bigger role in business solutions with machine-to-machine (M2M) innovations. M2M technology allows wireless and wired systems to communicate with other devices of the same type, such as vehicle or fleet tracking systems.

U.S. Cellular also is excited to see the evolution of Voice-over-LTE (VoLTE) technology in 2015, which we believe will bring more VoLTE-enabled devices. We’re currently conducting trials of this service, and it provides several advantages over current voice calling.

Lastly, with wireless technology providing access to TV, movies and video, 2015 could be the year to cut the cable cord, as some major networks are planning to provide streaming options outside of the traditional TV format.”

Cathy Ackermann, CEO, Ackermann PR

“Overall economic improvement — we see it in our business as clients are less cautious about pursuing new ventures and funding new initiatives.

They are moving faster and with more confidence to execute their plans than they have been for the past few years. There is a continuing trend toward tying marketing even more closely with sales and revenue growth. Delivering a measurable return on a company’s marketing investment is increasing in importance.

Corporate philanthropy will become increasingly more focused and will require greater strategic alignment with a company’s mission and values, which will generate larger but fewer charitable gifts. Companies are finally figuring out how to create digital assets that are meaningful and measurable relative to supporting their business plans.”

Dr. Andrew Howard, CEO, LaFollette Eye Clinic

“A stronger economy has the potential to drive business growth, but relying solely on such a surge may backfire when it slows. It is wise to keep an eye on external forces, but focusing on internal items is also very important.

Companies with purpose can build a growth plan independent of external influences. This allows them to serve customers well whether times are lean or not, building trust. This process has allowed LaFollette Eye Clinic to grow steadily for the past several years. And now that the economy appears to be on the upswing, we are poised to meet the additional demand we expect along with it.

The concept of personalization continues to drive growth in the eye care field, like it has in other industries. The virtual world has people wanting increasingly tailor-made enhancements to their lives. The physical world is following suit, and recent technology and innovation allows our team to apply this concept, whether we’re treating eye diseases or fitting high definition lenses. More of our patients want these enhanced services and products, and we expect this trend to continue.”

John Blum, senior project executive, Messer Construction Co.

“Following a record year in 2014, Messer Construction Co. anticipates continuing that momentum in 2015. Our pipeline of work is 50 percent higher than at any time pre-recession, with health care and higher education projects leading the way.

Messer is excited about the landmark projects we’re doing in Knoxville this year, including the $234 million Presidential Court student housing redevelopment project on the University of Tennessee campus. As we ramp up this and other projects, we’re glad to be contributing to East Tennessee’s rebounding economy.”

Cynthia Moxley, CEO, Moxley Carmichael

“At Moxley Carmichael, we pride ourselves on solving problems for our clients — and the community.

For instance, Natalie Haslam mentioned to us her frustration that several major Knoxville events and fundraisers were repeatedly being scheduled on the same evening. In June 2014, Moxley Carmichael and Pilot Flying J launched EventCheck Knox, an online calendar tool for meeting planners to help them avoid scheduling events on the same day that target a similar audience. The website has become well-used in the Knoxville meeting planner community.

In six months of 2014, 312 of Knoxville’s major fundraisers and events saved their date and heading into 2015, we already have 145 upcoming events on the calendar. We look forward to raising awareness of that service to our event planning partners at local nonprofit organizations, arts and culture organizations and others, as well as identifying and tackling new challenges for 2015.”