CHICAGO (IDoA) -- The Illinois Department on Aging (IDoA) held the final activities for the 2014 Governor’s Conference on Aging & Disability. This annual event was held December 10, 11 and 12 in Chicago. It marks the 33rd consecutive conference IDoA has presented which is considered the largest statewide meeting of advocates and experts who focus on issues that affect the aging population and people with disabilities. At the close of the conference, IDoA hosted an awards program to recognize individuals for their commitment and service.

“As we end this year’s conference I hope we each leave feeling more knowledgeable and with a renewed spirit to continue our efforts of serving the needs of older adults and people with disabilities. It is appropriate that each year we close this conference by recognizing individuals for the dedication and compassion they show to the people they serve. We thank you and salute you,” said IDoA Director John K. Holton, Ph.D.

Director Holton and Deputy Director Mary Killough were on hand to present awards, including the Charles D. Johnson Leader of Excellence Award named for the first African American and longest serving agency director.

This year’s recipient is Michael Gelder, Senior Health Care Policy Advisor to Governor Pat Quinn. He spearheaded the implementation of Adult Protective Services within IDoA to better protect people with disabilities from abuse, neglect and exploitation. He served as a former deputy director and acting director of the Illinois Department on Aging. Michael Gelder received the Department’s highest award in recognition of his outstanding vision, dedication and achievement on behalf of older adults in Illinois.

Other 2014 awardees include:

Jan Tuman, a supporter and resident of Aperion Care in Amboy, was named the Outstanding Caregiver for a nursing facility. Ms. Tuman recently died unexpectedly, so IDoA and its partners in long term care presented the award posthumously in her honor.

Cory Caleron, with ASI Home Care Services of Chicago, received the Outstanding Caregiver Award for Home Care and Hospice.

Roberta Gold Cherrick, LCSW, ACSW, with St. John’s Hospital Home Health Services in Springfield, also received the Outstanding Caregiver Award for Home Care and Hospice.

Cathy Dickerson, who works at Heritage Woods of Flora, received the Outstanding Caregiver Award for a housing facility.

Gregory A. Kyrouac, MS, Ed., with the Center for Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders at Southern Illinois University School of Medicine in Springfield, received the Outstanding Caregiver Award for Older American Act Services.

The following awards were presented by professional associations to individuals and organizations that provide “best services” to assist older adults.

The Illinois Association of Community Care Program Homecare Providers named two Supervisors of the Year:

• Sharon Adams, of Chicago Commons, learned early about caregiving and made it her life’s work.

• Jennifer Adams with Addus Homecare Inc., serves three counties in rural areas of southern Illinois.

Fadila Campara, director of the Bosnian and Herzegovinian American Community Center in Chicago, received the Pillar of Service Award from the Coalition of Limited English Speaking Elderly (CLESE).

The Chinese American Service Center Adult Day Service Center in Chicago was recognized by the Illinois Adult Day Services Association as the Everything Under the Sun Award.

Norma Deters, with Golden Circle Nutrition Program in Effingham, received the Joyce Still Memorial Award from the Illinois Association of Nutrition Providers.

Elizabeth Friese, with Community Care Systems of Shelbyville, was named Care Coordinator of the Year by the Illinois Council of Case Coordination Units.

Jamie Freschi, with ICARE in Springfield, was named Ombudsman of the Year by the Illinois Association of Long Term Care Ombudsmen.

Teresa A. Fulmer, with ESSE Adult Day Center in Wheaton, received the Sunlight Award from the Illinois Adult Day Service Association.

The Honorable William R. Haine, state senator of the 56th legislative district, received the Sid Granet Aging Network Achievement Award from the Illinois Association of Area Agencies on Aging.

The Association of Illinois Senior Centers presented the Mind, Body and Spirit Award to two agencies:

• Maine Township Mainstreamers of Park Ridge; Mary Swanson, Director

• Senior Citizens of Christian County; Gerry Mahr, Executive Director

The Illinois Association of Community Care Program Homecare Providers selected Frida Cassie Williams the

D. Jeanne Tippett Scholarship winner. She works with Community Care Systems in Fairfield and is currently enrolled in the nursing program at Southeastern Illinois College.