By

You can hear it in his voice and see it in the homes he builds. Jeffree Nelson, owner of Jeffree Nelson Custom Homes, is proud of what he does. “I love bringing my ideas together with my clients’ ideas, putting the designs on paper, working with my clients and our trades people, seeing it all come together, working through the challenges, creating custom homes that reflect my clients’ dreams – right through to that final walk-through. The looks on the homeowners’ faces when they are realizing their dreams – it makes me very proud – and inspires me to do it again and again.”

How did you get started in the building industry?

I started Jeffree Nelson Custom Homes 16 years ago, but I’ve worked in the building industry for 25 years. I have an architecture degree and started working for a residential custom home builder when I was 20-years-old. I developed a passion for this kind a building at a young age. It was so rewarding to realize someone’s dreams. When the builder I was working for started to think about retirement, I remember walking through a house we had just finished thinking, ‘I could do this.” I got a couple of customers and things just grew from there. In 16 years, I have built about 100 homes; and 98 of them have been referrals.

How do you differentiate your business from others?

I’m a one-man show. I take a client’s wish list, their unique lifestyle, how they want their home to function and design a home custom to them. I want to incorporate a part of the homeowner or maybe an experience they’ve had to make their home uniquely theirs. I’m on the building site every day to make it a seamless process. It’s a personal experience for me – because it’s such a personal experience for my clients. The quality of the journey should evident.

What advice would you give someone looking to build or remodel?

Spend some time touring projects of the builders you are considering. Look at the quality and craftsmanship. Get referrals and ask, ‘what could the builder have done differently or better;’ be sure of the specifications and allowances. Make sure the builder is fully aware of the housing site. Make sure they are licensed, insured and have some builders’ association membership.

How has being a member of the MBA helped your business?

Being a member of the MBA has helped in many ways. It has a great history of working with and helping builders, remodelers and people in the trades. The staff has a real passion for making our local industry the best, which is so critical because this industry has a huge impact on our local economy.

How has technology changed your business?

Technology has really helped with communication – emailing, texting and sending photos with smart phones – to our clients, trades people and suppliers. Exterior products, or building science, continue to evolve and get better. And of course, there is the technology we build into our homes like being able to control lighting, temperature – even music remotely from a cell phone.

What is your proudest professional achievement?

I’m very proud of the relationships I’ve developed with the people I’ve built homes for, and my subcontractors and suppliers. Many have become great friends. Also, I’m proud that I have survived the ups and downs of this business. This industry has recently gone through some tough times. I believe you go through ups and downs to be a good business owner. It teaches you a lot about yourself.

What is one of your greatest business challenges?

This business is constantly changing. Other than navigating the ups and downs of this business, it’s probably zoning and building code changes.

What is the best advice you were ever given?

When I was trying to decide what to call my business, someone told me to put my name on it. It’s about quality and performance. Putting my name on it means I back that up.

What is your favorite quote or saying that represents your business philosophy?

My mother always told me, ‘treat people the way you’d like to be treated and you will be successful.’ That’s from clients to subcontractors. It creates a culture that builds pride in what you do. It’s reflected in the product.

Who is your personal hero?

I get a lot of strength and motivation from my parents. They taught me the value of hard work. My wife, who teaches nursing and trains students to go into such an honorable profession, and my three kids, who work hard and are motivated every day, inspire me to keep going.

What is your dream project?

An elaborate tree house. Ha! But I think it would be against some building code.