Life at Lynn Acres apartments in the section designated for families with children is shown in a 1951 photo. Later, the complex was called the Americana Apartments. (David Snyder/Courier-Journal file photo) Story Highlights Lynn Acres off Southside Drive was designed by D.X. Murphy and Assoc., which designed Churchill Downs

Former Americana Apartments site is being nominated for the National Register of Historic Places.

The development originally had more than 600 two-bedroom units renting for $75 a month in 66 buildings.

Between 1947 and 1950, during the post-World War II housing boom, a 642-unit apartment complex called Lynn Acres was built off Southside Drive next to the old Naval Ordnance Station.

Described a few years later as the largest apartment project in the Southeast, it’s the Kingston Park Apartments today — better known for many years as the Americana Apartments — which Underhill Associates recently bought for $7 million.

Underhill Associates plans a multimillion-dollar renovation, and the developer will change the complex’s name to Heritage Green, reflecting occupancy in recent times by many refugees and other international residents.

HISTORY

Lynn Acres was designed by T.D. Luckett of the Louisville architectural firm of D.X. Murphy and Associates — which designed Churchill Downs — and landscape architect Carl Berg. The two-bedroom apartments, in 66 brick veneer buildings, rented originally for $75 a month.

Lynn Acres was thought to have been built next to the Naval Ordnance Station to provide housing for workers there and to accommodate returning service members and people who stayed in Louisville after coming to work in other war-related industries, said Rachel Kennedy, with Corn Island Archaeology consultants in Jeffersontown.

At the time, homes were so scarce that multiple families were crowded into existing housing, and “people were living in chicken coops,” she said.

Lynn Acres helped relieve the housing shortage at a time when the Federal Housing Administration was providing mortgage insurance backing for such projects and when families “needed housing very, very quickly,” said Joanne Weeter, an independent historic preservation consultant.

In 1941, the ordnance station began production of equipment and did maintenance work for the Navy under a contract with Westinghouse Electric Corp., which continued throughout World War II.

At its peak, the facility employed 4,200 people, a number that declined after the war but rose again during the Korean War, the Encyclopedia of Louisville says.

ORIGINAL DEVELOPERS

Lynn Acres was developed by Leroy Highbaugh Sr. and Leroy Highbaugh Jr., perhaps better known for their roles in the history of Hurstbourne. They owned the Lynnford estate house that became the Hurstbourne Country Club, and in 1965 the younger Highbaugh began developing the family’s surrounding farm property into the community of Hurstbourne.

Weeter notes that Lynn Acres was designed in the shape of a racetrack, and it also was near the old Douglas Park racetrack, once owned by Churchill Downs. The Lynn Acres land may have been sold off from the track property, she said.

CHILDREN OR NOT?

A 1951 Courier-Journal story said a new form of “segregation” — for families with or without children — was developing in Lynn Acres and also would be adopted in Arcadia, the 432-unit apartment complex on Arcade Street near Taylor Boulevard.

About one third of Lynn Acres was reserved for families without children, because the two family types weren’t thought to mix well, “especially when the children occupy a second floor apartment.”

A 1955 Courier-Journal story by real estate editor Grady Clay — picturing Lynn Acres — said that the number of large apartment projects approved by the FHA was dwindling, largely because of more favorable financing terms for single-family houses and a 1954 congressional tightening of regulations.

FUTURE

Kennedy and Weeter are researching the history of Lynn Acres — which they say has changed very little over the years — for a report nominating the complex to the National Register of Historic Places and also for applications to receive federal and state historic rehabilitation tax credits.

The register application initially would be reviewed by the Kentucky Heritage Council/State Historic Preservation Office and ultimately would go to the National Park Service, if approved along the way.

“This is one of the largest and most complex historic tax credit projects in the state,” Weeter said. It’s geared toward continued use as affordable housing, a national trend, she said.

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061, melson@courier-journal.com and on Facebook. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

HISTORIC PHOTOS SOUGHT

Rachel Kennedy and Joanne Weeter are looking for interior and exterior photos of Lynn Acres: rkennedy@ciarch.com, (859) 806-7265; Joanne.Weeter@gmail.com, (502) 296-7666.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1ndOI3k