Low-to-moderate income and elderly taxpayers in Salida and Buena Vista can receive free income-tax assistance starting this weekend.

The service, provided through the Internal Revenue Service Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program, is being offered at the Salida Community Center from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. starting Saturday, according to a press release.

The program will be offered every Saturday through April 9, with the exception of Feb. 14.

In Buena Vista, the program is offered from noon to 4 p.m. Tuesdays and Thursdays from Feb. 5 to April 9 at the Buena Vista Community Center.

Appointments must be made in advance for both locations. Interested parties can call 539-5305 for the Salida program and 293-0291 for the Buena Vista program.

IRS-certified volunteers will help, free of charge, qualifying individuals prepare their tax returns. Qualifying individuals include disabled people, the elderly, people with limited English comprehension and people whose annual income is generally $53,000 or less, according to the IRS website.

The median household income in Chaffee County from 2009 to 2013 was $46,504, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.

Several hundred people visited the Buena Vista site to receive free help with their tax returns in 2014, said Mary Ann Grindle with the Buena Vista VITA program. There is definitely a need for the program in the county, she said.

This is the first time in more than a year that the program is being offered in Salida, said Linda Bergstrom, Salida VITA volunteer. Bergstrom and her husband, Randy Bergstrom, moved to Salida in 2013 from Des Moines, Iowa, where they volunteered with the VITA program for more than 15 years.

Although the program was not conducted in Salida in 2014, Bergstrom said she expects many people will take advantage of the assistance.

“We’ll do what we have to, to get as many people in as possible,” she said.

Anyone using the program will need to take their 2014 tax records, including W-2 and 1099 forms; a copy of their 2013 tax return, if possible; photo identification; Social Security card; and Social Security cards for all dependents.

Due to changes brought by the Affordable Care Act, health insurance information is also required. If child-care expenses are going to be claimed, people are instructed to take the provider’s tax identification or Social Security number. Those wishing to directly deposit their refund should take a check or deposit slip.

Both locations also are looking for volunteers to help with certified and non-certified positions. Anyone interested in volunteering can email the Bergstroms at SalidaVita@gmail.com or Doug Brady in Buena Vista at buenavistavita@gmail.com.