Republican presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, spoke scathingly of Republicans and Democrats alike at a St. Louis event hosted Saturday by the conservative group Eagle Forum.

One of six presidential hopefuls scheduled to address the conference, Cruz bragged to the crowd about being the Republican most hated by "Washington elites," called Hillary Clinton a "wild-eyed socialist" and accused "career politicians" in both parties of "bipartisan corruption."

Cruz, who is number five in the Washington Examiner's presidential power rankings, criticized Republican leaders who are resisting another government shutdown battle, this one potentially over defunding Planned Parenthood. Cruz was a key leader in the 2013 shutdown over Obamacare funding, which ended after leaders reached a deal in which Republicans got almost none of their original demands.

This time, Cruz says he'll try to block any spending bill that doesn't strip all federal funds from the women's health and abortion provider. Congress has until Oct. 1 to reach an agreement to keep the government funded.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

"Republican leadership is terrified of this fight and has already joined hand-in-hand with [Senate Minority Leader] Harry Reid," Cruz said.

The Texas senator, who's struggling to rise in polls above the middle fray of presidential contenders, threw the crowd plenty of bones too.

"This is a room of warriors," Cruz said to loud applause. "This is a room of women and men who charge into battle ... with a knife in your teeth."

He did have some warm words for one person: former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, who used his Eagle Forum address Friday to make a surprise announcement that he's withdrawing from the race. "I like and respect Rick Perry," said Cruz. "He did a remarkable job as governor of Texas ... he ran an honorable campaign."