She's expecting the arrival of her first born as soon as next month.

And on Monday former Neighbours star Stephanie McIntosh was delighted to reveal she and her partner of almost a year Pete Hieatt are having a baby girl.

The 29-year-old actress told Woman's Day magazine she is thrilled with the news and can hardly wait to meet to her daughter.

It's a girl! Former Neighbours star Stephanie McIntosh has revealed she is having a baby girl with her partner of almost a year Pete Hieatt

'We're so elated and just can't wait to meet our little girl,' she told the publication.

The soon-to-be mother, who has been romantically linked to Australian Idol cast-off Rob Mills and AFL player Nick Riewoldt in the past, flew home to Australia for her baby shower last month.

She revealed however that she will be giving birth in Los Angeles where she has been based for the past four years.

Stephanie was seen showing off her burgeoning bump on Wednesday when she attended an event in LA hosted by the American Society For The Prevention Of Cruelty To Animals on Tuesday.

Blossoming bump: The 29-year-old, who is eight months pregnant, showed off her growing figure alongside her 38-year-old love at an ASPCA event in LA on Wednesday

The actress, pictured here at seven months, flew home to Melbourne for a baby shower but will give birth in LA where she has been based for the past four years

Accompanied by her beaming 38-year-old beau, the former Ramsay Street resident held her hand protectively to her belly which was swathed in a loose-fitting black dress with an elegant midi-length hem.

Wearing her long locks out and swept over one shoulder, the blonde beauty was seen laughing and smiling, and appeared to be glowing with joy.

However the actress' pregnancy hasn't been without complication, with Stephanie suffering from severe morning sickness in her first six months.

The illness was so extreme that she was admitted to hospital for a brief stay.

'Severe nausea all day and all night, headaches - you name it, I had it,' she told Woman's Day.

'I'm grateful it all stopped and I can now enjoy my pregnancy and fell happy and healthy and about to exercise again.'

Loved up parents-to-be: The blonde beauty was photographed kissing her partner of almost a year in July

Briefly hospitalised: Stephanie's pregnancy hasn't been without complication and she suffered severe morning sickness throughout her first six months

Stephanie and Australian born Pete have been in a relationship since the beginning of the year, and the two were seen putting on quite the PDA for onlookers at the beach in LA back in March.

Showing the extent of her affection, the pretty blonde penned a loving message to her landscaper beau on his birthday last month.

Posting a cute image of the loved-up pair she wrote: 'Wishing my most wonderful man @petehieatt the happiest of birthdays!!

Cute couple: The actress penned an affectionate message to her love on his birthday last month

Girl next door: Stephanie rose to fame playing Sky Mangel on Aussie soap Neighbours

Announcement: Stephanie spoke to Woman's Day magazine this week

'Wish more then anything I could be with you today to celebrate, but looking forward to many, many more forever and always!

Hinting their relationship can only get better with the arrival of their newborn she added: 'You deserve all the happiness in the world and only the best things in life.. Perhaps the best is only 2 months away!! Love you always #3'.

Daily Mail Australia exclusively revealed the popular soap star was expecting her first child after she was seen showing off her blossoming baby bump in a photo posted to a friend's Instagram in September.

The actress was glowing as she shows off her stomach at seven months in the snap.

Stephanie, who rose to fame as Sky Mangel on the famous Aussie soap, is set to star in physiological thriller Red Herring, alongside her best friend and fellow Neighbours star Holly Candy.