Viewpoint author Jeff Bergosh (Photo: Special to the News Journal)

I’ve long been an outspoken advocate for the school governance model that sees elected school boards hiring superintendents, directing them, overseeing them, and holding them accountable by evaluating them on an annual basis.

This is the way 99.2 percent of our nation’s 15,000 school districts operate, and it gives the voters maximum oversight, accountability, and control of district schools.

A front-page story and a viewpoint on this subject recently appeared in the PNJ.

In Tallahassee, a recent editorial has called for appointing of superintendents after that district’s elected superintendent was the subject of a FBI corruption probe.

But a false-perception lingers; many voters locally feel they “lose control” if they allow duly elected school board members to hire a professional superintendent of schools from a nationwide pool of highly qualified applicants.

What people don’t realize is that with elected superintendents, once you vote one in, you’re stuck with that person for four years. If he initiates curriculum you don’t want; if he disregards and marginalizes the elected board; if he treats employees badly; or if he nonrenews your one-year contract administrative and professional employee, too bad. You’re stuck. For four years.

Elected superintendents politicize the system and the position, whether knowingly or unconsciously. The only realistic “check” on their power is the ballot box on an infrequent, four year cycle. Eventually they influence the elections of the very school board members that (allegedly) serve as a check to their ever-increasing power. This accumulation of power accelerates after a second and subsequent term, absent some self-inflicted political catastrophe.

Regardless of how they portray themselves — the multiterm incumbent, elected superintendent of schools (wielding massive expenditure power and holding the employment fate of so many people in his/her hands yearly) eventually accumulates power that’s practically absolute.

Lord Acton famously describes what absolute power does to people; his famous quotation on this subject remains spot-on.

Appointed superintendents, by contrast, are always on the bubble. They can and do concentrate on doing their jobs instead of appeasing special interests to win the next election. They don’t make decisions based upon the “election cycle.”

School board members who are elected in staggered cycles every two years can and do hold the appointed superintendent accountable, lest they themselves will be out of a job at the hands of an angry constituency in the next election!

Elected school boards can censure, redirect, and/or terminate the appointed superintendent immediately if he/she does not perform or follow school board policy. This model exemplifies maximum accountability for the electorate!

But neither an appointed nor elected “system” is a magic bullet that cures all issues in schools. For optimal performance, what’s required is a professional, appointed superintendent of schools working constructively with an elected school board that possesses the intestinal fortitude necessary to hold the superintendent accountable for executing their policy.

Either way, it all starts with the school board.

Every system requires a school board that is engaged, astute, and committed. Absent this, the elected-versus-appointed question becomes a problem of diminished significance.

Yes, more important than whether a superintendent is elected or appointed is whether or not members of a school district’s board are paying attention, actively following the issues, and demanding that superintendents follow school board policy with fidelity.

If school board members are just going along to get along, providing milk-toast, anemic oversight and no opposition to bad policy and budgetary recommendations — essentially “mailing it in” — things won’t ever improve. Under this scenario, either system (elected or appointed) always falls short of the mark for students, parents, teachers and taxpayers.

Jeff Bergosh is an Escambia County School Board member.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1TGtaT8