PETE BANNAN-DIGITAL FIRST MEDIA Fresh off his big primary win in Ohio, Republican presidential candidate John Kasich held a town hall meeting Wednesday March 16, 2016 at Villanova University.





Speaking to a friendly crowd of students, faculty and area residents, Kasich delivered his message of down-to-earth, practical conservatism to a standing-room-only crowd of about 650 at Connelly Center, with another 200 watching via video in another room.



Telling folksy stories, Kasich highlighted his experience in Congress balancing the budget and also helping to turn around the economy in Ohio. He spoke of reducing the government regulations that hamper small businesses, reducing taxes and having the “tired, worn out, not responsive” federal government become leaner to help solve problems.



And, Kasich made the case that he is perhaps the only remaining GOP contender who can beat Hillary Clinton in the fall.



He warmed up the crowd with his life story of growing up the son of a mailman and grandson of a coal miner in McKees Rocks, a small town near Pittsburgh, then going to Ohio State University.



There he went to talk to the university president and learned that he was going to Washington, D.C., to talk to President Nixon. No stranger to chutzpah, Kasich asked to go along but was told he couldn’t. Then he asked if the Ohio State president would hand a letter from him to Nixon and he agreed. The next thing Kasich knew he was invited to the White House. He called his parents to ask for a plane ticket.



“I said, ‘Mom, I’m going to need a plane ticket. The president of the United States would like to have a meeting with me in the Oval Office. And my mother was shouting, ‘Honey, pick up the phone. There’s something wrong with Johnny.’”



At the White House, the young Kasich was told that he had five minutes with the president.



He thought, “I didn’t come here for five lousy minutes,” he said. So as an 18-year-old college freshman he managed to stretch it out to 20 minutes. “The bad news is I was a congressman for 28 years and if you add up all the years I was a congressman, I peaked out at 18. I should have come to Villanova.”



The story is about everyone, he said, telling the students they may be wondering what they are going to do with their lives. Mentioning that it was nearly Palm Sunday and acknowledging the crucifix on the wall of the Catholic university, Kasich said, “I believe we are all made for something special. The Lord made us special.” He called on the students to use their unique gifts to heal the world and “to live a life bigger than themselves.” 1

2

3

4

See Full Story RADNOR >> The day after his victory in his home state of Ohio, Gov. John Kasich held an upbeat rally at Villanova University Wednesday as he continued his bid for the White House.Speaking to a friendly crowd of students, faculty and area residents, Kasich delivered his message of down-to-earth, practical conservatism to a standing-room-only crowd of about 650 at Connelly Center, with another 200 watching via video in another room.Telling folksy stories, Kasich highlighted his experience in Congress balancing the budget and also helping to turn around the economy in Ohio. He spoke of reducing the government regulations that hamper small businesses, reducing taxes and having the “tired, worn out, not responsive” federal government become leaner to help solve problems.And, Kasich made the case that he is perhaps the only remaining GOP contender who can beat Hillary Clinton in the fall.He warmed up the crowd with his life story of growing up the son of a mailman and grandson of a coal miner in McKees Rocks, a small town near Pittsburgh, then going to Ohio State University.There he went to talk to the university president and learned that he was going to Washington, D.C., to talk to President Nixon. No stranger to chutzpah, Kasich asked to go along but was told he couldn’t. Then he asked if the Ohio State president would hand a letter from him to Nixon and he agreed. The next thing Kasich knew he was invited to the White House. He called his parents to ask for a plane ticket.“I said, ‘Mom, I’m going to need a plane ticket. The president of the United States would like to have a meeting with me in the Oval Office. And my mother was shouting, ‘Honey, pick up the phone. There’s something wrong with Johnny.’”At the White House, the young Kasich was told that he had five minutes with the president.He thought, “I didn’t come here for five lousy minutes,” he said. So as an 18-year-old college freshman he managed to stretch it out to 20 minutes. “The bad news is I was a congressman for 28 years and if you add up all the years I was a congressman, I peaked out at 18. I should have come to Villanova.”The story is about everyone, he said, telling the students they may be wondering what they are going to do with their lives. Mentioning that it was nearly Palm Sunday and acknowledging the crucifix on the wall of the Catholic university, Kasich said, “I believe we are all made for something special. The Lord made us special.” He called on the students to use their unique gifts to heal the world and “to live a life bigger than themselves.” Continued...





Pivoting to the economy, Kasich noted that “everything is changing” except the government, so what we have to do is think about how do we lower the costs and deliver better services?”



Instead of changing things, politicians are afraid they won’t be reelected or are listening to special interests, he said.



“When I run against Hillary she is going to talk about the Clinton economy, which we (in the Republican Congress) brought about by balancing the budget,” he said. “And in Ohio, we went from a loss of 350,000 jobs to a gain of over 400,000. Wages are growing faster than the national average, our pensions are secure.” After some applause, he added, “When things start growing we have to make sure we don’t leave anybody behind.”



“I do not believe it is moral in America for the mentally ill to be sleeping under a bridge,” said Kasich. “You do know that sometimes life is hard.” He told the students there is no shame in asking for help. In Ohio they treat prisoners who are drug addicts and have an 80 percent success rate, he said.



Kasich said the federal government is now $19 trillion in debt and pays $225 billion in interest annually. He suggested that some of that interest could be better used to help with student loans. And also make sure that Social Security is there for the students, so they don’t have “a better chance of seeing a UFO than a Social Security check.”



Meanwhile, the U.S. has the highest corporate tax in the world so companies are moving jobs and capital oversees, he said.



“The strength of our country rests in us,” he said. He said that he was as “idealistic today as when I sat in that chair at Ohio State. We are fighting for the future of our country.”



“As I continue to pursue this campaign, I am not going to take the low road to the (White House),” he said.



After his stump speech, Kasich took questions from the crowd. 1

2

3

4

See Full Story When he hears about kids joining ISIS, or joining gangs or turning to drugs because they are “lonely and frustrated,” he thinks that “maybe no one ever told them how special they are.” He called on the students to reach out in friendship to their fellow students.Pivoting to the economy, Kasich noted that “everything is changing” except the government, so what we have to do is think about how do we lower the costs and deliver better services?”Instead of changing things, politicians are afraid they won’t be reelected or are listening to special interests, he said.“When I run against Hillary she is going to talk about the Clinton economy, which we (in the Republican Congress) brought about by balancing the budget,” he said. “And in Ohio, we went from a loss of 350,000 jobs to a gain of over 400,000. Wages are growing faster than the national average, our pensions are secure.” After some applause, he added, “When things start growing we have to make sure we don’t leave anybody behind.”“I do not believe it is moral in America for the mentally ill to be sleeping under a bridge,” said Kasich. “You do know that sometimes life is hard.” He told the students there is no shame in asking for help. In Ohio they treat prisoners who are drug addicts and have an 80 percent success rate, he said.Kasich said the federal government is now $19 trillion in debt and pays $225 billion in interest annually. He suggested that some of that interest could be better used to help with student loans. And also make sure that Social Security is there for the students, so they don’t have “a better chance of seeing a UFO than a Social Security check.”Meanwhile, the U.S. has the highest corporate tax in the world so companies are moving jobs and capital oversees, he said.“The strength of our country rests in us,” he said. He said that he was as “idealistic today as when I sat in that chair at Ohio State. We are fighting for the future of our country.”“As I continue to pursue this campaign, I am not going to take the low road to the (White House),” he said.After his stump speech, Kasich took questions from the crowd. Continued...





Kasich asked him if he had been listening, then added that he is the only Republican candidate talking about the environment and believes that people contribute to climate change. But he does not favor radical measures to throw “fathers and mothers out of work.”



“We can have a clean environment and get things done,” he said. “The one thing we don’t want to buy into is this idea of socialism and free stuff.” He mentioned that the owners of Ben & Jerry’s ice cream are supporters of Bernie Sanders and suggested they should give everyone free ice cream for a year.



Kasich said he is for reforming “corporate welfare,” and does not mind “shaking things up.”



“I’m idealistic,” said Kasich. “I believe we can change the world. I’m the only one who can win a general election.”



Asked about fighting ISIS, he said that he just read an article about ISIS members using a 16-year-old girl as a sex slave, raping her repeatedly.



“They’ll cut off your head, rape you and beat you,” he said. ISIS is “the sickest group of people…I’ve never seen an entity like this post World War II. “We have to destroy this.” But he said that he was troubled by calls to ban Muslims from coming into the U.S., saying most Muslims are peace loving and some are fighting for the U.S. now. America needs to lead in the fight against ISIS, he said.



“We have to destroy them, and then come home,” he said. But he does not want to engage in nation building. “We should go, take care of business, and then come home.”



On President Obama’s naming a nominee to the Supreme Court Wednesday to replace the late Justice Antonin Scalia, Kasich said that he agreed that he should not take that divisive move now.



“The president has failed in this,” said Kasich, pointing to Obama pushing through the Affordable Care Act with no Republican votes and has taken executive actions. “You cannot stiff the legislative body. You have to work with it,” he said. But he said the Republicans are not blameless in the friction. 1

2

3

4

See Full Story One high school student, who said that he is fiscally conservative but socially moderate, said that he is “shopping for a new candidate to support” since Marco Rubio dropped out of the race.Kasich asked him if he had been listening, then added that he is the only Republican candidate talking about the environment and believes that people contribute to climate change. But he does not favor radical measures to throw “fathers and mothers out of work.”“We can have a clean environment and get things done,” he said. “The one thing we don’t want to buy into is this idea of socialism and free stuff.” He mentioned that the owners of Ben & Jerry’s ice cream are supporters of Bernie Sanders and suggested they should give everyone free ice cream for a year.Kasich said he is for reforming “corporate welfare,” and does not mind “shaking things up.”“I’m idealistic,” said Kasich. “I believe we can change the world. I’m the only one who can win a general election.”Asked about fighting ISIS, he said that he just read an article about ISIS members using a 16-year-old girl as a sex slave, raping her repeatedly.“They’ll cut off your head, rape you and beat you,” he said. ISIS is “the sickest group of people…I’ve never seen an entity like this post World War II. “We have to destroy this.” But he said that he was troubled by calls to ban Muslims from coming into the U.S., saying most Muslims are peace loving and some are fighting for the U.S. now. America needs to lead in the fight against ISIS, he said.“We have to destroy them, and then come home,” he said. But he does not want to engage in nation building. “We should go, take care of business, and then come home.”On President Obama’s naming a nominee to the Supreme Court Wednesday to replace the late Justice Antonin Scalia, Kasich said that he agreed that he should not take that divisive move now.“The president has failed in this,” said Kasich, pointing to Obama pushing through the Affordable Care Act with no Republican votes and has taken executive actions. “You cannot stiff the legislative body. You have to work with it,” he said. But he said the Republicans are not blameless in the friction. Continued...





“America has not been stepping up,” said Kasich. “When there is evil in the world it has to be destroyed. Man is capable of great good and great evil.” The rest of the world was not able to stop the Nazis in World War II until America joined the war. “America’s got a great responsibility,” said Kasich. “To whom much is given, much is expected.”



Friendly crowd



The Villanova university rally drew not only students but adults from all over the Philadelphia region curious to see Kasich, many waiting for more than an hour as upbeat pop and country music played.



Among those attending the rally, West Chester resident Adam Gorski, 33, said he has tried to get the word out about Kasich on his Facebook page and posted a video of his 6-month-old son that touts the candidate. Kasich “has a proven record,” said Gorski. “He is pragmatic. He has shown he can get conservative things done, creating jobs.” Gorski called Kasich “respectable”



“I’m excited that he’s getting some attention finally,” said Gorski. “John Kasich is the only person I can be proud of to tell my son I voted for.”



Christopher LeClair, 18, a Villanova freshman from Fairfield, Conn., said that he was excited to be at the rally.



“I was a Rubio supporter,” he said. “Now I’ve thrown my support behind (Kasich). I think he’s the best candidate.”



And J.C. Gibbons, 21, another Villanova student, from Watching, N.J., said he was there because Kasich “isn’t Donald Trump and I actually think he has experience and he’s a lot more moderate.”



Villanova student Roque Martin, 19, of Easton, Conn., said he was excited to be voting for a president the first time and wanted to learn more about the candidate.



Joseph Esposito III, 20, a sophomore from Weston, Mass., said he wanted to make “an informed decision.” He didn’t know much about Kasich because “other candidates were taking up the spotlight,” he said.



Brian K, Sirach, 59, a firefighter from Trenton was at the rally, too. Kasich is “the only one I like in the whole group (of Republican candidates),” he said. “When he tells you he’s going to do stuff, he tells you how he’ll do it.” 1

2

3

4

See Full Story In a show-stopping moment, Jack Shapiro, an 11-year-old boy, asked Kasich about his strategy to fight ISIS.“America has not been stepping up,” said Kasich. “When there is evil in the world it has to be destroyed. Man is capable of great good and great evil.” The rest of the world was not able to stop the Nazis in World War II until America joined the war. “America’s got a great responsibility,” said Kasich. “To whom much is given, much is expected.”The Villanova university rally drew not only students but adults from all over the Philadelphia region curious to see Kasich, many waiting for more than an hour as upbeat pop and country music played.Among those attending the rally, West Chester resident Adam Gorski, 33, said he has tried to get the word out about Kasich on his Facebook page and posted a video of his 6-month-old son that touts the candidate. Kasich “has a proven record,” said Gorski. “He is pragmatic. He has shown he can get conservative things done, creating jobs.” Gorski called Kasich “respectable”“I’m excited that he’s getting some attention finally,” said Gorski. “John Kasich is the only person I can be proud of to tell my son I voted for.”Christopher LeClair, 18, a Villanova freshman from Fairfield, Conn., said that he was excited to be at the rally.“I was a Rubio supporter,” he said. “Now I’ve thrown my support behind (Kasich). I think he’s the best candidate.”And J.C. Gibbons, 21, another Villanova student, from Watching, N.J., said he was there because Kasich “isn’t Donald Trump and I actually think he has experience and he’s a lot more moderate.”Villanova student Roque Martin, 19, of Easton, Conn., said he was excited to be voting for a president the first time and wanted to learn more about the candidate.Joseph Esposito III, 20, a sophomore from Weston, Mass., said he wanted to make “an informed decision.” He didn’t know much about Kasich because “other candidates were taking up the spotlight,” he said.Brian K, Sirach, 59, a firefighter from Trenton was at the rally, too. Kasich is “the only one I like in the whole group (of Republican candidates),” he said. “When he tells you he’s going to do stuff, he tells you how he’ll do it.”