State Coroner Mark Johns.

FAMILIES SA did not drug test Chloe Valentine’s mother because it was “just too difficult” and the young addict knew and exploited that fact, the State Coroner says.

A fiery exchange between State Coroner Mark Johns and former Families SA supervisor Kelly Francou opened the sixth day of the inquest this morning.

Ms Francou told the inquest she threatened to “walk Ashlee to Gribbles” and have her drug tested if she did not admit her habit — but promised not to remove Chloe if she were honest.

Mr Johns said Polkinghorne knew it was a hollow threat and so, just five days later, volunteered to submit to drug testing in a false show of co-operation.

“The real reason you didn’t take her up on her offer was because you had no idea how to implement (drug testing) ... Ashlee was calling your bluff,” he said.

“It was never seriously going to happen ... the fact is you just didn’t want to do it because it was too difficult.

“You knew, at the time, it would have been a difficult thing to put in place, you’d never done it before — you never had any intention to realistically accept the offer from Ashlee.”

Ms Francou said she “couldn’t disagree with that enough”.

“I have never been fearful of things being too difficult ... we were trying to build a rapport with this woman,” she said.

Mr Johns interrupted, saying: “She wasn’t a woman, she was 16 years old.”

The inquest is investigating Families SA’s handling of 21 abuse notifications it received about Chloe from before her birth through to her death in January 2012, aged four.

Polkinghorne and her former partner, Benjamin McPartland, are serving four-year minimum jail terms over the little girl’s death.

Mr Johns has heard many of those notifications were classified as “tier 2”, meaning “an investigation is required” and Chloe could have been removed by Families SA workers.

OPINION: NO GROUND FLOOR IN LITTLE GIRL’S PERSONAL HELL

Multiple witnesses have told the inquest the agency failed to act upon their concerns and reports, even though the little girl was living a transient life with Polkinghorne.

They have revealed the duo lived in squalid, rat-infested homes, that Polkinghorne was a drug user who ignored her child’s needs and convincingly lied to care and welfare agencies.

They have recalled that, aged three, Chloe “hated her mum” and endured further abuse from Polkinghorne’s partner, Benjamin McPartland, who filmed and humiliated her.

They dubbed Polkinghorne “very good at lying and hiding things” from social workers, including her drug use and the poor state of her accommodation.

Families SA staff have admitted they took a “softly, softly” approach to Polkinghorne in the hope she would “stop lying and engage” with support programs.

Instead of condemning her illegal habit, the agency drafted an agreement under which Polkinghorne promised to find a sober person to care for Chloe whenever she took drugs.

Ms Francou’s involvement with Chloe’s case started in September 2007, after the “softly, softly” approach was adopted and before the agreement was drafted.

She said she heard a recording of a “frightening” phone conversation during which Polkinghorne insisted she was a better mother when she was high on methylamphetamine.

That recording prompted her to call Polkinghorne in for a face-to-face meeting, notes of which describe Polkinghorne as “slurred and slow of speech”.

Ms Francou said that was not of immediate concern to her.

“I thought there could be lots of reasons for that ... she was a 16-year-old person with a four-month-old baby, doing it tough on her own,” she said.

“I know I didn’t have any concerns that she was actively taking drugs that day ... I had seen a lot of parents actively using (with) pupils dilated and scattered thinking.

“That was certainly not her presentation on that day ... if I thought she was substance-affected, I would have removed Chloe on the spot.”

Mr Johns was critical of Ms Francou’s thinking.

“You actually had no idea at all, really ... (your thinking was) based in your loose previous experience observing people who were drug-affected,” he said.

“You seem to have exercised your discretion very much in the optimistic hope that Ashlee was going to do the right thing.”

After Ms Francou threatening to “walk” her to Gribbles, Polkinghorne admitted being a drug user but insisted she was not addicted.

Ms Francou said she thanked Polkinghorne “for her honesty” and agreed she would not remove Chloe if that honesty continued.

Five days later, Polkinghorne volunteered to undergo drug testing in order to keep Chloe but Ms Francou dubbed it “not necessary” as Families SA did not want to take “a punitive approach”.

“I thought it was a very big thing for a 16-year-old to admit what she was doing, knowing what the outcome would be,” she said.

Mr Johns said that was the wrong approach to take with a “blatant liar” like Polkinghorne.

“You had given her an inducement that you would not take Chloe away if she was honest — why on earth did you perceive she deserved acknowledgment for being honest?” he asked.

“She was not an honest person, she had not been honest.

“You had every reason to expect that her next utterance ... would also be a lie.”

Ms Francou disagreed, saying Polkinghorne had “turned a corner” by admitting she had a problem.

Asked whether, “with the benefit of hindsight”, she should have organised random drug testing, Ms Francou said she did not know.

“We were trying to collaborate with someone who wanted to work with us (so) it’s a really difficult question,” she said.

“At the time, I was comfortable with the decision.”

Ms Francou agreed she had missed an opportunity to require Polkinghorne undergo drug and alcohol counselling.

She said she assumed that would be initiated by her peer, Nicholas Ratsch, when he took over the case — the inquest has heard he drafted the drug-taking agreement with Polkinghorne.

This afternoon, Families SA social worker Jennifer Warren gave evidence about the two times she dealt with Chloe’s case.

The first was alongside Ms Francou, when she took notes of the meeting in which Polkinghorne admitted using drugs.

Ms Warren told the inquest she formed the opinion, that day, that Chloe “was at high risk” while in her mother’s care.

A year later, in September 2008, Ms Warren was serving as an acting supervisor when another tier 2 child abuse notification was made about Chloe.

The notifier alleged Chloe, then 14 months old, was “frequently unwell, vomiting, losing her hair and not even walking”.

Ms Warren said that, despite the seriousness of the allegations, she had no choice but to recommend the report be “closed without investigation”.

“(Our office) didn’t have the capacity to become involved in another matter,” she said.

“It certainly was not that it didn’t warrant investigation, it was that we didn’t have the resources to investigate.”

Asked how many tier 2 cases were dealt with in the same manner, Ms Warren conceded there “would have been a number”.

“It was fairly well known we were having to close off intakes (child abuse reports) without investigation,” she said.

Ms Warren’s recommendation was authorised by her then-superior, Bruce Johnston, who has since retired from Families SA.

In his evidence, Mr Johnston said the number and nature of the allegations made about Chloe’s care were “concerning” — but that could not alter the realities of resource problems.

“I would see probably 20 to 30 of these (recommendations) a week,” he said.

“I and every other manager felt extremely concerned about the risk we were carrying, every supervisor I was aware of was concerned they couldn’t get to the work they should get to.”

Asked if his office had ever received more resources, Mr Johnston replied “no, I don’t think there were any”.

The inquest continues tomorrow.