With mounting concern over the explosive rise in Type 2 diabetes, mostly among overweight and obese Americans, it is easy to forget that Type 1 diabetes, which is far less common, can be a much more serious disease that often seems to arise out of nowhere for no apparent reason.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disorder in which the body attacks its own insulin-producing pancreatic cells. Most patients must be treated with insulin for their entire lives to prevent the blood sugar glucose from reaching levels that damage tissues and threaten life. Although it accounts for only 5 percent to 10 percent of all diabetes cases, it usually affects many more years of patients’ lives than the Type 2 variety.

Long called juvenile diabetes because the majority of cases are diagnosed in children and teenagers, it can also start in adulthood, prompting the name change to Type 1. Now there is an international movement to change that name, too, to reduce confusion and stigma.

Many adults with Type 1 diabetes feel obliged to explain that, unlike most cases of Type 2, the disease is not something they brought on themselves, say, by overeating and underexercising.

Like Type 2, however, the incidence of Type 1 diabetes is also rising, in this case for reasons experts cannot yet explain. Often there is a genetic predisposition, which can raise a person’s risk of the disease twelvefold. But genetics alone cannot account for all those affected; even identical twins may not both develop the disease.

Studies have suggested various environmental factors, including infections by enteroviruses that can invade insulin-producing cells in the pancreas; high birth weight and rapid infant weight gain; and the feeding of complex proteins like cow’s milk and gluten early in an infant’s life.

Now, Dr. Johnny Ludvigsson, a pediatric specialist at Linkoping University in Sweden, and colleagues have zeroed in on the role of serious life stress in provoking the onset of Type 1 diabetes in children, an idea he raised nearly a decade ago. The study, directed by Maria Nygren, a doctoral candidate in epidemiology at the university, is the first such study in which data was collected prospectively, eliminating potential distortion because of inaccurate parental recall or stress induced by diagnosis of the disease.

The study involved nearly 10,500 healthy children, enrolled at age 2 and followed for more than a decade. It found that the experience of a serious stress tripled a child’s risk of developing Type 1 diabetes by age 14, even after the researchers took into account other known or suspected risk factors, like heredity and size at birth.

The children were born from Oct. 1, 1997, to Sept. 30, 1999, to families participating in the All Babies in Southeast Sweden study. Nearly all the children had regular checkups at 250 government-supported well-baby clinics through age 6, after which the data was collected from parents or schools.

Fifty-eight of the children were found to have Type 1 diabetes during the follow-up period. Among the serious life events they could have experienced were death or illness in the family; divorce or parental separation; a serious accident; intense family conflict; even introduction of a new child or adult into the family.

How might such stresses induce an autoimmune reaction? Two theories have been advanced. One, called the beta-cell stress hypothesis, involves an increased demand for insulin caused by high levels of stress hormones like cortisol, which are known to affect children under serious psychological stress. Even high stress levels in a parent can result in high cortisol levels in their children.

Beta cells in the pancreas are the source of insulin, the hormone all cells need to extract glucose from the blood and use it for energy. When this hormone is insufficient or absent, blood glucose can rise to dangerous levels. Undue stress can increase the resistance of cells to insulin, resulting in elevated blood levels of glucose. This, in turn, increases the demand for insulin and could overwhelm or exhaust the beta cells’ ability to supply it. A second possible mechanism links stress to a more general imbalance in the immune system that launches an autoimmune attack on the insulin-producing beta cells. Both mechanisms may be involved.

Ludvigsson said that stress-induced insulin resistance was probably the “most important” explanation for the study findings. He added that beta cells may become more sensitive to agents that could disrupt immune function.

Beta cells can also release autoantigens that could start or increase an autoimmune reaction, “especially in genetically predisposed people,” Ludviggson added.

It is true that a high level of psychological stress in families has been associated with an increased risk of obesity, which can raise insulin resistance and a greater demand for the hormone. But the new study, in the journal Diabetologia, took body mass index into account, suggesting that being overweight did not influence a child’s risk of developing Type 1 diabetes.

Unlike the more gradual onset of Type 2 diabetes, the signs and symptoms of Type 1 diabetes often develop rather quickly. They can include increased thirst; frequent urination; bed-wetting in children who previously did not do that; extreme hunger; unintentional weight loss; irritability; fatigue; weakness; blurred vision; and, in women and girls, vaginal yeast infection.

The disease is diagnosed by blood tests for glucose and a substance called A1C, which indicates blood glucose levels over time. Keeping blood glucose levels as near to normal as possible through injections of insulin or use of an insulin pump, along with controlled diet and exercise, is the surest way to prevent or delay complications of Type 1 diabetes.

Among tissues that can be damaged by Type 1 diabetes, especially when blood glucose is poorly controlled, are the heart and blood vessels; nerves, especially in the legs, feet, gastrointestinal tract and, in men, erectile tissue; the filtering system of the kidneys; and retina of the eyes. During pregnancy, high glucose levels raise the risk of miscarriage, stillbirth, birth defects and pre-eclampsia.