I thought I’d share my response to a piece by Darrell Cheney on The Blaze. In his “conservative” ignorance he uses abortion as an issue when rampant authoritarianism and government involvement in personal decision is what people are actually pissed off about.

Many in the right don’t understand this and that does nothing but exacerbate the anger.

To save space this is just my response.

You may want to read Cheney’s original post so this all makes sense.

Pro-life and pro-choice is a religious issue

True, no it’s not.

It’s a freedom issue and it’s clear most so-called freedom loving conservatives love neither freedom, nor conservation of the founding. They wish to use government to enforce their morality, just as the Marxists.

Darrell Cheney may believe in the sanctity of life, but not liberty. Protecting a life that is not inside of you has nothing to do with you, or especially government.

It’s between God and parent.

Religious socialism is still socialism, and that’s really what he’s preaching — he doesn’t actually believe this is a non-religious issue.

The two sides are pro-life and pro-choice

Both of his points are invalid. They do not offer you a free choice on either side.

The Leftists want abortion to lower population and the right-wingers wants to force their will on your personal realm.

Adding to my prior point, this argument is constantly surrounding the involvement of government. It is not in their authority, as per Jefferson’s “The World Belongs to the Living”.

Government has no say what-so-ever in that which is not here breathing. Either opinion — pro-life or pro-choice — is a matter of social debate and personal activity. Violation of this is by definition tyranny.

Men shouldn’t exact their will upon women

“The laws we pass as a country and the laws on the books are exactly that – a system of beliefs that are, in essence, pushed on everyone.”

This person is a tyrant and thus their opinion is null and void.

The goal in the advancement of the Republic is to whittle government at every level out of the personal decisions of each individual and only to be able to arbitrate punishments after the fact.

His ignorance is compounded and proven in stating illegal law (such as Obamacare, which everyone ounce of Jefferson and Madisonian ideology tells us not to obey) is an appeal to keep false authority in your mindset so when those he agrees with get in charge and pass infringing laws you are convinced to obey them.

Self-government is not sending representatives, it is living as you see fit, taking responsibility for the effects from those choices by no one else. Unless those you interact with incur damage, theft, or trespass. Even then they have a right to immediately respond against you.

“Do no harm”, is what Locke said not, “Stop harm from being possible.”

Small minds like this believe you have the right as a community from keeping bad things from even possibly happening.

Not only does this attempt to violate nature and liberty, but it is again… tyranny.

The baby isn’t a human life until a certain point, it’s just a mass of cells

None of government’s business. If you believe murder is happening… use your gun.

It’s not a human unless it’s viable outside of the womb

None of government’s business. If you believe murder is happening… use your gun.

It’s a woman’s choice and right to decide what she does with her body

None of government’s business. If you believe murder is happening… use your gun.

This is a false issue.

There are communists in the government making law. That’s the issue.

Abortion is being used for Christian Socialism to creep in and propel the lie this is a “Christian Nation”.

It is actually a Nation of the Free.

This issue isn’t one of authority to mind themselves with, and is only a matter for those involved. If you think its murder, shoot those committing it and let your community decide through jurisprudence if you did the right thing, or not, on a case-by-case basis.

Use of force to defend is a right of nature, laws specializing authority illegally is how we have socialists thinking they could use public money for any of this in the first place.

If legislators had obeyed the founders and not funded churches within the states, there would have been no argument for others to fund their socialist programs in the first place.

You who keep building your own demise and threatening those of us who are truly free will be held responsible for it.