Pulaski County gets two new assistant administrators

By CALVIN PYNN

calvin@southwesttimes.com

The job for Pulaski County’s assistant county administrator will be split in two starting Monday.

The position, which was vacated by Robert Hiss in May 2014, was held in the interim by community activities director Anthony Akers, who will be promoted to work as one of the county’s two new assistant county administrators. Karen Thompson, who has worked with Floyd County for the past decade, will serve as the other assistant administrator.

This will be the first time the county has had two assistant administrators. While both positions share the same name, their duties will differ.

Thompson worked as Floyd County’s assistant county administrator for eight years, and as Floyd’s town manager for two years. Her duties will focus primarily on finance, insurance, personnel and other administrative duties.

Thompson’s experience working in Floyd is primarily associated with the county’s recent economic resurgence into a cultural center for the New River Valley, as she will assist with similar changes in Pulaski County. Her work will focus on growing administrative needs in Pulaski County that have been similarly incurred in other localities due to the Affordable Care Act, recent changes to the Virginia Retirement System and other managerial functions.

In addition to her career in local government, Thompson has also managed nursing homes for 25 years. The most recent one was Blue Ridge Nursing Home, the second largest employer in Patrick County.

She holds a bachelor’s degree in business administration from Radford University, and is also a graduate of Shawsville High School.

Akers, who grew up in Pulaski and has worked with the county for 20 years, will focus on human service and issues of growing concern in the community. Expanding the position for two assistant administrators will allow the county to address long-standing issues with drug and alcohol abuse in the county.

In addition, new businesses that have recently established operations in the county have created job opportunities for previously unemployed residents. Other recent developments, such as the drug court and leadership changes in social services and community corrections have provided new alternatives for the county.

Overall, the hope in hiring the two new assistant county administrators is to usher Pulaski County into a new era of economic growth.

Written by: Editor on February 27, 2015.

Comments

comments