MONTREAL — By now, it can be considered a trend. The Avalanche can be really good when the challenge is great and the odds are stacked on the other side.

Following Saturday night’s 6-1 victory over the Montreal Canadiens — making Colorado 3-0 on its seven-game road trip — the Avs have now handily defeated the NHL’s two conference leaders.

Patrick Roy’s puzzle is piecing itself together, and undoubtedly looking like a team on the rise.

The Canadiens entered the Bell Centre 13-2-2 — 7-0-1 at home — on Saturday with a league-high 28 points. The Avs pounded Western Conference-leader Dallas 6-3 on Oct. 10 in Denver.

Thanks to goalie Reto Berra, timely scoring and a solid penalty kill, the Avs have become a poised and confident bunch playing without No. 1 goalie Semyon Varlamov (injured) and captain Gabe Landeskog, who served the first game of his two-game suspension in Montreal after missing the last half of Thursday’s 3-2 win at Boston because of a match penalty.

Left-winger Mikhail Grigorenko, who replaced Landeskog on the Avs’ top line, was excellent. The 21-year-old had the game-opening goal and assisted on center Nathan MacKinnon’s two goals within 13 seconds to give Colorado a 3-0 lead after the first period.

Matt Duchene, the right-winger on that line, also had three points — including a power-play goal — and John Mitchell also scored late in the third period.

After the Habs got within 3-1 in the second, Blake Comeau produced his first goal of the season during the Avs’ penalty kill to turn the sellout crowd into hushed spectators.

MacKinnon’s two goals came at 18:25 and 18:38 of the first period, coming close to Jon Klemm’s franchise record of two goals within nine seconds in 1997. MacKinnon’s first came off a faceoff, when he collected a loose puck, turned and fired inside the far post (glove-side). His line remained on the ice and took the center-ice draw. On the rush at high speed, MacKinnon drove the net and redirected a Grigorenko feed. Duchene collected his second assist and Colorado was in charge 3-0 after 20 minutes.

Montreal took advantage of two mistakes to get within 3-1. Fourth-line center Ben Street caused an icing when he was feet away from the center line and dumping the puck cleanly. On the ensuing faceoff in front of Berra, Street and two defensemen didn’t body-up or box out Brendan Gallagher, and the Habs forward knocked in the bouncing puck high over Berra’s shoulder. Otherwise Berra stopped the other 39 shots he faced to improve to 4-3 on the season.

During Montreal’s ensuing power play, Comeau gathered the puck and drove in on a 2-on-1 short-handed rush. He faked the pass and his slap shoot zipped behind Condon.

The Avs move on to Toronto, where they play the Maple Leafs on Tuesday.