Leadership at Wellness Pointe health center in Longview says it's hiring more doctors to meet increased demand for its health care, spurred in part by the center's addition of services.

"We have listed three positions that we're trying to fill," said Jeff Brown, business development director for the three-county, multi-practice federally qualified health center. "We expect that to continue to grow."

Those physicians' jobs will be added to Wellness Pointe clinics and practices, but more jobs might be expanded in the future to meet patient demands, he said.

Earlier this month, Wellness Pointe announced significant year-over-year growth in its annual report to the federal government.

Between 2014 and 2015, patients using Wellness Pointe services increased almost 21 percent, and the health center reported a 31 percent increase in patient visits.

CEO Chad Jones credits the increase to organic growth in Wellness Pointe's clinical practices and the opening of new sites and services. In the past year, it added an obstetrician/gynecologist clinic in North Longview, plus psychiatric services to its locations on High Street and on East Marshall Avenue.

At its main location on East Marshall Avenue, Wellness Pointe added vision and optical care in 2015. It's the third federally qualified health center in the state to add optometry services, Jones said.

Brown said more people have health insurance because of the Affordable Care Act, allowing them better access to services.

"While we do see a lot of patients that are Medicare/Medicaid related, we have seen our numbers grow in insured patients as well," Brown said.

The new physician positions are expected to boost Wellness Pointe's pediatric and OB/GYN departments, "and we'll soon be adding in our family medicine," Brown said.

Despite higher patient volumes, Brown said patient wait times have not increased substantially, as the health center strictly monitors its quality measures.

"We have not experienced (increased wait times), and we don't expect to experience additional wait times, which is why we're increasing staff," he said. "We increased our total staff capacity by more than 15 percent last year."

Wellness Pointe operates five clinics with three in Longview, one in Gilmer, and one in Kilgore and serves as the federally qualified health center for Gregg, Upshur, and Wood counties.

The center offers services including obstetric/gynecologic, pediatric, family medicine, family dentistry, optometry/optical, behavioral health counseling, psychiatric services, substance abuse counseling and a wide range of social service programs.

Wellness Pointe accepts Medicaid, CHIP, Medicare and most private insurance. The center also offers a sliding-fee discount based on income and family size.