Topics: 2016 Elections, Charlie Crist, George W. Bush, GOP establishment, GOP primary, Jeb Bush, Matthew Corrigan, Rick Scott, Tea Party, Ted Cruz, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

Election Day 2016 is just a bit less than two years away, so you’ve got more than enough time to prepare. But if you’re not numb to it already, get used to this phrase, because you’re going to hear it constantly in the weeks and months to come:

“Jeb Bush, the moderate former governor of Florida…”

In terms of convenient but factually dubious crutches that will be leaned on constantly by the horse-race media, the “Bush-the-moderate” narrative is poised to blow its competition out of the water. Its lesser cousin, “Bush-the-genius,” won’t even come close.

The problem with seeing Jeb Bush this way is rather simple: Unless “moderate” simply means “to the left of Ted Cruz” — which, to be fair, it very well might! — it is a terrible descriptor for Bush’s record. Indeed, when University of Northern Florida professor Matthew Corrigan needed a name for his new book on Bush, he went with “Conservative Hurricane: How Jeb Bush Remade Florida.” He did so with good reason, as his review of Bush’s track record demonstrates — on education and affirmative action, on taxes and reproductive rights — he did so with good reason.

Recently, Salon spoke with Corrigan over the phone about his book. Our conversation touches not only on Bush’s policy record, but also his governing style, his personality type, his vision of the role of government and how he’d likely act if he became the United States’ 45th president. You can find our discussion, which has been edited for clarity and length, below.

Can you tell me a little bit about when you started paying close attention to Gov. Bush?

I’ve been a professor here [at the University of North Florida] for about 20 years and I started paying attention to him not as much in his first campaign but more in his second campaign in 1998. He came on as such an important force, and what I mean by that is that he was running against a lieutenant governor whose name was known but wasn’t the personality that Jeb Bush was. When he campaigned and he won, you knew that we were in for a different type of governor here in Florida, so that’s when I started paying attention to him.

When I started thinking about writing the book was later, because I had written a book on the Bush and Clinton families and their quest for the presidency and one of the chapters in that book was on Jeb. I got interested in him and, of course, being here in Florida just magnified it. That’s when I decided to write the book on him. When I wrote the book, I didn’t know, obviously, that he’d be probably running for president. I thought he might, but I wasn’t sure.

For people outside of Florida, Jeb Bush isn’t all that well known as a political commodity. What is the Jeb Bush personality?

I think he has a particular style. He is not a glad-hander, maybe like George W., and he’s not a stirring speech-giver like President Obama, but he’s very good at answering questions and he magnifies belief in executive power, belief that if he’s going to lead government we’re going to get things done. With the Bush last name and with his forceful personality — and I would say that his personality as governor is different from the personality that’s being seen in the media today; he seems to be much more moderate in style.

He was conservative as a governor, but [he’s showcasing] a much more open expression, a much more moderate way of reacting to everything from reporters’ questions to unflattering media inquiries and things like that. Let me give you an example: When the gay marriage issue came up recently, he said something to the effect that he was for so-called traditional marriage but we need to respect all sides. I’m not sure you would have heard that especially during his first term as governor, because he was very conservative on socio-cultural issues. It was basically the idea of, hey, there’s a right and a wrong on these issues and I’m in the right. I think the overall personality — at least the outward image — has changed somewhat since he’s left the governorship.

Part of the way the media presents him to the national audience is as a moderate and a technocrat. Does that come through if you look at his time as governor?

One of the reasons that he’s been seen as a moderate is because of the emergence of the Tea Party. If you go back to the 1994 race, which he lost, you could argue that he was the Ted Cruz of his time. He really talked about eliminating our state Department of Education. There was the infamous comment about African-Americans, when he was asked what he’d do for blacks at the time, and said, probably nothing.

When he won in ’98 he definitely changed his manner and approach but he still had very conservative policies. I think what people don’t realize is that his social and cultural agenda gets mixed up a little bit with his stance on immigration reform because they see that as the moderate or even liberal position on immigration