Dr. Daniel "Chicago Slim" Ivankovich jamming with the Chicago Blues All-Stars (Photo: Aaron Porter)

CHICAGO –Few things give Daniel Ivankovich more satisfaction than responding to what might be called "Code Blues."

Ivankovich, known locally as "Dr. Dan" or "Chicago Slim," is a musician and spinal surgeon who dedicates much of his time and effort to helping the aging crop of local blues stars navigate the health system, often providing free care through his non-profit One Patient Global Health Initiative.

A one-time college basketball star at Northwestern University with dreams of going pro, the Yugoslavian-born Ivankovich turned to medicine – and music – after a career-ending knee injury.

"That was a very, very dark time for me, but the solution was blues music," he said. "It was a real life-preserver for me and I vowed I would do something positive for all the people who helped give me another chance at life."

As co-founder, guitarist and vocalist for the Chicago Blues All-Stars band, Ivankovich came into contact with many of the art's greatest names and realized that many of them, after lifetimes of touring and hard-living, could often end up broke, sick and out of luck.

Ivankovich's back-of-the envelope estimate is that there are around 200 blues musicians in Chicago below the age of 65 – when they can get start getting Medicare and "about two-thirds of them are uninsured or underinsured."

Brian Jones is the drummer for the Chicago Blues All-Stars. The 57-year-old, who suffers from kidney disease drummer, has played with some the greats including Koko Taylor, Otis Rush and Mighty Joe Young.

"Dr. Dan has helped me in every way possible," he said. "Medical, financial and spiritual. Any way he can find to help you, he will."

Jones added that "I hear a lot of people say 'we have to save the blues music' but Dr. Dan says 'Hell, we have to save the blues musicians."

The group tends to consist of mostly middle-aged African-Americans who wait until the last minute to deal with their health issues. Many end up spending whatever modest nest-eggs they have on serious health problems.

Or they just die.

"Most of them didn't have any coverage at all and no burning desire to get it," said Marty Salzman, a Chicago attorney who has managed legends including Buddy Guy and the late Junior Wells. "When they get sick, they end up in trouble and with very few exceptions, they eat only greasy, fatty foods. And they drink too much and smoke too much."

Further, he added, "they have very little motivation to want to change their habits unless a guy like Dr. Dan can straighten them out by putting the fear of God – or death -- into them."

The numbers are pretty grim. According to a 2013 study by the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 26% of African-American adults have no health coverage at all, as compared to 15% of the white population. (The rates of non-coverage are even higher for Hispanics and American Indians).

"People of color face persistent and significant disparities in health coverage that contribute to poorer health access and outcomes and unnecessary costs," the report noted.

According to data compiled by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, African-Americans have lower life expectancies and higher incidences of maladies including cancer, heart disease and diabetes than other races in the U.S. While the gap has gradually been narrowing and the Affordable Care Act has potential for cutting it further, it remains stark.

Ivankovich and some other medical colleagues are hoping to change that.

Dr. Janice Johnston is a family physician in Phoenix and a board member of the Memphis-based Blues Foundation.

"We try to help blues musicians and their families with medical expenses and funeral expenses," she said. Part of that involves urging preventative care and helping people work through a confusing maze of varying costs so they get the most for their money.

For instance, she noted that an MRI at a hospital might run $3,000 while one performed at a free-standing facility could be as little as $400.

Too often Johnston said, "if you have to pay cash and don't pay right away, you will end up paying twice as much."

She helps sponsor "outreach events" at various blues festivals, urging musicians to get screened for diabetes, cholesterol levels and other warning signs.

"We want to reach them prior to their having a crisis," she said. "Recognizing diabetes early could mean not spending tens of thousands of dollars on care."

For Ivankovich, who came to Chicago as a five-year-old, it's about trying to bring an up note to the Chicago blues community.

"Growing up here as an immigrant, I see a part of the city most people never see," he said. "The Blues has done a lot for Chicago, like bringing in tourism. That was built on the backs of these musicians and very little ever comes back to them."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1EdmrUQ