Mackenzie Cosgrove is treated for a rattlesnake bite by Cal Fire personnel on May 10. (Photo: Courtesy Greg Cosgrove)

Many deserve thanks

The recent rattlesnake bites I experienced while hiking on Mount Eisenhower on Mother’s Day made me realize how important our valley’s first responders are, and how our community can make a difference in the life and recovery of someone like myself.

Without the efforts of Cal Fire, California Highway Patrol, Riverside County Sheriff’s Department, the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Aviation Air Rescue Unit, the Desert Sheriff’s Search and Rescue team and our good friends and staff at Eldorado Country Club, my story may not have had such a happy ending.

I would also like to thank the ER staff at Desert Regional Medical Center for my initial care and the Pediatric ICU staff at Loma Linda Children’s Hospital for the amazing treatment they provided me throughout the week following my accident, as well as the love and outpouring of support from my classmates and staff at Palm Desert High School.

My family and I are grateful for all the thoughts, prayers, and well wishes that we have received, and I look forward to running into some of you on one of our valley hiking trails in the not too distant future!

Mackenzie Cosgrove, Palm Desert

CV Link check-in

Where is the voice of Palm Springs on the subject of the CV Link?

The city councils of both Rancho Mirage and Indian Wells have expressed concern about the future maintenance, operation and security costs of the valley-long pathway. Palm Springs is scheduled to have one-third of the CV Link miles and will be responsible for the largest portion of the ongoing costs. Yet, we haven’t heard a word of official protest or concern from our City Council, even though the future expense of the CV Link could eventually reach into the pocket of every Palm Springs resident and business.

It’s time for the Palm Springs City Council to actively protect its citizens by limiting the future burden of the CV Link on our city.

Donald Richroath, Palm Springs

Paying their way

I pay a lot of taxes.

In addition:

I pay to use a golf course.

I pay to use work out facilities.

I pay to use a swimming pool.

I do not bike.

Shouldn’t those who use the CV Link pay for it?

Ron Marinella, Rancho Mirage

No longer fighting solo

I am glad to see another city looking into the real cost of the CV Link.

Mayor Dana Hobart is a very bright man, he and our City Council have done an excellent job in our city.

Ann Brown, Rancho Mirage

Hands off senior coverage

As senior citizens, we have had a Medicare Advantage health plan for several years. Unfortunately, the Advantage program was hit hard with more than $200 billion in cuts under the Affordable Care Act. As a result of these cuts, our co-pays went up last year and our prescription costs increased as well.

We are afraid that if the funding cuts to our Advantage plan continue it may cause us and other seniors to lose Advantage coverage and force us to find new health insurance.

Being retired and on a fixed income we really feel all of these little increases. Social Security just does not keep up with our out-of-pocket increases. This is a real tragedy because so many senior citizens have to rely on it as their only source of income in retirement. Yet they need good quality health insurance that fits into their budgets, and it will not remain affordable if Congress keeps making cuts to MA.

Congress is stealing money from senior citizens when cuts are made to Medicare and Medicare Advantage. We paid for these programs and we expect Congress to preserve their funding.

Duane and Stella Dier, La Quinta

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1Ht9M0b