Marin General Hospital has reached "an agreement in principle" with insurer UnitedHealthcare, hospital officials said this week.

Jon Friedenberg, the Greenbrae hospital's chief administrative officer, said Monday that Marin General and UnitedHealthcare have agreed to extend the existing contract until Jan. 17 to enable them to finalize details.

"We're very hopeful that in a couple of weeks we will be able to announce a new agreement with United," said Friedenberg, who has switched roles from chief fund and business development officer to chief administrative officer following the passage in November of a $394 million bond measure to upgrade the hospital.

"In the meantime, members of the community who get their insurance through United are still covered regarding services at Marin General," he said.

Last month, UnitedHealthcare policyholders received letters notifying them that unless a new contract between Marin General and UnitedHealthcare was signed by the end of December that they might have to begin paying higher out-of-network costs to receive treatment at Marin General. The hospital had already extended UnitedHealthcare's contract for six months without an increase during negotiations.

Cheryl Randolph, a spokeswoman for UnitedHealthCare, said, "We are continuing discussions with Marin General and hope to have a new agreement in place. We signed an extension with the hospital to allow for more time to get a new agreement in place."

Pat Abrams of Kentfield, a UnitedHealthcare insured patient who is scheduled to have spinal fusion surgery at Marin General on Jan. 13, said she was pleased to learn she won't have to worry about getting stuck with a bigger bill.

"I'm glad about that," Abrams said. "I hope it is resolved because I think there are a lot of people out there who have more life-threatening things to worry about than me."

Wanda Jones, president of the New Century Healthcare Institute, a San Francisco-based think tank, said with the advent of the Affordable Care Act, price is just one of the possible points of contention in contract negotiations between hospitals and insurance companies. Jones said in some cases insurance companies are asking for more control over hospitals' referrals to other hospitals for services they don't provide.

"This is one way of limiting the cost of serious patients," Jones said, "because the insurance company can turn that down or see that you're on a waiting list."

Randolph said she didn't know if such a request was part of the Marin General negotiation. She said, "There are other factors that go into a contract, but we don't normally discuss contract specifics."

Friedenberg said Jones is right that insurance companies are attempting to exert control over hospital referrals "in certain markets, in certain parts of the country."

He added, "But that doesn't mean that is an issue in all markets, in all regions."

Contact Richard Halstead via e-mail at rhalstead@marinij.com