It's been nearly three months since two people were struck by real bullets in a mock shootout in the heart of Tombstone. The Tombstone City Council passed an ordinance on Jan. 12 which would give law enforcement greater control over staged gunfights.



"Any time something happens as dramatic as what happened, that wakes everyone up," said Gene "Specs" Jackson, who's been a member of the Old Pueblo Gunfighters group for about three years.



In October, an actor with the Tombstone Vigilantes group was struck near his groin and a female bystander was also struck by a bullet fragment. The popular curb-side reenactments have not been allowed since.



But that hasn't stopped tourists from coming out to check out the popular southern Arizona attraction. Some visitors believe the new rules will make the shows more enjoyable.



"I'm glad that they take the time to make sure that everyone stays safe," said Aaron King, who was visiting Tombstone from Phoenix.



Mike Jones is a professional gunfighter and actor who has been performing in theater-style gunfight shows in Tombstone for 20 years.



He said the ammo they use is loaded by a licensed firearms dealer and they double check the guns before every show to make sure a real bullet isn't loaded.



"We don't allow any live rounds on the property," Jones said. "We shoot a blank that doesn't have a bullet. Even those can be dangerous at close range, and no one wants to lose an eye or get shot in the face."



But Jones believes an ordinance won't stop accidents from happening.



"It's an unfortunate accident and it really could've happened to anybody," Jones said. "Any city ordinance that I've seen that's been drawn up would not have stopped what happened."



Jones said all gunfighter groups take gun safety seriously and making sure no one gets hurt is always a top priority.



"We just don't want to get shot," Jones said.



For more information on Old Tombstone Western Town, click here.



Copyright 2016 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.