Tulsan and former Major League Baseball player Charlie O’Brien was profiled in a Tulsa World story two months ago because he co-authored a book about being on the receiving end of pitches from Cy Young Award winners.

The book (“The Cy Young Catcher”) is out and O’Brien is doing promotional signings, beginning with an 11 a.m.-1 p.m. appearance Saturday at The Book Exchange and Bible Bookstore in Pryor and an April 25 appearance at ONEOK Field. Signings in Oklahoma also will include a June 12 appearance at the Five Civilized Tribes Museum in Muskogee.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

In the book are chapters about each of the 13 Cy Young catchers that were O’Brien’s batterymates. Roger Clemens was one of them and O’Brien admires Clemens so much that he said this: “Of all the people I played with, he’s like the John Wayne of pitchers.”

Funny story from their time together: O’Brien said Clemens had pitched something like seven innings in a game against Seattle and was, for all intents and purposes, done. Clemens retreated to the clubhouse and took off his gear.

“He was totally naked standing there watching the game,” O’Brien said.

Then a Mariners pitcher, in retaliation for something which had happened earlier in the game, beaned one of Clemens’ teammates.

Clemens hurriedly began putting on his uniform and cleats. He didn’t want to leave the job of exacting “justice” to someone else.

“He put his hat on, grabbed his glove and went running out there to start the eighth,” O’Brien said.

“He told (manager) Cito (Gaston) ‘I’ve got this.’ So he went out there and warmed up. First pitch, he hits (Paul) Sorrento, who happened to be leading off the inning. He hit him right, square dead in the back. Cito came out and took him out of the game.”

The rest of the story: It was so important to Clemens (“He’s a special cat,” O’Brien said) to be ready for the start of the inning that he didn’t have time to put on all of his gear.

“He had no undershirt, no shorts, no nothing.” O’Brien said. “He just put on pants. No socks. Nothing. He didn’t have a jock. He was totally nude. He put on his uniform top. He knew he couldn’t dressed and still get out of (the clubhouse). He was running in front of his little runway, running and hopping and trying to put his other shoe on.”

O’Brien knows Clemens as a fierce competitor. He doesn’t know Clemens as a user of performance-enhancing drugs. He testified on Clemens’ behalf in 2012 and wrote in the book about an instance when Clemens chose not to “cheat.” O’Brien tossed Clemens a scuffed ball before the umpire could see it. Clemens tossed it back and said, “I don’t need that.”