After years of developing and publishing ministry materials, Thom and Joani Schultz wanted to know why fewer and fewer people are going to church.

"In our work at Group (Publishing) in the past 39 years, we had the opportunity and responsibility to keep an eye on the health of America's churches," said Thom Schultz, founder and CEO of Group Publishing in Loveland. "The last 10 years has caused us to look into the more challenging data that has come out."

The data shows that each year, thousands of churches in the United States are closing and 80 percent suffer declining or stagnant membership, leaving few churches actually seeing growth.

Thom Schultz and Joani, chief creative officer at Group Publishing, conducted research and hundreds of interviews to find out "Why Nobody Wants to Go to Church Anymore: And How 4 Acts of Love Will Make Your Church Irresistible."

Their 2013 book by that title has been selected by Leadership Journal, a ministry of Christianity Today, as one of 2013's Best Books for Church Leaders, an annual award of the editors' picks.

"In the church leadership arena, it is a significant award," Schultz said. "We're among some good company of thinkers who are helping the church and church leaders navigate these changing times."

The Schultzes found four main reasons why churches are failing and four practical ways churches can respond.

The non-churched and de-churched say they do not want to be lectured, and they view the church as judgmental, hypocritical and irrelevant, Schultz said.

They view church as a one-way lecturing platform that does not welcome questions. They instead want two-way communication, Schultz said. As for hypocrisy, they want church leaders to be authentic and to admit they don't have all the answers about God and faith, he said.

And they want God to be "packaged" differently in a way they find relevant, Schultz said.

"They want a close and personal interaction with God," he said. "In real simple terms, what the majority is crying for is evidence and stories that God is real."

The Schultzes identified four tested and proven principles for bringing people back to the church, which they call the "4 Acts of Love," as a way to experience God based on faith as a relationship.

The first act is "radical hospitality," a replacement for judgment by welcoming visitors as they are, no matter their backgrounds or stations in life, Schultz said.

Instead of lecturing, church leaders can engage in "fearless conversation," encouraging two-way communication and a willingness to tackle difficult and controversial topics.

"People today really want to grapple with the important issues in their lives," Schultz said.

The third act favors genuine humility over hypocrisy.

"We're not putting ourselves on a pedestal. We're fellow travelers on this faith journey," Schultz said. "Genuine humility also points toward a ministry that doesn't focus on personalities but more on the community of believers."

As for packaging God, the Schultzes recommend helping churchgoers see that God is real and active today, not just in biblical times, Schultz said.

"Jesus exemplified these four acts of love," Schultz said. "These are biblically based practices that would be good to do even if the culture wasn't walking away from the church."

Overall, the Schultzes are not recommending changing the message, but the methods for reaching people, Schultz said.

"Joani and I have a deep love of the church and the ministry of the church," he said. "It is out of that love that we desire the church reach its full potential."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.