The “Motor City Madman” is at it again, driving liberals insane.

Iconic rocker Ted Nugent has penned another column for World Net Daily that warned “everything good about America is in a dire, suicidal tailspin into hell – and none of America’s ailments has anything to do with coincidence.”

Following up on last week’s column that the left denounced as a “racist tirade,” Nugent offered more commonsensical views on the world around him, for what it’s worth.

“I raise as much hell as I can for a bowhunting guitar player, but more often than not I am labeled an extremist and crazy radical for simply demanding accountability,” he wrote.

And to clarify where he stands, Nugent listed a number of things he’s sure are NOT coincidental.

‘We’re screwed!’: Hot mic catches reporters after WH Ebola presser

Views the liberal website Raw Story described as “a litany of extremist and radical beliefs that he mistakenly thinks he shares with the rest of America.” Their angst, no doubt, driven in part by the fact that many of Nugent’s views are shared by far more Americans than they’re comfortable acknowledging.

Nugent wrote:

We don’t believe for a minute that the terrorist attack on Fort Hood was anything close to workplace violence. We refuse to believe that all those children showing up at our southern border just happen to make that near impossible journey all on their own. We don’t believe that the mindless, wasteful, unaccountable spending orgy by our government has anything to do with good intentions or anything close to the nonsense of “social justice.” We don’t believe that our president is a Christian. We don’t believe that denying any semblance of security in Benghazi was due to simple ineptitude. We don’t believe the Affordable Health Care Act has anything to do with providing better health care to needy Americans. What we are convinced of is that Obamacare is just another redistribution scam by the scammer in chief and his socialist/commie supporters. We don’t believe that president Obama and his sidekick, Attorney General Eric Holder, were unaware of the Fast and Furious gunrunning scam to Mexican gangs. We don’t believe that the criminal conduct by the IRS was isolated or rare. We don’t believe a government or president can be trusted when they trade a U.S. Army deserter for five dangerous terrorists. We don’t trust or believe in a government that would fail to get our own U.S. Marine out of the criminal Mexican anti-justice prison system. We can’t believe that both Republican and Democratic representatives of we the people of the United States of America would allow our military and national defense to be gutted like it is. We can’t believe that our so-called justice system would allow for the incarceration of good law-abiding citizens for simply firing a warning shot to save their families’ lives, and no one says a damn thing to help him. We can’t believe our government squawks about so many living in so-called poverty when the vast majority of such poor people have cellphones and every imaginable luxury known to man. We are astonished that any organization in America can force the removal of the Ten Commandments from our courthouses or government buildings. We cannot believe that our government continues to send massive economic aid to countries that stand against everything we believe in. We cannot believe anybody is stupid enough to still claim Islam is the religion of peace.

“But more shocking than all this disbelief and abandonment of logic, common sense and basic national responsibility,” he continued, “is the fact that so many Americans remain in a zombie-like daze of cluelessness to the dangerous, life-threatening conditions increasing all around them on a daily basis.”

Nugent tells us the wolf is no longer at the door, but has moved into our living rooms and the beast “is ravenously hungry and doesn’t give a damn what is on the authorized menu.”

He points out that the November election may be our last chance.

“The Republicans aren’t exactly the knights in shining armor, but compared to the Democrats, they could very well be the only chance we have,” he said on ridding ourselves of the wolves.

“Vampire wolves be gone,” he proclaimed. “It is now or never, America. Are you American enough?”

Well?