Emergency dispatcher Rosalie Racine answers a call at the Phoenix Fire Department Regional Dispatch Center. (Photo: Michael Schennum/The Republic) Story Highlights Chandler testing new ways to respond to non-emergency 911 medical calls

Pilot treat-and-refer program suggests follow-up care with a doctor rather than ER

Department renamed to Chandler Fire, Health and Medical Department

Some Chandler residents might be surprised to learn that paramedics who treat them on a 911 response will be calling them back.

The Chandler Fire, Health and Medical Department is testing a "treat-and-refer" program, in which patients with certain low-risk conditions might be referred to a primary-care physician for further evaluation rather than taken to a hospital emergency room.

Paramedics will treat any immediate symptoms, suggest follow-up care and then get a patient's contact information. They will check back with the patient by a visit or phone call within 10 hours.

It's part of a larger goal to make emergency-medical response — a majority of the department's calls — more effective and efficient, Fire Chief Jeff Clark said.

People who call 911 now have two options: Take a costly trip to the emergency room by ambulance or sign a form refusing further medical intervention.

Fire departments that receive a 911 call have one option: Immediately rush a four-person crew to the scene in a fire engine.

"That is just so limiting and expensive to do things that way continually," Clark said.

"Just because we have to prepare for the worst doesn't mean we always have to send the cavalry for the worst. We have to learn how to be smarter."

The six-month pilot program, which launched in March, is designed to show how successfully paramedics can treat a patient with a non-emergency condition and link them to a more-appropriate resource than the ER for follow-up care.

This strategy could be more effective for patients because it will connect them to ongoing care, instead of the episodic response of emergency medicine, said Joshua Zeidler, an emergency-room doctor and EMS medical director for Chandler Regional and Mercy Gilbert medical centers.

It is an opportunity to connect residents to community-health resources they might not know about, said Zeidler, who helped Chandler create its plan.

This program will apply to only a small portion of 911 calls, and it will not change the response to urgent medical issues, Clark said.

Chandler 911 medical calls What would have been the most appropriate treatment after a study of 185 medical-related 911 calls from May and June 2013: Transport to ER

OK for patient to refuse further care

Taken to physician

To urgent-care site

Other

In the pilot program's first two months, 45 patients were treated in this way by the Chandler Fire Department.

Although improving patient care is the primary goal, Clark said, these changes are inextricably linked with finances.

When the pilot is complete, the department will compare the expense of the treat-and-refer program to how patients might otherwise have been treated, and then take that data to hospitals and insurance companies, Clark said.

Paramedics have no way to be reimbursed if they stabilize patients at the scene but do not transport them to the emergency room, so the policy has been to encourage those patients to go to the hospital for any additional treatment, Clark said.

It would be less expensive for patients and for the entire health-care system if insurance companies would reimburse fire departments for transporting patients to urgent care or primary care, he said.

Chandler determined through a study of past calls that about 24 percent of the patients taken to the ER by the department in one month could have been more appropriately treated by urgent care, a primary-care physician or another option. If those patients avoided the ER, it could translate to $2.4 million in health-care cost savings in a year, the department extrapolated.

The incentives, which are changing through the Affordable Care Act, have "forced the conversation" in some ways, Clark said. Hospitals are penalized for high re-admittance rates, for example.

Clark foresees first responders taking more of a prevention role to address this. For example, paramedics may proactively check on patients discharged from the hospital to ensure that they are following doctors' instructions, hopefully preventing them from returning to the hospital. If they have a medical problem that forces them to return to the hospital, it is often EMTs who respond anyway, he said.

The treat-and-refer pilot is one phase of a long-term plan to reinvent emergency-medical response in Chandler. The department has a written strategic plan that incorporates prevention, initial response and follow-up care.

The department's name was changed to add health and medical on June 12.

It plans to buy smaller trucks so paramedics can respond to non-emergency calls and patient follow-up without tying up the more-expensive fire engines. Although there is some prioritization of 911 calls now, Clark envisions a nurse in the regional dispatch center to better determine how quickly paramedics need to respond, if at all.

Other Southeast Valley fire departments are considering changes in medical-response policies, he said.

In Mesa, for example, the recently renamed Fire and Medical Department, has been sending smaller, transitional-response vehicles to non-emergency medical calls since 2006. The department has created teams to handle behavioral-health calls and with a physician assistant or nurse practitioner to provide more advanced treatment at the scene.

Fire departments are spending much of their time responding to emergency-medical calls, and many of those are not life-threatening emergencies.

A survey of Chandler EMTs found that about 41 percent of the patients treated in a month needed to be transported to the emergency room.

About a quarter would have been more appropriately transported to primary care, urgent care or through the treat-and-refer program. Another 28 percent appropriately refused further follow-up care.

This treat-and-refer program also might help reduce the number of people who repeatedly rely on emergency-medical help, Clark said.

Chandler found that 225 people called 911 for medical response more than five times in a nine-month period.

"If you're calling us five times, somewhere else in the system something's broken," Clark said.

Treat-and-refer conditions

The Chandler Fire, Health and Medical Department has begun a pilot program in which paramedics who respond to designated, low-level conditions will treat the patients' immediate symptoms and then give a suggestion for follow-up care rather than bringing patients to the emergency room for follow-up. Paramedics will contact these patients within 10 hours to check back on their condition.

The conditions determined to be appropriate for this treat-and-refer plan for patients 2-65 years old:

• Nausea/vomiting/flulike symptoms.

• Allergic reaction.

• Respiratory distress.

• Altered neurological function, not related to trauma (for adults 15-65 years old only).

• Pain management.

• Behavioral-health management.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1q8Y7h1