More than 511,000 Pennsylvanians have access to health care coverage who didn't before.

By Ted Dallas

When I joined Gov. Tom Wolf's team, he asked me to work with him to develop better health care options for Pennsylvania's most vulnerable.

For individuals and families, access to health care coverage improves health outcomes and offers financial protection against costly health care expenses that some cannot afford.

The governor asked that I smoothly transition people into HealthChoices (Pennsylvania's Medical Assistance program) while enrolling hundreds of thousands more into the program.

In 2015, the Department of Human Services made significant improvements to ensure Pennsylvanians have access to high-quality health care. DHS serves more than 2.6 million individuals through HealthChoices.

We are committed to delivering health care options that fit people's needs while working towards a shift in health care provider thinking about value over volume.

Expanded Medicaid

Throughout his campaign, Wolf promised to simplify a complicated health care system.

Once he was in office, DHS transitioned to a traditional Medicaid expansion through our HealthChoices program. Pennsylvania's uninsured population has decreased from 14 percent in 2013 to eight percent today. A majority of the decrease can be attributed to Governor Wolf's expansion plan.

As a result, more than 511,000 Pennsylvanians have access to health care coverage who didn't before.

That means people who previously fell in the gap – the working class who previously made too much for Medicaid, but not enough to qualify for subsidies on the federal exchange - have access to dental, behavioral, and physical health care.

As a result, hundreds of thousands of people have a brighter future and the potential for better health outcomes, which provides the added bonus of enhancing the fiscal well-being of our state.

Began Shift from Volume to Value

We believe it's time for the health care system to shift their thinking from volume to value. We are working hard to make sure those involved in your medical needs are focused on the outcomes of your health, not how quickly services are provided.

In September, DHS issued a request for proposals (RFP) for physical health services provided through HealthChoices.

When awarded, the contracts will require the managed care organizations (MCOs) to increase the amount of money they spend on contracts that reward value, care coordination, and better health outcomes rather than simply paying for services.

I believe that if you pay for services, you will get services. If you pay for outcomes, you will get outcomes. The result will be a system that focuses more on the patient as a whole and provides higher quality care to those in the Medicaid system.

To drive Pennsylvania's Medicaid system toward these better outcomes, the new contracts will set targets for all contracted MCOs to increase the percentage of value-based or outcome-based contracts they have with hospitals, doctors, and other providers to 30 percent of medical funds they receive from DHS within three years.

The result will be that billions of dollars will be invested in options such as:

Accountable care organizations (voluntary networks of hospitals, doctors, and other providers that work together to provide coordinated care to patients);

Bundled payments (increases value-based purchasing);

Patient-centered medical homes; and

Other performance-based payments.

The contracts will also include better integration of the physical and behavioral health systems and approaches like telemedicine to help serve areas of the state that do not have easy access to doctors.

We must continue to innovate and move forward if we are going to provide the high-quality health care that all Pennsylvanians deserve.

As the biggest insurance payor in the commonwealth, our hope is that these changes will encourage innovation in the private sector as well.

I believe the efforts made this year have laid the groundwork to achieve the goals that Wolf has laid out for me, as well as the goals that the DHS team has established.

I thank you for the opportunity to work together to make Pennsylvania a better place.

Ted Dallas is secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services. He writes from Harrisburg.