TOPEKA, Kan. (AP) — The Latest on the Kansas Legislature. (all times local):

12:05 p.m.

Republican Gov. Sam Brownback’s spokeswoman says reversing an income tax break for business owners would not help Kansas maintain a pro-growth environment.

Brownback spokeswoman Eileen Hawley also said Friday that the proposal being considered by legislators could make the state’s tax climate unstable.

The proposal emerged from negotiations between three senators and three House members on tax issues. The House planned to consider it later Friday.

The measure would end a personal income tax exemption for more than 330,000 farmers and business owners enacted in 2012. Brownback championed the exemption.

Legislators must eliminate projected shortfalls in the state’s current and next budgets totaling more than $290 million. The tax proposal would close only part of the gap, but it would help keep the budget balanced in the future.

___

11:45 a.m.

A proposal that would reverse an income tax break for Kansas business owners has emerged from negotiations among legislators.

Three senators and three House negotiators agreed Friday on a proposal to end a personal income tax exemption for more than 330,000 farmers and business owners enacted in 2012. The measure is designed to help balance the state budget.

Legislative leaders appointed the negotiators to resolve differences between the House and Senate over a broad range of tax issues.

The House would vote first on the new tax plan.

Legislators must eliminate projected shortfalls in the state’s current and next budgets totaling more than $290 million. The tax proposal would close only part of the gap, but it would help keep the budget balanced in the future.

___

10:05 a.m.

The Kansas House Taxation Committee’s chairman says he expects to bring a proposal to repeal an income tax break for business owners into negotiations with senators over tax issues.

Republican Rep. Marvin Kleeb of Overland Park said House and Senate negotiators will be meeting later Friday to discuss tax issues.

The targeted policy was a key part of massive personal income tax cuts enacted in 2012 and 2013 at GOP Gov. Sam Brownback’s urging in an effort to stimulate the economy. It exempted more than 330,000 farmers and business owners from personal income taxes.

Even some Republicans are pushing to reverse the tax break to help balance the state’s budget through June 2017. Lawmakers must close shortfalls totaling more than $290 million in the state’s current and next budgets.

___