Ryer Porter, left, and Joe Abbatiello, both Colorado State University Air Force ROTC cadets, shovel silt out of Ed Ketterer's workshop Friday west of Loveland after the flood. a ( Jenny Sparks )

When faced with the task of digging through feet of silt to reach what remains of your decades-long career, you need a little help from your friends.

You also need a little help from strangers. And a little from youthful cadets from the Colorado State University Air Force ROTC training program, too.

Ed Ketterer and his wife, Jane, had help from all three on Friday as they recover from the flood that ravaged their business, Ketterers' Landscaping, along with other businesses and homes along the Big Thompson River on U.S. 34.

A volunteer who asked to remain anonymous was directed to the Ketterers when he approached a local church about how to help after last week's destructive flooding. When he saw the damage the Ketterers were dealing with -- 4-foot high water lines against the workshop walls, cement-like mud caking every edge of a house the Ketterers rent out, a nursery that had been submerged in floodwaters -- he put in a request to the CSU ROTC program.

"We got a phone call and once we heard people needed us, we knew we wanted to be here," said ROTC Cadet Kyle Kroncke, a CSU senior.

Kroncke and cadets Ryer Porter and Joe Abbatiello were first to arrive at Ketterers' Landscaping on Friday afternoon, but about 20 from the program had signed up to help Ed figure out what's left of his business. When rain began to get serious last week, he put machinery and cars on the hill behind the nursery.

Advertisement

"I never thought the water would do all this," he said.

Longtime friend Bob Backman was there to help Friday, too. He and Ed met while volunteering in the Big Thompson Canyon after the 1976 flood, and since then, Backman said he's experienced Ed's giving nature firsthand.

"I can't begin to repay him for all the things he's done for me," Backman said. "This is just a little bit."

Backman said he's seen Ed's generosity with countless others, as well -- those who needed work, those who needed a place to live, those with addiction problems.

"He's always been there to help other people," Backman said. "He didn't call me (after the flood), I had to call him."

Wheelbarrow by wheelbarrow, the cadets toiled through Friday afternoon in what was called 'mud extraction' from the three bays of the workshop. Volunteers from Walsh Contracting helped on Thursday, and piece by piece the rooms will be cleared -- with tools and equipment from 59 years in the landscaping industry divided into what is salvageable and what is not.

Jane said it was difficult to see the destruction at Ketterer's Landscaping, the business that she calls her husband's dream. But when she thinks of the people who lost everything in the flood, she feels grateful.

She said she's also thankful for the volunteers -- new friends and old.

"God has been good to us in so many way through our lives," she said. "It's incredible -- the outpouring of love."

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.