FORT WORTH — It’s Ted Cruz’s state now. We just live in it.

Everywhere at the Texas Republican convention are examples of an unalloyed, take-no-prisoners conservatism where pursuing moderation is no virtue and resisting compromise is no vice.

Gone is the establishment wing of the GOP, at least from public view.

Every speech, sticker and display booth reflects a Cruzified party, defiant abroad and triumphant at home. Ban gay marriage. Embrace home schooling. Abolish the IRS. Repeal Obamacare. Quit “playing footsy with the mullahs in Iran.”

At one Senate district caucus, a delegate wore a T-shirt expressing discontent with the old status quo. There was a picture on the back of Cruz in tattoos, a cigarette hanging provocatively from his lower lip and a slogan that read: “Blacklisted and Loving It.”

When Cruz himself took the stage Friday under the huge dome of the Fort Worth Convention Center, the crowd of more than 8,000 leaped to its feet in rapturous applause.

He recalled the landing on D-Day and the siege of the Alamo. He declared: “Today, liberty is under assault like never before. And again today, Texans will stand up and lead the fight for freedom.”

Four years ago, Cruz was not even a footnote at the state GOP convention.

Two years ago, when Republicans gathered in Fort Worth, Cruz described his once-Quixotic challenge of the party hierarchy as “ground zero in the battle between the moderate establishment and the conservative tea party tidal wave.”

On Friday, he owned the party.

“He was born for this,” said Kandace Dusek, a delegate from Katy who stood in line more than an hour to get her picture taken with the U.S. senator. “He’s doing something bigger than himself.”

The line snaked its way through the exhibit hall, at one point crossing a separate line queued up for a photo with Cruz’s father, Rafael, an evangelical pastor with his own conservative following.

The party of Cruz found itself this week in some exotic places in pursuit of freedom: a platform debate over “reparative therapy” to turn gay people straight and the rights of open-carry advocates to visit Target with AR-15s over their shoulders.

Critics of Houston’s new anti-discrimination ordinance denounced it as “the sexual predator protection act.” Lieutenant governor nominee Dan Patrick offered evidence that the GOP is not anti-women.

“We will, I will, do everything we can to protect women from a man in a dress going into a woman’s bathroom,” he told an anti-gay marriage rally Thursday night. “So, which party wants to protect women?”

When the time came to introduce Cruz at the rally, Houston conservative activist Steve Hotze said, “Ladies and gentlemen, I give you the next president of the United States.”

Cruz extolled the virtues of heterosexual marriage and trumpeted his fights against the Obama administration. He praised the party’s candidates for reflecting the values he said are close to his heart.

“As good as 2014 is going to be, 2016 is going to be even better,” he promised. “It is up to the people to turn this country around and up to Texas to lead the fight.”

“You the man!” someone shouted. And as Cruz left the stage, the crowd chanted, “Run, Ted, Run!”

Follow Wayne Slater on Twitter at @wayneslater.