Classes are out for the summer, but Denver Public Schools is attempting to get more students to head to schools — not to study, but to eat breakfast and lunch.

The Summer Meal Program is back and has been going on for more than 25 years in the district. The program provides free breakfast and lunch to students regardless of income.

“The program is to provide students and families with healthy, nutritious meals when school is out. Many families rely on these meals, and this is a way to do it,” said Kristy Armstrong, spokeswoman for Denver Public Schools.

The district partners with Hunger Free Colorado, which helps find sponsors for the program statewide. The group got involved in 2009 and spokeswoman Michelle Ray said she’s seen a lot of growth in usage in the past five years. She said nearly 768,000 meals were served statewide in 2009, compared to 1.34 million last summer at 497 sites.

Ray added that is likely due to better outreach by school districts, not an increase in poverty over that time, but she added that there are many who need this program.

“Students are at the greatest risk to experience hunger during the summer when they lose access to school meals,” Ray said.

More than 40 schools offer the Summer Meal program in Denver. Some programs last for as little as 10 days , while others go on for up to two months.

Denver Public Schools kicked off the program on June 12 in order to bring greater awareness and encourage more people to take advantage of it.

Funding comes from the Department of Food and Nutrition Services from the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s School Meals program. Armstrong noted that no city or district funds are used.

Meal times at Denver schools vary depending on location, but most breakfast times are in half-hour increments, starting as early as 7:15 a.m. to as late as 9 a.m. Lunches are typically offered over the course of an hour, with some shorter and longer times.

According to Armstrong, children who eat better learn more effectively in school. Even though school is out of session, the district seeks to keep up positive eating habits.

Ray said that Colorado has one of the fastest-growing child poverty rates in the nation, which is why Hunger Free Colorado got involved in summer meal programs. She noted that one out of five children will experience hunger, meaning that their families will not have enough money to buy food. But she hopes these meals will hope to curb that.

She added: “It provides nutrition during the summer months and prepares them to achieve during the school year.”

Joe Vaccarelli: 303-954-2396, jvaccarelli@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joe_vacc

Details

For a complete list of locations, time and menu options, visit bit.ly/1nh008B. Visit kids foodfinder.orgfor an interactive map of all places summer meal programs are offered. Call the Hunger Free Hotline at 855-855-4626.