About 80,000 Louisiana residents will see their health insurance policies canceled in 2014 because they don’t meet new federal health-care standards, the state’s insurance commissioner said Monday.

Jim Donelon said the Department of Insurance collected the information from health insurance providers last week in response to numerous requests for an estimate.

The figure could account for close to half of the 165,000 people in Louisiana who hold individual health insurance plans that they pay for without the help of an employer or the government.

“These people were obviously satisfied with their insurance,” Donelon said, “and I hope that they don’t drop out of the market.”

The issue drew national attention last week after NBC News credited four unnamed sources with saying that 50 to 75 percent of the 14 million consumers who buy their insurance individually would receive policy cancellation notices.

Pundits as well as critics of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act cited the news as an indication that President Barack Obama was untruthful when he repeatedly stated that “if you like your insurance you can keep it.”

Obama countered that the policies that are being discontinued are substandard and insurers will be offering their policyholders new options that do meet the letter of the law. In many cases, consumers will qualify for subsidies to help offset the cost of the new plans.

Under the Affordable Care Act, insurance plans offered must include 10 essential health benefits: outpatient care, rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices, emergency room visits, hospitalization, lab tests, maternity and newborn care, preventative services and chronic disease care, prescription drugs, mental health and substance abuse treatment, and pediatric services including vision and dental coverage.

Donelon said Louisiana’s insurers indicated they would be offering new plans, but he said he suspects the costs will increase and fewer people will participate.

Right now, about 4 percent of the state’s population holds health insurance on the individual marketplace. Another 20 percent are uninsured. Both groups are eligible to shop for insurance on HealthCare.gov, the government website that has been riddled with difficulties since it launched on Oct. 1.

Insurers are also expected to offer plans off of the online marketplace.