Oreo jumps on the pumpkin spice bandwagon this fall with its limited edition flavor cookies set to hit shelves Sept. 24, but are they tasty?

Oreo jumps on the pumpkin spice bandwagon this fall with its limited edition flavor cookies set to hit shelves Sept. 24, but are they tasty? Taylor Lorenz/Twitter

It seems America just can’t get enough of all things fall, including the season’s ubiquitous flavor — pumpkin spice — as the nation’s favorite cookie gets a flavor makeover. The folks at Nabisco made sure to make their own pumpkin spice mark this fall with the limited edition release of Pumpkin Spice Oreos on Sept. 24, a day after autumn starts. Originally starting as a rumor in August, and now becoming a tasty reality with various media outlets taste testing this sweet treat, can America’s favorite cookie give Starbucks' iconic Pumpkin Spice Latte (PSL) a run for its money?

I had a chance to try one Pumpkin Spice Oreo today. Amazing. @NoshShow @junkfoodguy @theimpulsivebuy pic.twitter.com/Ce0k8mfTih — CT from Nerd Lunch (@nerdlunch) July 21, 2014

Editors at The Huffington Post were among the chosen ones to receive a sample of these cookies in the mail. Hesitant but also curious to taste the reinvention, editors immediately gave their reactions upon opening the package of goods. "Smells like a candle!" said one editor. The cinnamon scent was comparable to the smells of Yankee Candle stores. Another editor said: "The smell was way stronger than the taste. It's not too sweet, and the pumpkin flavors are mild, not overpowering at all."

The Daily Mail also got to do some taste testing of themselves with these pumpkin spice treats, with some reporters choosing the cookie over Starbucks “fall in a cup.” “I want to marry them. I’d much rather eat a handful of these than get a pumpkin spice latte at Starbucks," said a reporter.

The cookie wasn’t well received by all, though. Another reporter noted, “The color of the pumpkin spice filling is terrifying. I guess if they’re going for a Halloween vibe it fits. I’m not the biggest fan of pumpkin anything, so the flavor was not my favorite.”

Introducing Pumpkin Spice OREOs http://t.co/zilQT6meTN pic.twitter.com/CGBJ4AM8V4 — Taylor Lorenz (@TaylorLorenz) September 9, 2014

Perhaps the “golden” vanilla cookies with a dash of cinnamon and nutmeg may not be as well received as the original pumpkin spice pioneer, the PSL, but the overall consensus is it’s worthy of your taste buds. Also, they’re real, unlike the release of Durex’s “pumpkin spice” condom. Until pumpkin spice sex becomes a reality, have a cookie and nibble on Pumpkin Spice Oreos instead.