Denver got a much-needed weapon back on the field Wednesday when Emmanuel Sanders returned to practice.

Sanders had been bothered by a left high ankle sprain he suffered against Indianapolis and forced him to be limited against Kansas City and miss last week’s game against Chicago.

Coach Gary Kubiak said that Sanders was pretty much a full participant at practice and it was good to sit him out for a week to get him healthier.

Sanders said Monday that he was finally able to wake up out of bed without limping and that he was hopeful to play Sunday against New England. The Broncos’ second-leading receiver moved well in individual drills during practice’s open period.

Outside linebacker DeMarcus Ware (back) returned to the field, but did not practice. Ware was seen in a hoodie and sweatpants stretching on the sidelines with a trainer.

Kubiak said Ware was “a little bit better than last week,” but he’s not quite ready to practice yet.

Ware has missed three games, including the last two, with the back injury that he termed as “structural” earlier this month.

Guard Evan Mathis (ankle) also did not practice Wednesday. The Broncos’ starting left guard tweaked his ankle in the fourth quarter against Chicago.

Kubiak said Mathis didn’t do anything because his ankle was “really sore” and he has a good bit to go to be ready for Sunday.

Rookie guard Max Garcia would likely start at left guard if Mathis was unable to go against New England.

The Broncos also got a boost on the defensive line when Antonio Smith (hip) and Vance Walker (shoulder returned to practice.

Neither practiced all last week and were listed questionable for the Broncos’ 17-15 win over Chicago. Smith ended up playing limited snaps, while Walker was inactive.

The newest Bronco quarterback, Christian Ponder, was at practice Wednesday wearing No. 2. He spent a lot of time watching Brock Osweiler and Trevor Siemian, but also did some throwing of his own.

Kubiak confirmed Siemian will remain the backup quarterback Sunday against the Patriots.

Safety Darian Stewart was at practice Wednesday with a new member in his family. His wife, Whitley, gave birth to his daughter this morning.

Cameron Wolfe: 303-954-1891, cwolfe@denverpost.com or @CameronWolfe