NCQA Adds Narrow Networks to 2016 Accreditation Standards

New rules include provisions to ensure the accuracy of provider directories, and lists of participating doctors and hospitals. The inaccuracy of some directories has generated concern among patients, and prompted new state regulations.

The accreditation standards for 2016 released by the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) reflect a broader push to ensure the adequacy of the growing number of so-narrow network insurance plans.

With that in mind, NCQA has added a "Network Management" section to its evaluation standards. The section gathers together several existing measures and asks payers to take a more "holistic" approach to ensuring the quality of networks, says Raena Akin-Deko, the NCQA assistant vice president of product development.



Raena Akin-Deko

The new rules also include provisions to ensure the accuracy of provider directories, lists of participating doctors, and hospitals that consumers use to decide whether to enroll in a plan or choose a provider. The inaccuracy of some directories has generated concern among patients, as well as new state regulations.

The creation of the network management category "now elevates those requirements to say, 'hey, listen, this is a very, very important part of what you are doing,'" Akin-Deko says.

The NCQA is considered a top accreditation program for health plans. In order to pass NCQA muster, insurers have to comply with a list standards and must supply the non-profit group with data on performance. The NCQA reports that it has accredited plans in 50 states that cover 70.5% of all insured Americans.

Narrow Provider Networks Set to Spread

In terms of network adequacy, Akin-Deko says that the group already looks at measures such as how far and how long patients have to travel as measures of access to care. Based on NCQA's experience, time and distance are good measures, but are not sufficient, she says. The group now wants plans to consider patients satisfaction, for example, how long it takes to schedule an appointment.

Member experience has to be a factor, she says: "When you do your analysis of can somebody get to an appointment… how long it takes them to get there… [what are the] complaints and member experience… we want you to consider that as a whole, because that will paint a picture for you for what opportunities there are to improve."

Even prior to passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, payers were using networks as a variable to control costs, says Gerald Kominski, director of the Health Economics and Evaluation Research Program at the UCLA Center for Health Policy Research.