By

For many years, Frieda Smart worked as a cosmetic rep for Elizabeth Arden and had real estate customers who would come into the shop. “Because of that, when I got burned out and the company was sold, I went into real estate. A customer of mine referred me and I’ve been at it for 23 years. I am among the top 1% of the company,” she said during this edited interview.

What do you enjoy about selling real estate?

I really love meeting people from all over the world and helping them find exactly what they’re looking for. It’s kind of like a needle in a haystack. It’s a pleasure having new people in your life as not only your customers, but sometimes they become your friends. I especially like it when they have children and I can help them get to know the school district. I’m a relocation specialist and I understand that moving from another state can be hard. I help them move nationally and internationally.

How do you consider yourself to be different than other real estate agents?

I’m a really high energy, don’t-take-no-for-an-answer kind of girl. I’m a great negotiator and have passion for what I love. Real estate doesn’t feel like a job to me so I really feel as though I’m helping friends. I enjoy what I do.

What role should a real estate agent play for a client?

To be a leader and someone they rely on to inform them about the community and the various schools and values. I guess they would look at me as someone they should rely on.

What qualities make for a good real estate agent?

Positivity, loyalty, dedication and honesty. All those traits belong to someone who goes that extra mile, does the extra thing and helps the sellers and buyers, especially the elderly buyer who hasn’t sold his or her house in 50 years. You have to educate people and sometimes hold their hand.

How you keep yourself current with the various aspects of the industry?

We have mandatory continuing education and I serve as an arbiter for the Greater Milwaukee Association of Realtors. I also educate myself by reading about the various neighborhoods, schools and the changes happening. I attend seminars.

How have you grown as an agent since you began?

I came from old school when we didn’t have cell phones, computers and MLS books, which came later. Today, we have the Internet, digital photos, cell phones and electronic signatures. I grew as the industry grew.

What have you learned from your clients?

I’ve learned how to deal with many types of people. I work with clients from all over the country and some are international. I’ve learned a lot about whom they are and where they’re coming from. I’ve also learned a lot about listening and patience.

What is the biggest challenge clients face today?

The market has slowed down a bit because we’re going into the colder months and buyers really don’t want to move until spring time. It’s still a great market, but you may have to be a bit more patient.

What is your favorite part of the process when working with clients?

At a recent closing, both the buyers and sellers were ecstatic. I had just sold their home in Delafield, and had an offer just five days later. It’s just the joy on their faces. I love the happiness when everyone gets what they want.

Have you had any mentors?

When I was in the cosmetic industry, one of my managers, Delores Kay, was a wonderful spiritual mentor. Within the industry, Tony Robbins and Zig Ziglar are fantastic mentors. They have tremendous views of the world and they’re two people I think of when something may go wrong.

What’s the best advice you’ve been given?

Be true to who you are.

What’s the most important advice you give to clients?

To work with me as a team. I’ll do all the hard work.

What is your business philosophy?

To have fun, enjoy what I do every day, work hard and stay true to myself.

How do you relax in your down time?

I watch goofy movies to relax. I also play with my grand-puppy, Charlie. I go to dinner with friends and listen to live music. I have a friend who is really into German culture and go to German dances and Oktoberfest. I also enjoy the festivals and riding a Harley. Once a year, my daughter and I take a trip abroad. We backpack to get around and it’s a different experience seeing things through her eyes.

What professional/charitable organizations are you involved with?

I work with the Salvation Army, the food pantry in Wauwatosa, Hunger Task Force and donate to the Wisconsin Humane Society, the Humane Animal Welfare Society in Waukesha County, Blind Dog Society and Veteran Dog Society. I also cook for the Ronald McDonald House.