Molina eyes growth in revenue, members with HealthPlus deal

Seeing a perfect opportunity for growth, Molina Healthcare of Michigan, the state's second-largest Medicaid HMO, is expected to add $300 million in annual revenue as it absorbs the Medicaid business of financially troubled HealthPlus of Michigan in a deal expected to close Sept. 1.



By adding 96,000 members from HealthPlus' Medicaid and MIChild business, Troy-based Molina is projected to grow to 352,000 members in Michigan. In 2014, Molina recorded $1.06 billion in revenue, earning $26.7 million in net income.



Molina still remains far behind in membership to Detroit-based Meridian Health Plan of Michigan, which also has been experiencing double-digit growth and now stands at 420,000 Medicaid members.



But Molina, a for-profit subsidiary of Long Beach, Calif.-based Molina Healthcare Inc., also began participating this May in a demonstration program to integrate care of 13,000 Medicaid and Medicare beneficiaries in Southeast Michigan and other parts of Michigan.



Adding HealthPlus "was an opportunity to serve the Medicaid population and expand that into Genesee County, Saginaw and the bay area," said Christine Surdock, Molina's COO in its Troy office.



Surdock said Molina's experience in Medicare's special needs plan will help it manage the dual-eligible population, which historically is a sicker patient group. "The new program is more care coordination, more member touches and long-term care and support," she said.



Flint-based HealthPlus, meanwhile, is re-forming this year into a "flatter and leaner organization," said incoming CEO Mike Genord, M.D., in an interview with Crain's last week.

State watch list

On March 9, the Michigan Department of Insurance and Financial Services placed HealthPlus under state financial supervision because losses in 2014 lowered its capital reserves below the required state minimum.



In May, Molina announced it would acquire the Medicaid and MIChild business units of HealthPlus for an unspecified price. Molina has declined numerous interview requests on the transaction.



Over the past two years, HealthPlus lost $60 million in its Medicaid, Medicare Advantage and commercial HMO and PPO business, according to state regulatory filings and interviews.





Financial factors

A variety of actuarial miscalculations, higher-than-expected medical utilization and a flood of new PPO clients led to HealthPlus underpricing its various products the past two years, Genord said.



"There were multiple factors," he said. "Past financial models didn't serve us well in the future market. We had new membership, (many of whom) were underwritten for the first time, (and it) led to significant losses we didn't predict."



Genord said HealthPlus' various preferred provider organization products with employers and individuals haven't performed well for several years.



"At year end, we expect to be out of the PPO market," he said. "The (Affordable Care Act) market didn't serve us well the past years."



Genord said HealthPlus also is phasing out its PPO contracts with employers at the end of this year. HealthPlus has 43,000 PPO members.



"We have informed our customers and are looking to move to self-funded options for our PPO customers and offer PPO projects with other health insurers," he said.



Before joining HealthPlus in 2013, Genord, an obstetrician-gynecologist, was in private practice for 17 years and affiliated with William Beaumont Hospital and United Physicians Inc., a Bingham Farms-based physician organization.



"I am excited about the turnaround we had this year with the executive team, employers, community and employees all going forward," said Genord. "We have paid our bills, taken care of our employees and are proud of what we went through. We have grown as an organization."



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links