Buy Photo Dr. Jeffrey Kirian provides dental services for a patient Friday morning at the Look Up Dental Clinic. (Photo: Michael Lehmkuhle/The Advocate)Buy Photo Story Highlights Although Licking County has some resources, more is needed to help low income adults who need dental care.

The United Way's Community Blueprint listed access to dental health as an issue facing Licking County.

NEWARK – A toothache is easier to ignore during the day with the distractions of work and family.

But when people lay down to sleep at night, the pain ramps up - often becoming unbearable.

Facing a sleepless night of agony and very few options, many people reach out to Pathways of Central Ohio's 211 Crisis Hotline. From Jan.1 to April 20, 425 people dialed their number, seeking help with dental emergencies.

There are options in Licking County to help alleviate their pain. The Look Up Dental Clinic offers free appointments to people who need teeth pulled because of infection.

But people in pain usually don't want to wait. Many of them head to the emergency room for antibiotics and painkillers. Those solve the problem temporarily, but don't treat the underlying problems with their teeth and gums. They'll be in pain again and the cycle will continue, said Dr. Geoffrey Bauman, chairman of the Look Up Dental board.

"There are a lot of people (in this county) who have a lot of dental needs, but a lot of people go around with those needs being unmet," Bauman said.

Bauman and his colleagues aren't the only ones concerned about this.

During the two-year study that produced its recent Community Blueprint, United Way of Licking County found many of the people it surveyed were worried about the county's most vulnerable populations not having access to dental care.

Data from Pathways of Central Ohio seems to emphasize the need.

In 2011, 520 people contacted 211 looking for help with a dental crisis. As word spread about the Look Up Dental Clinic in 2012, that number increased to 2,890 people, then 3,011 people in 2013.

In 2014, the number of calls dropped to 2,009 then to 1,387 in 2015, which Bauman theorized was partly due to Medicaid expansion.

With changes brought on by the Affordable Care Act, some people are getting the care they need - but many are still slipping through the cracks, said Walt Zang, program director of the 211/crisis hotline at Pathways.

It's a problem that needs to be addressed because poor dental health has significant costs, said Dr. Paul Casamassimo, a professor at Ohio State University's College of Dentistry and past president of the Ohio Dental Association.

Dental problems have been linked to heart disease, dementia, respiratory infections, diabetic complications and other health problems.

Having unattractive or missing teeth can also effect a persons confidence, especially when they are living in poverty and looking for work, Casamassimo said.

"It’s pretty clear that a healthy mouth is an asset when looking for employment and trying to interact socially," he said.

Some options but barriers remain

Licking County kids from low-income families have several options when it comes to dental care.

Licking Memorial Hospital collaborates with the Licking County Foundation to offers a dental clinic for uninsured children. Children's Hospital in Columbus also offers a kids dental clinic on a sliding scale.

The Licking County Health Department provides a dental sealant program for schools in Licking, Knox and Coshocton counties, said Mary Beth Hagstad, director of nursing. Health educators visit local third graders in school to teach them about brushing and flossing.

Those programs help, but dentists around the state still face an uphill battle, Casamassimo said.

"In Ohio, about half of our children have tooth decay by the age of 5," he said. "And that continues to be a problem for those kids."

Providing dental care and education for adults is typically even more challenging, Casamassimo said.

"Kids tend to be able to get dental care through 18 years of age, but from 21 to 35 - maybe because they are marginally employed or unemployed or have other priorities - they are not seeking dental care. By the time they experience dental pain, their teeth are in bad shape and it’s very hard to take care of them. The diseased teeth need to be pulled and crowned and that starts them on the path of loosing their teeth in a relatively young age."

The Ohio Dental Association and the Ohio Department of Health Dental OPTIONS program can match low-income uninsured Ohioans with volunteer dentists, Casamassimo said

Muskingum and Knox counties have healthcare centers with dental clinics that also do preventative work, such as fillings and cleanings. The Ohio State University Dental School sees some patients on a sliding scale, Hagstad said.

But transportation can be a barrier to those services, Zang said.

"We have to send these individuals out of our county, but it doesn't do me any good to send someone to Zanesville when they don't have a way to get there," he said.

For people with urgent need, the Look Up Dental Clinic is their best bet. But they have to meet certain criteria, Zang said.

Eligible patients must be uninsured, must meet income guidelines and be complaining of pain that is a seven or higher on a 10 point pain scale.

The only service the clinic provides is extractions. So anyone trying to have teeth pulled for dentures or struggling with a cavity or their wisdom teeth isn't going to find help there, he added.

Between Jan. 1 and April 20, the Look Up Clinic scheduled 121 patients and turned away 121 other individuals, he said.

The costs of dental care

Although 211 continues to get calls, the Look Up Clinic has seen a decrease in patients over the last few years, Bauman said.

Dentists used to volunteer twice a week but have cut their time at the clinic to one half day a week. Sometimes only some of the patients on the schedule show up.

That might be because they found temporary relief at the emergency room, because they have a work conflict or had difficulty getting to the appointment, he said. Some people might just be afraid of the dentist. Others might have been able to get dental coverage through Medicaid.

Since the Affordable Care Act prompted Ohio's Medicaid expansion, more people have dental coverage for the first time. But that doesn't guarantee they'll find a provider that accepts it, Casamassimo said.

"Medicaid reimbursement is so poor - around 38 cents on the dollar - many dentists chose not to take it because they lose money," he said.

Ohio needs to strengthen its Medicaid system so more dentists will have incentive to take on those patients. But even those with private insurance might be skipping appointments because of costs, Casamassimo said.

Some families are underinsured or have such high deductibles they can't afford to regularly see a dentist, he said.

"They can't get routine preventative care," he said. "They have to make some hard choices. Do we go to the dentist or do we save that money for something else."

A preventable problem

There aren't many mysteries left in dentistry, Bauman said. With the proper care, almost all dental disease is completely preventable.

"It's one of the the few things in healthcare that is assured," he said. "If you could get people to do what they are supposed to do, it would really help control it."

The challenge for dentists and community members is to educate people to care for their teeth while giving them the resources to do so, he said.

Something as simple and inexpensive as flossing every day can help make a big difference. Although it's not visually appealing or marketable, it goes a long way., Bauman said.

Getting more education, more frequently in schools is one way to promote better hygiene. Another option is to encourage primary caregivers to get engaged in promoting dental care.

"We need to be cooperating," he said. "Dentists need to refer families to doctors and doctors need to be doing preventative (dental health) counseling."

But education is only one piece of the puzzle, Casamassimo said.

Communities plagued by dental problems usually also struggle with poverty, addiction, unemployment and physical health problems such as heart disease.

It's difficult for families to think about their teeth when they are struggling to put food on the table or find work.

"We are never going to stop it until we turn around these communities," he said. "Until we can fix some of the underlying problems, we will be playing catch up and treating these emergency problems."

ajeffries@newarkadvocate.com

740-328-8544

Twitter: @amsjeffries

Learn more

For more information about the Look Up Clinic and other dental resources for families in need, call 2-1-1 or 740-345-4357.

Read or Share this story: http://ohne.ws/27M0htj