By Rajesh Roy and Santanu Choudhury

Agence France-Presse/Getty Images While India’s trade ministry is considering launching an old vehicle buyback program similar to a popular program in the U.S. in 2009, for now it is only considering the program for old trucks and buses.

India may launch its own cash-for-clunkers scheme to encourage drivers to retire rickety vehicles, but it’s not going to pay for your old Ambassador or Padmini just yet.

While India’s trade ministry is considering launching an old vehicle buyback program similar to a popular program in the U.S. in 2009, for now it is only considering the program for old trucks and buses.

India’s trade ministry has asked for the budget for a 10-billion-rupee ($162 million) program which would offer owners of trucks and buses that are more than 15 years old 100,000 rupees if they scrap their jalopies, one trade ministry official who asked not to be named, told the Wall Street Journal.

The move would not only improve India’s air quality and road safety by taking the smoke-belching, weak braking monsters off the highways, it would also give a much-needed boost to sales of trucks and buses which would generate tax revenues.

The trade ministry’s department of industrial policy and promotion has recently sent the proposal to the finance ministry for its approval. “It will have a spin-off benefit in terms of the environment, employment and ‎boosting manufacturing,” the trade ministry official said.

Details such as the exact size of the incentive scheme and the ways it would be distributed will be worked out after approval from the finance ministry, he said.

Truck and bus sales in India have been declining for more than a year thanks to a slowing economy, a ban on mining and a fall in freight rates.

Sales during April to November 2013 declined 17.5% from the year earlier to 423,911 vehicles, according to the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers.

SIAM had been demanding fiscal incentives to revive the overall automobile market. Car and SUV sales in the country declined 5.3% to about 1.64 million units during the April to November period.

“It will benefit the industry,” by creating demand said Sugato Sen, deputy director general of SIAM told the Wall Street Journal. “The industry has been demanding it for a long time.”

It remains to be seen whether the finance ministry–which is already facing a severe cash crunch–will give its nod to the proposal. But if it passes, drivers hope it will mean fewer tired trucks and broken buses blocking traffic along India’s already overburdened highways.

Follow India Real Time on Twitter @WSJIndia.