Scientists and the public need to be on the same page to solve society's greatest problems.

Engineered corn and soybeans have faced resistance from environmental groups and consumers. gmo concept (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

The recent Pew Research Center survey pointing to the gaps between what scientists and the American public think about several key societal issues is disturbing news on two counts.

It's disappointing for scientists, of course. But it also poses risks to society at large. We need to figure out how to bridge this perception gap.

The consequences of this gap are already proving problematic. Consider:

Vaccines — The Pew survey found that the general public and the scientific community both support strong vaccination policies. Yet we're seeing a dangerous resurgence of measles and other diseases in the United States. Why? Because a rising percentage of parents are skeptical of the scientific consensus on vaccines, which over the last 100-plus years have saved an incalculable number of lives. As a result, diseases like measles and whooping cough, which should have been eradicated, are reappearing across the United States.

Climate Change — The Pew survey found 87 percent of scientists believe climate change is mostly due to human activity. In contrast, only 50 percent of the general public agreed.

We don't have to look far to see the results of that gap. Even as the average global temperature continues to break records, efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions are opposed in the United States and elsewhere.

I worry about this a lot because agriculture is particularly vulnerable to climate change. We're working on ways to help farmers grow food in the face of extreme weather fluctuations and related challenges from insects and plant diseases. But we would all be much better off if we could take action to stop climate change instead of just adapt to it.

GMOs — The Pew survey's findings on genetically modified organism are striking. Eighty-eight percent of the scientists surveyed agree that it's safe to eat foods containing GMOs — a higher consensus among scientists than for vaccines and climate change. Despite this consensus, only 37 percent of the general public agreed.

This one is especially personal to me because I was one of a handful of people who helped develop the first GMOs. But access to nutritious, affordable food is a challenge that will affect us all as the world's population grows and the effects of climate change impact farmers' ability to grow food. GMOs could be one of the tools to help meet that challenge, but the perception gap hinders our collective ability to do so.

So how do we bridge the divide between public and scientific opinion?

•First, scientists need to communicate better. Scientists, myself included, bear a large responsibility for the current situation. On GMOs, for example, the public is confronted with a great deal of misinformation. We can't just expect people to recognize that misinformation for what it is. But too often that's what we've done.

We need to spend more time instead listening to the public's questions and trying to answer them in ways that make sense to them and they can relate to.

•Second, we need to expand access to science education around the world. By increasing scientific literacy, we can better equip people to evaluate scientific claims for themselves. That begins with improving science education and communication. It also means expanding participation in STEM (science, technology, engineering, math) among underrepresented groups including women and minorities.

•Finally, we need rational dialogue and open minds — Scientists don't have all the answers, nor do I think they're always right. But I do think it's important that people listen to what science has to say, just as scientists should listen to those with doubts. Dialogue based on reason rather than politics or ideology is an essential part of ensuring science's viability and role within society.

Science has eradicated diseases, reduced childhood mortality and saved millions from starvation. But it only works if people want to use it. And it will only continue to play an essential role in society if we can improve understanding between the scientific community and the public.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1Htsxk0