For well over a decade, many have raised concerns that redefining marriage would impact the ability of churches, pastors, religious ministries and individual people of faith to maintain their religious freedom. And during that same time, activists have repeatedly given their assurance that religious entities and individuals will remain free to conduct their business in accordance with their deeply held religious beliefs.

First, the battle of some family-owned Christian businesses against the Obamacare abortion-pill mandate cast doubt on those assurances. But now, the ongoing debate over state religious freedom laws and the numerous legal actions taken against Christians, such as Barronelle Stutzman in Washington and Jack Phillips in Colorado, who simply want to live in accordance with their religious beliefs should be enough to demonstrate that those assurances have been completely false.

The unfortunate confirmation of this fact has come in Louisiana through the debate over the Marriage and Conscience Act (House Bill 707). The central thrust of the bill guarantees that the state of Louisiana will not make tax determinations based on a person or organization's beliefs about marriage. In other words, if a church believes that marriage is the union of one man and one woman, the Marriage and Conscience Act simply ensures that the government cannot functionally defund and eliminate that church's existence by withdrawing its non-profit status.

If the assurances that certain activists have given us were honest, they would steadfastly support such a bill. Instead, they are steadfastly opposing it.

The concern here for churches and other non-profit entities is not merely hypothetical. A movement to defund non-profit entities that maintain the long-held belief in one-man, one woman-marriage has already begun in some jurisdictions, including California. The Legislature there recently considered a measure curiously titled the "Youth Equality Act," a defunding measure specifically targeted at the Boy Scouts of America.

While the bill did not become law, it came very close, and its sole purpose was to hold the Boy Scouts' tax status contingent upon its approval of same-sex marriage. If advocates of redefining marriage are willing to do this to the Boy Scouts, who traditionally meet in churches, are we really to believe that the churches themselves are not next?

In addition to preserving the tax-exempt status of churches and ministries that maintain a biblical definition of marriage, Louisiana's bill also seeks to preclude the imposition of a same-sex marriage litmus test for state licenses. Well over 60 different professions are licensed within Louisiana, ranging from accountants, to jockeys, to plumbers and everything else in between. Should we only license people that embrace same-sex marriage, or will we recognize that licensing professionals has nothing to do with their viewpoint on marriage?

The concern about licensing is also not without precedent. In Maine, complaints were filed against social worker Don Mendell for appearing in a 30-second TV commercial in support of marriage as the union of a man and a woman. The complaints sought to strip him of his professional license and, thus, his livelihood.

And because the agency involved oversaw the licensing of more than 60 different professions, the activists that filed the complaint against Mendell were on course to create a licensing litmus test for nearly every licensed profession. In Mendell's case, the complaints against him were eventually (and rightly) dismissed, but what about the next time this happens? The mere fact that activists would want to strip professionals of their licenses for merely believing in man-woman marriage is beyond concerning.

Louisiana's Marriage and Conscience Act only means that tax status and licensing will not turn on the applicant's view of marriage. Americans who don't think that churches should be defunded, or that their plumber needs to support same-sex marriage in order to be licensed, can support this bill regardless of their view of marriage, because it protects them all. Those who oppose it are simply showing their true colors.

Austin R. Nimocks is senior counsel with Alliance Defending Freedom, which has provided legal counsel on religious freedom and conscience protection laws to federal and state legislators nationwide and is also legally representing Barronelle Stutzman, Jack Phillips and other Christians in defense of their First Amendment freedoms.