Ted Cruz, the Republican senator from Texas, says that he has the support of the Jewish community for his presidential run, as he makes several stops in New York City and upstate this week to encourage voters ahead of the state primary this month.

“We’ve got tremendous support in the Jewish community, tremendous support especially in the Orthodox community,” Cruz, who is Christian, said in an interview with CNN on Thursday. “I’ve been privileged to speak at synagogues all over the country, and in particular to focus on defending religious liberty, which has been a passion of mine, my entire life, and focus on standing with Israel.”

Earlier on Thursday, before the interview, Cruz visited the Chabad Neshama Model Matzah Bakery in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn where he was making matzo.

Cruz supports the state of Israel and he has said that if he were president he would work with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, in a reference to the often rocky relationship between Netanyahu and President Barack Obama.

When asked by CNN journalist Dana Bash about his comments on “New York values,” Cruz said that he referred to the liberal values of New York City politicians including Mayor Bill de Blasio. While New York City regulates the sale and possession of guns, Cruz wants to ensure that Americans have the right to bear arms. As part of his conservative views, he has also preached eradicating the Internal Revenue Service and repealing Obamacare.

While Cruz took a decisive win in Wisconsin’s primary on Tuesday, he’s in third place – behind Queens-born Donald Trump and Ohio Governor John Kasich — among New York voters for support, according to one recent poll. Cruz says that the people in upstate New York are in common with voters in Wisconsin, and he’s hoping to get Republicans united.

New York holds its state primary on April 19, and Cruz needs to catch up with Trump in terms of delegates needed to secure the party’s presidential nomination.

(This story update includes comments about uniting Republicans.)