Trenton Stringari during the Class 4A state track and field meet Saturday at Jeffco Stadium. Stringari won the 300-meter hurdles state championship. (Brandon Hopper/Daily Record)

Trenton Stringari during the Class 4A state track and field meet Saturday at Jeffco Stadium. Stringari won the 300-meter hurdles state championship. (Brandon Hopper/Daily Record)

Lakewood — Trenton Stringari had a little extra motivation Saturday. Although, it's not like the Cañon City junior needed it when it came to the state title race.

The standout finished his 300-meter hurdle run of 38.20 with a emphatic double fist pump to beat slightly favored Glenwood Springs junior Kaden Weller's 38.56.

“It's the most amazing feeling ever,” Stringari said after the race. “I'm just giving God the glory. This is awesome.

“My start was so much better this time. I got an early lead on him. When people get an early lead on me it kinda gets me mentally. I think that might've happened to him.”

Weller and Stringari had been fairly even the entire season, and the Glenwood Springs junior came in with a slight edge. Stringari said Weller wasn't shy about his previous-best time, either.

“He was kinda bragging to me and a couple others in the tent today, kinda rubbing it in that he had the highest seed time,” Stringari said. “He's got so much talent, there's no need to be cocky about it, he can be humble.”

Stringari got off to a good start, but Weller's was anything but. Weller said he hit the first hurdle with his knee and sported a big red mark on his right knee after the race.

With 80 meters to go, Stringari had about a one-half step lead on Weller, and a bit more comfortable length ahead of Palmer Ridge seniors Evan Malin and Thomas Busath.

“It was perfect,” Tigers coach Jordan Gilge said. “That was finally the best race he's run all year, best time, hit every hurdle well.”

The lead stayed about the same as the two came down the straightaway, and Weller clipped the last hurdle as Stringari had already landed.

“It's a state championship,” Weller said. “Everybody's going to do their best. He had a cleaner race.

“I wish I had a clean race. A clean race would've had an, I'm guessing sub-38. I just kinda screwed it up.”

Juniors Stringari, Weller and Dustin Ethridge from D'Evelyn were the only non-seniors in the race. Ethridge took ninth place.

Stringari also took third place in the 110-meter hurdles earlier in the day.

Stringari joined a small group of track and field state champions from Cañon City in the past few years. Two years ago, Andrea Tuck won the triple jump and Zac McCoy won the 400-meter run. Last year, McCoy won the 400- and 200-meter runs.

“I had one goal,” Stringari said. “I kept telling myself that I wasn't going to let anybody pass me. This is all I've been working for.”