Details of the allegations against the Norman North JV wrestling team disturb the Yes All Daughters founder to tears, but she applauds the quick action by the NPS.

Allegations of a sexual assault on a Norman North High School bus spark quick response from Norman Schools. Several students and a coach are suspended and new Friday, a victim's advocacy group commends the district.

Norman police continue to interview people for this case. Investigators hope to present charges to the DA next week.

1/15/16 Related Story: Charges Expected Over ‘ Disturbing Incident’ On Norman North Bus

Police and district official remain quiet about details surrounding the incident on a bus which Norman Schools is calling "extremely disturbing".

The district says it was made aware of the allegations Tuesday morning and "Within a matter of hours, two students were suspended and additional students have been suspended as the investigation continues".

Details of the allegations against the Norman North JV wrestling team disturb the founder of "Yes All Daughters" to tears, but she applauds the quick action by the NPS.

“I really, really commend Norman schools for how swiftly and decisively they moved on this case. I think it speaks volumes for how far they've come in the last year when handling cases like these,” said Stacey Wright, Yes All Daughters founder.

In November 2014, hundreds of students demonstrated outside Norman High, protesting the school's handling of conflicts among students in the wake of several rape allegations.

The protest was organized by Wright after she says her niece told her about claims from multiple teenage girls who said they were raped by the same classmate.

A former Norman High School student, Tristen Kole Killman-Hardin, is now serving prison time the rapes of two girls.

Norman police yet again are working to determine if a sexual assault took place. This time, as a News 9 source says, on a bus as wrestlers returned from a weekend tournament.

“Bystander intervention is a really, really effective way to stop an assault,” said Wright. “If one person will step in it can make all the difference.”

News 9’s source said this investigation involves two victims both juveniles. News 9 was also told a camera on the bus may have recorded the incident.