Business Name: TRS Wellness

Location: Conway

Telephone: 501-358-6013

Website: www.trswellness.com

Date Opened: Operations began in June 2012; we moved into our new office in May of 2014

Number of Employees: 8

What Type of Business is it: Corporate and Industrial Wellness Services

What specifically does your business do? TRS Wellness emphasizes wellness in the workplace. We empower employees to get and stay healthy while lowering health care costs for all involved. This unique model, developed by sports medicine minded professionals, supports the power of therapy and wellness as the center of musculoskeletal health. Our goal is to reduce organizational health risk through biometric-based wellness coaching, health risk assessments, interactive wellness workshops/education, team challenges, and incentive management. Among other things, TRS Wellness can provide on-site health care, rehabilitation, injury prevention, nutritional support, ergonomic training and stretching/strengthening programs specific to a company’s needs. TRS Wellness is a subsidiary of Therapy & Rehab Solutions, Inc. of Conway. Therapy & Rehab Solutions has been providing therapy services for Conway Regional Health System for over 30 years.

Owner: Chris Throneberry

Why did you decide to open this business: We saw a real need in the market. Unfortunately, over 65 percent of Americans are now either overweight or obese, and the extra weight costs employers in terms of productivity, healthcare costs, increased employee absences, and chronic health conditions. Couple those statistics with the Affordable Care Act, and employers are in a position where they need help improving their staff’s health.

We’re all about improvement and prevention, not perfection. Our goal is to break the trend in declining employee health and cultivating a culture of health and wellness in the workplace.

What is the best part about owning this business: Seeing the changes in our client’s employees- greater productivity, healthier lifestyles, and reduced healthcare expenses.

What has been the biggest surprise that has happened since the opening: How many people who are completely unaware of their health conditions.