Freddy Krueger has some new competition for the scare factor, only this guy dones red, white and blue and comes armed not with a razored glove, but with the Affordable Care Act.

In a new ad from by Generation Opportunity, Creepy Uncle Sam makes his return to encourage Millennials to opt out of the Affordable Care Act, but with a Halloween theme. The short video features a young man named Chad at home watching a scary movie. But as the film breaks for a commercial, the television plays ads for Obamacare over and over and over again.

“We need young people like you to pay for the older, wealthier people,” a spokesman for the Affordable Care Act says.

No matter how many times Chad changes the channel, the same man — later identified as Ted Teddingsly — appears.

Chad, attempting to escape the madness, unplugs off the television. But then, the doorbell unexpectedly rings.

Apprehensively, the young man heads to the door, fear rippling through the air. He opens it, and…

“Trick or treat,” two young children say as Chad breaths a sigh of relief.

Relieved, he returns to his couch just as the television mysteriously turns back on, his phone starts ringing and an email comes through — all from the Obamacare spokesman, Teddingsly.

Then, the doorbell rings again.

“You’d better get that, Chad,” Teddingsly says from the television.

He opens the door, and there, with his own bag for candy, Creepy Uncle Sam stands.

Scary, right?

The ad, the latest from Generation Opportunity, comes not long after the group unveiled their campaign to encourage Millennials to opt out of Obamacare. Viewers were first introduced to “Creepy Uncle Sam” in the inaugural short videos released last month.

In order for Obamacare to succeed — and for all who enter into its exchanges to receive low-cost healthcare — more than 2.7 million 18- to 35-year-olds must register in the marketplace.

But with Generation Opportunity and Creepy Uncle Sam in the mix, more may choose to opt out instead.

Check out Creepy Uncle Sam’s Halloween comeback below.