Innovators The startup behind private health care exchanges

Rob Butler long thought that the employee benefits enrollment process was confusing and messy. Then came the Affordable Care Act, and benefits administration became an even bigger jumble of “solutions.”

Butler thought he could simplify matters. ACA vendors were doing a good job with helping people shop for and enroll in a health plan. They just weren't there the other 364 days of the year when policyholders might be getting married, divorced or having a baby. In April 2014 he founded Maestro Health.

His startup provides employers with a back-end platform to offer health insurance through private exchanges. MaestroEdge, as the product is called, covers everything from choosing health care providers and onboarding new employees to managing benefits and ensuring ACA compliance. In short, says Butler, Maestro Health delivers “the kind of service you get from Nordstrom.”

Rather than build a platform from the ground up, Butler, Maestro's CEO, acquired a company in Orlando, Fla., called Workable Solutions in September 2014 and had his developers “modernize” it. That took about six months. CoBiz Insurance, based in Denver, became his first client in January 2015.

“They have built a rapid development process that gets technology upgrades to market quicker than many of the other platforms we looked at,” says Michael Tilton, vice president of sales at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Arizona, which in November signed Maestro to be its exclusive private exchange for employers. Other customers include the city of Ann Arbor, Mich., Mazda and Aramark.

Maestro has competitors in the increasingly cloud-based benefits administration space, including startups Maxwell Health, Namely and Zenefits, which hit a wall recently because of its overzealous growth practices.

Privately held Maestro has more than 275 employees across five offices (Chicago headquarters, Detroit, Phoenix, Orlando and Charlotte, N.C.), and Butler expects to hire across all departments this year. Based on Maestro's client acquisition rate, he estimates it likely will generate $35 million to $55 million in revenue in 2016.

Maestro's major investors, Oak HC/FT of Greenwich, Conn., and Boston-based SV Life Sciences, initially committed $65 million, which funded technology development and three acquisitions.

Andrew Adams, general partner at Oak HC/FT and a Maestro board member, says Butler has “built a unique offering through acquiring certain capabilities and developing proprietary software to offer a high touch, flexible solution.”

Butler, 58, who grew up in a small town near Peoria and graduated from Bradley University, worked in the pharmaceutical industry and became president of PayFlex Systems USA, an administrator of flexible spending accounts based in Omaha, Neb. Aetna bought that company in 2011.

A big “Seinfeld” fan, he took the name Maestro from a popular episode of the sitcom. The company's West Loop headquarters has bright yellow walls accented with bold black graphic type and many “Seinfeld” references.