PRAGUE–CSA Czech Airlines said that its key shareholder Korean Air Lines has agreed to inject fresh capital into the country’s flagship carrier as it seeks to overcome its current financial struggles.

“The offered sum is within expectations of CSA laid out in the company’s restructuring plan,” CSA Czech Airlines’ spokesman Daniel Sabik told the Wall Street Journal Thursday, referring to the required maximum financing needs that in September were estimated at about $20 million.

Thanks to the company’s improved performance in recent months “it’s possible the actual figure may be even lower,” said Jakub Puchalsky, the spokesman of Czech Aeroholding AS, a state-owned company which is currently in the process of reducing its stake in CSA Czech Airlines to 19.74% from 53.74%.

Korean Air Lines, which holds a 44% stake in CSA Czech Airlines, was earlier reluctant to invest in the airline amid the ownership changes in the carrier. For that the Korean carrier has recently sealed an agreement with Prague-based and privately held Travel Service airline to co-operate on the management of CSA Czech Airlines.

Travel Service, which has recently agreed to acquire 34% of CSA Czech Airlines from Czech Aeroholding, is expecting to obtain regulatory approvals of its transaction in coming weeks.

The deal will leave the Czech government with the minority stake in the airline held through Czech Aeoroholding, which also owns the operator of the international Vaclav Havel Airport Prague in the Czech capital.

Under the European Union regulations non-EU carries can only stakes below 50% in European airlines. Therefore Korean Air Lines need Travel Service and Cesky Aeroholding as their local partners to retain the Czech carrier’s European status, which is essential for airlines to benefit from the European Union open-sky policies on air traffic in the 28-nation bloc. EU officials are currently reviewing ownership stakes in EU carriers, including CSA Czech Airlines.

In recent years, the Czech carrier has focused on flights to Europe from Russia and Ukraine. The weakening Russian economy, bans on foreign travels for Russian government officials and the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine have sharply curtailed demand for flights in the two countries, making many CSA Czech Airlines’ routes in that region barely profitable.

However, the company’s recent shift to focus on other markets in Europe and cutting costs have been paying off.

“On the operating level, meaning purely on ticket sales, CSA has been profitable since April through September and the outlook for October is also positive,” Mr. Sabik said.

Czech Aeroholding is also ready to participate on the CSA Czech Airlines’ capital increase, Mr. Puchalsky said, adding that Czech officials are currently studying details of the Korean Air Lines’ proposal to stabilize the Czech carrier’s finances.

In September, CSA Czech Airlines unveiled plans to lay off about a third of its 230 pilots, nearly half of its 400 onboard flight attendants and a quarter of its 270 administrative staff. The company said it was also cutting its fleet to reduce costs.