Life doesn't pause after a divorce or separation, and the many single mothers in the Millennium City are proving this true every day. These self-dependent, working single mothers tell us that Gurgaon has been treating them very well, while Delhi was rude and intrusive.Neighbours mind their own business Gurgaon residents belong to different corners of the world and seem to naturally adapt to new things.A single mom in their neighbourhood is nothing 'shocking' for them and being intrusive is simply not their cup of tea. "My in-laws are from Janakpuri. When I was going through the first stage of separation, I came back to my parents' home in Pitampura. All day I had to face thousands of weird questions from extremely nosy relatives and neighbours. But in Gurgaon, nobody cares. If you are sweet to talk to, helpful and a decent neighbour, nobody has any concern with your marital status," says Sunita*, a 34-year old marketing manger. "In Delhi,it is assumed that a divorced woman will never get a fresh start. The scene is different in Gurgaon. As long as you are educated and have a good background, it is no big deal even if your boyfriend or a male friend is visiting you," says Arushi, a single mom who works in an MNC.Part-time maids and creches are easily available "My life in Gurgaon is completely sorted. On a full working day, I have my maid in place. I drop my daughter at the creche while going to office, and I pick her up on my way back. For single moms who live in a society or apartment complex, taking out their children for a walk is not risky like it is in Delhi. In the evenings, the kids can play with their friends inside the society itself. These societies have guards and watchmen, so the safety issue is also taken care of," says Sheena Singh, a single mother and an aviation industry professional."Gurgaon's lifestyle is quite western, like what I have seen abroad during my studies. I can never imagine that happening in Delhi. In Delhi, if you are doing your household work yourself, it means that you can't afford a maid. And when the neighbours consider you not of their status, they barely interact with you and in a way, you are totally isolated. I moved to Gurgaon two years back and it feels like I am in London. My office is near my home and my son's school and I make it a point to visit him once during the day," says Sunita*.Getting flats on rent is really quick and easy Single moms in the city tell us that it is very easy to get good and safe rented flats in Gurgaon and the process is quite fast. Also, the landlords, unlike in Delhi, are not judgmental about their marital status. "If you want a flat on rent, you call up a real estate agent and he will show you the options available. You meet the owner, have a chat, get the formalities and legal things done and the flat is yours. It is that easy in Gurgaon. In Delhi, I faced 10 rejections when the owners found out that I am a divorced woman with a kid. It felt like a Fear Factor task would be easier," says Niti Kothari, a resident of DLF Phase II."The landlord of one particular house that I went to see in Lajpat Nagar gave me several guidelines - can't invite friends over, can't have a party, can't drink, can't have a male friend visiting and many other things. After hearing this, I called up a friend in Gurgaon and the next month, I shifted to a new rented flat in Gurgaon. This was four years ago," says Kalpana, a western dance teacher and a flautist. "The Millennium City has a western culture. Your marital status, your religion, your caste and creed do not have any role to play when you look for a house on rent," Arushi tells us.Gurgaon Schools respect your motherhood While talking to these single moms, we found out that Gurgaon schools are very polite and supportive when it comes to a single mom's marital status and details of the child's father. "While getting my daughter's admission done at an international school in Gurgaon, I did not have to think about the fact that I am a single mother. Her school did not ask me about the whereabouts of her father. So far, I have never had a problem with the school authorities and I think it is one of the biggest differences between the schools of Gurgaon and Delhi," says Sheena."My life in Delhi was full of challenges and after relocating to Gurgaon, I got my own space. The biggest reason behind my easier life here is that I found a supportive school for my kid. The teachers at Amity International School are very helpful and friendly and they make sure of my kid's comfort all the time," says Priya, a single mother from Guragon."The fact that the mother is a child's primary guardian has always been a matter of debate in our country. Gurgaon schools are very supportive in this matter. My kids got admission to Pathways, Gurgaon, and both of them are very happy there. The school did not ask me about the father and that made me feel complete as a guardian," says Arushi."Our school provides a comfortable environment for students whose fathers doesn't stay with them. The teachers and staff are aware and sensitized about the issue and we do not ask for any signature or particulars from the father if the mother says that she cannot provide it," says an administrative staff member of Amity International School, Gurgaon.(*Name changed on request)