Q&A with Jim Whitley

WWII veteran Jim Whitley, Private First Class U.S. Army 5031st Engineer Shore Regiment, poses for a portrait at his home, Friday in Longmont. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

WWII veteran Jim Whitley, private first class U.S. Army 5031st Engineer Shore Regiment, is seen in this undated photo when he was enlisted. (Courtesy of Jim Whitley / Longmont Times-Call) Related Veterans Day 2014

Longmont World War II era vet celebrates his first novel at 86

Betty Heath: Remembering our veterans

In 1943, when he was 19, Jim Whitley enlisted in the United States Army and was quickly shipped overseas following basic training where he served as an engineer with 531st Engineer Shore Regiment during World War II.

The now 90-year-old Longmont resident spent nearly three years as a private first class in Europe during the war. Despite the death and destruction he witnessed, Whitley said, he holds on to mostly positive memories of his time there.

"I like to remember the positive, of course," Whitley said. "There were negative, and I do remember a lot of negative, but I remember the positives better."

If you go What: Veterans Day parade When: 11:11 a.m. Tuesday Where: Main Street and Coffman Street from Third Avenue and Longs Peak Avenue, Longmont

As Veterans Day approaches, I asked Whitley about joining the Army, D-Day, the people he met during the war and coming home.

Why did you enlist?

My buddy was drafted. I wanted to go with him so then I volunteered to be drafted — my time was coming up anyway. Him and I went to Texas together and then we separated and I've never seen him after that. Or since. I don't know what happened to Scott. That was in January 1943.

What do you remember about the D-Day invasion?

Those memories are quite vivid.

I was kind of apprehensive. Everything was new. I'd never experienced anything like that before. We'd had practice runs but that wasn't anything like the real invasion.

Our job was to blast the seawall open, cut roads through and build roads. I had a D-16 tractor. It was on tracks. My job was to pull stalled vehicles off the beach. I did that for a couple of weeks I guess.

The paratroopers and the infantry went in before we did so they were back a couple of miles inland, but the Germans were still shelling the beach. There was a pillbox (concrete guard posts) up north that the Germans abandoned and then at high tide there were some that would come back into the pillbox and throw a few shells down onto the beach where I was. Being on the tractor, I couldn't hear them coming in, but I could see others running and hiding so I got off and got under the tractor. That probably saved my life a couple of times.

What was your platoon like?

Jim Whitley, Private First Class U.S. Army 5031st Engineer Shore Regiment, is seen driving a tractor, left, in this undated photo. (Courtesy of Jim Whitley / Longmont Times-Call)

We only had one casualty in my platoon and he stepped on a mine and blew his foot off. They call it a shoe mine. That was the purpose to blow your foot off. We thought we had lost another the day of the landing. We couldn't find him for a while, but finally he came to the company and said he had been in a pillbox for two days. He was so scared.

Did you meet many locals?

From the initial landing, what I remember the most are the people I got acquainted with. I met a family over there just off of the beach. It was maybe a week after the initial D-Day landing. They had a little girl and her name was Janine. I've kept track of her over the years. We went back for the 50th anniversary and found her again. Last year, we got a Christmas card from her a little late.

I also found two fellows in Belgium that I got acquainted with. One has died, but the younger one is still alive. They had a small farm there on the edge of town. I went to their farmhouse to get acquainted with them and they asked me to stay the night. The younger boy took me upstairs to the bed and I flopped down in a down bed and mattress and a down winter cover. Boy that was nice. It was upstairs, it was unheated really, but much different than a typical night there. Most nights, I was sleeping on a cot in a tent with the whole platoon.

What was it like coming home?

Naturally, I was glad to get home. I came back on the Queen Mary.

Then, home was Bristol, Illinois. It's a small town, maybe 100 to 125 people.

It was just my brother and I when I came home. I was so glad to be home, to be a civilian again. The formalities of home and the area I missed, of course. And the friends and relatives and the things that I did.

What does Veterans Day mean to you?

It means that I served my country to the best of my ability. And that I had a country to come back to. And friends.

It's about remembering the people I met and the guys in my outfit.

It's remembrance, to remember the things that happened. Some had it really rough. I was very fortunate.

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter