Buy Photo Vanderbilt junior Matthew Huffer, 20, is running for state representative for District 39. he is trying to balance running his campaign and keeping up with his studies. Wednesday Sept. 3, 2014, in Nashville. (Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean )Buy Photo

While many students at Vanderbilt University will be heading home this weekend for a fall break full of rest and relaxation, junior Matthew Huffer will be hitting the campaign trail.

But he’s not knocking on doors as a volunteer for someone else’s campaign. The 21-year-old is the candidate — he’s running for a seat in the state’s House of Representatives.

The college junior, who is majoring in political science and economics, decided to join the race in January while he was looking over education statistics for his hometown in Moore County.

“I got intrigued,” he said, mentioning the county’s low ACT scores. “I figured I could do a lot to help our public education system.”

He researched the requirements to run between sips of root beer in the school cafeteria. After consulting with his parents and professors, he decided to move forward, navigating a maze of paperwork necessary to get his name on the ballot.

Huffer met constituents in a local coffee shop to get signatures for his petition to run.

“I didn’t really go into it with a ton of political connections,” he said. “Most of the people who signed it were people who had just gotten out of high school.”

Huffer doesn’t think his age should count against him in voters’ eyes. Instead, he says, his existing relationships with high school students back home could help inform his work to improve state education policy.

“I knew that politics was something I wanted to get into, and I saw this issue that I thought I could help with,” he said. “I think once they see that they’ll realize it’s not just a gimmick.”

Huffer knocked on about 1,000 doors over the summer, and he’s continued to campaign this semester, even though his voter base is across the state. He scheduled his classes on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday so he can have long weekends in Tennessee House District 39, which includes parts of Moore, Franklin and Marion counties.

The pressures of juggling a campaign with a full slate of exams and coursework has forced Huffer to cut back on on-campus events and movie nights with friends.

“Finding a way to keep focused has definitely been a struggle,” he said. “I have to make the most of every moment I’ve got.”

If he is elected Nov. 4, Huffer plans to arrange his classes around legislative sessions downtown.

Despite the challenges, Huffer, who is running as a Democrat, believes he has a chance to beat the incumbent in his district, Rep. David Alexander, R-Winchester. He credits the environment at Vanderbilt with sparking his political ambitions.

“You’re always around people who are driven to do better,” he said. “It pushes you to strive to do better.”

Reach Adam Tamburin at 615-726-5986 and on Twitter @tamburintweets.

About the incumbent

Rep. David Alexander was first elected to the General Assembly in 2010, and then reelected in 2012. He lives in Winchester and owns Reliable Rental, a construction equipment and special event rental store.

He said his robust life experience, from service in the Army to owning a small business, qualifies him for reelection.

“I believe that I have served them and represented them well,” he said. “I would ask for them to send me back.”

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1w1C9An