Topics: Abortion, Birth Control, Catholicism, Christianity, Feminism, pope francis, Religion, Reproductive Rights, News, Politics News

What self-respecting progressive doesn’t love Pope Francis?

Though Francis’s popularity among conservatives has nosedived of late, his ratings among liberals remain sky-high. Liberal journalists seem the most enamored of all. For the past two years, they’ve produced a steady stream of gushing tributes to Francis, praising him as “visionary,” a “flaming liberal” and even “radical.” Just last week, Naomi Klein wrote a glowing encomium to Francis for his encyclical on climate change–without once mentioning that one of the most powerful tools for reducing our carbon footprint is birth control, which Francis opposes. Also the last week, the New Republic’s Elizabeth Stoker Bruenig penned yet another valentine to the man, this time praising “Francis’s feminism.”

Wait—what? Pope Francis, feminist? In what sense is Francis—a man who presides over one of the most deeply patriarchal institutions in human history, which bans women from positions of authority and restricts them to subservient roles; who preaches a doctrine of “separate spheres” for women that reads like a musty Victorian-era relic; and whose unwavering support of Catholic doctrine on abortion and birth control is responsible for the death and suffering of countless women across the globe—a feminist? To label Francis a “feminist” is downright Orwellian. It twists the meaning of the word beyond all recognition.

There’s plenty wrong with the piece, including its hilariously awkward subhead: “He’s no Amy Schumer, but that’s okay.” (Ah, if only he were!) Let’s start with a subject that Bruenig, who identifies as a feminist and a woman of the left, should care about: poor women. Bruenig misleadingly claims that the ideas about family planning Francis expresses in his climate change encyclical are consistent with feminism. Yet neither that nor any other Vatican document supports key feminist goals such as a woman-centered, rights-based approach to contraception. Bruenig also recycles the Catholic canard that making birth control freely available to those who want it is a form of oppressive “population control.”

But as the World Health Organization (WHO) has reported, an estimated 225 million women in developing countries would like to prevent pregnancy but are not using birth control, for reasons that include lack of access and religious prohibitions against contraceptive use. WHO and other organizations have found that in developing countries, lack of contraceptive access is associated with significantly elevated rates of AIDS/HIV, as well as some 290,000 pregnancy-related deaths each year. Bruenig’s data-free piece does not engage with this tragic reality.

Bruenig also lauds Francis for his statements condemning capitalism and global poverty and championing economic justice. I agree that Francis’ comments on these subjects have been moving and powerful, and may even end up doing real good. Yet Bruenig seems unaware that one of the keys to reducing global poverty and promoting economic development is strengthening women’s agency—including their reproductive agency.

A vast literature exists on this subject, including work by Nobel Prize-winning economist Amartya Sen. Expanded reproductive freedom for women is associated with significantly reduced poverty, in part because it enables women to pursue education and paid employment. Additionally, children from smaller families stay in school longer. As Adele Stan wrote, if Francis “really wanted to help the poor, he’d be a feminist.” Claiming you want to end poverty but failing to support reproductive rights makes about as much sense as claiming you support low-income workers while opposing the minimum wage.