Photo

Dr. Savita Gopal, a 27-year-old resident physician at the Family Health Center of Harlem, sat in front of a computer last Thursday, peppering Jacob Doble, a 10-year-old from Harlem, with questions for 20 minutes.

As Dr. Gopal typed copious notes, Jacob, accompanied by his mother, Mekisha Hawkins, said he had been to the emergency room repeatedly in February for asthma, migraines and hallucinations.

“Like what?” Dr. Gopal asked about the visions.

“I saw a giant dragon that looked like it was trying to get me,” Jacob replied.

Dr. Gopal, who also gave Jacob a physical examination, said she accepted a residency program at the center last year, after studying at Rutgers New Jersey Medical School in Newark, because she wanted to work with patients who did not have access to adequate care. “I wanted to continue working in that environment, in an underserved community,” she said.

Dr. Gopal’s residency is supposed to last three years, but its future is uncertain. Her training is paid for by a provision of the Affordable Care Act called the Teaching Health Center Graduate Medical Education program, which is up for renewal this year. The program has allocated $230 million nationwide over five years to try to tackle a worsening shortage of primary care physicians and draw eager young doctors to places where they are sorely needed.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But if Congress does not reauthorize the program, it is unclear what will happen to Dr. Gopal, the 31 other residents at the Harlem center and the hundreds of other residents under the program working at similar centers across the nation.

“Losing them would greatly reduce the care we can provide to the people of Harlem,” said Dr. Neil Calman, the chief executive of the Institute for Family Health, which operates the center in Harlem.

Residents at the center, he noted, handle almost one-third of the 47,000 annual primary care visits there.

Photo

A provision to finance the program for the next two fiscal years is included in a health care bill that is expected to go to a vote in the House of Representatives on Thursday. The bill will also need approval from the Senate and President Obama.

Advocates for the program say it enjoys support among individual politicians, including Republicans. But its roots in the Affordable Care Act mean it could expire, the collateral damage of a deeply polarized Congress.

Representative Charles B. Rangel, a New York Democrat, whose district includes the Harlem center, called the residency program, and health centers in general, “tremendously successful.” But he also said in a recent telephone interview that he was worried that political concerns might destroy the program.

“We have to determine just what kind of Congress we’re going to have here,” Mr. Rangel said. “Will they ever stop fighting health care, for their own constituents?”

Representative Chris Gibson, Republican of New York, said in a statement that he appreciated the young doctors the program had attracted to a health center in his district, in Kingston.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The training supported by this program improves the odds that my constituents have access to primary care providers,” Mr. Gibson said. “Too many upstate New Yorkers have to drive 30 minutes or more to see a doctor. By training and keeping doctors in underserved areas, we’re working toward a goal of increasing access to quality health care for more of our communities.”

Dr. Calman cautioned that even if the program were refunded, it would not permanently address the issue.

“It’s a short-term fix that leaves programs with anxieties about their futures,” he said.

The teaching program’s residencies train primarily in health centers, rather than traditional teaching hospitals. Health centers, which are based in underserved communities, provide outpatient medical services and often have a sliding pay scale for patients who are uninsured or on Medicaid, the government insurance program for the poor.

The idea is that dealing with preventive medicine for ambulatory patients in such settings will connect primary care doctors to the communities and teach them how to best serve their patients.

Photo

The Health Resources and Services Administration, which manages the program, has not yet released an official evaluation.

But a recent policy brief from the Milken Institute School of Public Health at George Washington University indicated that the program has had positive results. The report found that by 2014, 60 residency programs were training more than 550 physicians in 27 states and the District of Columbia. Those doctors could soon serve up to nearly a million patients annually.

In addition to at the centers in Harlem and Kingston, program residents in the area are training at two centers in Brooklyn; one in East Meadow, on Long Island; and one in Danbury, Conn.

The report found that three times as many doctors who served their residencies in the health centers stayed in underserved communities and 91 percent remain primary-care doctors.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Despite the report, Tannaz Rasouli, the director of government relations for the American Association of Medical Colleges, warned against funding the program if it detracted from existing options.

“It’s a matter of ensuring that we’re not investing in one priority at the expense of another,” she said.

Last Thursday, Dr. Gopal determined that Jacob’s hallucinations were a reaction to steroids he received at a hospital to treat his asthma. After consulting with Dr. Venis Wilder, a faculty physician who was training her, Dr. Gopal prescribed higher doses of his asthma medicines to avoid a similar reaction.

Jacob spoke highly about the attention he received at the clinic. “They really care about you,” he said.

Dr. Gopal may be worried about her own future, but she said that was not her main concern.

“The patients are the ones who would be losing out in the long run,” she said.