Helena Morrissey, CEO of Newton Investment Management. Getty Images

One of the biggest proponents of gender balance in U.K. corporate boardrooms has taken the helm of the trade body that represents the interests of asset managers in the U.K. managing £5 trillion ($8.45 trillion).

Helena Morrissey, chief executive of £52 billion Newton Investment Management and well known as founder of the 30% Club, which advocates for 30% representation by women in U.K. boardrooms, is to become chairman of the Investment Association. The trade body was created via a merger of the Investment Management Association and the Association of British Insurers, and Ms. Morrissey replaces Douglas Ferrans at the helm.

The IMA represents asset managers across U.K. in their dealings with governments and regulators. It provides industry data and advises its members on how to promote their funds and achieve corporate governance objectives.

Ms. Morrissey’s 30% Club was officially launched in the U.K. in November 2010. It had the “aspirational goal” of hitting a 30% female board representation by the end of 2015. Its influence helped boost the proportion of female directors at FTSE 100 companies from 12.5% in 2010 to beyond 20% for the first time this year, according to a statement from the club. Its members include Goldman Sachs International co-chief executive Richard Gnodde, Philip Hampton, chairman of Royal Bank of Scotland and David Walker, chairman of Barclays.

In April it launched in the U.S., garnering support from top-level figures from the U.S. professional and financial services and other sectors. Its founding chairman in the U.S. is Bloomberg chairman Peter Grauer, who will be the founding chair of the 30% Club in the U.S.

Ms. Morrissey also chairs the advisory board of Opportunity Now, a gender equality campaign.

Writing in January in sister title Financial News about the paucity of women at the World Economic Forum in Davos, she said: “There has, I believe, been an epiphany here in the U.K. over the past few years. The paucity of women at the top is now seen by many as a business issue, not a special-interest issue. The financial crisis was one catalyst for change – the zeitgeist now is firmly in favour of more diversity, and less homogeneity, in the boardroom and beyond.”

Vivek Ahuja contributed to this post.