Big towns are known for being Democratic strongholds—in 2012, President Obama carried all four of Texas’ largest cities despite losing the state by almost 16 points. But, as a 2014 MIT and UCLA study shows, there are a few urban holdouts where populations lean Republican and policies lean conservative. And there’s something to be said for red cities. Take Mesa, Arizona, the most conservative in the United States, which is “building new infrastructure and even embracing trendy liberal ideas like 'new urbanism'—all while managing to keep costs in line and municipal workforces small and cost-effective,” writes Ethan Epstein. Here’s what’s going on in a few of the others.

***

Story Continued Below

Oklahoma City, Oklahoma

Population: 600,000

Conservative ranking: 2

While Oklahoma’s Republican Gov. Mary Fallin refused to expand the state’s Medicaid program under the Affordable Care Act or even to accept the $54 million in federal funds offered her state to implement it, Oklahoma City’s Mayor Mick Cornett—also a Republican—decided to take advantage of the controversial law, accepting federal money to bolster old and initiate new public health projects in his city. In 2007, Men’s Fitness magazine ranked Oklahoma City as one of the nation’s fattest, and Cornett, inspired by his own 40-pound weight loss, stood in front of the elephant cages at the zoo and declared, ‘This city is going on a diet.” Over the next few years, with the new federal cash infusion and other city revenues, Cornett helped build bike lanes and walking paths around the city, constructed an Olympic rowing complex and launched a website called “This City is Going on a Diet” to track OKC’s overall weight loss and provide healthy exercise and dieting tips. More than 47,700 people (around 8 percent of the city’s population) signed up for the site and, as of January 2012, had collectively lost more a million pounds. Thanks to these initiatives, along with Cornett’s efforts to bring Oklahoma City its first NBA team, Newsweek ranked Cornett one of the country’s five most innovative mayors in 2012. In the same year, Men’s Fitness moved OKC, one million pounds lighter, to its list of fittest cities.

***

Colorado Springs, Colorado

Population: 430,000

Conservative ranking: 4

In 2010, with the Great Recession eating into city tax revenue, the Colorado Springs government made headlines with drastic spending cuts, including turning off one-third of its traffic lights, selling the city police’s helicopters and even removing trashcans from local parks to avoid paying garbage collectors. Then-Mayor Lionel Rivera, who in 2010 turned down $42 million in federal jobs assistance on principal, replaced certain city services by using volunteers. Citizens were asked to sponsor streetlights for $100 a year or empty trash from parks. The city government also urged private swimming programs to manage city swimming pools and churches to run local community centers.

But, as Monica Potts argued in the American Prospect, Colorado Springs might be more dependent on government than citizens believe. The U.S. military employs one-fifth of Colorado Springs’ working population and the city’s successful aerospace industry receives a variety of government funds. “While conservatives like to gripe that government jobs don't inspire innovation in their workers,” Potts wrote, “they don't like to point out how many private-sector jobs are spurred by government spending.”

***

Aurora, Colorado

Population: 340,000

Conservative ranking: 10

Aurora—a growing suburb just outside Denver—is host to one of the 14 House races that POLITICO currently classifies as toss-ups. Just four of those 16 feature Republican incumbents—and one of them is Rep. Mike Coffman of Aurora. After the 2012 movie theater shooting in which a 24-year-old killed 12 people with a semi-automatic rifle and high-capacity magazines that had been banned by the federal government until 2004, Aurora became a national symbol for gun control activists. But Coffman did not support the Manchin-Toomey bill that would have expanded federally mandated background checks, a move that led to protests outside of his office. His opponent, Democrat Andrew Romanoff, backs the legislation.

Immigration has also become a major flashpoint in the race, due in part to a surge in the Hispanic population: Aurora was 28.7 percent Latino in 2010, compared with only 19.8 percent a decade earlier. Romanoff backs comprehensive immigration reform along the lines of the 2013 Senate bill, but Coffman would begin by securing the borders and would not offer a majority of undocumented immigrants a path to citizenship. At a recent debate Coffman contrasted his stance on immigration with Romanoff’s rather flippantly: “The difference is I lead, and you follow.”

***

Anchorage, Alaska

Population: 300,000

Conservative ranking: 11

Despite its relatively high per capita income ($34,565 in 2012 compared to the national average of $27,319), Alaska’s most populous city has been plagued by high violent crime rates in recent years, which many blame on the city’s methamphetamine problem. According to the FBI, Anchorage saw 837.7 violent crimes per 100,000 citizens in 2010, more than 10 percent higher than the national average for cities over 250,000 people, and the city’s rate of forcible rapes is nearly three times what it is in other large metropolises.

It’s no surprise, then, that violent crime has become an issue in the hotly contested 2014 Alaska Senate race. Incumbent Sen. Mark Begich (D) recently ran a television ad accusing his opponent, former Alaska Attorney General Dan Sullivan (R), of letting sex offenders off with light sentences, including one who went on to commit a particularly gruesome double murder and sexual assault. But the attack cuts both ways: Certain crime rates, including rape, increased during Begich’s tenure as mayor of Anchorage from 2003 to 2009. Begich pulled the ad amid accusations that the ad interfered in an ongoing trial.

***

Fresno, California

Population: 500,000

Conservative ranking: 13

Truth be told, there aren’t many conservative big cities left in the United States. Fresno, located approximately halfway between Los Angeles and San Francisco, is one of the country’s two neutral cities, neither conservative nor liberal, according to the MIT/UCLA study. It became a hotspot in the 2014 California gubernatorial race this summer when Neel Kashkari, the multimillionaire Republican candidate, posed as a homeless person and spent a week in the city looking for work and accepting donated food. The op-ed Kashkari wrote for the Wall Street Journal about his experience criticized his opponent, California Gov. Jerry Brown, and his Democratic cohorts for allegedly “willfully ignor[ing]” the millions of Californians living in poverty.

Fresno ranks among the most disadvantaged urban areas in California, suffering from pollution, health problems (with above-average rates of asthma and diabetes) and joblessness. The only problem for Kashkari: Fresno is governed by a Republican mayor, Ashley Swearengin, and has been GOP-led since long before the 2008 financial crisis. Swearengin refused to say that she’s voting for Kashkari when asked in late August at the Sacramento Press Club. She chose instead to emphasize “how well he was treated by everyone in the city” when he was posing as a homeless man.