You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

— The Apex Cougars (16-7, 10-4) defeated the Fuquay-Varina Bengals (16-7, 8-6) twice during the regular season, and they got a third win Saturday afternoon at home in the most important meeting yet.

The Cougars won in three games (25-17, 25-21, 25-23) and overcame two late deficits to eliminate the Bengals and advance to the second round of the N.C. High School Athletic Association 4-A state playoffs. Volleyball: Fuquay-Varina vs. Apex (Oct. 18, 2014)

After running away with the first game, the Cougars were in a five-point hole midway through the second before finishing the game on a 12-4 run. The Bengals led the majority of the third and final game, but again, Apex climbed back and finished on a 9-4 run to put the match away.

"This match was the story of our season," said Fuquay-Varina Head Coach Jeff Pagel. "All season long, Fuquay will get on a run, we'll beat them to 15, we'll beat them to 20, and then we just get complacent. Instead of taking control of those last four or five points, we just take a step back. We've done that all season."

Apex, entering the playoffs as the No. 12 seed in the 4-A East bracket, will face the winner of No. 5 Green Hope and No. 28 Ashley in the second round Tuesday. Fuquay-Varina was the No. 21 seed.

Apex's late-game rallies were fueled by the return of Abigail Veit, a junior outside hitter who was previously sidelined with an injury. Veit's offensive performance was instrumental in turning the Cougars around in the second game.

"We were able to switch things up a little bit because we had Abby back," said Apex Head Coach Emily Regan-Whitsett. "She only started practicing yesterday, so I was just trying to ease her in."

Apex's Allison Beckman recorded four kills in the second game to complement Veit and swing the momentum of the set.

In an error-ridden final game for both sides, Beckman, Anna Patrick and Hanna Hepburn each recorded kills during the final stretch to send Apex to the second round of the state playoffs for the seventh year in a row.

On defense, Apex's front line managed to counter Maddie and Morgan Sonnendecker, the Bengals' offensive leaders.

"Fuquay is a great team," Regan-Whitsett said. "I'm kind of glad we see them in the first round because they're such a good team and it gives us a little bit more of that competition going into the next round."

Pagel, who saw his team lose 3-1 and 3-0 to the Cougars during the regular season, said Saturday's playoff match was similar to the previous two meetings.

"In the first meeting we had with them, we beat them in the first game," he said. "The second and third games were close and in the fourth game we let up. The second time, it was the same thing."

While Green Hope and Ashley's first-round game had not started at the time of Apex's victory, Regan-Whitsett acknowledged the probability of another conference rematch in the second round of the postseason. The Cougars lost twice to Green Hope during the regular season.

"I think the girls are really excited for a revenge match," she said. "I'm okay with it. Green Hope is a good, strong team and I think the girls want it."

Follow Zach Mayo on Twitter at @ZachMayoHSOT