ANNAPOLIS, Md. - People sometimes get confused when Robi Rawl tells them she’s a social worker.

They usually expect her to be working in a clinical setting, she said.

Instead, she’s putting her years of experience as a teacher and a Peace Corps volunteer to work as the executive director of Sugar Free Kids Maryland, championing public policies that could help kids lead healthier lives.

“It takes all kinds of people to make change,” Rawl said.

Rawl draws on experiences she had volunteering in post-apartheid South Africa, where she and her husband served as educational consultants from 2007 through 2009. There, urban areas looked just like any other first-world city, she said.

But once you got outside those areas, there was no running water, people with little education and high rates of poverty.

“It was the very hard for those who had to see the other side of it,” Rawl said. “I can see that quality here. There are communities that don’t have access to basic things, like affordable water and healthy food.”

Sugar Free Kids Maryland is pushing for two bills during the 2015 legislative session, one that would remove the 6 percent sales tax from bottled water and another that would prohibit restaurants from automatically including sugary drinks with kids’ meals.

How to help: If you are interested in becoming involved in Sugar Free Kids Maryland or joining their coalition, go to www.sugarfreekidsmd.org . You can also attend the hearings on the bottled water bill, which are scheduled for 1 p.m. on Feb. 24 before the House, and 1 p.m. on Feb. 25 before the Senate. The hearings on sugary drinks in kids's meals will be held at 1 p.m. on March 3 before the House, and at 1 p.m. on March 12 before the Senate.

Rawl majored in anthropology and art history at the University of Maryland, with a focus on archeology in both disciplines. She also minored in international studies and Spanish language and literature, studying abroad in Spain before she graduated in 2000.

After college, she taught Spanish to middle schoolers before deciding to join the Peace Corps.

“South Africa was looking for experienced teachers,” she said.

It was an “eye-opening experience,” she said. While much progress has been made since the end of apartheid in 1994, the effects of decades of segregation linger in every level of society.

After her stint in the Peace Corps ended, Rawl decided she wanted to pursue a career in social work, believing change starts at the local level.

She pointed to the corner stores in many Baltimore neighborhoods, where many residents buy the bulk of their groceries. Even if they know which foods are more nutritious, that doesn’t matter if they don’t have access to a grocery store with a complete inventory of healthy foods.

RELATED: National report ranks Baltimore City as unhealthiest in state, food deserts contributing to problem

“No matter what kind of education you have, you’re limited to what’s in your neighborhood and how much money is in your wallet,” Rawl said.

After graduating with her master’s degree in social work, Rawl worked as a social work fellow with the Healthcare For All coalition, and worked on outreach related to the Affordable Care Act, the tobacco tax and tightening Maryland’s gun laws.

“If we want to make a change, we have to affect the underlying policies that affect everything else,” Rawl said.

Right now, that’s fighting for policies that help curtail the amount of sugar in children’s diets.

“We’re at the point now that if we don’t make any change, this generation of kids will live shorter lives than their parents,” she said.