The flight landed at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport at 8:16 p.m. Monday. Texas hospital leader 'deeply sorry'

A top official from the Texas hospital system that had the first Ebola case on U.S. soil will apologize for how it was handled before a congressional committee Thursday.

Daniel Varga, the chief clinical officer of Texas Health Resources, plans to tell a House subcommittee that he is “deeply sorry” for the mistakes that his hospital made in not correctly diagnosing Thomas Duncan. He will also say that Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas “inadvertently provided some information [to the public] that was inaccurate and had to be corrected.”

Story Continued Below

He plans to praise nurse Nina Pham — who was initially criticized for breaching safety protocol — as an “extremely skilled” nurse who used “full protective measures under the [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] protocols.” The hospital doesn’t know how she was exposed but is “poring over records and observations” to find the answers, his prepared testimony states.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama cancels trip for Ebola meeting)

Varga will also tell the committee that the hospital has changed its procedures to now immediately ask emergency department patients about their travel history. It will also implement more “proactive, intensive and focused training” for diagnosing the virus.

His remarks also mention the second hospital nurse who has become sick with Ebola, news that was announced Wednesday. Wednesday evening, Amber Vinson was flown to Emory University Hospital in Atlanta for treatment at its specialized biocontainment unit. Since August, Emory has treated three aid workers stricken with the disease while in West Africa.

Like Pham, who is hospitalized in Dallas with Ebola, Vinson provided care to Duncan, the Liberian national who died at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas a week ago. That hospital has become the focal point of Ebola in Dallas.

( Also on POLITICO: 2nd worker tests positive for Ebola)

The CDC is investigating how the virus spread in the hospital’s intensive care unit. CDC Director Tom Frieden said health care workers used protective gear inconsistently in the first few days after Duncan was admitted, before the Ebola diagnosis was confirmed. Several of them had “substantial contact” with him, and four are being monitored intensively.

Vinson flew on Frontier Airlines Flight 1143 from Cleveland to Dallas the night before she became ill, and although the risk that she spread the virus is “extremely low,” public health authorities are following up with passengers on the flight, Frieden told a briefing.

The woman “should not have flown” on a commercial flight while knowing she had come in contact with an Ebola patient, Frieden said.

( Also on POLITICO: In world of Ebola, no room for error)

President Barack Obama postponed a Wednesday campaign trip to New Jersey and Connecticut. He instead met with advisers to discuss the government’s response to Ebola.

Vinson’s infection is the third U.S. case of the disease. It is the second case transmitted in this country and only the third time the disease has been spread outside West Africa. A Spanish nursing assistant became infected in a Madrid hospital.

Authors: