Topics: AlterNet, Charter schools, Mark Zuckerberg, Public Education, Reed Hastings, Working Ahead News, Social News, Technology News, Media News, Business News, Life News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

There’s more evidence that the push to privatize traditional public schools across America is a pet project of Silicon Valley’s billionaire boy’s club.

On Tuesday, Netflix founder and CEO Reed Hastings announced on Facebook that he was creating a $100 million foundation to fund education, which mostly means bankrolling the charter school industry.

“I’m thrilled to announce that I’m funding a new $100m philanthropic fund for education, creatively named the Hastings Fund, through the Silicon Valley Community Foundation,” he wrote. “Neerav Kingsland is the CEO of this fund, and will donate these funds in the best way possible for kids’ education.”

While its first two grants are going to the United Negro College Fund and the Hispanic Foundation of Silicon Valley to support college education of black and Latino youth, Kingsland’s background is telling about Hastings’ priorities. He was CEO of New Schools for New Orleans, where more than 90 percent of the children attend charter schools, and is a senior fellow at the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, which over the past four years has given away $150 million to a range of players in the charter industry.

“The work ahead is really hard because we’re at 8 percent of students in California, whereas in New Orleans they’re at 90 percent, so we have a lot of catchup to do,” Hastings said in a profile last winter on EducationNext.org, created by the pro-privatization Hoover Institute. “So what we have to do is continue to grow and grow… It’s going to take 20 to 30 years to get to 90 percent of charter kids.”

There are many problems with charter public schools, according to traditional public school advocates. They are anti-democratic, often embracing secretive and unaccountable corporate-style governance. They are prone to fiscal corruption, often using taxpayer money to enrich top staff and business associates. (In California, which has the most charters in the nation, reports by pro-public education advocates found that fraudulent self-enrichment schemes were expected to cost taxpayers in excess of $100 million in 2015.) They vehemently oppose teachers’ unions and have a disdain for locally elected school boards. When it comes to academics, many—especially the largest chains—share an over-reliance on teaching for test scores and not addressing individual student needs.