10 public sector projects win GCN Awards for IT excellence

Ten government IT projects, showing the power of mobile technology to transform the government IT enterprise as well those designed to support agency program teams and public end users, took top honors in the 2014 GCN Awards for IT achievement.

This year’s winning GCN Award projects ranged from a system that streamlined obtaining protective orders for victims of physical abuse to a cost-saving mobile app by a self-taught Air Force dev team.

Kshemendra Paul, Program Manager of the Information Sharing Environment and chairman of this year’s panel of judges, noted how the winning projects illustrated a “balance of innovation” across federal, state and local jurisdictions.

Renee Wynn, CIO of the Environmental Protection Agency, said the projects also illustrated the “true power of mobile” in government. “It is revising processes, creating applications, modifying the way large systems are managed and deployed and how we do business,” she said.

In the aftermath of the 2013 roll out of the Affordable Care Act, health information technology caught the attention of the GCN Award judges this year, who selected two state health care insurance site launches that demonstrated the ability to withstand heavy transaction loads yet be responsive to users.

The judges this year picked a special project, the relocation of Naval Sea Systems Command offices in the aftermath of the 2013 Navy Yard shootings, in a tribute to those who lost their lives and in recognition of their NAVSEA colleagues who picked up the pieces after the tragedy.

This year’s award winners stood out because they “focused their attention on achieving mission outcomes for stakeholders and not just on the milestones to get there,” said PV Puvvada, Unisys Federal Systems acting president, one of eight judges of the GCN Awards this year.

Five other judges rounded out the panel for the awards, including:

Terry Halvorsen, Chief Information Officer, Department of Defense

Karen Jackson, Secretary of Technology, Commonwealth of Virginia

Mike Krieger, Deputy CIO, Department of the Army

Dan Chenok, Executive Director, IBM Center for the Business of Government

Adel Ebeid, Chief Innovation Officer, City of Philadelphia

The judges were asked to score the nominated projects on basis of the impact of the program on the agency or public, the innovation in the project technology plan and the quality of leadership in the team that carried the projects to fruition.

The winning projects and their teams will be featured in the October issue of GCN and honored at GCN’s annual awards gala dinner and reception at the Ritz Carlton, Tyson’s Corner on Oct. 14.

Here are the 2014 GCN Award winners, followed by a list 10 Honorable Mentions also picked by the judges.

Commercial Cloud PAO under DOD Security Model

Navy Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command (SPAWAR)

In 2011, the undersecretary of the Navy directed the department to cut its IT budget by 25 percent over the next five years. SPAWAR’ commercial integration team (CSI) addressed the mandate by enabling Navy to move low-impact information systems and functions to commercial cloud service providers.