MIAMI, Okla. — Immediately before the start of any boxing competition, the referee instructs participants to “protect yourself at all times.”

Trey Lippe Morrison may not have heard that advice. After the opening bell, the Vinita native was reckless and vulnerable during Saturday’s heavyweight fight — the first professional boxing experience for the son of the late Tommy Morrison.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

More intent on attacking than defending himself, Lippe Morrison was knocked down by Kris Renty during the first 30 seconds of the opening round. Lippe Morrison recovered and responded with flurries of power punches, overwhelming his Oklahoma City opponent until referee Gary Ritter stopped the contest at 1:48 of the second round.

“I’ve never had an adrenaline rush like that,” said the 24-year-old Lippe Morrison, whose debut fight attacted a sellout crowd of more than 1,000 to the Peoria Showplace at the Buffalo Run Casino.

By the two-minute mark of the opening round, Renty’s left eye was nearly swollen shut.

Lippe Morrison’s most consistently effective punch was a jarring right uppercut.

A former football player at Vinita High School and the University of Central Arkansas, Lippe Morrison’s fight experience had amounted to only one amateur bout.

The 21-year-old Renty now is 1-1 as a professional boxer. He has a background in mixed martial arts.

Morrison, who captured a world heavyweight title in 1993 and died last year at the age of 44, was known for action-packed fights and for occasional defensive flaws. Lippe Morrison’s fight was exactly that — a slugfest riddled with defensive mistakes.

“I give him a C,” said Mahcoe “Peppe” Johnson, Lippe Morrison’s trainer. “When he worked the jab, he controlled the fight.”

Johnson said Lippe Morrison may fight again within a month.

Lippe Morrison’s ring entrance was preceded by a video shown on screens in the arena. “My dad’s spirit will be with me tonight,” he said in the video. At ringside were scores of Lippe Morrison’s family members and friends.