You might say Jacob Epstein, a lean, healthy, 88-year-old Floridian, died in early May from a broken arm. Following surgery to reset the bone, he was given an antibiotic to prevent postoperative infection, a common hospital practice.

His daughter, Beth Fidanza, recalled that within a week her father developed diarrhea caused by a nasty intestinal bacterium called Clostridium difficile, or C. diff. Another antibiotic seemed to eradicate the disease, but a month later the gut infection recurred. Epstein was given another antibiotic, but within days developed a fatal combination of kidney failure, low blood pressure and gastrointestinal bleeding. Epstein’s demise was really the result of inappropriate use of antibiotics, which has given rise to a virulent, antibiotic-resistant strain of C. diff., an organism that causes close to 500,000 new cases and 30,000 deaths a year in the United States.

C. diff. is a spore-forming, toxin-producing bacterium that can colonize the large intestine and wreak havoc there, causing frequent watery stools and severe dehydration. The spores are resistant to heat, acid and antibiotics; they can be washed away with soap and water but not the alcohol-based hand sanitizers widely used in health facilities. Thus, poor bathroom hygiene can spread the organism.

Dr. Dale N. Gerding, an infectious diseases specialist at Loyola University Chicago, said in an interview: “C. diff. is found in soil and water, even chlorinated water, and is a low-level contaminant in food. Most of us ingest C. diff. every day.”

In most people, the microorganisms that normally reside in the gut protect against C. diff. infection, he explained. That is, until antibiotics disrupt the healthy balance of microorganisms. Freed of competition, C. diff spores can germinate and reproduce unchecked, and not only in people with compromised immune systems.

Since the early 2000s, hospitals have reported drastic increases in severe C. diff. infections, Dr. Daniel A. Leffler and Dr. J.

Thomas Lamont of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston reported in the journal. The predominant virulent strain, NAP1, has a mortality rate three times as high as that associated with the less virulent forms most prevalent in decades past.

“The most important risk factor for C. difficile infection remains antibiotic use,” the doctors wrote.

Gerding said most antibiotics “are being used inappropriately, for things like upper respiratory infections that are caused by viruses.”

Eating yogurt or taking commercially available probiotics while on an antibiotic have not proved protective, he said. But in England, where a program of more judicious use of antibiotics was put into effect, C. diff. infections have declined.

The risk and severity of a C. diff. infection, and the risk of a recurrence, rises with age. In a study of an outbreak in a Quebec hospital, people over 65 were 10 times as likely as younger patients to become infected. Even after infected individuals recover, about 5 percent continue to harbor the toxic strain in their stool for six months, and if they take another antibiotic during that time, the illness can recur, Gerding said.

The good news, he said, is that new treatment approaches are proving capable of preventing recurrences, and may be able to prevent an initial infection in the future.

This month in JAMA, Gerding and his colleagues described treatment using a nontoxin-producing strain of C. diff. in patients who initially recovered from an infection. While not a permanent solution, the strain persists in the intestine long enough to allow the normal healthy microbiota to repopulate the gut and greatly reduce the risk of a recurrence.

A more permanent solution now under study involves an injectable antitoxin vaccine. Because it can take weeks to months for vaccine protection to take effect, one of the temporary measures could be used in the interim, Gerding said.