WASHINGTON — Michelle Obama has written the recipe for the worst Thanksgiving ever.

The first lady is calling on supporters to serve up a huge helping of pro-ObamaCare propaganda to their families as they sit down for their holiday feasts.

Obama wants loyal Dems to lambaste their kin over dinner with 14 health-care talking points — from hectoring them about signing up to lecturing them on the plan’s benefits to asking that they even bring their W2 tax forms to dinner,

“As you spend time with loved ones this holiday season, be sure to talk with them about what health care reform can mean to them,” Obama wrote in an e-mail to backers.

One of America’s top manners experts, however, said anyone who tries to follow this White House advice will be as welcome at dinner as dry turkey.

“They are effectively hijacking a holiday that’s really about giving thanks and not about having heavy, heavy conversations like this,” said Thomas P. Farley, the etiquette guru known as Mister Manners.

“This is a whole lot of potentially fractious conversation — arguments stirring up — that I think is best kept for an occasion other than Thanksgiving.”

The first lady’s tips are being offered on a Web site run by he president’s political arm, Organizing for Action, called “Health Care for the Holidays.” They are meant to “get the ball rolling” on a campaign to push ObamaCare.

”Don’t wait until the last minute — be sure to start the conversation early!” the site says. ”Integrate the talk into family time: Take advantage of downtime after meals or between holiday activities to start your talk.”

The site says advise kin to “find a quiet place to shop” for a health policy, which is good advice considering the troubles plaguing the official ObamaCare Web site.

The “Holidays” site also suggests Democrats pointedly ask loved ones, “When do you plan on signing up?”

It also says, ”Don’t forget to follow up.”

The Web site recommends more than just talk. It advises people to tell loved ones actually to bring along their financial data to the dinner table.

Social Security numbers, pay stubs or recent W2 forms to verify income, as well as current health- insurance cards, are deemed Thanksgiving necessities.

Because young, healthy uninsured Americans are a key target audience, there’s even a video on the Web site to show parents how to get their kids who are over 26 interested.

Mrs. O’s call to talk turkey was carved up by Republicans.

“Thanksgiving is a time to be thankful and to be with family – not a time to discuss a misguided health-care plan,” said Rep. Ted Yoho (R-Fla.)

Meanwhile, President Obama engaged in another Thanksgiving ritual Wednesday, the ceremonial pardon of two turkeys.

“The office of the presidency — the most powerful position in the world — brings with it many awesome and solemn responsibilities,” Obama joked on the North Portico of the White House. “This is not one of them.”