U.S. Rep. Jared Polis said he had a “pleasant” exchange on the floor of the Colorado House with a controversial Colorado Springs Republican who last summer accused the “openly homosexual congressman” of wanting to join Islamic terrorists and behead Christians.

Likewise, state Rep. Gordon Klingenschmitt, who took office in January, called their encounter Thursday “very positive” and said he felt “joyful” about it.

State Rep. Perry Buck, the wife of Congressman Ken Buck, introduced the pair before Gov. John Hickenlooper delivered his fifth State of the State address in the House chamber. Both Polis and Klingenschmitt confirm their discussion centered on Klingenschmitt’s other job — he’s a pastor whose comments have attracted national attention — and the difficulty of separating the various hats elected officials wear.

“It was a pleasant exchange. It was nice to finally meet him,” Polis said. “Maybe now he won’t call me a terrorist again.”

Both lawmakers were asked what they talked about. Klingenschmitt provided a lengthy explanation via e-mail, which Polis said was an accurate reflection except for one part.

Klingenschmitt, who has compared President Barack Obama to a demon on his religious television show and claimed Obamacare causes cancer, was thrust into the spotlight in June after he won his primary race in a GOP-heavy district. Other Republicans moved to distance themselves from Dr. Chaps, as he calls himself.

Klingenschmitt in August was critical of Polis’ support for legislation that would prohibit discrimination in hiring and employment on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.

“The open persecution of Christians is underway. Democrats like Polis want to bankrupt Christians who refuse to worship and endorse his sodomy. Next he’ll join ISIS in beheading Christians, but not just in Syria, right here in America,” Klingenschmitt said.

Klingenschmitt then filmed a video in which he “half-heartedly apologized, saying that he was merely using hyperbole and some Democrats do not have a sense of humor,” according to the group Right Wing Watch.

Klingenschmitt said Polis appeared “cheerfully surprised” when Buck introduced them, “saying something like, ‘So this is Dr. Chaps, who wears two hats.'”

“He was referring to my two roles as TV preacher on Sundays and state rep Monday through Friday,” the state lawmaker said. “If I recall properly, I said to Jared, ‘Wow, it’s an honor to meet you, sir. I admire your political courage, and despite our obvious theological differences, you take such bold stands. May I take a photo with you?”

Buck took their picture and others joined in, including Sen. Pat Steadman, D-Denver, who is gay. Steadman posted his shot on Twitter.

annual State of the State speech brings all Coloradans together, incl Reps. Polis & Klingenshmitt. #copolitics #coleg pic.twitter.com/xxt2hDBQGc — Pat Steadman (@PatSteadman) January 15, 2015

“We made small chit-chat, nothing controversial I think, but at one point he gave me some advice, which I paraphrase to the best of my memory,” Klingenschmitt said.

“Jared said, ‘You know, I’m not sure you can successfully continue your TV show as a Sunday preacher and also be a state representative during the week. You’ve got to realize you’re still a state representative seven days a week.’ To which I replied, ‘Yes, but I’m also perhaps the only ordained minister in my Republican caucus here, and my identity as a chaplain also follows me seven days a week, so I do have two roles in life, and I can’t easily give up one at the expense of the other.”

Klingenschmitt said Polis questioned whether he could continue his TV show.

“I answered, ‘You might be trying to give me good political advice, so maybe I should say ‘thank you.’ However, I feel I should not forsake my identity as a minister, or stop believing and preaching the Bible on Sundays, just because I got elected,” Klingenschmitt said.

He said the congressman implied the pastor should keep doing what he has been doing “or words to that effect.”

On this point, Polis disagrees.

“I don’t think that I implied that he ‘should keep doing what you’re doing.’ I just offered advice in a friendly context that what he did on weekends as Dr. Chaps would reflect on the perception of him as a legislator and there is no way to separate the two.

“You can’t really have a secret alter ego,” Polis said.