In this largely rural church between the Cascades and the Rocky Mountains, Roman Catholics say Chicago's next archbishop steered his own course — even when it meant risking offense or contradicting other U.S. bishops.

Bishop Blase Cupich's bold efforts to direct the Spokane Diocese after it had emerged from bankruptcy included a malpractice lawsuit against the law firm that handled the legal proceedings, a move that drew praise from some but criticism from others who saw it as an attack on his predecessor.

He launched an effort to enroll thousands of eastern Washington's poor in health care under the Affordable Care Act, despite the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops' opposition to the law's contraception mandate.

And, shortly after arriving in Spokane, he would not endorse curbside vigils outside abortion clinics, which drew the ire of local opponents of abortion rights.

"This guy is not lukewarm about anything," said Rob McCann, executive director of the local Catholic Charities, the diocese's social ministry arm. "He's a guy that doesn't shy from a fight, and that's exactly what the Catholic Church needs."

When Cupich arrived in 2010, the diocese of 90,000 parishioners was on the brink of losing properties, including its cathedral, said the Rev. Darrin Connall, rector of the Cathedral of Our Lady of Lourdes in Spokane.

"That was a pretty dark time, and, frankly, I think it was touch-and-go," Connall said. "It was a nervous time for all of us."

Chicago Catholics react to selection for new Archbishop CBS 2's Jeremy Ross talked to some parishioners before Sunday Mass in Bridgeport. CBS 2's Jeremy Ross talked to some parishioners before Sunday Mass in Bridgeport. See more videos

Although the diocese emerged from bankruptcy in 2008, the church was still mired in ongoing legal struggles related to unresolved sex abuse claims.

Morale, according to many in the diocese, had reached an all-time low.

From the beginning, Cupich focused on untangling the legal mess, according to some pastors within the diocese, who praised his shrewd administrative skills.

At the same time, those within the diocese said his rigorous work ethic drove various outreach efforts that helped rally the congregation.

He started the Nazareth Guild, which raises and distributes money to the area's cash-strapped Catholic schools and has widely been viewed as a success within the church.

And in a pastoral letter released last week, he called on priests and parishioners to devote the next four years to renewing evangelization and liturgy and making the church more welcoming.

"His legacy is the momentum from a time of darkness to a time of great hope and enthusiasm, in just four years," McCann said. "And in the cycle of the Catholic Church, where everything moves at prehistoric speeds, that's amazing."

McCann said he also was struck by Cupich's dedication to the many migrant farmworkers who live in the area — people he said Cupich considered to be among the area's poorest and most vulnerable.

McCann recalled that after a destructive wildfire ripped through the area, Cupich traveled three hours to one of the farmworker camps and held Mass, staying late into the evening to talk to the men, women and children afterward.

Cupich saw the Affordable Care Act as another way to provide the poor with health care, even though the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops had taken a stance against it.

"Bishop Cupich's response was to march into my office and say, 'Rob, you sign up as many poor and vulnerable low-income people as you can,'" said McCann, who said they eventually helped to enroll some 40,000 people during the first enrollment period.

The Rev. Mike Savelesky, the diocese's vicar general for internal matters, said Cupich's successes have been very much tied to his discipline as a leader and expectation that others within the diocese would rise to the occasion as well.

Savelesky recalled when Cupich was relatively new that he had tasked an adjunct ministry in the diocese with putting on a major fundraiser.

As the time of the fundraiser got closer, Savelesky said it became obvious that the ministry had not put in enough work to pull off a quality event.

Instead of proceeding on a smaller scale, Cupich called the whole thing off.

"He doesn't believe in this privileged clerical class that can get by with whatever because they're priests, bishops or deacons or chancery officials," Savelesky said. "He expects high personal integrity."

Some parishioners, however, have not appreciated his approach.

Shortly after he arrived in Spokane, he caused a stir with abortion rights opponents by declining to endorse their curbside vigils outside clinics. His opposition also prevented local priests from participating, local activists said.

In a posting on the diocesan website, officials acknowledged that Cupich met with the group and that he believed the political environment around abortion had become "very toxic and polarizing." He instead endorsed an education model that asked priests to "create new openings for learning and reduce obstacles."

He also shocked many in 2012 when he filed a malpractice lawsuit against the firm that had represented the diocese and his predecessor, Bishop William Skylstad, in the bankruptcy. As part of the settlement, the firm had negotiated the establishment of a $48 million trust for victims, including $1 million for any future claims.

Cupich accused the lawyers of botching the bankruptcy by failing to financially prepare the diocese for future claims.

Some parishioners said they were angered by the move, viewing it as a direct attack on Skylstad. They said they didn't see the need to rehash a difficult and painful time for the diocese.

"He's not my favorite," said parishioner Charlie Thomas, 77, of Cupich. "I don't like the way he took off against the old bishop."

Parishioner Maura Dixon, who said she knows one of the lawyers in the lawsuit, said she felt Skylstad was "more available to the people" and that Cupich's lawsuit was unnecessary.

"It was a terrible time, and this just brings it all up again," Dixon said. "It has been quite divisive."

Skylstad said the lawsuit "did not break" his relationship with Cupich.

"People come in and have different viewpoints, and they have a right to have those viewpoints, especially as the diocese's bishop," Skylstad said. "I thought we did the best job we could do under the circumstances."

But many in the church have supported the lawsuit, describing Cupich's tenure as unifying and Cupich as the kind of able and approachable leader that the church needed during difficult times.

"He stood up for us," said parishioner Colleen Anderson, 53.