When the votes were counted and D.C. Council member Muriel E. Bowser huddled with supporters Thursday evening, thanking them for delivering a straw-poll victory in Anacostia, some in the crowd awash in her campaign’s trademark green had just packed away signs of another color.

Red-white-and-blue placards, fliers and T-shirts paid for by a mystery group appeared in some of the District’s most impoverished neighborhoods east of the Anacostia River on Thursday — areas that Bowser (D-Ward 4) is counting on in her bid to win the mayoral election Nov. 4.

The signs blared messages denouncing the candidate whom polls identify as Bowser’s chief opponent, council member David A. Catania (I-At Large), and his “war against the poor.” The main message — “DC CITIZENS AGAINST CATANIA” — was not accompanied by a line indicating who paid for the signs, as required under city election laws.

Joaquin McPeek, a spokesman for Bowser, said Saturday that the Democratic nominee’s campaign has nothing to do with the signs. A dozen people who wore the T-shirts and held the signs outside the final mayoral debate at Anacostia High School on Thursday evening would not say who provided them.

At least three people who held the signs are active in the District in promoting rights of ex-offenders, or “returning citizens,” as advocates and city officials prefer to call them.

The groups have coalesced behind Bowser in recent weeks, several said, after a teleconference with the candidate that several participated in about a month ago. Several said that Bowser had also promised to take seriously the challenges that returning citizens face, such as high unemployment and affordable housing.

Eddie Moton, an organizer for ex-offenders, pulled a blue anti-Catania­ T-shirt over his head as voters began to arrive at the debate and chanted, “Citizens against Catania.” Two others wore the shirts over green Bowser tops that they already were wearing.

By the end of the evening, Moton stood beside Yango Sawyer, a well-known advocate for several returning-citizen groups, including Families of Returned and Returning Citizens. Both Sawyer and Moton stood in Bowser’s circle of supporters after the straw-poll results were announced, cheering and wearing green.

“A lot of individuals here tonight are individuals who came out as a result of mobilizing, organizing,” Sawyer said. “We got people throughout the city, man, energized in our population so we can make a difference in this election year. We feel as if our voice has to be heard and Bowser is the best candidate for our issues.”

Asked whether he or his groups were paying for the anti-Catania­ messages, Sawyer said only that those holding the signs represented “more than just returning citizens.”

As the straw poll was underway, Debra Rowe, the longtime director of Returning Citizens United, passed out a mock ballot with pictures of a man and women, one wearing a shirt that read “EX-FELON,” and the other wearing one that read “do u count?” The ballot, which listed Rowe and Sawyer as contacts, urged returning citizens to vote for Bowser because, among other reasons, she would “increase funding for the Office of Returning Citizen Affairs.”

Rowe, who backed Andy Shallal during the Democratic primary, said she was won over by Bowser in the spring after conversations with the candidate about the need to focus more on the plight of returning citizens.

“After a conversation with her, she said, ‘I’ve had to step back and take a look at myself, especially with all the criticism,’ and she’s going to do better,” Rowe said.

Rowe and Catania have a bitter history. Ben Young, Catania’s campaign manager, called the illegal attack ads “more of the same underhanded stuff we have seen for years. . . . And why voters are going to stop voting business as usual.”

Two other advocates for returning citizens pointed to Sawyer as the lead organizer, including Ronald L. Moten, co-founder of the anti-violence youth group Peaceoholics, which a judge recently ruled had misused city grant funding.

Moten said he knew of some returning-citizen advocates who were swayed by Bowser after their teleconference with her a little over a month ago.

“She’s agreed to sit down and talk with the population after the election, including on one thing that I want to see which is entrepreneurship, where we will be empowered, not just through the office of returning citizens, but through the city’s” employment office “to connect returning citizens with jobs,” he said.

Bowser campaign officials said last week that there was no campaign event with returning citizen groups, but McPeek said Saturday that there was a call between Bowser and the groups in late August.

“Muriel Bowser has brought many groups together to discuss their issues. This is nothing different,” McPeek said.

Bowser and Catania have promised in their campaign platforms to expand jobs programs for returning citizens. Bowser on Friday also spent several minutes discussing returning citizens in a teleconference at a town hall for women’s issues. “This is an issue for men and women,” Bowser said. “There are women taking care of men” returning to our communities.

Returning-citizens groups have scheduled a news conference Monday outside the D.C. elections office, in part to demand same-day registration this fall in the D.C. jail.

Under some of the country’s most liberal voting rights laws, more types of convicted criminals are eligible to vote in the District than nearly anywhere else: felons, parolees, probationers and even those in jail awaiting sentencing or serving out misdemeanor sentences.

A widely cited study from 2011 put the number of D.C. residents with a criminal record at 1 in 10. It remains unclear how many vote. One returning-citizen group says it has registered 2,600 voters this year.