WASHINGTON — John W. Gardner, a cabinet secretary in President Lyndon Johnson’s administration who later founded Common Cause, once said that a requisite for effective citizen action, and governing, was to build an “inside-outside alliance.”

In American politics, that means an effective outside citizen movement coupled with resourceful inside political operatives. It’s a shame that the makers of “Selma,” a fabulous movie about the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the brutal road to the passage of the Voting Rights Act in 1965, did not appreciate this.

The film is the best depiction of the civil rights struggle of the 1960s, and was long overdue. But it needlessly, and erroneously, casts Johnson as a reluctant supporter of the Voting Rights Act, which gave blacks the franchise they were shamefully denied in Southern states.

In the film, Johnson relents only after pressure from Dr. King, who picked the small town of Selma, Ala., as the focal point of a voting rights drive; the white community responded by viciously beating, even killing, advocates.

In fact, Johnson, after succeeding the slain President John F. Kennedy, became a passionate advocate of civil rights. After passage of the Civil Rights Act in 1964, which desegregated public facilities, he embraced the 1965 voting rights bill, endorsing it in his State of the Union address two months before Selma.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Johnson and Dr. King differed sometimes on tactics, but never on objectives.

“We could not have had this bill without L.B.J., but L.B.J. could not have passed it without Martin Luther King,” said Andrew Young, a King lieutenant in Selma and later United Nations ambassador and mayor of Atlanta.

Mr. Gardner’s inside-outside alliance is central to governing. James Baker’s appreciation of this reality is why he remains the gold standard for the post of White House chief of staff; he always balanced the public mood with the necessary legislative deal-making to push through President Ronald Reagan’s agenda.

The George W. Bush administration, with the strategist Karl Rove, flunked that test when, after winning re-election, it made Social Security reform the top priority and tried to rally public support. The failure to get on board any important congressional Democrats — the necessary inside alliance — set the domestic tone for the rest of the administration.

In 2009, President Obama’s team made the reverse mistake. They became so immersed in deal-making on the huge economic stimulus and later the Affordable Care Act that they forgot about the outside alliance.

Today, most economists say the stimulus measure helped pull the United States out of an economic crisis. The health care program, judging by enrollment and costs, is faring far better than critics expected. Yet both measures remain unpopular.

The King-Johnson alliance was strong. The president knew he needed the civil rights leader to drum up public outrage. He had a larger agenda, the Great Society, and most of its programs also benefited poor minority groups.

The film depicts John Doar, the head of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division in the Selma era, as a bit of a wimp. This is the same John Doar who, when told there might be snipers in Selma, walked down Dexter Avenue scanning for shooters. He showed extraordinary courage in the civil rights struggle.

Nevertheless, the film is powerful, bringing to life Dr. King’s genius, bravery and perseverance. It is hard to believe he was only 36 at the time of the march. The venom of the white racists in Selma is rendered just as vividly.

Joseph A. Califano Jr., a top Johnson aide, has documented the movie’s distortions, a view shared by many historians. He also urged people not to see the movie.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That is wrong. You should see this movie, and know the story of Selma’s Edmund Pettus Bridge. That was brought home to me by my 25-year-old apolitical daughter, Lauren: “Seeing it is a lot different than reading about it.”