AURORA — City manager Skip Noe, the City Council and the mayor met Monday afternoon in an executive session to hash out concerns that Noe treats women on the Aurora council differently than the men.

While the group met for nearly two hours, they did not come up with a resolution. Officials could not discuss what was talked about in the closed-door session.

Councilwoman Sally Mounier said the discussion was “very good” but added there is not a set date when they will talk about the issue again.

“We did not have enough time,” Mounier said. “We need to talk more.”

Mayor Steve Hogan said having an outside facilitator present helped move along the meeting.

“We started some discussion that could have been held before,” Hogan said. “I think it was valuable.”

Noe declined to comment, and the topic did not come up at the regular City Council meeting later Monday night.

During the Jan. 26 City Council meeting, five female council members — Mounier, Barb Cleland, Molly Markert, Renie Peterson and Marsha Berzins — voted in favor of having a no-confidence vote added to the regular council agenda. But the measure needed eight votes to place it on the agenda and it failed.

Since then, some of the women have said Noe is condescending to them, yells at them and treats them differently compared to their male counterparts.

“He treats us like we’re hysterical females and we should sit down and take three Midol,” Mounier said last week.

Noe told The Denver Post last week that he hoped all sides could work things out, and that if the majority on the council support him continuing in his role as city manager, he intends to do so after running the city for four years.

Noe’s fate is even more significant given that Aurora, unlike Denver, is not a strong form of mayoral government; the city manager runs the day-to-day operations. Also of note is the November election, when the dynamic of the City Council could change dramatically. Five of the 10 council seats are up for grabs, as well as the mayor’s position.

Carlos Illescas: 303-954-1175, cillescas@denverpost.com or twitter.com/cillescasdp