WASHINGTON — Gov. Chris Christie said Pope Francis should not have helped broker a renewal of diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba.

"I just think the Pope is wrong," Christie said on Sunday on CNN's "State of the Union." "His infallibility is on religious matters, not on political ones."

Christie, who is seeking the Republican presidential nomination, said it was "outrageous" that President Obama agreed to restore relations with Cuba without first insisting on the extradition of Joanne Chesimard, who escaped from prison after being sentenced in the killing of a New Jersey state trooper.

The fact that Obama "could extend diplomatic relations with that country without getting her returned so she can serve the prison sentence that she was sentenced to by a jury of her peers in New Jersey, is outrageous," Christie said. "And so I just happen to disagree with the pope on this one."

RELATED: Christie's strong debate performance fails to register in CNN poll

Christie won praise for his performance in last Wednesday's debate, but a CNN/ORC International poll released Sunday showed that he got no bounce in the polls afterwards. He was in ninth place with 3 percent, while businessman Donald Trump led with 24 percent and former Hewlett-Packard chief executive Carly Fiorina came in second with 15 percent.

The governor criticized both candidates during the debate for talking about themselves, not what they were going to do for Americans, and returned to that theme on Sunday.

Their attitude was, "Look at me, look at me., it's all about me," Christie said. "It should be about the people out in the audience and about their problems and their concerns. And that's what the American people really want to hear from us on. How are we going to help them fix their problems?"

Also on the program, Christie said the Republican-controlled Congress should be passing bills to defund Planned Parenthood, overhaul the tax code, and repeal the Affordable Care Act. Three of his GOP presidential opponents sit in Congress, U.S. Sens. Ted Cruz of Texas, Rand Paul of Kentucky and Marco Rubio of Florida.

"We gave them majorities in 2010 in the House and then in 2014 in the Senate, and they have done nothing with them," Christie said. "They need to do some things. Now, if the president is going to veto them, that's the president's choice. But at least then the American people will know who the obstructionist is. We look like we're obstructionists now, as Republicans, by getting nothing done and making excuses."

MORE POLITICS

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.