An e-cigarette is a battery-powered device that heats a solution containing nicotine into a vapor that users inhale. (Photo: Rod Millington for USA TODAY)

Last year, 10% of high school students say they tried e-cigarettes, up from 4.7% in 2011, according to a CDC survey released Thursday. Comments from Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

Teens shouldn't be smoking anything or drinking anything (drug related) anyway. E-cigarettes are made for adults, not people who still have a developing brain.

— John Alton

They are not as deadly as real cigarettes. Nicotine is a poison, yes, but it is not what causes death in cigarette smokers. The tar and other chemicals in traditional cigarettes are more harmful.

— Jonah Henry

These could be more addictive than regular cigarettes. They have much more concentrated doses of nicotine. Nicotine increases the risk of heart disease.

— Danny Blaney

Smoke-free cigarettes are the way to go. Besides, if high-school and middle-school students are using them, perhaps we should look at the parents and hold them accountable. Why do we continue to blame the manufacturer of a product instead of the user? Products are made because people buy them: supply and demand.

Take away the demand, and the supply will follow.

— Joe Salvatore

The store selling these e-cigarettes looks like a Baskin-Robbins. And that is only part of it. Given the assortment of trendy colors to choose from, I'll bet a closer look at the teen demographics would reveal a majority are sold to girls.

The tobacco industry knows exactly what it is doing.

— Teri Jo

Give me a break! What is there to regulate with e-cigs? There is no smoke so banning it indoors is ridiculous. A lot of e-cigarette users do not even use the nicotine liquids, just flavors.

We have a product that is hurtful to the person using, no-one else. Why regulate it? Coffee is more harmful to people around others (one might spill it) than e-cigs.

— Karin Jared

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1fOgal6