MONDAY 29TH SEPTEMBER 2014

Dance and Cafe Culture: a new exhibition of work by Andrew Fitzpatrick, Norma Maclean, Peter Nardini, Chris Taylor, Nichola Martin and Maggie Vance. 11am-5pm Monday to Friday, 10am-1pm Saturdays, closed Sundays, The Edinburgh Gallery, Dundas Street. Until 24th October 2014.

Muirhouse Children’s Gardening Club: meet at the library every Monday for gardening activities with Declan and Valla. 3.30pm, Muirhouse Library, 15 Pennywell Court.

From Grez to Giverny: American Artists’ Colonies. Francis Fowle, curator of American Impressionism: A New Vision, will discuss the American artists who worked out of doors at the picturesque village of Grez-sur-Loing in the Ile de France or settled in the village of Giverny in Normandy, close to Monet’s house. 12.45-1.30pm, Hawthornden Lecture Theatre, National Gallery of Scotland, The Mound. Free and unticketed.

The African Queen: a classic set in Africa in World War One. Humphrey Bogart won an Oscar for his role as a hard-drinking riverboat captain who provides passage for a missionary spinster (Katherine Hepburn.) Shown as part of Gorgie War Memorial’s First World War Commemoration. 6.30-8.45pm, St Bride’s Community Centre, Orwell Road. Free.

Confucius Week: to celebrate the recent opening of the Scottish Confucius Institute for Business and Communication and to mark Confucius Day on 27th September, Heriot-Watt University is holding a Confucius Week. The week will showcase Chinese culture, language, food and arts, the university’s links with China and the opportunities the Institute offers for further engagement with China, through a programme of free events. Today to 3rd October 2014, Heriot-Watt University Edinburgh Campus: see website for more information and details of events.

Knitting Club: beginners more than welcome! 6.30pm today and every Monday, Granton Library, Wardieburn Terrace.

60+ Lunch Club: come along, have lunch, play carpet bowls or bingo, and socialise. Today and every Monday, 11am-3pm, Gilmerton Community Centre, 4 Drum Street. Also available on Tuesdays and Fridays at same times.

Toddler Time @ The Cameo: specially designed to introduce children to the big screen, featuring 30 minute shows for pre-school children, their parents and carers. This week: Timmy Time Programme 13 – Timmy’s Truck and Other Adventures. 11am, Cameo Cinema, Home Street, Tolcross. £3 per child, accompanying adults free if they join Toddler Time – ask at the Box Office or call 0871 902 5747. Babies under 1 year go free. No adult unaccompanied by a todder will be admitted.

Monday Social Club: a social afternoon for adults and older people. Bingo is played and tea and coffee are available. 1-3pm today and every Monday, Craigentinny Community Centre, 9 Loaning Road. 50p per session. For more information call the Centre on 0131 661 8188.

The Big Band: The Jazz Bar’s 17-Piece Big Band – four trumpets, four trombones, five saxes and four rhythm (personnel vary weekly) ‘absolutely fantastic arrangements.’ Open rehearsal 8-9pm (entry from 7.30pm), gig 9-10.45pm tonight and every Monday, The Jazz Bar, Chambers Street. Entry £5/£4, cash on door only.

TUESDAY 30TH SEPTEMBER 2014

Little Ducks Club for parents and toddlers: stories, singing, crafting and playing, with free snacks for children. All welcome. 9.30-11am every Tuesday, St Andrew’s and St George’s West Church (meet in Chapel in Undercroft Cafe), 13 George Street. For more information call Angela Grant on 0131 225 3847.

Edinburgh Inter-Faith Assocation (EIFA) Annual Lecture on Gandhi Day: a talk by author and historian Anthony Copley. Afghan Peace Volunteers will join the meeting via Skype, the Lord Provost will speak, there will be a Q & A session, and local musicians will perform. A reception will follow hosted by the Lord Provost. 6-8.30pm, City Chambers, 253 High Street. Free places should be booked via eventbrite. ‘There are many causes that I am prepared to die for, but no causes I am prepared to kill for.‘ Mahatma Gandhi.

American Impressionists in the Garden: garden historian Caroline Holmes will explore European gardens painted by Sargent in France, Italy and England, together with those by Hassam, Cassatt, Chase, Freiseke and the American colony at Giverny. 12.45-1.30pm, Hawthornden Lecture Theatre, National Gallery of Scotland, The Mound. Free and unticketed.

Prospects of Climate Justice: Scottish Parliament Cross-Party Group on International Development. Prospects of international agreement on limiting climate change depend on COP talks in Paris in 2015. Will they succeed? Will the poorest people and nations be protected? And what can Scotland do to aid success? This event is open to the public through pre-registration. 5.30-7pm, Scottish Parliament, Horses Wynd. Email sarah.boyack.msp@scottish.parliament.uk or info@ewjf.org.uk to register. Part of Edinburgh World Justice Festival.

Air Pollution and Heart Attacks: Our Changing World lecture by Professor David Newby. Air pollution is one of the leading causes of heart attacks and death worldwide. Prof Newby will discuss the size of the problem, the scientific evidence and ways to reduce the risks. 6-8pm, Appleton Tower (Lecture Theatre 4), University of Edinburgh, 11 Crichton Street. Free tickets should be booked via eventbrite.

John Hunt’s After Work Blues: acoustic/electric blues by singer/guitarist John Hunt with his amazing hand-built guitars. ‘Gritty, funky boogie-woogie from a master of blues slide-guitar‘ (Evening News) 6.30-8.30pm, The Jazz Bar, Chambers Street. Free entry before 8pm.

eBook surgery: get help with downloading free eBooks, emagazines and audiobooks. 2-3.30pm, Central Library, George IV Bridge. No appointment necessary.central lib

Cafe Ceilidh: a friendly session concentrating mostly on Scottish traditional or more modern songs and tunes, but appreciative of other songs, music and poetry too. Hosted by members of Linten Adie, a group which grew out of Scots Music Group’s daytime singing classes and now meets at St Bride’s. Singers and musicians from Scots Music Group and non-members who would like to perform or just enjoy listening all welcome. A confidence builder for those who are new to performing and fun for the more experienced. For more information contact Mary on 01573 223515 or email mary.m.watt@gmail.com. 1.30-3.30pm, St Bride’s Community Centre, Orwell Road. Free.

Life in Progress: Image Theatre. An exciting introduction to Image Theatre and the work of Brazilian director Augusto Boal. Explore the themes of discrimination and stigma using a variety of fun drama techniques. Includes a showcase of work-in-progress from LGBT Health and Wellbeing Drama Group. 4-8pm, South Side Community Centre, 117 Nicolson Street. Free but booking required: email emily@health-in-mind.org.uk. Part of Scottish Mental Health Arts and Film Festival 2014.

Lunchtime Concert: Uli Fenner (violin), Robin Mason (cello) and Peter Evans (piano) perform Schubert’s Piano Trio in B flat D898. 1.10pm, Reid Concert Hall, Bristo Square, University of Edinburgh. Free.

WEDNESDAY 1ST OCTOBER 2014

Luminate Scotland: Colin Gray: a journey with his parents through life, love and death. A selection of works documenting Colin Gray’s 34 year collaborative journey with his parents. Including work from The Parents series which started in 1980, from In Sickness and In Health photographs that explore his parents’ older age and his mother’s death, and a preview of new work from Do Us Part, his ongoing series of images of his father and daughter. Part of To Absent Friends, a people’s festival of storytelling and remembrance. 10am-4pm Monday to Saturday from today until 7th November 2014, North Edinburgh Arts, 15a Pennywell Road. Luminate is Scotland’s Creative Ageing Festival.

Go home and sit still! The Scottish Women’s Hospitals in the First World War. Chris Short tells the story of the women who braved deprivation, disease and war to provide a high standard of nursing care during the Great War. Elsie Inglis offered a 100-bed hospital unit staffed by women to be deployed anywhere in the war zone. The courage and tenacity of doctors, nurses, orderlies , drivers, cooks and administrators in the Scottish Women’s Hospitals won them the respect of civilians and the military, and their work influenced legislation that is still relevant today. 6pm, National Library of Scotland, George IV Bridge. Free but booking required via website.

Michael Bracewell on Jim Lambie: internationally acclaimed writer, novelist and cultural commentator Michael Bracewell discusses Jim Lambie’s work in relation to its broader cultural context. 6.30-7.45pm, Fruitmarket Gallery, 45 Market Street. Free.

New Realities and Challenges for Emerging Markets after (and in) crisis: the case of Russia. Alexei Kudrin is Honorary Professor in the School of Literatures, Languages and Cultures, University of Edinburgh, former Russian Minister of Finance, former Deputy Prime Minister, Honorary Professor at St Petersburg State University and the author of over 30 books on economics and finance. 5.30-6.30pm, Lecture Theatre 175, School of Law, University of Edinburgh Old College, South Bridge. Free tickets should be booked via eventbrite.

Lunchtime Concert: Kingston University Twist Choir. 12.15pm, St Giles’ Cathedral, High Street. Free.

PhD in an Hour: If I Swear My Translator Swears…one PhD student, one fascinating topic, one cafe, one hour. This month Ilgin Aktener talks about his PhD investigation of the effect of unfair censorship on literary translation in Turkey, where publishers of William S Burrough’s The Soft Machine and Chuck Palahniuk’s Snuff were taken to court on the grounds of obscenity and are now facing 3-6 years in jail. 6-7pm, Lovecrumbs, 155 West Port. Free tickets are bookable via eventbrite.

WHALE Snappers: anyone with an interest in taking photos, learning about portraits and printing in a darkroom is welcome to come along to these monthly sessions. Lead by a friendly professional photographer, all levels of experience welcome – try it out! 6-9pm, WHALE Arts, 30 Westburn Grove. £4 per session: next session 5th November.

Get Online i-Pad Course: do you have an iPad with which you need help? New four week course for beginners starts today. 12 noon-2pm, Blackhall Library, 56 Hillhouse Road. Places are limited, so drop into the library or call 0131 529 5595 to book a free place. Suitable for all versions of i-Pad.

Chatterbooks: reading group for P4-P7. Books, games, craft activities and a snack. First meeting today 3.45-4.45pm, then every first Wednesday in the month. Wester Hailes Library, 1 Westside Plaza. To book your place call 0131 529 5667 or drop into the library.

Drawing and Painting Hands: Edinburgh-based artist and tutor Damian Callan will teach this free class, which will begin with demonstrations of drawing and painting hands in charcoal and oil paint. All materials provided. 9.45am-4pm or 7-9.45pm, WASPS Studios, 2/3 West Park Place, Dalry (off Dalry Road, 5 minutes walk from Haymarket Station.) Call 07951 878560 to book a place.

Free The Technics Two: vinyl session – ‘not only do we demand a revolution we can dance to, we want to dance to our own tunes.’ 4-7pm, Forest Cafe, Lauriston Place.

THURSDAY 2ND OCTOBER 2014

Bubble Day: North Edinburgh Arts has been appointed by Urban Union to develop an arts strategy for the regeneration project at Pennywell. Come along to this creative thinking day and have your say! 12 noon-4pm, Community Shop, Pennywell Road. Tea and cakes provided! Contact North Edinburgh Arts for more information.

Live Music Now Netherlands: Duo Ivoire. As part of an ongoing Live Music Now exchange programme Duo Ivoire, featuring Joukeline Sizoo on harp and Sophie Gourlet on flute, present a programme of French music by Faure and Francaix, along with the Sonata for flute and harp by Italian film composer Nino Rota. 6-6.30pm, National Gallery of Scotland, The Mound. Free and unticketed.

Books in Focus: Small Scottish Presses. The NGS’s series of Books in Focus sessions looks at artists’ books held in the special collections of the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art. This session will focus on publications produced by small 20th century Scottish presses, including artists’ books published by Helen Douglas’ and Telfer Stokes’ Weproductions, the Moschatel Press and the Morning Star Press. 11.30am-12.30pm, Reading Room, Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art TWO, Belford Road. Limited places: please book by calling 0131 624 6268 or emailing gmainfo@nationalgalleries.org

Stigma Free Arts Cafe….Inspiring Tastes of Life: take a break and bring your lunch to an inspiring and safe cafe space and enjoy poets, musicians, dancers, speakers and visual artists. All welcome! 12 noon-2pm, Augustine United Church, 41-43 George IV Bridge. Free, no booking required. Part of Scottish Mental Health Arts and Film Festival 2014.

Oui Love Tour: Andrea Balency and NLF3. Oui Love showcases the cutting-edge creativity and pop nous of France’s current exports, featuring the exquisite dubstep-R ‘n’ B-pop hybrid of Andrea Balency and the chiming Afro-tinged experimental grooves of NLF3, plus local support act. 7-11pm, Sneaky Pete’s, 73 Cowgate. Admission free but ticketed: reserve your ticket via eventbrite. Supported by bureauexport and the Institut Francais: more information here.

Rushton and Tyman: Stop Thief! Rushton & Tyman’s Flaghall is a space of potential multiple uses – a community hall, an exhibition space or a meeting place. In this exhibition the artists re-imagine Flaghall as a reading room where texts, talks and performances are brought together under the title Stop Thief! Visitors to the exhibition at this time will experience live interventions in the gallery, further exploring themes raised in this work. 5pm, City Art Centre, 2 Market Street. Free.

John Currie’s Infra Red Scanner: looking at a hot world through very cool technology! Professor John Currie’s inaugural lecture will explore the application of infra red technology through the medium of music. Professor Currie will show how the development of research using infra red thermography at Napier over the last 30 years has provided a greater understanding of the world in which we live, drawing examples from whisky making to the animal world, from outer space to your living room, all tempered with a little light music….The lecture will be followed by a drinks reception. 6-7pm, The Lindsay Stewart Lecture Theatre, Craiglockhart Campus, Edinburgh Napier University. Free but please register your attendance with lectures@napier.ac.uk

Mystic Hymns of Sufi Poets: mediaeval Italy and Turkey produced two of the greatest mystics, St Francis and Rumi. 800 years after their deaths, Latif Bolat, Turkish singer, composer and scholar of Turkish music and folklore, presents this programme celebrating their legacies with poetry, music, movement and philosophical ideas, reflecting the devotional and mystical aspect of Anatolian culture accumulated over thousands of years. 6pm, Italian Cultural Institute, 82 Nicolson Street. Free. Part of Journeys, a project delivering a message of unity and fraternity in the face of conflicts.

Antonio Pacitti: Joy and Protest. An exhibition presenting two sides of the Scottish-Italian painter, sculptor and potter, who died in 2009. Pacitti was inspired by nature but also by injustice and oppression. ‘No other artist painted with so much love, brightness and enthusiasm‘ – Craigie Aitchison (The Guardian.) Today until 24th October 2014, 2-5pm Mondays, 9.30am-5pm Tuesday -Thursday, 9am-12 noon Fridays, Italian Cultural Institute, 82 Nicolson Street. Free. Part of Journeys, a project delivering a message of unity and fraternity in the face of conflicts.

Highlight Arts Launch: the team behind Reel Syria, Reel Iraq and Reel Afghanistan are celebrating their transformation into Highlight Arts with a free evening at the Scottish Storytelling Centre. Live music, film and poetry with collaborators old and new, including Shooglenifty, Krystelle Bamford, singer Kaela Ewan, Syrian writer Golan Haji, DJ Dolphin Boy, plus films by director Roxana Vilk and some specially curated Arctic region shorts. 7.30pm, Scottish Storytelling Centre, Royal Mile. Free but booking essential: up to four tickets per person. Call Box Office on 0131 556 9579 or book via the Centre’s website.

Adding Gender Equality to Your Shopping Bag: Edinburgh Fair Trade City Group lead a discussion on what more could be done to promote gender equality in the world of Fair Trade, both at home and abroad, looking at Equal Exchange’s Coffee Grown by Women, the work of Get Paper Industries in Nepal and Weaving Destination’s work with trafficked women in India. 6.30-8pm, One World Shop, St John’s Church, Princes Street (corner of Lothian Rd.)

The Scotland-Russia Forum: monthly meeting for sparkling Russian/English conversation over tea and cakes. 11am, Cafe, Summerhall, 1 Summerhall. No need to book, all very welcome. No charge apart from cost of any refreshments you may wish to purchase in the cafe.

Engineers Without Borders Charity Fundraiser Party: live bands and a party vibe to raise money for projects, including local outreach and international projects in countries with harsh developmental barriers. Music from Jack Wright (soft rock/country) and the 17-piece Edinburgh University Jazz Orchestra. 9pm (entry from 8pm) The Jazz Bar, Chambers Street. £5/£4, cash on door only.

FRIDAY 3RD OCTOBER 2014

Makers By Commission: an exhibition by the Scottish Furniture Makers Association featuring pieces by 25 makers, many of which are on display for the first time. Focusing on the processes of designing and commissioning bespoke furniture, each piece has been developed with a particular place or person in mind. Many works use timber from elm trees grown on The Meadows and donated by Edinburgh City Council. 10am-4.45pm from today until 19th October 2014, John Hope Gateway, Royal Botanic Garden, Inverleith Row. Free.

Golden Hare Books presents An Evening with Magnus Florin: one of Sweden’s leading writers, acclaimed poet, playwright and critic Florin will be discussing his latest novel The Garden, the first of his books to be translated into English by pioneering Edinburgh publishing house Vagabond Voices. ‘A finely wrought and and deeply researched portrait of Carl Linnaeus, one of the most eminent figures in the Swedish enlightenment, famous for his classification of animals and plants.’ 6.30-9pm, Golden Hare Books, 68 St Stephen Street, Stockbridge. Free tickets available via eventbrite.

Alison Auldjo: Lifelines. A new exhibition of landscapes by the gallery’s founder. Union Gallery, 45 Broughton Street. From today until 3rd November 2014, open 10.30am-6pm Tuesday-Friday, 10.30am-5.30pm Saturdays and 12 noon – 6pm Sundays.

Lunchtime concert: John Kitchen (senior lecturer and university organist) – Tomkins’ Voluntary Fancy, Purcell’s Voluntary in D Minor for Double Organ, Russell’s Voluntary III in G, set one, Praetorius’ Nun lob, mein Seel, den Herren, JS Bach’s Three Organ Chorales from Orgelbuchlein, CPE Bach’s Sonata in G Minor H87, Buxtehude’s Praeludium in A Minor BuxWV 153. 1.10pm, Reid Concert Hall, Bristo Square, University of Edinburgh. Free.

GEM: Contemporary Gemstones and Jewellery from Afghanistan. An exhibition including specially commissioned jewellery created by artists from Turquoise Mountain, a Kabul-based organisation that promotes Afghan craft and design to the wider world. These are shown alongside pieces of contemporary jewellery by UK designers, including Melanie Eddy, Vicki Sarge and Pippa Small, all of whom visited and worked at Turquoise Mountain and were inspired by Afghan design, processes and gemstone usage. 10.30am-5.30pm Monday to Saturday from today until 8th November 2014, Dovecot Studios, Infirmary Street. Exhibition originally produced as part of the British Council’s South Asia season in 2013.

Disability History Scotland: a community event and exhibition on the theme of change. The First World War gave a new identity and cultural value to those who were disabled: in the same way the outcome of the Scottish Referendum will lead to a redefinition of the people of Scotland and those from the rest of the UK. How will this affect the identity, cultural value and place in society of disabled people? Disability History Scotland invites everyone, disabled or not, to come along and talk about identity and change after the referendum. 6.30-9pm, Out of the Blue Drill Hall, 36 Dalmeny Street.

Anatomy #9: Monkey Grind. ‘Anatomy takes the music hall variety show to strange futures. It’s a brave new stage for risk-taking performances and breathtaking theatrics from artists, dancers, music makers and destroyers, puppeteers, film-makers, clowns, poets, mimes, installations, weirdos and burlesques.’ Hosts Ali Maloney and Harry Giles. 8-10pm, Summerhall, 1 Summerhall. Tickets £6/£5 bookable via website. For ages 18+ only.

Children’s Craft Sessions: every Friday at 2pm, South Neighbourhood Office and Library, 40 Captain’s Road.

Children’s Craft Sessions: every Friday 2.30-3.30pm, Newington Library, 17-21 Fountainhall Road.

SATURDAY 4TH OCTOBER 2014

Fresh Start Sale: cake stands, china, glass, bric a brac, coffees, teas and home baking. Fresh Start is an Edinburgh-based charity helping those who have been homeless to get established in their new homes: it delivers a range of services to provide practical and social support. 10am-1pm, Food Station, 1 Harrison Place. For more information about Fresh Start click here.

Polish Bookbug Session: 11am, first Saturday of every month, Granton Library, Wardieburn Terrace. Contact library for details.

The Power of a Cup of Tea: MECOPP (a charity that supports ethnic minority and black carers in Scotland) invites carers and their families to get together and relax whilst enjoying arts and crafts, food demonstrations, music, complementary therapies and more. 11am-1pm, Leith Academy (main hall), 20 Academy Park. For more information call Lucy Arnot on 0131 467 2994 or email lucy@mecopp.org.uk. Free, no booking required. Part of Scottish Mental Health Arts and Film Festival 2014.

Resources: Climate and Conflict. Do we understand what is driving conflicts across the globe? Should we feel responsible for consequences across the world caused by our way of life? Keynote speakers including Humza Yousaf MSP, workshops and stalls from campaigning organisations. 10.30am-5pm, Appleton Tower, University of Edinburgh, Crichton Street. Free places should be reserved via eventbrite. Part of Edinburgh World Justice Festival.

GENERATION tours at Modern One: free, discussion-led tours of the exhibition, focusing on key themes and artists. 11-11.45am or 1-1.45pm, Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art One, Belford Road. Free and unticketed.

Palestinian Handicrafts: Identity and Non-Violent Resistance. Nada Shawa, born in Gaza, living in Edinburgh, presents My Distant War, illustrated with personal photos of Gaza past and present. Voices and stories from Gazan Embroiderers with Sulafa, UNRWA Project, readings from Gaza Writes Back (short stories from young writers in Gaza), Q & A session, tastings of Palestinian snacks. 1-3pm, Hadeel, (Fair Trade Palestinian crafts shop) 123 George Street.

Portrait Gallery Thematic Tours – Colour: monthly thematic tours of the Portrait Gallery’s collection. This month Abby Ingham explores colour in some of the portraits in the collection – from its use as a symbol of status, power or political affiliation to an instrument of fashion or taste. 2-2.45pm or 3-3.45pm, Scottish National Portrait Gallery, 1 Queen Street. Free and unticketed.

Butoh Dance Workshop with Paul Michael Henry. Butoh dance originated in Japan in the mid-20th century: Paul Michael Henry has studied it and Noguchi gymnastics with many teachers and is a co-director of Moving Bodies Festival. 11am-5pm, St Margaret’s Art Complex, 151 London Road. For more information and bookings call 07528 597880 or email paul@paulmichaelhenry.com. See also paulmichaelhenry.com

Moving Minds Book Launch: presenting Moving Minds, an anthology of work from Gypsy/Travellers across Scotland that explores memories, poetry, photographs and the impact that prejudice can have on wellbeing. Chaired by acclaimed poet Jo McFarlane: an opportunity for discussion and reflection. 12.15-1.15pm, Portobello Old Parish Church Hall, Old Parish Church, Bellfield Street. Free places should be booked by emailing emma-jane@mecopp.org.uk Part of Scottish Mental Health Arts and Film Festival 2014.

Choral Evensong sung by RSCM Scottish Voices: director Richard Walmisley. Howells St Paul’s Service, Haydn The Heavens are Telling. 4pm, St Giles’ Cathedral, High Street.

Apple Festival: is the early ripening of the apples this year a taste of things to come, and should we be planning to use new varieties? Apple and fruit tree displays, tastings of unusual varieties and the opportunity to get your apples identified (juice pressing available on Sunday only.) 12 noon – 4pm, John Hope Gateway, Royal Botanic Garden, Inverleith Row. Free. Also on Sunday 5th October at same times. With the Royal Caledonian Horticultural Society.

Auld Alliance Contemporary Exhibition. A Franco-Scottish collaboration of painters, sculptors, photographers and an illustrator. The works of established French artists are shown alongside the works of young, established and up-and-coming Scottish artists, with the aim of bringing some freshness to the contemporary art scene in Scotland. 9.30am-6.30pm Monday to Friday and 10am-1pm Saturdays until 1st November 2014, running jointly at the Institut Francais, Randolph Crescent and the EDS Gallery, Great King Street. Free.

Beth Robertson Fiddes: a new exhibition by the landscape artist, who works in acrylics, oil, ink and paper to create works that ‘evoke a sense of place, capture the feeling and essence of the landscape rather than recreating it in paint.’ 10am-5pm Monday to Friday, 12 noon-5pm Saturdays, Doubtfire Gallery, 3 South East Circus Place.

Patriothall Gallery: Open Studios. A weekend event as part of WASPS Open Studios, which are taking place throughout Scotland at various dates during October. WASPS is a charity set up to provide good quality, affordable studio space to enable artists and arts charities to carry out their work. The weekend will also include demonstrations of Mokuhanga (Japanese wood block printing) and tapestry weaving, and a children’s landscape painting workshop. Patriothall Gallery, Patriothall, off Hamilton Place, Stockbridge. See website for times and details. Also opening on Sunday 5th October 2014.

Luminate Scotland: Life Lines: Intergenerational LGBT+ Storytelling. Wit and wisdom from voices across the generations in a welcoming evening of inspiring and moving performance, poetry and storytelling from a diverse range of LGBT+ people, aiming to increase understanding of LGBT+ identities and communities. Organised by LGBT Health and Wellbeing. For everyone aged 13+, all genders and sexualities welcome. 5-8pm, Scottish Storytelling Centre, High Street. Tickets cost £3/£2 and are available from the Storytelling Centre on 0131 556 9579. More information on 0131 652 3284. Also part of Scottish Mental Health Arts and Film Festival 2014. Luminate is Scotland’s Creative Ageing Festival.

Queen Margaret University Undergraduate Open Day: an opportunity to speak to lecturers about the courses that interest you, chat to current students, attend subject and other talks and go on a tour of the campus. 11am-4pm, Queen Margaret University, QMU Drive, Musselburgh EH21 6UU. Please register your interest here. If attending, please note that the train service between Edinburgh & Musselburgh will be replaced by buses this weekend. Further information on QMU website.

Free Family Cinema: adventure, excitement, fun and laughs, best for children up to 10 years. Juice and choc ices available in the interval for 50p each. All children must be accompanied by an adult. This week The Sword in The Stone; next week The Iron Giant. 10.30am-12.30pm (includes interval), St Bride’s Community Centre, Orwell Road. Free.

SUNDAY 5TH OCTOBER 2014

Global Justice in a New Scotland: an Open Space discussion. This is an opportunity to get together – regardless of how or whether you voted in the Referendum – to explore how Scotland can become a champion for global human rights, action on climate change, economic justice and equality. Be prepared for positive, practical discussion! 1-4pm, City of Edinburgh Methodist Church, Nicolson Square. Free, all welcome, no booking required. For more information email scotland@peopleandplanet.org

GENERATION tours at the Royal Scottish Academy: free, discussion-led tours of the exhibition, focusing on key themes and artists. 11-11.45am or 1-1.45pm, Royal Scottish Academy, National Gallery of Scotland, The Mound . Free and unticketed.

Art Maker: join the Art Maker club and make your own masterpieces, with artists Tessa Asquith-Lamb and Louise Fraser. For ages 4-12. 2-4pm (drop-in session), National Gallery of Scotland, The Mound. Free and unticketed. Supported by the Friends of NGS.

Apple Festival: is the early ripening of the apples this year a taste of things to come, and should we be planning to use new varieties? Apple displays, fruit tree displays, tastings of unusual varieties, the opportunity to get your apples identified and apple juice pressing by Cuddybridge Apple Juice. 12 noon – 4pm, John Hope Gateway, Royal Botanic Garden, Inverleith Row. Free. With the Royal Caledonian Horticultural Society.

Songs of Environmental Justice: listen to singers of radical songs and share stories, songs and poems. All welcome, free entry, donations welcome, raffle. 6.30-9.30pm, The Constitution Bar, Constitution Street. Organised by Radical Voices.

Blackwell’s Edinburgh Teenage Book Group: a monthly group reading anything from classics to contemporary, dystopian to historical. This month’s book: Emma Haughton’s Now You See Me. 2-3pm, Blackwell’s, South Bridge. If you would like to join, email schools.edinburgh@blackwell.co.uk

Patriothall Gallery: Open Studios. A weekend event as part of WASPS Open Studios, which are taking place throughout Scotland at various dates during October. WASPS is a charity set up to provide good quality, affordable studio space to enable artists and arts charities to carry out their work. The weekend will also include demonstrations of Mokuhanga (Japanese wood block printing) and tapestry weaving, and a children’s landscape painting workshop. Patriothall Gallery, Patriothall, off Hamilton Place, Stockbridge. See website for times and details.

Fungal Foray: 10am-12 noon, Colinton Dell. Free but booking essential: email ruth@elgt.org.uk or call Ruth Wyatt on 0131 445 4025. The first in an autumn series of workshops organised by Edinburgh and Lothians Greenspace Trust.

St Giles at Six: organ recital by Peter Backhouse. Widor Symphonie B. 6pm, St Giles’ Cathedral, High Street. Free: retiring collection.