Will Ferrell’s Facebook posting/picture encouraging people to #getcovered by Obamacare received a “healthy” response, but apparently most of it negative.

Nearly 6,000 users added comments to Ferrell’s Facebook page about the actor/comedian’s role in trying to convince consumers, particularly younger ones, to enroll in the health insurance program, which is falling far short of projections. Ferrell posted a brief message and a picture of himself holding a #GetCovered sign.

According to The Hill, many A-List celebrities have avoided helping the president and the Obama administration in the Obamacare public relations blitz in the run-up to the March 31 enrollment deadline. “It seems that not even the president’s most fervent and committed supporters want to get too close to ObamaCare.”

The administration claimed yesterday that enrollment has hit four million, but according to the Washington Examiner, that’s not the full picture: “The [Department of Health and Human Services] numbers include only those who have selected a plan through one of the exchanges, rather than the number who have paid — which is typically how insurers measure enrollment. As a gauge, last week California reported that 20 percent of those who signed up in the state as of Jan. 31 hadn’t paid first month’s premiums.”

The contradiction inherent in celebrity endorsements is that most wealthy Hollywood types have gold-plated insurance plans and access to the best doctors that insulate them from the limitations, cancellations, and many other problems associated with Obamacare, including glitches on HealthCare.gov and the state equivalents, that ordinary Americans face or will face.

While quite a few pro-Obamacare comments (some of which sound like they might have been posted by political operatives working from talking points) showed up on Ferrell’s page, the following are representative:

“You can pay for my Obamacare Mr. Ferrell. You millionaires know what’s best for us anyways right?”

“Will!!! Love your movies, but you are out of your mind on the ACA. Why don’t you make a movie about some huge group of morons who are promised lower rates, better coverage, and the ability to keep your doctors… Oh wait, nobody would believe a stupid story like that.”

“…As a former Obama supporter, former democrat and now former fan of yours I can tell you this much why don’t you try walking in our shoes or at the very least read about the topic or the actual Obama care platform, you fucking sellout!! You were never that funny anyway.”

“Which plan did you sign up for Will? Did you get to keep your doctor?”

“The problem with Obamacare is that the premium is more than double what I currently play for private individual health insurance, and for fewer benefits…”

“Go hold that sign in front of the President and Congressional morons who voted this law upon the country and then opted themselves right out of it…”

Whether you’re a fan of Obamacare (i.e., the Affordable Care Act) or not, in general would those in the entertainment industry like Will Ferrell be better off steering clear of politics?