Topics: caitriona balfe, diana gabaldon, Outlander, sam heughan, Sex, Spanking, starz, TV, Entertainment News

“Outlander” returned from a long hiatus last night to continue the adventures of Claire Randall—now Claire Fraser—a former combat nurse from 1945 who has fallen through time to 1743, where she quickly falls in with redheaded Scot Jamie Fraser and ends up marrying him out of expediency and, let’s be real, explosive sexual tension. The Starz series is based on a set of historical romance novels by Diana Gabaldon that have long been bestsellers, and that popularity has translated to the show. “Outlander” has become one of Starz’s most successful shows, both with viewers drawn to the sumptuous historical details and the character-driven, soapy romance and with critics who appreciate “Outlander’s” ultra-rare, ultra-precious female gaze.

It helps that the show is just practically very well done—it’s gorgeous, beautifully scored, and deliciously plotty, which one would expect from the showrunner who created the fantastic “Battlestar Galactica” reboot, Ronald. D. Moore. It also helps that the show’s two stars, Caitriona Balfe and Sam Heughan, have sizzling on-screen chemistry. Their performances anchor the fantastical elements of the plot—and there are plenty, ranging from time-travel to the fact that this improbably hot guy happens to be a virgin—and make “Outlander” an enormously enjoyable show to watch.

But as readers of the book know already, Jamie and Claire are about to hit a big, problematic snag. In the last episode before the hiatus, Claire broke away from the camp to search for the standing stones that precipitated her time-traveling. She gets kidnapped as a result, and Jamie manages to barge into the British barracks just as sadistic Capt. Jack Randall is about to rape Claire. Jaime saves her in the first few minutes of Saturday night’s episode, “The Reckoning,” but the ordeal isn’t over: Scottish patriarchal custom demands that Jamie punish his wife for “disobeying orders,” i.e., whip her with a strap.

The book reads:

“I mean to do it, Claire! Now, if you cooperate wi’ me, we’ll call the account square with a dozen strokes.” “And if not?” I quavered. He picked up the strap and slapped it against his leg with a nasty thwapping sound. “Then I shall put a knee in your back and beat you ‘til my arm tires, and I warn ye, you’ll tire of it long before I do.”

Claire accuses him of being a sadist, to which he replies:

“I said I would have to punish you. I did not say I wasna going to enjoy it.”

And the next morning, Claire describes the punishment thusly:

It had been a most unpleasant night. My reluctant acquiescence had lasted precisely as far as the first searing crack of leather on flesh. This was followed by a short, violent struggle, which left Jamie with a bloody nose, three lovely gouges down one cheek, and a deeply bitten wrist. Not surprisingly, it left me half smothered in the greasy quilts with a knee in my back, being beaten within an inch of my life.

Which is not, you know, particularly sexy. And as Bryn Donovan writes at Persephone Magazine, the way that Claire’s frostiness toward Jamie is resolved in the book doesn’t really dispel the upsetting weirdness of the scene—if anything, Claire comes to “grudgingly accept” that Jamie was in the right, and then impetuously declares that she loves him; Jamie reaffirms how much he enjoyed it, and tells her, too, that she’s lucky he didn’t try to have sex with her after he beat her (because that’s how much he enjoyed it, presumably).

Naturally, as I watched “The Reckoning,” I felt some foreboding—especially because the episode is narrated, for the first time, from Jamie’s perspective, not Claire’s. But the show takes several creative liberties with the shape of this scene—and to my surprise, carries them off. The scene is not “beating within an inch of [her] life,” it’s spanking with a folded belt. And Claire doesn’t forgive Jamie until he goes out of his way to make amends to her. The intimacy of the punishment in the first half of the episode is balanced out by the intimacy of mutual enjoyment and coming to terms with each other in the back half—and each has its own share of power struggles. Most important—in the book, the episode seems like a weird sideshow designed to bring Claire down a peg. In the series, it’s a crucial relationship-building conflict, central to the narrative of the episode and to the series as a whole.

“Outlander” has gotten criticism for centering violence against women so much in its narrative—from perceived husbandly duties to the seemingly ever-present threat of rape and/or sexual assault for Claire in 1743. But what I’m finding valuable about the series is the conversation it’s opening up about pervasive violence against women, in that culture or in ours. “Outlander” is not a happy fantasy—it’s a horror story, too, to be banished from the relatively modern era to a nearly medieval society. I spoke to the stars about filming that spanking scene, how they’re interpreting it for their characters, and in general, the challenges of inhabiting this sexually charged, violent world.

Caitriona, what is it like playing a character who goes from a world that has very specific sexual mores to one that has very different ones? Such as, for example, on one of Claire’s first nights in the castle, the laird’s brother Dougal (Graham McTavish) tries to rape your character in a side passageway.

Caitriona Balfe: That to Dougal is just flirting, by the way. (Laughs.)

Exactly. There’s something weirdly casual about it in that context—but obviously she’s like, no, I do not want this, and has to be very violent.

CB: When we began the show, it’s quite shocking when you first read all the attempted rapes. And as a modern woman, your first instinct is that that would be such a traumatic event that it would be something that I don’t think you would ever get over. And yet, sexual violence against women in that time is used so casually and is such a weapon. But it’s not even the most treacherous one, in a sense.

It was hard for me. I remember saying to the writers, “Doesn’t she still feel affected by this? Surely there would be a greater… overhang.” We’re in such an analytical society now, and we take all of these things—rightly so, I believe—with such seriousness that it’s hard to see how someone could just pick themselves up and move on. But one of the pieces of research I was doing was reading books on the nurses who had served on the front lines in the Second World War. Their stories, some of them, are so horrific, but some of the things that jumped off the pages to me were that in that immediacy of life, in that time when life and death are sitting — people just get on with things. You don’t have the luxury or the time to wallow or have any sort of self-pity. The survival instinct really kicks in. And that’s what Claire is, she’s a survivor. I really tried to approach it from that point of view. It’s not that these things don’t affect her—they do—but she’s a survivor, and she doesn’t have the luxury of wallowing in these moments.

For Jamie, so much of his origin story in the books is this terrible flogging that he endured because his sister was being threatened by, again, this pervasive threat of rape. Sexual assault as a plot device is a much-discussed issue in our society, right now, especially.

Sam Heughan: Absolutely—and also maybe how more accepting we are now of it. We were talking earlier about this spanking scene [in Saturday’s episode, “The Reckoning”] and how there was a cheer, and that was just interesting for us. Perhaps it was more about the fans were waiting to see these events happen and how they played out. But it is interesting, isn’t it? Definitely a recurring theme in the story.

CB: But I think it’s important. Nowadays, obviously there’s so much in the media about what happens in India or in a lot of war-torn countries. Unfortunately, it still exists—no matter how much we think we’ve moved forward as having equality for men and women, unfortunately sexual attacks still happen. We also deal with it in terms of between two men in our show, towards the end of the season. That also exists. In England in the last year, that whole [Operation] Yewtree situation where you have these pedophile rings. So I think in our culture we have to examine why this never goes away. It’s constantly there. I don’t have any answers but I think it’s interesting to look at it and examine it and maybe keep people thinking about it and spark conversation. I think that’s what entertainment should do. As much as it should be entertaining, it should evoke a feeling, and evoke some kind of conversation out of people, so they examine who we are and why we do things.

What was this about the cheer during the spanking scene?

CB: Apparently last night at the theater [for the “Outlander” premiere] the whole audience cheered or something.