COLUMBUS, Ohio, -- The Ohio Supreme Court on Friday rejected efforts by six conservative Republican legislators and two right-to-life organizations to thwart the expansion of Medicaid in Ohio.

The court’s ruling was 4-3, but the three who dissented did not side with the plaintiffs. Rather, they thought the case should not have been heard.

The ruling clears the way for expansion of the program that provides health insurance to low income Ohioans to proceed.

The expansion will allow families with incomes of up to 138 percent of the poverty line to obtain Medicaid coverage beginning in 2014. The state estimates 275,000 people now without coverage could be added to the Medicaid program in the next three years.

The lawmakers and abortion opponents, in a suit filed with the court in October, had sought a writ of mandamus from the court to stop the expansion. They argued that the state’s controlling board had overstepped its authority when it voted 5-2 to accept federal funding needed to pay for the expansion.

The lawmakers -- Ron Young of Leroy Township, Matt Lynch of Aurora, Ron Hood of London, John Becker of Union Township in Clermont County, Andy Thompson of Marietta and Ron Maag of Lebanon -- and the right-to-life organizations in Cleveland and Cincinnati argue that the action is contrary to the intentions of the General Assembly and therefore illegal.

Language in the state budget bill that was sent to the governor included a specific prohibition against expansion. But Gov. John Kasich vetoed that language. Another section on the bill, meanwhile, authorized the state’s director of Medicaid to expand the program.

There was no attempt in the General Assembly to override the governor’s line-item veto.

That was noted by Ohio Chief Justice Maureen O’Connor, who authored the opinion. She was joined by Justices Paul Pfeifer and William O’Neill. Justice Judith Ann Lanzinger concurred.

The legislators’ argued that their intent was ignored because the bill, as it passed the General Assembly, included the prohibition. The appropriate time for determining the intent of the law, O’Connor wrote, was after the governor signed the final version.

“The Ohio Constitution expressly confers upon the governor authority to excise any item or items in an appropriation bill, and such disapproved items ‘shall be void,’ “ O’Connor wrote. To operate otherwise “would operate as a statutory negation of the governor’s constitutional powers.”

The General Assembly’s remedy, she wrote, is to override the governor’s veto. “The legislature cannot circumvent this constitutional option by obtaining a writ from this court that forbids the Controlling Board to comply with the law, as that law is modified by the governor’s veto.”

Justice Terrence O’Donnell wrote a dissent arguing the case should have just been dismissed. He was joined by Justices Sharon Kennedy and Judith French.

O’Donnell argued that the case involved a political issue, not a legal issue for the court to hear.

“The General Assembly has both the incentive to protect its prerogatives and the institutional mechanisms to do so. This case involves an impermissible judicial foray into the province of the legislature and raises a political question that is not justiciable and which we ought not to answer.”

The ruling removes any doubt about whether the state will expand Medicaid. It already has been signing up new enrollees. The insurance coverage is to be available beginning Jan. 1.

The Kasich administration has estimated that at least half of the newly covered people already hold jobs, but do not get health care insurance through their employers. About 26,000 are veterans.

The administration's reaction was brief.

“Obviously, we’re pleased with the Court’s ruling and glad that Ohio can now move forward,” Kasich spokesman Rob Nichols said.

Randy Cole, the president of the Controlling Board, said its members had been comfortable in the belief that they acted with proper authority and that he was please with the decision.

The 1851 Center for Constitutional Law, whose lawyer Maurice Thompson represented the lawmakers and right to life groups, made no comment. A spokeswoman there said the decision was still being reviewed.

Kasich lobbied for Ohio to expand its Medicaid program since he unveiled his budget plans in early February. Thousands of Ohioans echoed those calls. A poll in June found 63 percent supported expanding Medicaid.

The money to pay for the expansion is authorized by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. It commits the federal government to pay 100 percent of the costs of expansion for three years. That figure gradually reduces to 90 percent of the costs by 2020. Ohio would be in line to receive an estimated $13.5 billion over that time.

Major hospitals and physician organizations, coalitions of churches, health care advocacy groups, labor unions and business organizations like the Ohio Chamber of Commerce all joined him in calling for expansion.

But the governor’s fellow Republicans in the Legislature steadfastly refused to go along. Some cited opposition to such a major expansion of a public support program. Others expressed concern about size of the national debt. General opposition to health care reform, commonly called Obamacare, also was a reason.

Ohio law requires that before money can be spent, it must be formally be appropriated. Typically that is done through a vote of the General Assembly. But the Controlling Board also has the authority to adjust appropriations as additional reveneus become available.

The Controlling Board's vote on Oct. 21 gave the state's Department of Medicaid authority to spend newly received federal money earmarked to pay for expansion. That vote is what triggered the action in the Supreme Court.