Today's top stories:

A grand jury indicted former North Charleston, South Carolina, police officer Michael Slager on a murder charge today in connection to the April shooting death of Walter Scott. (CNN News)

The leaders of seven major industrialized democracies are meeting for their annual summit, with the first day devoted to the global economy and talks to liberalize trade rules. (Voice of America)

President Barack Obama today said the Supreme Court should not have taken up the challenge to the Affordable Care Act in King v. Burwell. (Huffington Post)

National news:

The prison worker at the center of the probe into the dramatic escape of two inmates at an upstate New York penitentiary has been identified as Joyce Mitchell, an official briefed on the investigation has confirmed. (ABC News)

Authorities in Boston released a surveillance video today that shows six plainclothes law enforcement officers surrounding a terrorism suspect in the moments before police shot him to death. (USA Today)

A McKinney, Texas, police officer has been put on administrative leave after a video surfaced of him forcing a 14-year-old girl in a bikini to the ground and kneeling on her back and then drawing his gun on others who came to her aid. (ABC News)

A man accused of plotting a suicide bomb attack at a Wichita, Kansas, airport in 2013 pleaded guilty today in U.S. District Court to a charge of attempted use of a weapon of mass destruction. (Reuters)

Former House Speaker Dennis Hastert has hired a top white-collar crime defense attorney to defend him against federal charges he tried to hide hush money payments and lied to the FBI about it. (CNN News)

Kalief Browder, the young man who was held for years in a New York jail without a trial, killed himself on Saturday. (NPR News)

Former first lady Barbara Bush celebrated her 90th birthday today by spending time with her family and promoting literacy, a cause long dear to her. (Chicago Tribune)

International news:

President Obama said today his top national security advisers were still working to solidify training plans for Iraqi defense forces battling ISIS in their own country. (CNN News)

The parents of Reeva Steenkamp, who was shot dead by her boyfriend, Oscar Pistorius, have condemned a decision to free the Paralympian on parole in August when he will have served just 10 months in prison. (The Guardian)

Turkey faced the prospect of weeks of political turmoil after the ruling AK Party lost its parliamentary majority in weekend polls, dealing a blow to President Tayyip Erdogan's ambitions to acquire sweeping new powers. (Reuters)

Government airstrikes on a northwestern Syrian village today killed at least 49 people and left survivors screaming in anguish as they pulled bodies from the rubble. (Associated Press)

The Eritrean government is responsible for systematic and gross human rights abuses on a "scope and scale seldom witnessed elsewhere," according to a United Nations report released today. (Al Jazeera America)

The relationship between the Philippines and China may improve as long as one has "mutual respect" for the other, President Benigno S.C. Aquino III said today during an event organized by a Filipino-Chinese business group. (BusinessWorld Online)