With most of its 230 beds empty, Meadowlands Hospital Medical Center in Secaucus has announced that it will lay off more than 100 employees, or about 20 percent of its workforce, according to its center's chief executive, Thomas Considine.

With patient census today at 48 but “trending in the low 30s for the past week,” the hospital is “grossly overstaffed, Considine told The Star-Ledger this evening.

In a letter that went out to its staff on Tuesday night, Considine said that for every patient there are 17.1 employees, a situation he called "an intolerable. . .efficiency ratio." The average hospital has 4.72 employees for every patient, according to the letter.

Considine has proposed laying off 102 of the 477 full-time employees "at virtually all levels and in virtually all areas of the organization." But he said before people are let go, management will look to save money by seeking voluntary summer furloughs and early retirements, and leaving jobs unfilled.

Managers would forgo pay one day a week in each pay period to bear some of the burden, he said.

"I obviously wish that I did not have to send this memo,” according to the letter from Considine. "However, I wanted to be clear and open about the decision and my reasons for it. I truly believe that we will see an upturn in the fourth quarter of this year, and that 2015 will be a great year for MHMC."

Despite the job cuts, Meadowlands is not operating in the red, Considine said. A report ordered by the health department last year forecasting the hospital’s financial outlook through 2017, predicts Meadowlands will finish 2014 with a 2 percent operating margin.

“There is no correlation . . .between the reduction in staff and financial health of the hospital,” according to an email from Considine.

But the financial report showed serious systemic operating issues at Meadowlands, which investors bought in 2010 before it went bankrupt. “Since 2010, Meadowlands has been facing multiple financial problems which have created significant cash flow challenges, exacerbating difficulties in meeting day-to-day financial commitment,” according to the report by Executive Resources Healthcare Management Consultants.

The hospital also lacks a “formalized budgeting process” and a “financial review process,” according to the report. At Meadowlands’ request, the health department redacted more than half of the report to protect “trade secrets and proprietary commercial or financial information,” according to a letter from the public records custodian.

The announcement stunned members of Health Professionals and Allied Employees, the union that represents nurses and medical employees, and renewed calls for more state oversight or the appointment of a financial monitor.

"How does a hospital get to the point of laying off 20 percent of its staff?" said Jeanne Otersen, a union spokeswoman. "Is the Department of Health aware of this? Where is the state?"

Union leaders, consumer advocates and Democratic lawmakers have repeatedly urged the administration of Gov. Chris Christie to require such for-profit hospitals as Meadowlands to open its financial books and explain how it is running its operations.

Meadowlands has been cited by the Internal Revenue Service for indicating on paychecks that it had collected payroll taxes but then not sending the money to the government. In addition, the hospital has also delayed paying medical claims for some employees.

The state Health Department declined to comment.

RELATED COVERAGE

• New Meadowlands hospital CEO pledges more cooperation with state



• Meadowlands Hospital submits long-overdue financial report, NJ accepts smaller fine