“Alice (in Wonderland)” is a big, colorful acid trip of a ballet, a welcome update of Lewis Carroll’s classic tale that aims to meet the action-packed expectations of contemporary audiences.

The production, which premiered just three years ago at the Washington Ballet, zooms along at a relentless pace. Set pieces rise and fall. Dancers fly. The music pulses non-stop.

It’s a lot to take in, but certainly in keeping with the flavor of Carroll’s wild and loopy story, and the work is, from start to finish, a clever piece of theater.

In the hands of Colorado Ballet it is also vehicle well-suited to the talents of dancer Sharon Wehner who is celebrating her 20th year with the company. Can she still play little Alice? No doubt, and with grace, charm and some impressive spins on her left toe.

She kept the story centered at the Ellie Caulkins Opera House Friday night, and it needed her. Choreographer Septime Webre loads the ballet to maximum capacity, mixing traditional steps, points and leaps with the affects of gymnastics, Broadway, jazz and hip hop. It is built from a big bag of tricks and only rarely runs out of steam.

When it does, the sets, lighting and costumes (by James Kronzer, Clifton Taylor and Cirque du Soleil vet Liz Vandal) keep the audience amazed. Supporting Webre’s sexy, slithering caterpillars and birds that both prance and peck, are beautiful washes of blues, purples and greens and backdrops of neon flowers and giant, pink flamingos.

The music drives this crazy train. Matthew Pierce’s score pumps up the energy and the volume (so does amplification, not a routine assist for musicians at the Ellie). Pierce yanks all sorts of noises from an unusual ensemble consisting of just 13 string players and two percussionists. The odd combination has its sonic limits and the composer takes them right to the edge over a two-hour program, but conductor Adam Flatt drove his players with rigor Friday eve.

As with a lot of Colorado Ballet’s productions, the soloists carried the night, including some fresh faces new to the evolving company. Yosvani Ramos was a shiny, dazzling Dodo Bird (sorry that’s Carroll’s invention) and Melissa Zoebisch moved with magic as the Caterpillar. Local favorite Dana Benton (who alternates the lead role with Wehner through the run) brought star power to her feather-clad Eaglet.

There were a lot of high points to this production, kid performers who were cute and not at all cloying; impeccably dressed playing cards; cats, rabbits and mice who moved with the nuance of their species. It’s an ambitious choice for Colorado Ballet and not what we’ve come to expect from this company — there’s no romance, and as category of dance it falls somewhere between a contemporary romp and a story-based pageant. But it’s an enjoyable and rare event in Denver and that makes it a wonder indeed.

Colorado Ballet’s “Alice (in Wonderland)” continues through Feb. 28 at the Ellie Caulkins Opera House in the Denver Performing Arts Complex. Tickets are $30 to $155 and available at 303-837-8888 ext. 2 or coloradoballet.org.

Ray Mark Rinaldi: 303-954-1540, rrinaldi@denverpost.com or @rayrinaldi