A spokeswoman on Friday said the federal government and insurers now are engaged in a "very intensive process" to identify enrollment applications that contain the so-called "834 errors," and to get them fixed so that people will actually have coverage. The errors included forms not being generated, duplicate enrollment forms, and forms with missing or erroneous data.



"We are going to get to a very granular level to identify the individuals who have been impacted, so we have the ability to reach out to them directly," said the spokeswoman, Julie Bataille, of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which operates HealthCare.gov.

Bataille, whose agency before Friday had repeatedly refused to release its internal estimates of 834 error rates, also said that federal workers and contractors were laboring to fix the problems that are continuing to cause some 834 errors in current enrollments.

She said people who have completed their enrollments online should make sure to make their initial premium payments to insurers — which could flag insurers that there might be a problem with that person's enrollment — or ask their insurer to confirm their enrollment is processed. To fix the errors, insurers are often having to re-enter data by hand for each individual.

Bataille said the estimates of the error rates are based on sampling of enrollments, and that the variation in the kinds of errors have "made it difficult for us" to precisely quantify the error rate.

"We do not have precise numbers," she said.

Still, in October and November the error rate "could have been as many as one in four," Bataille said.

With the recent fixes, "we believe nine out of 10 834 transactions are now being successfully transmitted," she said.



(Read more: "Fixed" Obamacare site still not secure: hacker)



HealthCare.gov sells Obamacare insurance to residents of 36 states, and has to date enrolled more than 150,000 people. However, the 15 other Obamacare exchanges being run by 14 other states and the District of Columbia are also experiencing problems from 834 errors.

After the botched, software-glitch-ridden Oct. 1 launch of HealthCare.gov, federal officials had initially denied there were any significant problems with 834 transmissions, despite CNBC.com reporting early on that insurers were seeing error rates as high as 50 percent.

But in late October, after being recruited by President Obama to oversee the repair effort on the site, management guru Jeff Zients said 834 errors were at the top of his list of problems to address.

Robert Zirkelbach, a spokesman for industry trade group America's Health Insurance Plans, said, "The new process put in place this week is making a difference. The enrollment files are getting better, but there is more work to do to ensure consumers are covered."