Topics: Apocalypse, Christianity, Climate Change, Donald Rumsfeld, Editor's Picks, Environment, Environmentalism, Errol Morris, Fox News, Global Warming, Judaism, Movies, Noah, The Unknown Known, Entertainment News

As Darren Aronofsky’s “Noah” and its source material should remind us, the idea of apocalypse is nothing new in human history. We were fascinated with it thousands of years ago, when the villain of the story was an angry God who had decided, for unclear reasons, that the species he had created in his own image was a huge mistake. We remain fascinated with it today, when every Marvel Comics movie, every cable-news broadcast, every nature documentary and every tween fantasy bestseller retails its own version of the coming technological and/or ecological catastrophe. But the nature of the apocalyptic narrative has changed, in ways we’ve only partly noticed. God has receded from the picture over the past century or two, leaving us in his place as both the authors and victims of disaster, the only possible heroes and villains of the story. It’s not clear which we want to be.

In “Noah” we see a contemporary spin on one of the oldest instances of the apocalyptic imagination, but it can be found at work everywhere around us. In Errol Morris’ documentary “The Unknown Known” we see it put to use as a devastating political instrument. Throughout Donald Rumsfeld’s career in public service (definitely a term of art, in his case), he relied on alluring and terrifying apocalyptic fantasies to advance a neoconservative foreign policy agenda, not to mention the economic interests of the military-industrial complex. In the ‘80s, he helped craft elaborate fictions about the looming Soviet threat, which justified the enormous defense buildup of the Reagan years. In the 2000s, the absence of any evidence linking Saddam Hussein to al-Qaida or to nuclear weapons was of course not evidence of absence, leading to a dozen years of pointless war that has poisoned America’s international reputation (even more) and torpedoed any hope of progressive economic policies into the indefinite future.

While Jennifer Baichwal and Edward Burtynsky’s spectacular and upsetting documentary “Watermark” is not a work of the imagination in the usual sense, its portrait of real-life apocalypse in the making has a mythic and visionary power. Burtynsky makes beautiful, large-format photographs of what humans have done to the planet, and in this often breathtaking film about the most precious of all natural resources – water — he and co-director Baichwal travel from the poisoned tanneries of Bangladesh to the construction of a Chinese dam six times larger than Hoover Dam to the desiccated delta of the Colorado River to the half-drained Ogallala aquifer in the central U.S., which has driven an agricultural boom that will sooner or later go bust. There are no moralistic lectures or forecasts of doom in “Watermark”; the film has no voice-over narration, and on-screen info is kept to a minimum. The tragedy and yearning are all in the images, and the biblical judgment is in our heads.

We can find versions of the flood myth and associated legends of apocalyptic cleansing many centuries before the Hebrew Bible, in Mesopotamian, Greek, Hindu and even Native American mythology. As long as we’ve had human civilization, it would seem, we have yearned to imagine its destruction. If Yahweh’s rationale for destroying the world in the Genesis account seems pretty murky to the modern reader, the central premise of the whole story is the supposedly reassuring notion that one guy is in charge who knows what he’s doing. There’s an amusing and almost contemporary quality to the chaotic story told in the epic of Gilgamesh, where the disastrous flood results from infighting among a bunch of gods who behave like spoiled children and spend the storm “cowering like dogs” against the walls of heaven. We like these stories for all kinds of reasons, not bad in themselves: We like being as scared as those quarrelsome Mesopotamian gods, we like explanations for unexplained phenomena (whether or not they are true) and we like stern cautionary fables about how we should behave or else.