GRETA VAN SUSTEREN, FOX NEWS HOST: Let me talk about the Obama administration. President hitting the road, bad numbers. Your thoughts about how the president is doing.

CHARLES KRAUTHAMMER, SYNDICATED COLUMNIST/FOX NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: There is a kind of weariness. You saw it in the "New Yorker" interview with David Remnick. I think the president had a sense that he is not going to be what he thought he was. He can see his legacy slipping away. Look, he said in 2008 that Reagan was historically consequential in a way that a Clinton was not. The ambition of Obama was to be the Reagan of the left, to changed ideological trajectory of America. And he was extremely ambitious in that way.

If you look at the things he's tried to, he struck out with cap-and-trade as a way to get control of the energy economy. He didn't accomplish much with education, which is another one of his ideals. He is not going to get the preschool education, the universal, that he wanted. The one thing he got was health care. That is the one thing that history will remember him for. And it is falling apart around him. And he can see it.

VAN SUSTEREN: Are you saying he lacks the enthusiasm? He's almost given up, is that what you are saying?

KRAUTHAMMER: He can see that having lost control of the Congress and having no prospect of regaining control, and losing the trust of Americans. His numbers are low. You can succeed against a hostile Congress if the people are with you. Reagan did that. But there is nothing large that he can accomplish. And he is has always seen himself as large.

He will be remembered historically, not just because obviously he was the first African-American, but because he changed the ideological direction of America the way a Reagan did. That he is not going to achieve. He got a stimulus and he got Obamacare.

VAN SUSTEREN: What's his achievement?

KRAUTHAMMER: The one thing that would have been a monument would have been ObamaCare. That is a road to nationalizing health care, which is what he wanted. But he can see it falling apart around him. There is not a single Democrat of any stature supporting it right now. He can see it slipping away. If that slips away, then his presidency is ruined. I think he sort of has a sense of that, trying to recapture it but not seeing a way in which he can. And I don't think there is a way in which he can. He is not going to recapture the Congress? He will probably lose the Senate. And then he will truly be a lame duck.