Shirley Burris was shot to death at her home in Midwest City early Saturday morning.

Midwest City police arrested six people, including a juvenile, in connection with the shooting death of a woman early Saturday morning.

According to police, at about 1:22 a.m., officers responded to the report of a shooting at a home, located in the 10000 block of Caton Place in Midwest City. The caller, 42-year-old Kalvin Murray, told police that his wife, 39-year-old Shirley Burris, had been shot after she answered a late night knock at their front door.

9/14/2013 Related Story: Police Investigate Deadly Shooting At MWC Home

Butler was pronounced dead at the scene from a gunshot wound to the chest.

Five suspects, who are all 19 years old, and a 17-year-old girl were arrested over the weekend in connection with the murder. The 19-year-olds have been identified as Jarvis Jones, Justin Woody, Ravan Craig, DeMarkus Long, and Aaron Gaines.



Officers say they found a large amount of marijuana at the victim's home. And the suspects admitted to police that robbery for drugs and money was their motive to commit the crime.

According to police, bullet casings, a clip from one of the weapons used, and a woman's shoe were left behind in the front yard by the suspects.

Two suspects, Jarvis Jones and Justin Woody, were arrested on unrelated traffic charges by the OU Health Sciences Police Department in Oklahoma City on Saturday. Police identified Jones as the one who shot Burris. They say Woody was outside the house breaking a front window as a diversion during the crime.

Ravan Craig and her 17-year-old sister were arrested on Saturday as well. Police learned that Craig's teen sister was the one who knocked on the door prior to the shooting. Officers say they found her shoe at the crime scene.

Craig is accused of driving one of the getaway cars.

DeMarkus Long was arrested Sunday in Oklahoma City by the Oklahoma City Police Department's gang unit. Police say Long was with Jones on the porch at the time of shooting. Long was armed with a handgun during the crime.

Aaron Gaines was also arrested Sunday in Oklahoma City by Midwest City investigators. He was identified as the other getaway driver, since two cars were used.

As officers searched Burris' home, they found a large quantity of marijuana, and learned that Murray and Butler's house had been robbed in August, but they did not report it due to drugs being involved.

The murder weapon and both vehicles used during the crime have been recovered.

All six suspects face charges of first-degree murder, conspiracy to commit a felony, and first degree robbery.

"I am extremely proud of our agency and individuals who worked 36 hours straight through the weekend to solve this murder. Drugs, money and guns are a deadly combination which cost one person their life and most probably will ultimately send six others to many years in prison," Chief Brandon Clabes said.

Felony drug charges will be filed against Burris' husband, Kalvin Murray.