By mid-morning, the line of taxpayers outside the IRS center stretched along the marble wall, past the elevators and water fountain, all the way back to the metal detectors near the entrance of the Earle Cabell Federal Building.

Andrew Concha emerged from the office holding a purple sign. He checked his watch — 11:04 a.m. — then calculated how many people could be seen before the tax assistance center closed at 4:30 p.m. He placed the sign behind the 17th customer, signaling to the other 30 or so in line that their chance of seeing a specialist that day was slim.

"I'm not technically turning them away yet," Concha explained. "I'm letting them know it may not be in their interest to wait three to four hours to see someone."

With Tax Day approaching, it was the best the IRS could offer.

Five years of budget cuts by Congress have left the agency so cash-strapped that IRS Commissioner John Koskinen doesn't bother sugarcoating the state of customer service. "It's abysmal," he said.

Nationwide, only 4 in 10 callers to the agency's toll-free help line are getting through to a real person. The number of 'courtesy disconnects' — a euphemism for an overloaded system hanging up on the customer — has reached 5 million, up from 200,000 last year, the agency reported.

When callers do get off hold, they can forget about asking questions that require real expertise. These are now considered "out of scope." The call-center staff members have been instructed to only tell callers what tax forms they need, where to get them and where to look for online information. No longer can staff offer line-by-line assistance, provide guidance on tax planning or tax law, or help make payment arrangements.

Taxpayers who file paper forms will get refunds later than usual. And with 5,000 fewer agents to go after tax cheats than four years ago, officials estimate that $2 billion in revenue will go uncollected.

At the Dallas tax assistance center, there's an empty space where the office printer sat before it was yanked out. The maintenance contract was too expensive. The shelves in the Forms Room are mostly bare. The 40-page P-17, the bible of tax-return preparation, now costs $23 and must be ordered online.

Overcrowding at the Dallas center came to a head in February when the fire marshal showed up and notified its manager, Johnny Holiday, that he couldn't have customers sitting on the floor and blocking exits and walking space. So now, no one gets in the door unless the person has a seat in one of the 40 chairs in the waiting area.

Late last month, Holiday had to call security officers when a man lunged at an employee, cursing, after waiting two hours to drop off documents for an audit.

Holiday spends his time devising strategies to bring order to an office that, being the IRS, should thrive on order. Twenty minutes before the doors open at 8:30 a.m. on a recent morning, he's making sure that the Line Elimination Team is in place. Its job is do triage on the line, pulling customers out of the queue who have straightforward requests, like asking to make a payment or to get a copy of an old return. Staff members move along the line, handing out paper tickets like at the deli counter, asking customers in Spanish why they were here.

This task takes three of his specialists. That leaves only eight others to meet with taxpayers and answer their questions.

As money has gotten tighter, the demands have grown. Two years ago, another walk-in center in DeSoto, 16 miles south of Dallas, closed, leaving the IRS office in the Earle Cabell building to absorb the business.

With its gray carpets, dropped ceilings with fluorescent lights and keypad-coded doors five blocks from where John F. Kennedy was shot, the Earle Cabell building is a monument to a time when there was more optimism about the federal government.

Since 2010, Republicans on Capitol Hill have slashed the IRS budget by $1.2 billion, about 17 percent adjusting for inflation. Just this fiscal year, $346 million was cut.

By contrast, cuts across the rest of the government have been far more modest and concentrated between 2012 and 2014. During that two-year period, automatic spending reductions shrank non-defense spending, as adjusted for inflation, by 1.3 percent, while IRS spending was chopped 5.6 percent, according to Scott Lilly, budget expert at the Center for American Progress.

Even in an era of shrinking government, conservatives' antipathy toward the tax collection agency stands out. It is punishment for a string of missteps — an extravagant conference for employees in Anaheim, California, the targeting of conservative groups seeking tax exemptions, and $1 million in bonuses given to agency employees who didn't pay their federal taxes.

"We deliberately lowered IRS funding to a level that will make the IRS think twice about what you're doing and why you're doing it," Rep. Ander Crenshaw, R-Fla., who chairs the House panel that sets the agency's budget, said at a hearing last month. The IRS should "focus on core missions providing taxpayer services."

Leslie Paige, vice president for policy and communications at Citizens Against Government Waste, said every government agency could sustain deep cuts and in particular the IRS.

"I think taxpayers and their representatives need to think long and hard about throwing more money at an agency that has proven that it persistently mismanages and wastes the money they have gotten in the past," she said.

As funding has declined, the agency's workload has grown. The IRS is helping to administer subsidies and compliance under President Barack Obama's health-care law and deal with other new wrinkles in the tax code. The agency is also battling an epidemic of identity theft and new, sophisticated cheating schemes. Since the budget cuts, the agency has processed 11 percent more returns, the IRS said.

Koskinen, hired to restore trust in the IRS, is also looking for money to upgrade a system that still runs on COBOL, the computer language that debuted half a century ago. He needs more revenue agents. In Dallas, they only go after people who've cheated the government out of $1 million or more.

"At this point it is a little frustrating when people say, 'We keep cutting your budget so you'll be more efficient,' " Koskinen said.

When Jerry Reed, a beaten-down taxpayer, finally made it to a cubicle inside the Dallas center, Andrew Concha apologized for the long wait.