UW safety Tanner McEvoy comes down with one of his two interceptions against Minnesota on Saturday. He finished the regular season with six picks. Credit: Getty Images

By of the

PLAYER OF THE GAME

Give the game ball to Joe Rudolph, UW's offensive coordinator/offensive line coach.

With starting right guard Walker Williams out with an unspecified injury suffered against Northwestern, the staff decided to shift right tackle Beau Benzschawel to right guard and give Jacob Maxwell his second start at right tackle.

It must be noted that Minnesota was without its top three defensive tackles because of injuries, but nevertheless UW's line, tight ends and fullbacks dominated the line of scrimmage.

The Badgers, who entered the day 10th in the Big Ten in rushing at 138.2 yards per game, rushed 35 times for 199 yards and four touchdowns — in the first half.

Minnesota's linebackers came downhill against the run more in the second half and UW coach Paul Chryst acknowledged afterward he got a bit too conservative calling plays.

As a result, UW rushed 27 times for just 58 yards after halftime to finish with 257 yards on 62 carries.

The damage was done in the first half and that allowed UW to prevail against the Gophers for the 12th consecutive time.

OFFENSIVE

PLAY OF THE GAME

Tailback Dare Ogunbowale entered the regular-season finale with a college-high rushing total of 117 yards on 18 carries in UW's victory over Nebraska.

Ogunbowale surpassed that in the first half Saturday when he rushed 19 times for 131 yards.

The former walk-on ran hard, made defenders miss and got just about every yard he could.

His cleanest run came late in the first half to help UW take a 28-14 lead.

UW ran the ball on five consecutive plays after a Minnesota turnover and faced second and 6 at the Gophers' 18. Ogunbowale, who had carries of 15, 4 and 4 yards on the drive, took a handoff from Joel Stave and bounced to the outside of left tackle Tyler Marz.

He picked up a key kick-out block from tight end Troy Fumagalli and outran the defense to the end zone.

DEFENSIVE PLAY OF THE GAME

UW linebacker Joe Schobert entered the day with four forced fumbles in 11 games.

His fifth of the season helped turn the momentum, and the game, in UW's favor in the second quarter.

With the score tied, Minnesota took over at its 16 after a UW punt. Quarterback Mitch Leidner ran the ball on the third play of the possession and Schobert came in from the side and ripped the ball loose just before Leidner's knee hit the ground.

The ball popped into the arms of cornerback Darius Hillary at the Minnesota 34 with 6:32 left in the first half.

The call was upheld by a booth review and Taiwan Deal scored on a 13-yard run four plays later to break the 14-14 tie.

SPECIAL TEAMS

PLAY OF THE GAME

Minnesota's last real hope to rally for a victory ended with a botched onside kick.

The Gophers had just driven for a 72 yards on five plays for a touchdown to pull within 31-21 with 5 minutes 33 seconds left in the game. Kicker Andrew Harte lined up on the left side of the Minnesota formation and hit a hopper toward the right sideline.

The ball bounced over the heads of several UW players and a Minnesota player hoping to recover the kick, failed to go the required 10 yards and went out of bounds.

UW took over at the Minnesota 37, and although the Badgers didn't score the Gophers failed to score on their final two possessions, the second of which ended with an interception.

INSIDE THE HUDDLE

In case you missed it, defensive end Chikwe Obasih dropped tailback Shannon Brooks after a 1-yard gain on the Gophers' first offensive play and then appeared to imitate swinging an ax after the play.

"I was swinging an ax," Obasih said with a devilish grin.

Obasih was imitating teammate Dare Ogunbowale, who made a similar move after making a tackle on special teams in UW's 34-24 victory over the Gophers last season.

The referee made sure Obasih didn't try the move again.

"I thought I'd do it all game long," Obasih said, "but the ref said don't do any more of that or else I'm going to flag you."

QUOTE

"Every win is fun. Every win is special. But this one...I know I wanted it more than I probably ever wanted to win a game before."

Joel Stave, UW quarterback

BY THE NUMBERS

5 Turnovers forced by UW, one third of its season total

6 Interceptions this season by Tanner McEvoy

7 Starting combinations UW used on the offensive line in 12 games

12 Consecutive victories by UW in the series

53 Rushing yards for Minnesota, below the team's average of 151.1 per game

155 Rushing yards for UW's Dare Ogunbowale, a college high

UP NEXT

Wisconsin (9-3, 6-2 Big Ten) must wait to learn its bowl destination, but the likely landing spot appears to be the Holiday Bowl on Dec. 30 in San Diego. UW would be paired against a team from the Pacific 12.