Raymond "Rich" Smith with his van on Main Street, where he has been repairing chipped windshields for 10 years. ( Vince Winkel / Staff )

EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call's Take Two series revisits people and things we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

Raymond "Rich" Smith had his day in court Friday, and it didn't go as he had hoped.

"I was found guilty on all five counts. Each count carries 30 days in jail and up to a $1,000 fine," said Smith, whose windshield repair business at the Countrywood Inn & RV Park at 1550 N. Main Street received a city citation. He was accused of violating a city ordinance prohibiting such mobile businesses.

Smith is disappointed and bewildered. As the Times-Call reported in January, Smith repairs windshield chips and cracks and has been doing so for 10 years. But he doesn't work out of a garage or shop. Instead, he has a van parked outside the Main Street motel where he works as a repairman and landlord. The van says "Auto Glass Chip Repair" and has Smith's phone number listed, and that's the problem.

Longmont's city zoning code does not allow for mobile businesses, except food trucks, anywhere in the city, according to Joni Marsh, director of planning and development services.

The five counts are for conducting a mobile auto repair business, which is not permitted in any zoning district within the City of Longmont per municipal code 15.09.030.

"Why this focus on me, after all these years. I know I was unfairly targeted. And it's because the competition complained," Smith said.

Council member Bonnie Finley, who is the council liaison to the Planning and Zoning Commission, told the Times-Call in January she had heard from Smith and was sympathetic, but the city's law was the law.

"I think it's a shame that we're impacting his ability to make a living, but I do know the city has spoken with him and tried to help him to develop a business plan to allow him to continue," Finley said in January. "He hasn't wanted to make those adjustments or meet the requirements."

Finley said she wished the city could make an exception for Smith, but she feared it would set a precedent for others who want exceptions. She did however contact the court on Smith's behalf.

In an April 1 email to Longmont Municipal Judge Diana VanDeHey, council member Finley wrote "I understand that Rich is coming to your court tomorrow for code violations. ... On further inquiry, it was discovered that a competitor had complained and this is what set the code enforcement in motion. While I understand that his business does not meet the requirements, it seems very heavy handed to me that we shut him down after so many years. I ask the court to be lenient in this case as I do not believe Mr. Smith continued operation out of malice, but out of necessity."

Smith charges $25 to repair a windshield chip and $5 for every chip after that. His main work is running the motel, where he also lives, and doing its maintenance.

"I like doing windshield repairs. I find it very therapeutic actually. And I only do a few a week. I'm really not taking business away from anybody," he said Saturday afternoon in the motel parking lot.

"I run a motel here so I can't just leave or fix windshields somewhere else. That's why I do the work here."

On May 20, Smith will meet with his probation officer and learn what penalties he'll end up paying. He doesn't think it's fair.

"I keep telling friends, I don't know why this is the crime of the century," Smith said. "I'm not selling drugs, you know. Why go after me?"

For now his white van with the red lettering remains parked at the Countrywood Inn & RV Park. Smith says he has no plans to repair windshields until his court date and most likely beyond.

He is considering an appeal.

"Public opinion is on my side. It's flattering really, I'm getting lots of calls and visits of support," he explained. "They see that someone is getting beat up and bullied, and nobody likes it."

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel