— South Florida has had its problems on both sides of the ball this season, but the Bulls entered Saturday night’s game against SMU looking like a powerhouse compared to their opponent.

The only winless team in the Football Bowl Subdivision, SMU came by that distinction honestly.

The Mustangs entered their matchup with USF on a 10-game losing streak, the longest current streak in FBS. They also rank last in the nation in six categories: Scoring offense (9.6 points per game), scoring defense (46.8), total defense (547.0 yards per game), pass efficiency defense (172.46 rating), sacks allowed (5.13 per game) and turnover margin (minus-1.88 per game).

Their scoring average was almost five points worse than the 14.3 of next-to-last Eastern Michigan, though the Mustangs entered the night fresh off their best offensive performance of the season in a 38-28 loss to Tulsa.

In addition, SMU ranked 124th among the 125 FBS teams in takeaways (eight) and 123rd in total offense (276.3 yards per game).

The Mustangs do rank among the nation’s top 95 in one category — net punting. Their average of 35.5 net yards per punt is 95th.

Watson stays home

USF starting DT Elkino Watson was suspended indefinitely because of what the university called a violation of team rules. The 6-2, 291-pound senior did not make the trip.

The loss was a big blow to an already-shaky defense that entered Saturday allowing 423.4 yards per game. Watson leads USF’s defensive linemen with 31 tackles and 61⁄2 tackles for loss.

He was replaced in the lineup by 6-2, 285-pound sophomore Derrick Calloway.

New QBs

USF wasn’t the only team at Gerald J. Ford Stadium starting an inexperienced quarterback. SMU sophomore Matt Davis was making his second career start after a strong performance last week at Tulsa.

Davis rang up 393 yards of total offense last week at Tulsa, including 181 yards and two touchdowns rushing.

Freshman Quinton Flowers made his first start for USF on Saturday, becoming the Bulls’ third starting quarterback in as many games and their fifth in Willie Taggart’s 22 games as head coach.

More new blood

Five players made their first career starts for USF. On offense, Flowers was joined as a new starter by senior WR Clinton Jones, while Calloway and freshman CBs Deatrick Nichols and Tajee Fullwood were in the defensive lineup for the first time.

Ejected – not

With 7:35 left in the second quarter, SMU safety A.J. Justice was called for targeting a defenseless player with a block on USF’s Reshard Cliett during a punt return. The call came with a 15-yard penalty and an automatic ejection.

But after a replay showed Justice’s block was made with a shoulder pad, rather than leading with the helmet, the call was overturned and Justice was allowed to remain in the game.

Frigid

The game-time temperature at Ford Stadium was a chilly 43 degrees — the coldest for a USF game this season – with fog and a heavy mist.

Inspiration

Rafael Williams, who scored the first touchdown in USF history in 1997, was on the Bulls’ sideline. Williams, who lives in the Dallas area, addressed the team Friday night.