Yesterday, Pfizer Inc. (PFE) announced it had won the approval of an influential US advisory panel, for its drug Prevnar 13. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) agreed that patients could take Prevnar 13, even if they had been injected with Merck and Co., Inc.’s (MRK) Pneumovax vaccine. The committee reached the agreement in a 13-2 vote, and will revisit this recommendation in 2018.

Prevnar 13 and Pneumovax 23 can both be used for preventing infection due to pneumococcus bacteria. The bacterium is responsible for causing pneumonia, meningitis, blood infections and ear infections. About 900,000 cases for pneumonia are recorded in the US each year, with 90% of them being adults and it has a 7% mortality rate.

Pfizer conducted a clinical trial for Prevnar 12 on 85,000 patients who received the vaccine or a placebo. The patients who were given Prevnar experienced a 46% drop in the rate of first-episodes of pneumonia, compared to the placebo group.

The drug is Pfizer’s second best-selling product as it generated $3.97 billion in revenues (7.7%) in FY13. It was given mainly to children but a large scale trial in March revealed is the drug is also effective in patients aged 65 and up. According to Reuters, this has led analysts to raise the long-term sales forecast for the vaccine by as much as $3 billion a year.

Insurance companies are required to cover for vaccines recommended by ACIP, according to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010. However, a panel from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said the Federal Medicare Insurance program might not be able to cover Prevnar 13 patients, who have already been treated with Pneumovax 23.

Those patients will be given only a shot of Prevnar 13, according to the recommendation. Otherwise, patients who have not been immunized previously will be given Pneumovax 23, after a dose of Prevnar 13.

The Federal Medical Insurance program reported it would cover for Prevnar 13 immediately, but it might take a year to make a final decision about the following dose of Pneumovax (for patients who haven’t been immunized).