I can't believe the February sweeps are just 10 days away. I'm still watching last year's shows! So before 2014 is too far along let's do an inventory, head count, status report, look back and/or ahead at the four local network affiliates.

■ WTMJ-TV (Channel 4)

Rest assured the Journal Broadcast Group station is hoping the Winter Olympics will help everyone forget about the two-month blackout on and ugly public battle with Time Warner Cable. The Olympics will provide strong prime-time ratings during the February sweeps, but the station's 10 p.m. newscast will be bumped to 10:30 p.m. and later. While some viewers may switch over to a competitor's newscast at 10 p.m., don't underestimate NBC's skill at creating dramatic story lines to keep viewers glued to Olympic action and driving them into delayed newscasts.

Journal Broadcast is owned by Journal Communications, which owns the Journal Sentinel.

Strongest newscast: 5 p.m., anchored by Mike Jacobs and Carole Meekins.

Comings and goings: On Dec. 31, reporter Annie Scholz, who joined the station in June of 2011 left to manage the marketing department for a local company. Veteran photojournalist Michael Greene died of cancer Jan. 7 at the age of 53.

■ WITI-TV (Channel 6)

A new year finds the Fox affiliate under new ownership. It's only been three weeks since Tribune Broadcasting took over WITI from former owners Local TV Holdings LLC, so it's too soon to tell what changes if any this might bring.

Tribune has no record of blowing up the stations it acquires, but it is a national brand — with the largest group of Fox affiliates in the country — and it's hard to think it will not make its presence felt. One thing that hasn't changed is the station's relentlessly upbeat public image, exemplified by the "Real Milwaukee" features show and the "Studio A" afternoon show made in its image.

Fox broadcasts of Green Bay Packers games on WITI took a hit about the same time quarterback Aaron Rodgers did, but finished strong. Expect the Super Bowl on Fox, Feb. 2, to end the football season with an exclamation point.

Strongest newscast: 6 a.m., anchored by Jessob Reisbeck, Angelica Duria, Nicole Koglin.

Comings and goings: Most recent hire appears to be multimedia journalist Jonathan Gregg, by way of Cedar Rapids and Green Bay, last fall. WITI recently advertised for a "Real Milwaukee" photojournalist with a "passion to tell hyper local stories" and for a reporter ( "If you need the desk or a newspaper for stories, we don't need you here.")

■ WISN-TV (Channel 12)

It's steady as she goes at the Hearst Broadcasting ABC affiliate whose square-shooting image is paying ratings dividends. It won its sixth consecutive 10 p.m. sweeps news ratings last November. And during the recent polar vortex, it was the choice of the frozen viewer demographic, winning the 6 a.m., 5 p.m., 6 p.m. and 10 p.m. newscasts.

Strongest newscast: 10 p.m., anchored by Kathy Mykleby and Craig McKee.

Comings and goings: Some recent anchor turmoil saw the departures of Jason Newton and Portia Young. The station subsequently hired Thema Ponton from Portland, Maine, as weekend anchor to replace Young, and continues to seek a replacement for Newton. Max Seigle joined the station in October from Little Rock, Ark., as a multimedia journalist.

■ WDJT-TV (Channel 58)

The Weigel Broadcasting station saw its share of turmoil. Reporter Shari Dunn and Telemundo anchor Carlos Vergara filed complaints with the EEOC. And WDJT is still looking for a replacement for general manager Jim Hall, named vice president of business development for Weigel. Bob Ramsey, Weigel executive for local media who oversees stations in South Bend, Ind., Chicago and Milwaukee, is acting GM here while conducting a search for Hall's replacement.

Combined viewership for the Chicago-based Weigel's eight programming "streams" here often beats the competition. "Jeopardy" at 6 p.m. on WDJT regularly beats local news. And a powerhouse CBS prime-time lineup helps its 10 p.m. news stay competitive. In November it was one-tenth of a ratings point behind WITI.

Strongest newscast: 10 p.m., anchored by Paul Piaskoski and Michelle McCormack.

Comings and goings: Dunn left in November, replaced by Sachelle Saunders. And WDJT anchor reporter Sandra Torres replaces Laura Rodriguez as co-anchor of the 10 p.m. newscast on Telemundo (Channel 63) with Vergara.

Email: ddudek@journalsentinel.com.