Q: I’m six weeks into a trial separation. My heart is telling me I’m better off alone. My husband can be very controlling, but I am struggling with guilt that he thinks we will reconcile. He is trying hard to address the issues we had and is in counseling himself. I don’t want to lead him on, but if I tell him “divorce” I know he will only increase his efforts to win me back.

A: I’m guessing that part of your instinct to walk on eggshells is not about guilt, but rather fear. It sounds like he’ll make it very hard for you to do what you feel is best for you, and that he will be relentless in getting his way (romantic in movies, but not so much with a real-life controlling ex).

Give yourself even more emotional space to get out from his grip, to evaluate your feelings and generate a plan of action. It’s great he’s working on himself, but that may not be enough. And you need a space of your own to hear yourself think, and to have those thoughts and feelings validated.

Seek counseling on your own, so that your decision is one that springs from your own wants and needs - not his.

Q: I am in my first real relationship. I love him, but he makes little, picky comments about my appearance. When you add them up, he has criticized practically every part of my body.

It’s like “You should run more — I bet it would tone you up” or “Time for a trim — your hair is out of control.” It ruins the moment. He thinks I’m too sensitive and he’s just trying to be helpful.

A: This is the reality: He’s consistently criticizing you, then criticizing your feelings about being criticized. If he thinks it’s “helpful” to repeatedly make you feel unattractive, and then to tell you that you should just get used to it, I urge you to reconsider this whole shebang.

First relationships can be bliss, but they run the risk of making you settle for subpar treatment. I hear your love for him, but in situations like this, that attachment can make it harder to pull the plug — even when an advice columnist’s gut tells you to.

Andrea Bonior, a clinical psychologist, writes a weekly mental health advice column for The Washington Post’s Express and is author of “The Friendship Fix.” For more information, visit www.drandreabonior.com. You can also follow her on Twitter: @drandreabonior.