Progressive liberalism is destroying the fabric of our once-great nation, and progressive liberals refuse to acknowledge that their grand societal experiment has been a miserable failure.

In cities and states all over the country, where high crime, high unemployment and unsustainable budget deficits prevail, the administrations are Democrat and liberal. These petty politicians pander to the lowest common denominator. Labor unions, teachers unions and special interest groups dictate public policy by threats of strikes, boycotts and civil unrest.

The city of Baltimore is a prime example of that. Over the past 10 years, almost $2 billion in aid, much of it designated for public schools, has been poured into that city, and still the Baltimore public schools are among the lowest performing in the nation. The schools are in disarray and disrepair, poverty in minority communities is at an all-time high, and black neighborhoods are run by gangs of uneducated, violent, fatherless youths who have nothing to lose. Yet, if we are to believe the Baltimore mayor and City Council, it is the fault of white America, and what they need is more money.

What did they do with the $2 billion? They sure didn’t spend it on improving conditions in minority neighborhoods and schools. Thanks to the rioting by a mob of thugs, 200 businesses in the inner city have been destroyed. What impact will that have on minority employment?

Nationally, the Treasury Department took in more tax revenue last year than in any year in history, yet we are saddled with a multi-trillion-dollar deficit, and the spending keeps growing. What are they doing with the money? I’ll tell you one thing they are doing with it: The Obama administration has announced a plan to provide Social Security disability benefits to Puerto Ricans.

Progressive liberals believe they can be all things to all people if we just get out of their way and yield them all the power they desire.

This country was founded as a capitalist republic; that’s how we became the great and shining city on the hill. What we need in government are representatives who understand that we must be able to afford our high-minded liberal philosophy. Unfortunately, no one in any political party appears on the horizon. Just more of the same political egomaniacs maneuvering to control our lives ... and our money.