I always thought the United States had separation of church and state pretty well settled. But I guess, according to the Republicans running for office now, it's not true. It's not just current presidential candidate Ted Cruz, former candidate Rick Santorum and all those guys. It's governors and mayors and everyone with the R in front of their names pushing their religion. This is kind of dangerous as far as I can see.

As a Vietnam veteran, I really appreciated Donna Vickroy's column about the Vietnam War. For years and years and years, we've always been pushed to the wayside. It's all about the World War II veterans. We've all suffered in wars. I was 18 years old and had no choice but to go, and I'm sure I've seen things just as dramatic as anybody else. We've never gotten any support, or any welcome home, or anything such as the World War II veterans, and now the Iraq vets. It was nice to see her acknowledge us in the column, but this is way, way overdue and I don't feel we can ever really hang our heads high like other veterans have.

Bob, Oak Forest

As I read with astonishment the remarks by Fred from Tinley Park, George, and Mike from Oak Lawn — three incorrigible Christians trying to defend God's existence — I couldn't help but be awed by their use of the same old tired refrains. 1. Free will. Here's the deal. If God truly gave man the free will to commit evil, than when man does commit evil, half the blame is on God's shoulders. 2. God isn't supposed to intervene in the lives of man. Oh really? Unless that man is an Israelite from 3,000 years ago, I guess. Then it's perfectly understandable. Christians are the only people I know who can deny facts, accept fantasies and use defenseless excuses to corroborate nonsense.

Bob, Calumet City

A lot of people believe Barack Obama is the worst president in the history of the United States. Some people say that because he's the first black president. That's not the reason. He's the worst president because of the terrible mess he made in the Middle East. He also made a mess with our allies all over the world. He promised us transparency and used secrecy. He also used race and class warfare to his advantage. He allowed immigrants who came here illegally to overrun our country. Now there is no way to monitor these terrorists all over the United States. He also lied to us about the Affordable Care Act. He is the worst president because of these faults.

Joe, Alsip

In regards to the commenter about no mail delivery on Good Friday and Holy Saturday: Well, the government employees actually get different holidays off than schools and everybody else, so Good Friday to them and other municipal employees was a holiday and Holy Saturday, too. It's not that they didn't deliver on purpose. Everybody gets a holiday and, like I said, some holidays are different than others. I used to be a government employee. Believe me, we work as hard as anybody else does.

Jerry, Chicago Heights

The preamble in the Illinois Constitution says, "We, the People," not "We, the Politicians." The people should tell all politicians in the State of Illinois: No more taxes. None. Zero. Zilch. Don't raise any taxes the rest of this year. You've got 10,000 taxes on the books thanks to these greedy, money-hungry, overpaid politicians throughout the state.

RC, Oak Lawn

It might not be a bad idea to entertain the possibility of taking students of college age or who are in college, and have them taken to a place where they will be spoken to by Vietnam veterans. Maybe then these students will get the appreciation of what these men did in the Vietnam War. Perhaps some of their fathers, uncles or brothers were a part of that war, but perhaps the reason that they're in college now is because of Vietnam veterans.

John, Bridgeport

While Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders has wonderful ideas, I have no idea how we're going to pay for them. Our main problems are the wars we're in, the deficit we've got and the money we're spending that we don't have. We have to change these things. Nobody's talking about this. The ideas of the Republican Party, led by candidate Ted Cruz, build on problems they've caused and now blame on President Barack Obama. While I'm not a fan of Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton, at least she hasn't promised us the moon. I'd like a candidate to come up with real answers to our problems. Stop this buffoonery. Let's get our country back on track to where it should be.

Ed, Homer Glen

What's Speak Out?

Speak Out allows readers to comment on the issues of the day. Email Speak Out at speakout@southtownstar.com or call 312-222-2427. Please limit comments to 30 seconds or about 120 words and give your first name and your hometown.