Striking a balance between work and life might be easier for men, especially if that balance calls for requesting flexible work options to accommodate personal life.

A study by Christin Munsch, a sociology professor from Furman University, reveals that employers are far more likely to grant a man’s request to telecommute for childcare obligations than a woman’s (69.7% to 56.7%).

Munsch’s study took 646 people, aged 18- to 65-years-old. Those who took part in the study were shown a transcript of what they believed to be a conversation between an employee and a human resources professional.

In the transcripts, some of the listed employees requested to begin the work day early and leave work early three days a week or asked to work remotely from home twice a week.

Employees who asked for flexibility were from both genders and gave various reasons (such as childcare issues) for requesting the time off.

Once participants read the transcript, they were asked how likely it was they would approve the request. Participants also evaluated the employees on such factors as dependability, likeability, commitment and dedication.

Revealing a Gender Bias

The responses offered by participants revealed a significant gender gap in favor of male workers seeking flexible work options. Here is how participants responded to questions on the survey:

Granting flexibility – 69.7% said they would be “likely” or “very likely” to approve a man’s request to work from home for childcare versus 56.7% for female employees

69.7% said they would be “likely” or “very likely” to approve a man’s request to work from home for childcare versus 56.7% for female employees Likeability – 24.3% found the man to be “extremely likeable,” as compared to 3% who said the same for the woman

24.3% found the man to be “extremely likeable,” as compared to 3% who said the same for the woman Commitment – Only 2.7% found the man “not at all” or “not very” committed versus 15.5% who said the woman was “not at all” or “not very” committed.

Explaining the Differences

Munsch said the disparities may reveal persistence of traditional gender role perceptions in the workplace. Men, for example, are considered the breadwinners. Those who also help out at home may be considered progressive, great guys.

On the other hand, women are still viewed as the primary caregivers at home, which means employers and colleagues may feel it would be impossible for them to telecommute and remain productive professionally.

Munch said the research shows that companies should proceed with caution when creating flexible work policies.

“I’m a big proponent of flexible work, but this work shows that unless we’re careful about how we implement it, we may just exacerbate inequality,” she was quoted by the Washington Post as saying.

She suggests devising objective measures for productivity and performance that help overcome unconscious bias.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments