I fell in love with cross-country skiing all over again this month on a backcountry holiday in Pagosa Springs, Colorado. I swear it had nothing to do with the local medicinal herb dispensary. The snow conditions were perfect, the company was divine, and I had the joy of re-learning a sport that is considered one of the greatest workouts in the world.

I used to cross-country ski in the North Woods of Wisconsin, but then I moved to the mountains and downhill skiing swept me off my feet. Repeatedly. Eventually, I gained new skills and became a solid intermediate skier with no interest whatsoever in going steeper, faster, bumpier.

“I like slow skiing,” I used to tell my instructors, who never believed me. “I don’t care about speed. I care about fun.”

Learning to downhill gave me strength, confidence, balance and edge control. It also gave me a concussion last year on an easy blue run — I slid headfirst into a rock, and if it weren’t for my helmet, I’d be dead — so I decided to give cross-country another go.

It was fabulous! No lines, no snowboarders, no $100 lift tickets. And no need for helmets.

I’m not ready to ditch downhill, but I am inspired to tell you five things about cross-country skiing to encourage you to try it yourself:

■ An amazing workout. Downhill skiing won’t develop your cardiovascular fitness; cross-country skiing will. You’ll strengthen your heart and lungs, not to mention your legs, arms, shoulders, back and core.

Cross-country is a highly efficient aerobic sport, rhythmical and repetitive, requiring continuous effort, building endurance as you go. Downhill is a controlled fall down a mountain. In fact, if you want to downhill safely and well, you’ll get in shape before you hit the slopes. And as a calorie-burner, crosscountry beats downhill every step of the way. Every limb, every joint, is in motion, and you get the bonus of working your body in a cross-over fashion — right leg forward, left arm forward; left leg forward, right arm forward — that works both sides of your brain in a coordinated, balanced, blissful way.

■ Consider the cost. Cross-country skiing costs much less than downhill, so you can afford to do it more often. The best cross-country boots cost a third of what downhill boots cost, and they are 1,000 times more comfortable. A day pass to use groomed trails might cost 10 bucks compared to $40-to-$100 dollars or more to go downhill.

And lessons! Learning to downhill ski can take years. You can absorb the basics of cross-country in a lesson or two, and then practice, practice, practice.

And then there’s the cost of hurting yourself. Downhill skiing is considered a high-risk, high-injury sport. Cross-country isn’t. The pace is slower, but the payoff can be just as thrilling.

■ Fun for the whole family. I’ve heard it said that if you can walk, you can cross-country ski. It’s not exactly true because there are skills involved, and you need to learn them to maximize your fun and minimize your risk. But just about anyone of any age can earn to cross-country ski, so the 8-year-olds and 80-yearolds can play together, and hot-dogging snowboarders are nowhere to be seen.

■ The gear has improved. Backcountry cross-country skiing — ungroomed trails on wider skis, with edges — is giving new life to cross-country, and so is skate skiing. My new backcountry skis are much lighter (and shorter) than my old ones. It makes the uphills much easier and the downhills more controllable.

Learning to snow plow is essential no matter what your gear, and the newer, lighter skis with edges make that much easier, too.

■ You connect to nature. When you downhill ski, you need to focus full attention on your technique, your turns and avoiding trouble. The margin for error is small. When you cross-country ski, not so much. It’s slower, less risky, more meditative.

You can look around, absorb the beauty, appreciate nature in all her winter splendor. Part of the magic of cross-country is the regular, repetitive breathing — slow, steady, deep. It takes you to another place, physically, mentally, spiritually.

I can’t wait to go back.

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.