Compared with the tools Hayden has at his disposal, I went to college in the Stone Age.

By Christina Baker Kline

My son Hayden started college last week. Like many parents of freshmen, my husband and I drove him to school together, the back of the car filled with essentials like extra-long twin sheets, a clip-on light for his bunk bed and a random mix of extension cords.

The milk crates, shower caddy and three-ring binders we helped him carry up the stairs flashed me back to my own first days of college — but they weren’t the only reason this experience felt so familiar.

Three decades ago I was a freshman at the same university. Unlike Hayden, who grew up outside of New York and attended a competitive suburban high school, I was the only student from my small town in Maine to go to Yale, one of the few to even venture out of state. And I had no idea what I was getting into.

I was lucky, in a way, to be so naïve; I didn’t know what I didn’t know. I floated through my first year obliviously unaware of the social currencies being exchanged around me, only dimly perceiving markers of wealth and status.

When a fellow student bragged about his Alfa Romeo, I thought he meant a Camaro, the fanciest car I’d ever seen. When a classmate casually mentioned that she was meeting her parents in Gstaad for the long weekend, I assumed it was a town in Connecticut. Imagine my surprise when I realized that actual Vanderbilts lived in Vanderbilt Hall.

But it wasn’t just my relative lack of sophistication that made my experience so vastly different from my son’s. Typewriters and carbon paper, telephones with curly cords, TVs with a few channels and no remotes, cassette tapes; compared with the tools Hayden has at his disposal, I went to college in the Stone Age.

Without even thinking about it, my son uses technology in almost everything he does, large and small. He installed Yale-specific apps on his phone that provide information about when the washers and dryers in the basement of his dorm are available, the daily menus of each dining hall, ratings of local restaurants, student contact information, the entire list of classes, and an interactive campus map that shows you where you are and where you’re going.

Within minutes of learning his three suitemates’ names this summer, he knew an incredible amount about them: They friended and followed each other on Face­book and Twitter and Instagram and immediately had access to each other’s prom pictures, family vacation shots, performance videos, philosophical musings. They established an ongoing group text, exchanging information such as who was bringing an Xbox and who had a coffeemaker. Soon after arriving on campus, Hayden made a spreadsheet of potential classes, vetting them in advance by using teacher rating sites and watching videos of potential professors on YouTube.

There’s no question that my son is better prepared for college than I was. He manages his time better, is more efficient and more directed, and spends less time in lines and more time doing exactly what he sets out to do.

But I wonder what may be lost. I suspect it’s unlikely that he will ever, as I did, trek all the way across campus on a snowy day to a friend’s dorm room, only to find that person gone but another roommate available, and making a new friend in the process. He won’t have to type and retype his papers — using Wite-Out, no less! — to make revisions, finding in that process new insights into what he’s written. I doubt that he’ll make his way to a common room at 9 p.m. every Sunday to watch a specific TV show (“L.A. Law,” I’m thinking of you), bonding with a hearty group of loyalists.

I think fondly of the rabbit holes I disappeared down when I researched papers for history and English because I couldn’t find quite what I was looking for, or because I had to go through so much material to find examples for my thesis. When you can type a few words into a search engine and land on your topic — or when you can scan a Shakespeare play for specific words or symbols — what opportunities might you miss to expand your thinking in unexpected ways?

I worry that students today are more connected and more fragmented, learning more about one another from afar but watching programs on their iPads in their rooms. The knowledge they have at their fingertips may make them more productive, but it may also blunt the thrill of unanticipated discovery.

Sometime in my first week on that long-ago campus, I found myself hopelessly lost, scrutinizing an indecipherable map, when a freshman boy came up to me. “Can I help you with that?” he asked, and though he didn’t know his way around any better than I did, we figured it out together. Twenty-three years of marriage later, we’re still figuring it out.

As Hayden navigates his own journey, I wish for him the satisfaction of productivity and the joy of tapping his potential. But I also hope for him at least some of the wide-eyed wonder I felt as a freshman, the delight of discovering a world that was as remote and unknown to me as a foreign country.

And I hope he’ll experience the unexpected pleasures of getting lost, of chance encounters, and the incalculable benefits of time wasted for no good reason at all.

Christina Baker Kline, of Montclair, is the author of five novels, including “Orphan Train,” currently on the New York Times trade paperback bestseller list.