PA-6: Another Republican Hopeful Weighs a Run

Written by Nick Field, Contributing Writer

Like nearly everyone else in and around PA-6, Patrick Collins is considering a run for Rep. Gerlach’s (R-Chester) open seat.

Collins, an executive at the biotech company CSL Behring, emailed several local media outlets on Sunday to let them know he has been paying attention to the articles written about possible GOP candidates who could replace Rep. Jim Gerlach in Pennsylvania’s Sixth Congressional District. He also wanted to let them know that he may decide to throw his own hat in the ring.

“I am one such person who is beginning to kick the tires on exploring the nomination through a primary challenge,” Collins writes. “As an outsider who has never held political office or a party position, it would be incredibly difficult to seek the nomination in a normal political cycle. However, with a four month sprint to the primary, an outside challenge is much more feasible and raising the funds necessary to be competitive far more possible.”

After that assessment of the race, Collins extolled his own virtues as a candidate.

“Further, as an executive at a successful biotech company in the area, I believe I could bring a pragmatic conservative approach to a district that is the home of biotech in the state of Pennsylvania and tens of thousands of its employees, much as Jim Gerlach has done over the past 12 years.”

Collins served on Gerlach’s campaign finance committee and has worked in the biotech and pharmaceutical industries. In his missive, he hit several key Republican checkpoints including opposition to taxes and Obamacare. He also stated he plans to “partially self-fund” his primary campaign.

On the other hand, Collins has kind words for some of his potential opponents and mentions some potential obstacles to his candidacy. He is apparently worried about what effect a leave of absence would have on his job and the fact that he and his wife are preparing for the birth of their first child just days before the primary.

He stated that he would likely not run if Chester County Republican Chairman Val DiGiorgio entered the race, and called DiGiorgio before he released his statement. DiGiorgio admitted to PoliticsPA that he is considering a run himself.

Ultimately, Collins’ statement highlights the fact that Gerlach’s surprise announcement has upended this race and left it wide open.

“In the end, this is a long-winded attempt on my part to say that there are other potential candidates out there besides the four current or former officeholders commonly mentioned in most articles to date,” he concluded.

January 13th, 2014 | Posted in Congress, Front Page Stories, Top Stories | No Comments