ANALYSIS/OPINION:

When facing the massive problems associated with an open border, deluges of illegal immigration, and now even government sponsored surges of so-called “refugees,” we naturally must discuss our concern about terrorism and violent crime. That, however, is only part of the threat.

The uncontrolled and chaotic violation this nation brought to us by President Obama’s immigration and refugee schemes pose a number of threats to the homeland as insidious and deadly as the Islamic jihadi.

Viruses we had finally eliminated from our lives are returning, and others we should never have to face are now crawling through our nation, targeting our children and families.

In addition to the word “jihad” we now must re-introduce into our lexicon the words measles, polio, diphtheria, tuberculosis, malaria, scabies, dengue, and now “Zika.”

The Zika virus is emerging as a new threat, is spread by mosquito bites, but the CDC is now warning of a transmission through a blood transfusion and sexual contact. Symptoms include fever, rash, joint and muscle pain, and headache. The horror show part of this scourge is it can also apparently cause brain damage in the fetuses of pregnant women.

In 2000, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) declared measles eradicated in the United States. But then there was suddenly a 20-year high of 600 cases in 2014, more than all reported cases between 2009 and 2013, reports Breitbart News.

The government and media blamed a lack of vaccinations for the spread, while admitting that it was an unidentified “foreign visitor” who likely brought the virus into the country.

At about the same time, in the summer of 2014, a mysterious polio-like illness began to strike children in 34 states. Over 100 children were impacted, many left permanently paralyzed. The CDC has guessed at a possible cause, but there has been no official finding as to what caused so many young people to be condemned with a virus similar to what was eradicated in the United States in 1979.

What was happening just prior to the spread of previously thought annihilated viruses? The massive surge of illegal immigrants, including “unaccompanied minors,” at the southern border and their transportation to the interior of the country by the federal government.

According to reports by PBS, at least 90,000 illegal immigrant children entered the country in 2014, with another 140,000 entering by the end of 2015. Almost a quarter of a million children, and that does not include additional “family units” still pouring into the country from Central and South America.

We now have cases of the Zika virus in Texas, Illinois and Florida. We’re told “travelers” went “overseas” and contracted the virus there, bringing it back to the United States. The New York Times reports the virus made its first appearance in South America in May 2015, just as we were in the middle of the continuing “surge” of illegal immigrants into this nation.

We aren’t told what “overseas” countries are involved in the introduction of Zika here, but we do know that the virus is spreading like wildfire throughout Latin America, specifically, Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, and Venezuela, according to The New York Times.

The three countries most of the 230,000 “surge” immigrant minors are coming from? Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador.

Europe is serving up a warning of their own when it comes to Syrian “migrants.” Germany and other European countries who have welcomed now over one million Muslim migrants are facing unprecedented acts of violence, including gang rapes. But they, too, are only now comprehending they didn’t invite just a rape culture to settle down in their midst. Breitbart News reports:

“Hospitals in Europe have been warned that newly-arrived migrants may bring with them diseases that have been eradicated in the country for several decades. The Danish State Serum Institute (SSI) has warned hospitals to be on the lookout for signs of diphtheria, an illness that has not been seen in Denmark for 20 years, after two Libyan migrants tested position for the disease.”

Breitbart London reports how “London is now the tuberculosis capital of Europe thanks to mass migration. In 2014, for example, the city saw 2,500 new cases, a higher rate than most nations’ totals, including Iraq, Rwanda and Algeria.”

The establishment is working feverishly to have you not notice the link between the massive influx of sick foreigners into the country and sick, paralyzed and potentially brain damaged children. They want you to think the return of measles, a bizarre new polio, and a virus that could transfer to your fetus, is just all a horrible coincidence.

None dare note that Americans have always traveled, and tourists have always visited, and yet these scourges only re-emerged with a vengeance after Mr. Obama’s open border chaos began in 2014 and continues to this day.

Suggesting that these horrific viruses — which are especially gruesome for our children — are just a fluke, is about as bad as saying the Ft. Hood jihadist terror attack was workplace violence and that ISIS is a JV team.

Is it malevolence or ignorance of the current regime and are you willing to stake your child’s life on it?

• Tammy Bruce is a radio talk show host and a Fox News contributor.