DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. — For our Furniture Row Racing team, I don’t know what else to call Daytona Speedweeks but a big-time roller coaster ride.

We were up when we qualified on the front row, down when we got collected in a multi-car accident in Thursday’s qualifying race, then back up when we took out our backup car Saturday and realized that we had an even faster car.

Then the big downer came when our engine blew early in Sunday’s 500 (on Lap 31 of 200) because of a broken oil pump belt. That’s when our day came to a screeching and very disappointing end with a 43rd-place finish.

I went to bed last night thinking this was my best shot ever to win the Daytona 500. The car was just so good and we were just riding around biding our time, being patient and trying to get to the end of this thing. Unfortunately it wasn’t meant to be.

It looks like something knocked the oil pump belt off. Not sure if it was debris off the race track or what. You typically get about two seconds to shut the engine off once that belt comes off or it will blow up. We just didn’t get enough warning.

Without having a camera under the hood you really don’t know what caused the belt to come off. I mean, you can speculate. We don’t have the belt so it’s hard to tell if it broke in half, if something hit it or what happened. I will leave that to the engine guys. I don’t want to speculate. I just know the belt is not on there and it should be.

The Furniture Row guys built us a great race car. I really felt like the car was super strong. Anytime we could get two or three cars lined up with us we could pass guys on the bottom pretty well. That is difficult to do here. I felt great about the car and just a shame we didn’t get to hang around all day and show what we could do.

We’re off to Nashville to conduct a test session on Monday and we’ll be ready to go again next Sunday at the 1-mile Phoenix International Raceway.

Furniture Row Racing’s Martin Truex Jr., driver of Denver’s No. 78 car, is keeping a daily diary for The Denver Post through the Daytona 500.