In a poll with few surprises, the latest Commonwealth Fund international survey crowns the United States with the dubious honor of being the most expensive country for healthcare. More Americans experience problems accessing basic healthcare due to the cost of services than residents of ten other countries including Canada, France, the UK, and the Netherlands. Americans spend $8,508 per capita on healthcare when adjusted for differences in cost of living, compared to $5,669 for Norway, the next most expensive, and $3,182 in New Zealand, which is the cheapest.

While access to health insurance has become a contentious political topic as the Affordable Care Act comes into effect, the reality remains that 63% have experienced problems accessing providers due to costs and more than a quarter of insured patients have also been unable to see a provider due to expenses. More than a third of both patients with and without insurance have spent more than $1000 out-of-pocket in a single year, despite paying more than $600 per capita for health insurance administration. A third of uninsured patients and 27% of covered patients have skipped dental care due to the costs involved, as well.

“The system is not only bad, but getting worse,” states David Blumenthal, MD, MPP, President of The Commonwealth Fund, in a blog post discussing the survey. “Whether you’re talking administrative hassles, out-of-pocket expenses, costs of administration, complexity of policies, or adequacy of coverage, the US consumer gets a bad deal.” For providers, this means that patients may ignore symptoms for longer than they would if costs were lower, leading to more expensive care and worse outcomes down the line.

They are also using the emergency room more than is strictly necessary, with 48% of uninsured patients turning to the ER within the past two years. Only 39% of US patients said they had access to after-hours care without going to the hospital, with a mere 35% stating that their primary care location had after-hours doctors or nurses available for an urgent visit. Comparatively, 69% of British patients can avoid the emergency room through urgent care or other clinics, while 95% can do the same through their primary care provider after the close of business.

While the design and implementation of health insurance reform is beyond the ability of most providers to influence, the lesson from this poll can strike much closer to home. Providing patients with better access to services, including after-hours and urgent care, as well as routine preventative services on a community level, can help slash costs before they are accrued by the beleaguered system. With 27% of Americans participating in the poll saying that the healthcare system as a whole should be completely scrapped, maybe it’s time to work from the bottom up to turn accountable care into true accountability for providers, payers, and patients alike.