Act will cut unintended pregnancy

More than half of all pregnancies in New York are not intended, even with so many types of birth control on the market and most insurance covering them without co-pays. So, what's the missing link?

If we want to reduce the unintended pregnancy rate, we need to do more to make sure women can get timely, affordable access to the contraceptive method that works best for them. Let's break it down.

The Affordable Care Act says that women with insurance can get birth control with no co-pay. But many loopholes remain, so they might not have coverage for the form of birth control they need — for instance, some plans might cover only one brand with a specific formulation within an FDA-designated category of birth control, when several types of pills might be on the market.

In addition, refilling a birth control prescription every month is particularly prohibitive for some women: those in rural areas, poor women lacking transportation, those without regular medical care, women who travel a lot, college students, etc. The result? You miss a dose, or two, increasing your chances of getting pregnant when you were actually trying not to.

And what about men? The ACA excludes vasectomies from its guarantee of contraceptive coverage with no co-pay.

Luckily for New Yorkers, the Legislature has an easy, common sense fix that would remove these remaining barriers to accessing contraception for both women and men.

And it has bipartisan support. The Comprehensive Contraception Coverage Act, which passed the state Assembly in January and is pending in the Senate, includes a host of advances in access to birth control.

For starters, the act allows individuals to obtain up to a year's worth of contraception at a time. That's not just convenient, it's good policy — and it's backed by strong scientific research that shows that dispensing a one-year supply of birth control decreases the odds of unplanned pregnancy by 30 percent, when compared with dispensing either 30- or 90-day supplies.

Oregon and the District of Columbia have already acted on this, and similar bills have been introduced in 14 other states.

The act would also close loopholes that restrict coverage to certain methods by guaranteeing coverage with no co-pay for the full range of methods; this would eliminate the remaining high co-pays that jeopardize correct and consistent contraceptive use. Additionally, the bill would make it easier for individuals to use their insurance to pay for emergency contraception at the pharmacy.

The act also would cover male methods like sterilization, bringing insurance coverage for men's contraception in line with the benefits women can access — and finally taking seriously men's role in preventing unplanned pregnancy.

With mere weeks left in New York's 2016 legislative session, the Senate must act now.

Backing for the CCCA comes from New Yorkers across the state — and that enthusiasm is reflected in bipartisan support. Republican John Bonacic is the lead sponsor of the bill in the Senate.

The CCCA would reaffirm New Yorkers' ability to determine when and whether to have children and guarantee their right to choose the contraceptive method that is right for them. It would enable patients to make informed decisions about their birth control options and improve their chances of using it correctly and consistently. Most markedly, it would help reduce unintended pregnancy.

In passing the CCCA, New York has the opportunity to lead the nation forward, improve life for New Yorkers, and finally end the partisan jockeying that has blocked common sense reforms for years.

Andrea Miller is president of the National Institute for Reproductive Health Action Fund and its Campaign for a Pro-Choice New York.