If a nation's success mainly depends on the functionality of its government, we're in deep trouble. Why does Donald Trump Donald TrumpSanders laughs off Trump's third-party question Sanders: Clinton showing 'tinge of arrogance' Trump and Sanders whip up debate buzz MORE continue to crush the opposition in polling for the Republican nomination for president? The "outsider" label is more valuable than ever as our government continues to drag us to a dysfunctional place that is finally having a devastating effect on our daily lives. My first boss once said to me that nothing changes until affairs hit rock bottom. We're rapidly headed there.

ADVERTISEMENT

It doesn't matter which side you're on. Democrats and Republicans display equally repellent behavior. Moderates are rushing headlong toward extinction. Progressives and conservatives despise each other to an ever-increasing degree, paralyzing our legislative process and politicizing every issue to the point of inaction.

Look at the San Bernardino, Calif., shootings. The motivation for the tragedy certainly needs to be investigated, but if it walks, quacks like a duck, etc. Obama-haters are quick to blame the president for anything related to Islamic terrorism; the president himself waffles and looks disingenuous by mentioning the absurd possibility of a workplace dispute. His supporters are quick to rally to his opinions because if he's wrong, it will not help the Democrats in the 2016 elections, and will apply additional pressure toward not allowing Syrian refugees into the country. Either way, no one is focusing on the implications for our nation, and what realistic efforts might lower the likelihood of future episodes.

This shooting is a law enforcement problem. Of course, we have to bring in the CIA, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the National Security Agency (NSA) and others to mitigate the likelihood of a recurrence. But what this is not is a political issue. Potentially worrisome might be the actions of Loretta Lynch, the attorney general, who has looked like a Democratic pol in congressional hearings. One would hate to think that she would slow-roll the investigation to take pressure off the president.

Then there's the gun control issue. The Republicans have clung to an imbecilic slippery-slope argument in refusing to adopt legislation that bars people on no-fly and terrorist watch lists from purchasing weapons. People with restraining orders against them lose the right to have weapons in most states. Are the Republicans saying that domestic miscreants are more dangerous than potential terrorists? In addition, their response is to push mental health legislation. More support for mental health is a great idea, but what is its connection with domestic terrorism, and how will it deter those with probable mental health problems who persistently stay below the radar?

On the other hand, the Democrats are no more helpful when it comes to healthcare. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) is a great idea executed as badly as it could have been. The Democrats have chosen to portray success as more people having health insurance. My son in California just obtained health insurance through the ACA, and quickly and painfully discovered that none of his doctors and none of his local hospitals participate. It is indisputable that millions of Americans have had crushing premium hikes. The Republicans have some ideas for reform (which the Democrats won't consider), but both parties are unwilling to face the real problem: the insurance companies. As a physician who practiced anesthesia for 24 years before switching to national defense, I can tell you that my former colleagues agree on one simple fact: Healthcare should be dispensed by nonprofit organizations, not by insurance companies that glom billions of dollars off the top while delivering no healthcare. The American business model got rid of the "distributor" many years ago. Why are these companies between Americans and their healthcare providers? Because their lobbyists shovel millions at both parties.

We also stagnate when it comes to tax reform, immigration, infrastructure repair, education and so many other critical issues. Proposals are extreme on both sides of Congress, ranging from the obviously unaffordable free-college-for-everyone to the ridiculous notion that the environment is just fine. What's even more problematic is where we're headed, because nations function dynamically. Things never stay the same. They either improve or worsen. Future prospects for improved leadership seem nonexistent.

The Democratic nominee will be former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonSanders laughs off Trump's third-party question Sanders: Clinton showing 'tinge of arrogance' Trump and Sanders whip up debate buzz MORE. She severely mishandled classified information, whether a Democratic Justice Department decides to prosecute or not. In addition, there is a long history of public service without much in the way of real accomplishment.

On the Republican side, there are caricatures of candidates. Is no one bothered by the constant invocation of religion for guidance in a country that tried assiduously at its birth to separate church and state? Should the Republican front-runner remind us of those guys who used to sell stuff no one needs on late-night TV?

The solution? Maybe redistricting would be a start, but in world where even news networks are politicized, who knows? Merry Christmas.

Blady, M.D., is a former program officer for the under secretary of Defense for policy and senior analyst for the under secretary of Defense for intelligence.