Instagram is rolling out new tools for advertisers in an attempt to help them better understand the impact of their activity across the image-centric social network.

An “ad insights” tool will now allow marketers to track the performance of their ads in real-time using typical brand metrics such as impressions, reach, and engagement. A second “account insights” interface will also provide advertisers with information about the non-paid content they post on the service.

The idea is to help its advertisers better understand their Instagram audiences, and to figure out the types of content they’re most interested in, the Facebook-owned service said. The tools will not be made available to marketers that do not purchase ads across Instagram, however.

“We’ve talked to brands and businesses a bunch over the last six months, and these tools are largely based on their feedback,” Instagram product manager, Jeff Kanter, told CMO Today.

“It’s important for us to provide measurement to really prove the platform… We heard from brands that they wanted more insight into how people engage with their organic content and ads,” Mr. Kanter added.

The analytics interfaces will now allow advertisers to access and analyze their ad campaign data in real-time. Previously Instagram sent that information to advertisers manually upon request.

A third “ad staging” tool will also allow marketers and creative teams to preview how their ads will look before they go live across Instagram.

To actually purchase ads marketers will still have to work directly with Instagram salespeople, however. There’s no self-service ad buying tool on offer yet. Mr. Kanter said the company would consider extending similar analytics tools to non-advertisers “over the long-term,” but explained that its attentions are focused on its advertiser clients for now.

Instagram will continue to add new features and other tools based on advertiser feedback. The company is already evaluating adding time-spent metrics for video content, for example, in response to advertiser demand.

“Our doors are open and we’re working with a lot of large brands now to prove that Instagram works,” Mr. Kanter said.

Brands already making use of the tools include Banana Republic.