SAN DIEGO – The magic and mystery of the Nutcracker comes to life Saturday, as San Diego’s oldest and largest ballet company kicks off the first show of the season.

Everyone has heard the music from the Nutcracker Ballet at malls, cafeterias, and even in elevators during the holiday season. Now it’s your chance to go experience it.

“You’ve heard it at all the department stores,” said John Stubbs, Musical Director of the California Ballet Company. “So they should actually come see it in the actual context in the theater, with the dancers and live music.

Tchaikovsky The Nutcracker Ballet has been mesmerizing people around the world for more than a century. San Diego’s California Ballet has been treating locals with the popular show annually since 1971. This year, more than 70 dancers spent the last three months preparing for its nine day run.

“It’s the tradition that we present to the San Diego community every year to bring the holiday spirit to everyone and to teach them the beauty of ballet,” said Denise Dabrowski, Regisseur of the California Ballet Company.

Chie Kudo is a ballerina from Japan. She has been the Sugar Plum Fairy for the last six years for the California Ballet. She says it is a traditional yet timeless piece that resonates with audiences of all ages.

“I try to keep it fresh,” said Kudo. “Every year, I have a new partner. It’s a challenge to meet someone and suddenly become their dance partner in two months. But it’s exciting. I learn something new everyday.”

To make it even more accessible, the company is using the discount app, Groupon to attract those who might otherwise pass on the show. Company officials say it is crucial to use all avenues of advertising, especially when fine arts programs are being cut all across California’s public education.

“I want people to keep coming to things like this and see how valuable music and dance are together, that is what I hope,” said Stubbs. “That’s why we present it every single year.”

When they do make a visit, performers guarantee patrons will leave with an out of this world experience.

“The audience will walk out of the theater with a warm and fuzzy feeling, like they just woke up from a dream,” said Kudo.

The Nutcracker at the San Diego Civic Theater has nine more shows until 22nd.

Tickets are available here.