MinuteClinic is a chain of retail health clinics CVS is opening inside its drugstores. (photo: CVS Caremark Corp.)

WOONSOCKET, R.I. (WPRI) – MinuteClinics could be open in Rhode Island before the end of this year.

CVS Caremark Corp., the Woonsocket-based drugstore giant, says it’s in the process of getting permission to open MinuteClinics in its home state for the first time. The fast-growing chain of more than 800 retail health clinics offer services provided by certified nurse practitioners and physician assistants seven days a week. The cost for most visits starts at $79.

“We hope to have the appropriate permissions and licensure by the middle of the year, and open the clinics before year end,” CVS spokeswoman Carolyn Castel told WPRI.com.

CVS is seeking to open seven MinuteClinics inside existing CVS/pharmacy stores in Cranston, East Greenwich, North Smithfield, Providence, Wakefield, Westerly and Woonsocket. MinuteClinics are already open across the border in Massachusetts in Seekonk, North Attleboro, Swansea, Taunton and Fall River, among other communities.

“With the nationwide shortage of primary care providers, the addition of millions of newly insured patients through the Affordable Care Act and an aging Baby Boomer population, there is a significant and growing demand for care,” Dr. Andrew Sussman, president of CVS’s MinuteClinic division, said in November. “MinuteClinic can help to meet that demand, collaborating with local provider groups, as part of a larger health care team.”

The expansion of MinuteClinics is part of CVS Caremark’s attempts to transform itself from a retail-oriented company into a health care-oriented one, as its executives emphasized last week when they announced CVS/pharmacy stores would stop selling tobacco products by Oct. 1. The company is aiming to have 1,500 MinuteClinics open in 35 states by 2017.

R.I. Department of Health spokesman James Palmer said CVS filed an application Nov. 1 to obtain licenses for seven “organized ambulatory care facilities,” the formal name for a facility such as a MinuteClinic. Officials have asked CVS to provide more information, and the company expects to resubmit its applications this month, Castel said.

Submitting additional information to respond to the health department’s questions “is a normal part of the process,” she said. MinuteClinic is always looking to participate in Medicaid, the government health insurance program for low-income Americans that’s being expanded under President Obama’s health law, in Rhode Island.

Once CVS submits its revised application, the powerful Rhode Island Health Services Council will conduct a 90-day review to decide whether to grant the MinuteClinic licenses, Palmer said.

MinuteClinic was founded in Minneapolis in 2000 as QuickMedx. CVS bought the company in 2006 and moved its headquarters to Woonsocket four years later.

CVS first attempted to open MinuteClinics in Rhode Island in 2005, but eventually dropped the idea amid opposition from doctors, who stand to lose business to the retail clinics and who warn they could get in the way of normal doctor-patient relationships.

Dr. Fredric Christian, then-president of the Rhode Island Medical Society, which lobbies for doctors, wrote at the time that “by skimming away a certain volume of less complex and routine work, MinuteClinic will compromise the economic viability of some primary care practices.”

CVS considered opening MinuteClinics in Rhode Island again in late 2010, eyeing a partnership with Rhode Island Hospital parent Lifespan, before dropping the idea for a second time, according to the Medical Society.

Steve DeToy, the society’s director of government and public affairs, said the opening of MinuteClinics in Rhode Island remains “a thorny issue” for the doctors’ group because it will take money from primary care and could lead to more fragmentation in the health system. But he also signaled they won’t fight CVS this time.

“We know they’re inevitable,” DeToy told WPRI.com. “We know they have some convenience factors that make them very appealing. … So they have some potential.”

“If they stick to their original approach, which was to provide care that supplements primary care, then that’s fine,” he said. “If they … keep seeming to expand what they want to do – chronic care management, physicals for kids – that’s not something that we’re interested in. … That’s stuff that should be done in physicians’ offices.” The doctors may propose limiting what services can be done at MinuteClinics as has happened in some other states, he said.

Still, DeToy said: “We’re accepting the inevitable.” (DeToy is a member of the Rhode Island Health Services Council, but said he will recuse himself from the MinuteClinic licensing decision.)

CVS Caremark is Rhode Island’s largest for-profit company and says it now employs more than 7,000 people in the state.

Ted Nesi ( tnesi@wpri.com ) covers politics and the economy for WPRI.com and writes the Nesi’s Notes blog. Follow him on Twitter: @tednesi