Public land management in the West has never been easy. With so many interests at stake, it can be tough to find the right balance between land protection and multiple use.

Over the last few months, however, the debate over public land management has gone from difficult to toxic. A handful of extremists have captured public attention with angry protests and threats of armed conflict. Land management, their story goes, is fundamentally broken and can only be fixed by ignoring the law or dismantling government agencies altogether.

This narrative is dramatic but wrong. What is broken is the ability by some to have respectful dialogue that leads to commonsense solutions. Federal lands are held in the public trust for all Americans. Proximity should not bestow special privilege, but rather a heightened sense of stewardship.

So no, federal land management isn’t broken. In fact, people all over the West have been working together and getting past old disagreements:

• In Montana, conservationists, landowners, outdoor businesses and communities have been working to protect the Rocky Mountain Front, the North Fork of the Flathead River, and wilderness lands around the state. They’ve built consensus and found ways to protect natural areas, preserve ranching and other traditional land uses, and maintain access for hunting, fishing and other recreation.

• In Colorado, bipartisan community-driven efforts to protect Browns Canyon and Hermosa Creek Watershed with little opposition have been under way for a long time, followed with bills introduced by our senators. Similar broad support had paved the way for Chimney Rock to become a national monument.

• In both northern and southern New Mexico, tribal leaders, Hispanic land grant heirs, state and county officials, sportsmen, ranchers and business leaders came together and helped convince President Obama to designate two new national monuments, Rio Grande del Norte and Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks. A similar effort is under way to create the Columbine-Hondo Wilderness near Taos.

This kind of collaboration is happening all over the West. People from all walks of life have looked at the issues, found common ground and crafted ways to manage natural resources for everyone’s benefit.

These grassroots efforts don’t grab headlines like gun-waving trespassers and angry mobs. Respectful dialogue doesn’t get airtime on the 24-hour news channels, but it does represent the reality of Western public land management.

These solutions are possible because they make economic sense. Protected public lands support local economies, and not just through tourism. Although recent estimates show that more than $50 billion was spent on visits to public lands in 2012 alone, protected public lands also attract businesses and high paying jobs.

Our organizations have participated in many of these efforts, representing the views of outdoor recreationists including hunters, anglers, viewers, wildlife photographers and others. Last month, we visited Washington to encourage our elected officials to enact legislation to implement the plans we’ve helped develop around the West.

While a few bold leaders have stepped forward to advocate for local land management solutions, Congress seems paralyzed. Committees appear to have given up on moving any bills to protect federal lands, no matter how broad the local consensus. Congressional leaders of both parties are crippled by the fear of letting “the other side” take credit for the smallest victory.

This gridlock over federal land management is a slap in the face to the people that have put so much effort into building local consensus.

Congressional leaders from both parties need to honor the hard work that people all over the West have put into improving public land management. They need to pass legislation to protect the Rocky Mountain Front, Columbine Hondo, Hermosa Creek, Browns Canyon and other priorities around the West. Then maybe our elected officials can rediscover how much can be accomplished when we work together.

Dave Chadwick is executive director of the Montana Wildlife Federation. Garrett VeneKlasen is executive director of the New Mexico Wildlife Federation. Suzanne O’Neill is executive director of the Colorado Wildlife Federation.