SCOTTSDALE, ARIZ. — When University of Texas baseball coach Augie Garrido leads recruits on a tour of UFCU Disch-Falk Field in Austin, he inevitably stops in the tunnel leading from the Longhorns’ clubhouse to the dugout.

Covering the wall is a blown-up photo of the 2002 Longhorns. The photo captures that one, shining moment at Omaha’s Rosenblatt Stadium when the Longhorns beat South Carolina to win the College World Series. Garrido asks recruits to pick out the future major-leaguers in the photo. Huston Street, the former Rockies and current San Diego Padres all-star closer, is pretty easy to spot. Some of the recruits pick out third baseman Omar Quintanilla, another former Rockie.

None of the recruits identifies the 14-year-old kid wearing a T-shirt and a Texas ballcap.

The kid was Brett Anderson, the son of Texas pitching coach Frank Anderson. Now 26, the self-described “baseball nerd” is the Rockies’ big offseason pitching acquisition. The left-hander is being counted on to fortify the rotation and help lift the Rockies from the depths of the National League West basement.

“He’s everything I expected, and more,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “I’m so impressed with his feel for the game and his conviction when he pitches. He’s a student of the game. He understands what he wants to accomplish on the mound.”

When the Rockies acquired Anderson from Oakland in an offseason trade for Drew Pomeranz, all Weiss really knew was that Anderson, when healthy, was a special talent with a biting slider. But he had been hurt a lot.

Anderson has proceeded to wow Weiss in spring training, along with his new teammates. Right fielder Michael Cuddyer calls Anderson a “bona fide ace.” Shortstop Troy Tulowitzki raves about Anderson’s ability to work quickly and induce groundball outs.

It’s clear where Anderson’s baseball acumen comes from. His father has been a college baseball coach for more than 30 years and is currently the pitching coach at the University of Houston. Anderson’s mom, Sandra, was an All-America softball player at Nebraska Kearney.

“I’ve always been the baseball equivalent of a gym rat,” Anderson said. “It seems like a coach’s kid can go one of two ways. He can embrace that life or despise it. I was all in, right from the start. I was climbing on batting cages, pestering all those college kids. I was playing catch with anyone that would play catch with me. I guess I’m just a baseball nerd. You might think it would get stale, but it hasn’t.”

Anderson, 6-foot-4 and 225 pounds, grew up a big kid who could hit for power. At age 12, he won a home run derby against the likes of future big-leaguers Travis Snider and Hank Conger in Steamboat Springs. But at age 14, unbeknownst to his dad, he started perfecting his slider.

“I guess that’s about the age when I knew he had a chance to be good at this game, if he really wanted to be,” Frank Anderson said. “I never pushed him, but it was pretty clear he loved baseball.”

With his dad busy coaching baseball, it was Anderson’s mom who drove him to practice and critiqued his game. She still does.

“My mom is one of the most competitive, intimidating people I’ve known in my life,” Anderson said with a laugh. “My mom knows more about the games than probably 95 percent of the women out there. She knew when I wasn’t playing right or not playing hard enough. Even now, she’ll question my pitching calls. And the fact that she knows that, and the fact that she’s usually right, makes it even worse.”

Anderson talks to his dad or texts him almost every day, saying, “I guess it’s kind of a cliché, but we’re best friends.”

Added his father: “We don’t always talk about baseball. We talk about movies, TV, music, whatever. We’ve stayed close. My wife always makes fun of it, says, ‘It’s really corny that you guys talk every day.’ “

When Anderson underwent Tommy John surgery on his left elbow in July 2011, his dad got permission from Dr. James Andrews to view the procedure.

“I was just hoping I wouldn’t faint,” Frank Anderson said. “I wanted be there for Brett. Plus, it was a unique experience.”

Anderson came back strong from the surgery and was tabbed as the opening-day starter last year. But early in the season, he suffered a stress fracture in his right foot that landed him on the disabled list for four months. For all of Anderson’s talent, he has made more than 19 starts just once in his career.

“I feel really good,” Anderson said. “I like this team and like the place I’m in right now.”

The man who taught him the love of the game believes he’s in a good place. “The move from Oakland to Denver was a good move,” his dad said. “I think Brett needed a fresh start.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp