Frankie Newhart, who has been chosen to play the national anthem at the Special Olympics World Games in Los Angeles this month, holds his new Fender Stratocaster at his home in Boulder on Tuesday. ( Ryan Gooding / For the Camera )

Frankie Newhart saw a video of Jimi Hendrix — a fellow left-handed guitar player — performing the national anthem at Woodstock and found his song.

Frankie, who's developmentally disabled and will be a junior at Boulder High School, started practicing and set a goal of performing at the Special Olympics World Games in Los Angeles, which opened this weekend.

He wrote a letter, though writing is difficult for him, to the selection committee telling the members about his love of music and how playing the guitar makes him feel cool.

His letter was convincing, and the committee recently called a shocked Frankie and told him that he was chosen.

"I was surprised and happy," he said. "It's pretty cool."

He's scheduled to play Thursday in front of an estimated crowd of 40,000 people at the UCLA stadium.

"I've played for lots of people," he said. "I'm not really that nervous. It feels good."

To prepare, he's practicing daily and playing at local venues, such as Oskar Blues in Longmont. Along with practicing the music, he's studied videos of people singing the "Star Spangled Banner" so he can learn where to pause as he plays.

He's also getting a new outfit — he's hoping for a T-shirt and jeans — donated by the Men's Warehouse for his big gig.

His mom, Marta Newhart, said he started playing the guitar a couple of years ago after his dad brought an electric guitar home and "told him to learn to play the guitar if he wanted the girls to like him."

Advertisement

She said it wasn't hard to convince him to learn because he loves music and is addicted to iTunes.

"Frankie goes into a different world when he plays guitar," she said. "And when he plays the guitar, people start looking at him differently."

To learn, he worked with both a guitar teacher and a neighbor who plays on the Pearl Street Mall as a hobby. Hendrix, Eddie Van Halen and Stevie Ray Vaughan are some of his favorite guitar players.

"I really enjoy it," he said, adding that he likes electric guitars because they're loud.

Newhart said her son was born prematurely, initially diagnosed with muscular dystrophy and not expected to live past 2. He was bullied in middle school, she said, but found his niche at Boulder High after becoming the manager of the football team.

"Even special people have goals," she said. "He's gone from the kid other kids made fun of to playing at the largest event in Los Angeles this year. It's pretty heartwarming."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa