Topics: From the Wires, News

WATERFORD, N.Y. (AP) — Long after the last barge dredging toxins from the bottom of the upper Hudson River moves on, scientists will track the slow fade in contamination levels.

General Electric Co. expects this year to finish removing some 2.7 million cubic yards of contaminated river sediment — enough to fill two Empire State Buildings — under a Superfund agreement with the federal Environmental Protection Agency. After six years of digging, crews will have removed most of the PCBs on the river bottom discharged decades ago from two GE plants upriver.

EPA officials say it’s too early to tell how quickly PCB levels in the water and fish will drop in the coming decades. And they don’t know precisely when it will be safe to eat fish caught along the 200-mile stretch down to New York City, a primary reason for the cleanup. But as calls intensify for additional dredging — which could speed the river’s recovery — the agency says it is already seeing early signs of success.

“The river is open for recreation. The challenge now is to assess the fish over time,” said Gary Klawinski, the EPA’s project director. “Once we get a better idea of at what rate … fish are recovering, we’ll be able to lift those advisories with New York state.”

The Hudson was a notoriously dirty river decades ago, littered with everything from old tires to sewage. Tighter environmental rules have helped revive the river, which even boasts some spots to swim along once-polluted beaches.

“When I was younger, there were old boat parts and cardboard and garbage,” said Carlos Francisquini, fishing for striped bass recently along a quiet stretch of river at Kingston. “Nowadays, it’s nice down here. You can enjoy it again.”

But fish and other wildlife are still tainted by PCBs discharged into the river until 1977 by GE’s capacitor plants in Hudson Falls and Fort Edward. PCBs, or polychlorinated biphenyls, considered a probable carcinogen, were used as coolants in electrical equipment. Advisories warning about the dangers of fish consumption span 200 miles of river, with warnings to eat no fish caught upriver.

The estimated $2 billion cleanup of PCB hot spots upriver will reduce the amount of contaminants flowing downriver. It’s expected the warning to limit or avoid eating fish from the river will be lifted near New York City first, then closer to the source. When the EPA called for the dredging in 2002, it estimated it would take around a decade to meet early goals and more than 70 years to meet the hardest-to-attain goal of fish safe enough to eat once a week in the upper Hudson.