Topics: America, California, Civil War, Democracy, federal government\, local government, State government, Texas, United States, Politics News

A ballot initiative that would support breaking California into six smaller and more coherent states is being backed by Timothy Draper, a tech investor. It’s a great idea. But why stop with California? Breaking up all of the too-large states would increase both the accountability and efficiency of the U.S. government.

America’s state governments are too big to be democratic and too small to be efficient. Given an adequate tax base, public services like public schools and hospitals, utilities and first responders are best carried out by cities and counties. Most infrastructure is either local or regional or national. Civil rights, including workers’ rights, should be handled at the federal level, to eliminate local pockets of tyranny and exploitation. Social insurance systems are most efficient and equitable when they are purely national, like Social Security and Medicare, and inefficient and inequitable when they are clumsily divided among the federal government and the states, like unemployment insurance, Medicaid and Obamacare.

So what are state governments particularly good at? Nothing, really. They interfere in local government, cripple the federal government, shake down lobbyists and waste taxpayer money.

Few if any state borders correspond to the boundaries of actual social communities with a sense of shared identity. A look at county-level voting maps shows that, in terms of politics, rural Americans everywhere generally have more in common with their fellow hinterlanders than with their urban fellow citizens in their own states — and vice versa. Arbitrary state boundaries merely insure that state legislatures will be the scenes of endless battles between country mice and city mice, resulting in stalemates that don’t serve the interests or reflect the values of either mouse species.

Not only is the state level of government a mostly useless layer of politics and bureaucracy between the city or county and the federal government, it’s also more dominated than local government by the well-financed and the well-organized. Nearly a century ago John Nance “Cactus Jack” Garner of Texas, FDR’s first vice-president, proposed that Texas be divided into multiple states because of the high cost of statewide campaigns. Expensive statewide campaigns tend to result in a state political system dominated by rich donors, corporations and banks, or powerful lobbies like public sector unions.

Fortunately, the U.S. Constitution provides the answer. Let’s turn to Article IV, Section 3, Clause 1:

New States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; but no new States shall be formed or erected within the Jurisdiction of any other State; nor any State be formed by the Junction of two or more States, or parts of States, without the Consent of the Legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congress.

No state has been formed from part of another state since West Virginia broke off from Virginia during the Civil War — but not for want of constitutional authority. The constitution authorizes states to divide into smaller states or fuse into larger states, with the permission of both the state legislatures and Congress.

Among other things, this dormant constitutional provision provides a solution to the malapportionment of the U.S. Senate that does not require a constitutional amendment — merely approval by the relevant state legislatures and a majority in Congress. America’s upper house is the most malapportioned in the world. By 2025, the population difference between California and Wyoming will be 70-to-1 — and yet both California and Wyoming will have two senators. In theory, a micro-minority of 17 percent of American voters can elect a majority in the Senate.

If we assume that microstates like Wyoming are not going to give up their two U.S. senators, then macrostates like California, Texas, Florida and New York should voluntarily divide themselves, in order to boost their representation in America’s upper house. Under the Six Californias plan, for example, residents of present-day California would send 12 senators to Washington, not two.

And because they are smaller, the successor states to the Former California would be more citizen-friendly. A citizen of Wyoming, Vermont, North Dakota or Alaska — the four least populous states — has a much better chance of influencing the legislature or arranging an appointment with the governor than does a citizen of California or Texas who is not backed by an army of lobbyists or hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Back in 1998 in Mother Jones I speculated about what the political map would look like if the U.S. added 25 states carved out of today’s populous states. Interested readers can find the article here (warning: The Mother Jones editors came up with the silly state names).