As most Colorado voters know, their state has become one of the most highly sought prizes in presidential politics, attracting far more attention (and spending) than its population would seem to warrant.

And what was true in the last few election cycles isn’t about to change in 2016. So long as Colorado remains decidedly purple in its outlook, it will stay a key swing state.

Unfortunately, the attention occurs only after the parties’ respective candidates are selected. In the run-up to the nominations, Colorado is almost an afterthought both in terms of campaign and national media attention, thanks in large part to this state’s antiquated caucus system.

Fortunately, some lawmakers are reportedly poised to tackle the caucus system in the waning days of the session and create a presidential primary to boost Colorado’s influence.

We’ve long supported moving back to a presidential primary (the state held them in 1992, 1996 and 2000) as a way to enhance Colorado’s impact and, more importantly, increase voter participation.

Even in years of high excitement in the caucuses — such as 2008 for Democrats — they attract far fewer voters than would turn out at a primary. As a result, they are less representative of genuine sentiment within a party.

But returning to a closed primary available only to registered Democrats and Republicans isn’t good enough anymore, either.

It so happens that the largest group of voters in Colorado, and still growing as a percentage of the total, is unaffiliated. It’s time to let them participate in primaries without having to declare for a party.

The change would be healthy for voters and candidates, too, who would have to broaden their appeal beyond party activists.

This is not a radical idea. Many states feature some form of open or semi-open primary system in which the unaffiliated have a role. Among the options, a semi-open primary is best. It gives unaffiliated voters a voice without allowing those registered to a party to cast a ballot in another party’s primary — opening the door to attempts to sabotage a rival party’s primary.

But would lawmakers ever approve even a semi-open primary and thus dilute the power of partisan activists? Probably not. It will very likely take a ballot initiative to bring this sensible reform to Colorado’s nominating process.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.