Fed up over paltry pay and pitiful working conditions, more than 1,000 contract workers at Kennedy and LaGuardia airports plan to go on strike starting Wednesday night.

The security officers, baggage handlers and wheelchair attendants — all employees of subcontractor Aviation Safeguards — will walk off the job at Delta terminals at Kennedy Airport at 10 p.m. Wednesday, union officials said.

Picketing will begin at LaGuardia at 6 a.m. Thursday.

"They have had no other choice," SEIU 32BJ President Hector Figueroa said at a Tuesday news conference attended by Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito and dozens of airport workers.

“They are the men and women that we depend on to guard our airports,” Figueroa added. “They should not be ... living in poverty unable to feed their families."

Union officials say Aviation Safeguard has come down hard on workers after their push for higher wages and enhanced benefits started producing results last year.

LaGuardia Airport workers, seen with protestors in January, will go on strike along with their counterparts at Kennedy Airport over alleged violations of their rights. (Frank Franklin II/AP)

The effort — championed by the Daily News' Fight for Fair Pay campaign — spurred the Port Authority to order raises for all contract workers at area airports.

The region's roughly 12,000 airport contract workers are now making $10.10 an hour.

But the Aviation Safeguards workers say their bosses have repeatedly violated their rights and threatened to fire anyone who went on strike.

Aviation Safeguards managers have also forced employees to remove pro-union buttons and denied them such basic privileges as the use of lockers, workers say.

“We have had MetroCards stolen, our food stolen,” said Donna Hampton, 55, a Kennedy Airport security guard from New Jersey.

Kennedy Airport terminal workers and members of the 32BJ SEIU Union strike and picket in September. (Bryan Pace/For New York Daily News)

“We will fight for every service industry until we get what we deserve,” Hampton added.

Craig Coy, CEO of the parent company of Aviation Safeguards, insists that his firm supports unions and has done nothing to dissuade workers from organizing or striking.

“We’re not anti-union. We’re pro-employee,” said Coy, of the Virginia-based Command Security Corp.

Coy says that the company pays wages mandated by the Port Authority and goes further than most contractors by helping to subsidize the health care offered through the Affordable Care Act.

“We offer above the minimum compensation,” he said.

It's not clear if the strike starting Wednesday night will affect operations at Kennedy Airport, pictured, and LaGuardia Airport. (Eric Thayer/Getty Images)

The Port Authority said it was working to prevent the disruption of regular airport operations.

“The Port Authority has taken significant steps in recent years to encourage wage and benefit increases for employees of airline contractors at its airports, and will work to avoid disruptions of airline operations at PA airports,” the agency said in a statement.

Mark-Viverito said the workers had her full support.

"If you're here, it's because you believe that if you work hard day in and day out, you should take home enough to provide for yourself and your family," she said.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE.