Topics: Editor's Picks, Family, family stories, Life stories, The Great Depression, Life News

Dad’s tone was businesslike. “They’ve moved your mother to the ICU. They don’t know why she’s going downhill so fast.”

My father couldn’t have called at a more depressing time. I was watching my impractical dream of being a writer turn to dust: I was in Minnesota trying to salvage the novel on which I had worked for five years. I had just lost my big time New York agent. She kept the book for a year, then told me, “Publishers are wary of taking a book from a white author that has so many black story lines. Now if you change your name to Fannie Lou Hamer, I could sell it in five minutes.”

The news had thrown me back into my father’s “factory mentality.” He once asked how much I would make per word as a writer. I didn’t have the heart to calculate the price per word, but I figured that my unpublished novel had cost me over $2 million so far in lost revenue from my former business. All told, it would probably have covered the cost of buying enough copies to make it into a bestseller.

Before Dad’s call, I knew that Mom had gone in for an operation for her back, but now he told me that her lungs were filling with fluid. Something may have gone wrong with the anesthesia. “You know how weak her lungs are.”

What I wanted to say was, “I bet living 50 years in close quarters with a chain smoker couldn’t have helped much.” But I didn’t.

“Sounds like I should come down.”

“Well, it’s up to you. Come if you want to.”

Not You need to be here, or Your mother needs you here, or, for God’s sake not, I need you here. My father and I routinely communicate like poker players, keeping our hearts as close as our cards.

“Do you think I should come down?” I asked, trying to force him to say it, that he needed me there.

“Do you have the time?” he asked. “She’ll understand if you’re too busy.” The sad thing was, he wasn’t being sarcastic. Work obligations always trump family.

“No, I don’t have anything scheduled that can’t be moved.” I didn’t have anything scheduled for the next 40 years, but I wasn’t telling him that.

“Well, come if you think you should,” he said, but quickly added, “but I don’t want to tell you to come down and then have her get well by the time you get here. I just don’t want to tell you one way or the other. You have to decide.” He refused to sway me. He wouldn’t have it on his hands.

“I’ll catch the next flight,” I said, making the choice that both of us knew I would all along.

“I’m sure your mother will appreciate it, whichever way it goes.”

I hung up, feeling like I had just gotten off a conference call with a lawyer. It was easier to approach the situation as a scheduling issue rather than as a trip that could be my last chance to see my mother alive.

When I arrived at Forrest County General, my younger brother and my father were in the waiting room. That morning, when the attendants came to my mother’s room to take her for X-rays, they found her sprawled unconscious on the floor. She had somehow managed to get out of bed and fallen. When my brother asked her why she hadn’t buzzed for assistance, all she would say was that she wanted “to fix her face.” She had been trying to get to her makeup kit. They figured she must have been delirious.

After shaking hands with my father, I took a chair close by and carefully observed him. Before you engage with my father, it’s wise to calibrate his mood, which could range from mildly controlling to tyrannically oppressive. Yet, tonight, something was different. My father had always been in charge, but here in the waiting room he was as close to passive as I had ever seen him. For one of the first times in his adult life, he was watching everything with keen interest, but not exerting authority over any of it. My brother David had assumed the lead role, and next to him, my father seemed small and submissive.

Dad politely asked the nurse if we could go into my mother’s room. The nurse brushed him off, somewhat heartlessly I thought. I held my breath, waiting for Dad to shame her out of the helping profession. He acquiesced. But my brother took off after the nurse and told her, not asked her, that we were going to see Mother now.

Mom had lost a lot of weight and appeared frail, as if she would snap in my arms if I hugged her. She was breathing oxygen through a tube in her nose. Her hair, always kept perfectly in place, was flat in spots and tangled in others. Her lips were dry and chapped. There was a lot of purple bruising on her arm where she had fallen. She was only semi-conscious, but still she recognized me.

“Johnny,” she said, brightening a bit. She lifted her hand for a moment before letting it drop again to the bed.

I held her hand and kissed her damp forehead. “Hello, Momma. They say you’ve had a pretty rough time of it.”

She shook her head, then a frown crossed her face. “There was something I wanted to tell you,” she said. “I forgot what.” Speaking was hard for her.

“It can wait,” I said. “There’s plenty of time. I’m staying till you get well.”

Again she shook her head as if frustrated by the sluggishness of her thoughts. “Oh! I know!” she said in a rushed whisper.

I looked into her washed out eyes. They were the weakest shade of blue I could ever remember them being, like the last remnant of morning sky, just before being bleached out by the heat of the day.

“Johnny, when you go to the house tonight, bring back the sack that’s under my bed.”

“What’s in the sack, Momma?”

“You’ll see. I want you to have something that I made myself. But it’s not finished, so don’t look. I want it with me. I don’t want it to get lost.”

I promised her that I would. She seemed satisfied and closed her eyes.

* * *

Back at the house, Dad and I sat out on the porch. It was late. He pulled out a cigarette and lit it. I noticed he had switched from Salem to a tiny brown cigar. The smell, even outside, was awful, but he claimed he smoked less.

“How do you think she looks?” he asked. If this were anyone but my father, I would have sworn he was asking for reassurance.

I told him the truth. “She looks bad. Real bad.”

He grimaced as if I had intentionally tried to hurt him.

“How do you think she looks, Dad?”

He was no longer facing me. “I thought maybe she looked a little better,” he said. “Of course you haven’t been here. Probably hard for you to tell.”

“Yeah, I guess that’s it.” I wasn’t going to burst his bubble. “What’s with the sack under the bed? Was that the drugs talking?”

“No. She said she wanted to leave you something you could remember her by. She’s been embroidering you a tablecloth. Been on it for over a year. Napkins, too. She’s nearly done. Don’t tell her I told you.”

My mother now has severe arthritis in the fingers of both hands. There passed a long silence between my father and me.

It occurred to me that I much preferred sitting in silence with my father than speaking with him. I felt closer to him when I wasn’t struggling to decide what a normal son might say to a normal father. I liked it best when no words were expected. Together we looked into the clear night sky. The stars were bright pinpoints.

After a long while I finally spoke it aloud even though I knew I shouldn’t. It broke the rules. “I don’t want her to die, Daddy. I’m scared she might.”

Dad jerked up in his chair and shot me a startled look. “You can’t let yourself think like that, son. No sense in getting emotional,” he said. “That’s not going to help.”

His eyes glistened in the dim porch light. “But Dad,” I said, “it’s you that’s crying. Don’t you even know it?”

He reached up and touched his face. No, he hadn’t, and it seemed to scare the hell out of him. He awkwardly said goodnight and went to bed.

I sat up for a while in the den. All was quiet, except for the steady ticking of a clock somewhere in the room. The den, like the rest of the house, was decorated with Mom’s arts and crafts projects. She lived to clip articles out of Redbook or McCall’s or Good Housekeeping on how to make some god-awful decorative piece that she could proudly display. On the coffee table sat a 2-foot-high pyramid made of a dozen Styrofoam balls. The surface of each ball was completely covered with row after row of lima beans, glued on and then spray-painted gold. I was being watched over by half a dozen angels on the mantel made from handkerchiefs stuffed with cotton balls, shirtsleeve buttons for eyes, supported on stands made of Popsicle sticks. I wondered, if she hadn’t been raised dirt poor and had gotten more than a high school education, would she have become a professional artist? She certainly had the inclination.

Mom got a raw deal, I thought to myself. She was the only one in the family who understood my need to write. She had taken the poem I read in high school and had given it a place of honor in the scrapbook. It was then she told me that she had been her high school’s poet as well. “But I wasn’t any good,” she said, embarrassed. “You are. You should write if that’s what you want.” It struck me how little her opinion had mattered when I was a teenager and how much it mattered now.

Again I noticed the ticking of the clock and looked to see that it was 3 a.m. But I’d never seen that particular clock before. Its face seemed to be made out of … what? A phonograph record? I got up to examine it.