If and when it happens, Broncos tight end Virgil Green doesn’t have a predetermined celebration script.

NFL players have different expressions to celebrate when they score a touchdown. Green doesn’t know whether he will spike the ball, do a dance or nonchalantly hand the ball to an official, but he can’t wait to find out what he will do when he finally puts six points on the scoreboard.

In his three-plus seasons with the Broncos, Green hasn’t scored on any of his 19 pass receptions.

“It has been a long time since I’ve scored a touchdown,” Green said Thursday after practice. “I’ll probably be super excited if it happens. I’ll go crazy, but I can’t go overboard. Julius (teammate Julius Thomas) will come out there and calm me down.”

It’s another part of Green’s game that drew raves in a rejuvenated Denver running game that overpowered the Miami Dolphins last Sunday. With Green at tight end, the Broncos rushed for 201 yards — including 167 yards from undrafted running back C.J. Anderson.

“I’m a versatile guy, but I like to block,” Green said. “That’s what this team has me doing and I don’t mind doing it.”

Green has only two receptions this season, for 18 yards, but he has missed some games because of an injured ankle. In comparison, Thomas has 40 receptions for 426 yards and 12 touchdowns and Jacob Tamme has 11 catches for 87 yards and two touchdowns.

Broncos coach John Fox said Green’s statistics are deceiving and possibly influenced by the game plan.

“I think historically he has done that,” Fox said when asked whether Green could become a factor in Denver’s offense as a pass catcher. “We’ve definitely leaned on Julius Thomas no doubt as far as a receiver, but Virgil’s very capable.”

Green has to look back to his senior year at Nevada to remember his last touchdown. In the Wolf Pack’s 2010 season, he had 35 receptions for 515 yards and five touchdowns.

But Green doesn’t dispute that blocking is his specialty.

“In blocking you have to be technically sound, but there’s also a huge mental part to it,” he said. “You have to say to yourself that the player across from me isn’t going to beat me. Absolutely, I’m a tough guy. My dad was in the military. I was taught to never back down from anybody.”

Green’s teammates know him by his performance on the field. They call him “The Hulk.”

“I don’t know if it’s obvious what he does as a blocker, but it helps,” Anderson said.

Added offensive tackle Ryan Clady: “In order to run the ball, you have to have a good blocking tight end at the point of attack. He was a factor for sure last week.”

Green’s primary focus is lining up against elite defensive linemen and learning what he can to improve his game.

“I’m not focused on scoring touchdowns,” Green said. “I just want to help this team win and get to the Super Bowl.”

Still, it will be interesting to see whether it will be a dance, a spike of the ball or a casual handoff to an official after Green scores the first touchdown of his NFL career.

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or twitter.com/irvmoss