Marc Maron doing a standup routine in May. Getty Images

It’s not every day that President Barack Obama stops by your garage for a chat.

But that was comedian and podcast star Marc Maron’s Friday, when Obama took a break from his fundraising tour through Los Angeles to visit Maron’s garage in the city’s Highland Park neighborhood and do an hour-long interview.

Maron, in turn, described in an interview with the Wall Street Journal what it’s like to sit down with the president—in what he called his “slowly dilapidating house,” no less.

The White House approached Maron, the irreverent host of WTF, one of the top five podcasts on iTunes, months ago about the possibility of setting up an interview, he said. He was taken aback. “I never thought I would talk to the president,” he said. “I never even thought to pursue that interview.”

Though Maron is the former host of a political radio show, his current podcast has a markedly different focus. He most often talks to members of the film industry—he sat down with director Judd Apatow on Thursday—or with fellow comedians, including a highly acclaimed episode with Louis C.K. in 2010. So when interviewing Obama became a reality, Maron had some catching up to do—though not too much.

“It did need to be the kind of interview that I do, so I tried not to overcompensate,” he said. “But I knew that in order to honor the office and to honor the conversation, I couldn’t completely disregard it.”

Then came the house preparations. Mr. Maron had been surprised enough that Obama wanted to come on the show. But when the White House told him the interview would be held in his garage—where he typically interviews subjects—his response was quick: “I said, ‘That’s crazy.’”

Some immediate concerns came to mind. “Oh my god, I hope the bathroom’s clean,” he said in Thursday’s podcast, as he announced his upcoming interview. “I should probably clean my house a little. Prep the cats somehow.”

Starting on Sunday, Secret Service began making stops at the Maron house. Officers closed down roads around his neighborhood, positioned snipers on his neighbor’s roof, and erected tents in his driveway. But far from grumbling at the inconvenience, his neighbors poured onto the streets to welcome Obama’s arrival Friday. The result was a veritable carnival, complete with a clown and a juggler.

Preparations complete, the interview began. Maron described the president as “very at ease … almost to the point where I’m like, ‘Is he really this at ease?’” He asked Obama whether he was nervous. The president’s response: “Of course not.”

President Barack Obama steps from Marine One in Pasadena, Calif., on Friday en route to tape a podcast interview with comedian Marc Maron. Associated Press

Their conversation covered a host of topics, Maron said, including Wednesday’s shootings in Charleston, S.C., race, family, and Obama’s goals for the rest of his presidency. The interview at times was “very candid” and “a little wonky,” he said. Audio clips are expected to be released later Friday, and the interview will air on the podcast at 3 a.m. ET on Monday.

In the interview, Obama offered some hints as to why he was sitting down with Maron, who, despite running a popular podcast, is still a relatively obscure choice. “At some point during the conversation he said that he wanted to get people to engage in politics,” Maron said. “I think in his mind [he thought] that this would reach an intelligent group of people that may feel detached from the actual personal engagement in political action and interest in politics.”

White House spokesman Eric Schultz told reporters Friday that sitting down with Maron allowed the president to “really offer listeners the opportunity to have more insight into how he makes decisions” and into “what he’s thinking about in terms of his family, his past, his future.”

For Obama, an interview on WTF is his latest foray into the less conventional world of media outlets, in an effort by the White House to reach a younger, more diverse audience. In 2010, Obama became the first sitting president to appear on Comedy Central’s “The Daily Show” with Jon Stewart. Last year, when he sought to pitch the Affordable Care Act ahead of an enrollment deadline, he delivered a purposely awkward interview on “Between Two Ferns,” an online show hosted by comedian Zach Galifianakis. Earlier this year, he invited three viral YouTube stars to the White House to interview him after the State of the Union. And he used a “selfie stick” to plug another health-care signup deadline earlier this year, where he riffed on the popular “Thanks Obama” Internet meme in a video for Buzzfeed.

But the interview with Maron did offer one first. “I’m fairly certain this is the first time a president of the U.S. has been interviewed in a garage,” Schultz said.

Maron came away with a souvenir, too. “The President forgot his coffee,” Maron posted on Instagram Friday, along with a picture of a to-go cup with the president’s seal.

He has since learned more. “Turns out it was tea,” he said. “Black tea.”