Esmeralda Hernandez of Molina Healthcare goes through the health plan options with Amalia Esparza as Molina Medical hosts an enrollment event for Covered California enrollees in Wilmington, CA., on Wednesda,y December 4, 2013. (Thomas R. Cordova / Staff Photographer)

WILMINGTON >> The CEO of Molina Healthcare said he expects the number of people to sign up for health care under the Affordable Care Act’s state-run insurance exchange programs to increase as the end of the initial enrollment period draws closer.

“Enrollments have been slow so far. I think a lot of it has a lot to do with the negative publicity of the website not working,” Molina Healthcare CEO Mario Molina said Wednesday night at the Molina Medical Group clinic in Wilmington.

“In the last week, we have seen traffic to our website increase fivefold.”

Molina declined to discuss enrollment figures at the event, saying those numbers will probably not be released until the end of the enrollment period.

The ACA’s deadline is Dec. 23 for enrollees to receive care through a government-managed exchange that will go into effect with the new year. The final deadline to get coverage through an exchange is March 31.

Molina Healthcare, based in Long Beach, is among the 13 insurers providing coverage through Covered California, the state-run exchange that offers subsidized health insurance to people whose incomes meet eligibility requirements. Individuals with an annual income of $28,725 or less or a family of four with an income at or below $58,875 may be able to receive premium assistance if they enroll for health insurance through the exchange.

The exchanges are a key part of the Affordable Care Act, the law that many opponents dubbed “Obamacare” before the term was taken up by supporters including its namesake, President Barack Obama, who signed it into law in 2010. The health care law, which requires Americans to obtain health insurance for 2014 or face a tax penalty, has been the subject of numerous criticisms.

Notable objections, as of late, include the prospect of individual plan holders being unable to retain insurance plans that do not meet the ACA’s minimum requirements. Republican critics have said those cancellations have made a lie out of the president’s previous pledge that those who liked their existing health insurance could keep their plans as the ACA goes into effect.

That controversy is in addition to the much-publicized problems that have afflicted Healthcare.gov, the federal government’s website for those considering applying for health insurance through the ACA.

Covered California has its own website, and the state’s exchange reports that as of today, more than 431,000 applications for health insurance have been initiated.

At Molina’s event in Wilmington, visitors were welcomed in English and Spanish before receiving one-on-one counseling from Molina employees on which plans that they may be eligible for. About 10 people visited the clinic when the evening session began and the counseling included walk-throughs on different levels of coverage and the various deductibles and co-pays involved with each plan.

Advertisement

Amalia Esparza, one of the people who attended the night event, said in Spanish after the counseling she was undecided whether to seek insurance through Covered California or through plans offered via her husband’s employer.

“She’s going to go back home and talk to her husband,” said Miriam Esparza, Amalia’s daughter and a Molina medical assistant who interpreted her mother’s remarks.

Molina Healthcare specializes in providing health coverage to patients who are seniors eligible for Medicare or low-income earners who can receive Medicaid. The ACA also expands Medicaid, administered as Medi-Cal in this state, and Molina said the company has hired some 4,000 people this year while anticipating an increase in business.

Although the ACA remains controversial, Molina said he expects the law to remain in place for the long term.

“I don’t know if they’re going to repeal the Affordable Care Act. I think it’s going to be hard to do,” he said. “I think it’s going to be harder to do as people get coverage.”

Contact Andrew Edwards at 562-499-1305.