Sioux Falls, SD

Gennadiy Mokhnenko is bringing his message to the Rushmore State.

"Give more information for people about my country about Ukraine, about problems with orphans, with homeless children and also want to tell people about terrible situation in Ukraine. What we have now because we have real terrible war," Mokhnenko said.

The Pastor from Ukraine searches the streets for homeless children struggling with substance abuse. His church has 30 rehab centers for both kids and adults. Many of the children later become a member of his family.

"Little bit strange family because I have 3 biological children and 32 adopted children," Mokhnenko said.

As his family continues to grow, so does the danger. Russian troops are on the ground near Mokhnenko's hometown in Mariupol. He recalls a story where a 75-year-old man was visited by his son and his family. The man left the house to close his garage door.

"It was just two seconds and rockets, Russian rockets came and killed all his family, all his family," Mokhnenko said.

It's violence he wants to see stopped, which is why he's bringing his message across the globe.

The pastor is in Sioux Falls for two days. He's spreading his message of the violence in Ukraine to youth groups.

"I want to say special thanks for American people who are thinking about my country who pray about my country," Mokhnenko said.

His voice is about to be heard on a larger scale. A documentary, called Crocodile Gennadiy recently played at the Tribeca Film Festival in New York. A film crew followed Mokhnenko for two and half years to illustrate the hardships in Ukraine.

"It's not a cinema for popcorn and Coca-Cola and to relax. It's a very hard experience," Mokhnenko said.

An experience the pastor wants everyone to see. He will continue to fight to get that message heard, no matter where he is in the country.

Many of the pastor's adopted children call him Pastor Crocodile. It's a name for a Russian Cartoon, where a Crocodile goes around saving children.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.