THE TONK

Great partnerships: Candice Falzon (right) with Kyly Clarke at the Gabba on Saturday. Photo: Getty Images

Dave Warner's relationship with ironwoman Candice Falzon has been the secret to his return to form, culminating in a sensational start to the Ashes series. That is the opinion of his father, Howard, who watched Warner at the Gabba as he raised his fourth Test century. ''He's got a new love life now and she's been a great asset to him, she really has,'' Warner snr said. ''She's calmed him right down, he's not on this [pointing to his beer], which hurts me because he won't buy me one any more. We went out for dinner last night, he'll have a couple of glasses of wine and then he'll go straight onto ginger beer or something. He's back in his bed by 10 o'clock of a night time. He's doing everything right, even when he's not playing cricket he's training every day with Candice. She's done well.'' He said Falzon's professional attitude had made all the difference. ''She had it with the ironwoman and all that. She knew what she had to do, and she did it. Dave had it in him but he got sidetracked. With Candice she goes training at four o'clock in the morning or whatever and he'll go with her. It's helped him something terrible.'' Warner's brother Steve was also jubilant on Twitter on Saturday: ''You f---ing beauty , so proud of u bro as are our family.''

HOW'S THAT? POMS READY TO DO OR DIET

England's new-age culinary tastes are not confined to their cricketers. When the Test team's dossier of dietary demands was leaked to Fairfax Media before the series, Guardian correspondent and former England and Middlesex fast bowler Mike Selvey checked his pantry at home and found he had almost every trendy ingredient on the list. Quinoa? Tick. Goji berries? Tick. The only item Selvey couldn't find was Agave syrup, the plant nectar from South America used to sweeten iced tea or pancakes. He expects England's recipe list to make it on to the bookshelves after the series. How well it sells may depend on how Alastair Cook's team fares on the field in the next six weeks.

Advertisement

LEE'S NEED FOR SPEED

Watch out batsmen in the Big Bash League. Brett Lee has set himself the goal of hitting the 150km/h mark this summer. The former Test speedster has recently started his training in the lead-up to the Sydney Sixers' opening match against cross-town rivals Sydney Thunder at the SCG next month. ''If I'm still bowling around 150ks I'll continue to play, I'd love to do it this year, it'd be 20 years of bowling at 150ks,'' Lee said. ''If I tick that box after Christmas I'll be pretty pleased with that.'' Lee is aiming to reach the 140km/h mark early in the tournament before hitting top speed with more conditioning. ''Physically I'm in very good shape, it's just a case of building the bowling now,'' Lee said.

FUN POLICE STRIKE

They say Queensland is a police state and a photographer at the Gabba felt the full wrath on Saturday, kicked off the ground by a cop for the heinous crime of throwing a beach ball back into the crowd. The crowd booed louder than they did for Stuart Broad but there was no changing the mind of the fun police.

RIXON SAYS NO THANKS

Australian assistant coach Steve Rixon says he was approached about the vacant Sri Lanka head coaching job but declined because the salary offered was ''embarrassing''. Greg Chappell and Tim Nielsen are also said to have been sounded out unsuccessfully by the island nation and Rixon, who oversees Australia's fielding, was also not tempted. ''Sri Lanka Cricket sent me a contract which was really embarrassing, I have to say, because it was so poor,'' Rixon told Cricinfo. ''I'm the assistant coach of Australia, and I get more staying with that job than on the contract they sent through. It was really quite embarrassing for an international coach.'' Rixon was not prepared to have to audition for the job. ''Don't expect me to come running over there to do an interview - interviews are a waste of time,'' Rixon said. ''You either want someone, and you know that, or you don't. I've been around first-class cricket for 20-odd years as a coach. I played for 15 years as a player. It's not as if I'm unknown.'' '' Sri Lanka Cricket denies Rixon was shortlisted or asked to fly over for an interview.

MIDGE'S NOD TO NATHAN

Australia's chief destroyer on Friday's extraordinary second day of the Gabba Test has paid tribute to his partner in crime, off-spinner Nathan Lyon, for the key role he played in bringing England unstuck so dramatically. Mitchell Johnson took the big share of the spoils after his hostile performance but he directed the plaudits to Lyon, who built up the pressure on Michael Carberry and Ian Bell, laying the platform for the carnage that followed. ''Credit has to go to Nathan Lyon,'' Johnson said. ''He was bowling exceptionally well at that stage as well. We had the runs dried up for a period there and something had to give and it gave.''