[This post has been updated with the photo that appears at the bottom.] CBS ran a story last night on the national evening news on the ongoing reaction to the poaching death of a lion known as Cecil in Zimbabwe. The story prominently featured a veteran pursuer of African big game from the United States who described himself as a “conservation hunter.” The hunter in question: Governor McCrory’s former Secretary of Public Safety, current East Carolina University Trustee and long-time conservative activist Kieran Shanahan.

Shanahan, who appeared in the story with the head of an animal he’d apparently killed mounted as a trophy on the wall of his office, told CBS he was “sickened” by poaching he’s seen and claimed to hunt only non-endangered animals under circumstances blessed by relevant African governments.

A Humane Society official, however, refuted Shanahan’s claim about the usefulness of such hunting later in the story:

“But Wayne Pacelle, who is president of the Humane Society of the U.S., said trophy hunters target some of the biggest, most magnificent animals, which is bad for species health. Creatures that are killed cannot reproduce and pass on their genes to future generations. ‘We don’t see any rationale to kill animals just as a head-hunting exercise,’ Pacelle said. ‘It’s pointless. It’s one thing to kill animals for food. It’s another to kill them just for their heads.'”

Several commenters to the story have also weighed in to dispute Shanahan’s claims.

As one noted:

“A point in fact: trophy hunters do NOT ‘cull’ the herd!! The trophy shot is the biggest, best coat, best conformation, etc., so it looks awesome hanging on the wall. Culling the herd is, by definition, taking out the weak, malformed, sick and elderly to protect the gene pool.”

And another:

“That CBS hunter guest was playing games trying to justify their unsustainable activity. He needs to find something else to use his guns with.”

Though a Shanahan defender said this:

“MEANWHILE, radical islamists are slaughtering innocent people!~ WHO CARES ABOUT THE BIG GAME HUNTERS! WE HAVE BIGGER PROBLEMS! Wake up!”

Going forward, it will be interesting to see if Shanahan’s status as a national spokesperson for big game hunting remains politically “sustainable.”