Mark Hunt

Related Galleries Primary Election Day across WV Primary Election Day across WV

Charleston lawyer Mark Hunt was declared the winner of Tuesday’s race to see which Democrat will try to replace incumbent Rep. Alex Mooney as congressman in West Virginia’s 2nd Congressional District.

Hunt and U.S. Army lawyer Cory Simpson were neck and neck Tuesday night in the race, but The Associated Press called the race for Hunt just before midnight.

At press time, with 70 percent of precincts reporting, Hunt and Simpson each had 29 percent of the votes. Hunt had about 300 more votes than Simpson, according to results from the AP. Mooney, a Republican, easily defeated Marc Savitt, a Martinsburg mortgage broker. Mooney had 72 percent of the vote at about 11 p.m.

Tom Payne, a Martinsburg patent examiner, had 21 percent of the vote at press time against his Democratic contenders. Harvey Peyton, a Nitro attorney, had 14 percent, and retired Roane County teacher Robin Wilson had 7 percent.

When they met with Gazette-Mail editors in April, all of the Democratic candidates criticized Mooney’s time in office.

Hunt, a personal injury lawyer, who previously represented Kanawha County in the House of Delegates for 14 years, called Mooney “an absent congressman.”

He repeated that claim against Mooney Tuesday night.

“Mooney promised he would come to West Virginia and be one of us. He hasn’t done that,” Hunt said. “I’m a native West Virginian. I understand the needs of our people.”

Hunt, who was celebrating at the Marriott, said November’s election would be a difficult, but that he could pull off a win.

“Anytime you run against an incumbent it’s difficult, they have sources of funding that can be tough to deal with. But we’ve done polling and we know Mooney is vulnerable,” Hunt said.

In a statement late Tuesday, Mooney said that it isn’t him who West Virginians can’t relate to, but Hillary Clinton.

“I look forward to running an aggressive, issue-based campaign focused on standing up for West Virginia’s conservative values,” Mooney’s statement reads. “Hillary Clinton and her West Virginia Democrat allies are out-of-touch with hardworking West Virginians. I look forward to continuing to fight for conservative values.”

Before deciding to make a bid for Congress, Hunt announced last September he would run for state attorney general.

Simpson, who grew up in South Charleston and is a veteran of the war in Afghanistan, raised about $160,000 for his campaign. Peyton raised about $112,000 and Hunt about $77,000, according to the Center for Responsible Politics. Mooney raised close to $780,000.

Mooney, who lives in Charles Town in the state’s Eastern Panhandle, was first elected two years ago when he defeated former state Democratic Party chairman Nick Casey. The seat was opened after Shelley Moore Capito successfully ran for the U.S. Senate.

Mooney, a former chairman of the Maryland Republican Party who moved to West Virginia in 2013, also previously ran for Congress as a college student in New Hampshire.

Mooney has campaigned vowing to fight the Affordable Care Act, while Simpson has said it’s doing much good and that its flaws should be fixed.

The 17-county 2nd Congressional District stretches across the central part of the state, from the Ohio River to the Eastern Panhandle’s borders with Maryland and Virginia.

West Virginia’s two other congressional races weren’t contested in Tuesday’s primary. In November’s general election, Republican incumbents David McKinley and Evan Jenkins will face, respectively, former state legislator Mike Manypenny and former U.S. Secret Service officer Matt Detch, both Democrats.

Reach Kate White at kate.white@wvgazettemail.com, 304-348-1723 or follow @KateLWhite on Twitter.