WASHINGTON -- Tea Party Republican and former U.S. Senate candidate Rob Maness of Madisonville called it an honor to join tens of thousands of marchers on the Edmund Pettus Bridge Sunday (March 8) to mark the 50th anniversary of Bloody Sunday.

"To be in such a historic place with so many other Americans remembering and honoring the bravery and sacrifice made for freedom will always be a memory I cherish," said Maness, who ran unsuccessfully for the Senate last year. "We have made great strides over the past 50 years, but need to continue to stand firm for policies that will positively impact poverty, incarceration rates, and help keep families together."

Last week, Rep. G.K. Butterfield, D-N.C., chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, criticized the House Republican leadership for not participating in the commemoration of the march in which peaceful demonstrators were met with violence by Alabama state troopers. Butterfield had urged GOP leaders, including Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, to attend. Butterfield had met with Scalise after reports surfaced that he had addressed a white supremacist group in 2002. Scalise has continued to apologize for that event.

"I made it very clear that I reject bigotry of all forms," Scalise said March 1 on Fox News Sunday. "I continue to build relationships and focus on things that we can do together."

Late Friday, Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., announced that he would attend the Selma march, according to CNN. Earlier, Scalise said he would attend the anniversary of the Selma march next year.

Maness last week criticized Scalise for supporting a spending bill for the Department of Homeland Security without language blocking the president's executive order on immigration. It has fueled speculation that Maness might challenge Scalise for his seat in 2016, though a Maness aide said he's concentrating on his political action committee and is "not even sure that he will run for another public office."

An estimated 80,000 marchers were in Selma Sunday to commemorate the march.

Attorney General Eric Holder spoke at a memorial service, saying challenges remain for African-American voters some 50 years later.

"Shortly after the historic election of President Obama in 2008, numerous states and jurisdictions attempted to impose rules and laws that had the effect of restricting Americans' opportunities to vote--particularly, and disproportionately, communities of color," Holder said.

Holder noted that, in 2013, the Supreme Court decided there had been significant gains in many southern states and struck down the need for the Justice Department's approval of any proposed changes to voting rules.

"Let me be clear: while the Court's decision removed one of the Justice Department's most effective tools, we remain undaunted and undeterred in our pursuit of a meaningful right to vote for every eligible American," Holder said according to prepared remarks provided by the Justice Department. Holder is awaiting Senate confirmation of his replacement, federal prosecutor Loretta Lynch, before leaving his position.

Holder has served as attorney general for the entire tenure of President Barack Obama, who spoke at events Saturday in Selma.