Ezekiel Emanuel, the older brother of Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel and a key figure in health policy circles, came under fire from fellow doctors this week for declaring in a magazine article that he wants to die at the age of 75.

In the article, which appeared in the October issue of The Atlantic Monthly, Emanuel said he plans to refuse life-prolonging and preventive care starting in 2032 because "this manic desperation to endlessly extend life is misguided and potentially destructive."

People become less creative as they age, he wrote. A deadline of 75 years "forces each of us to ask whether our consumption is worth our contribution."

That sentiment angered some doctors within the American Medical Association, who said that Emanuel had defied the Chicago-based physician group's code of ethics in suggesting that a human life becomes less valuable with age.

With the AMA's House of Delegates convened in Dallas in recent days, AMA delegate and New York ophthalmologist Gregory Pinto proposed a resolution that would have directed the organization to "issue a statement publicly disagreeing" with Emanuel.

The resolution, first reported by Modern Healthcare, also argued that Emanuel's article was "even more disturbing because it comes from one of the architects of national health care policy."

Emanuel, an oncologist and bioethicist, was a health policy adviser to the White House during the crafting of the Affordable Care Act.

The resolution was ultimately voted down, an AMA spokesman said. But the outrage sparked by Emanuel's article was a reminder of the charged nature of debates over the country's health care system.

Emanuel acknowledged in his article that a view like his could have policy implications. Life expectancy should not be used as a measure for the quality of health care once a country's average age has exceeded 75 years, he wrote. And biomedical research should be focused more on "Alzheimer's, the growing disabilities of old age, and chronic conditions — not on prolonging the dying process," he wrote.

Donald Palmisano, a New Orleans surgeon and former president of the AMA, said Emanuel's article was "his opinion."

"But if the government adopts such an approach (through) the IPAB (Independent Payment Advisory Board) of PPACA (Affordable Care Act) or some other scheme yet to be devised, then we have a problem!" Palmisano wrote in a response to the article.

Emanuel was not available to comment for this story, a representative told the Tribune. Pinto did not respond to a request for comment.

Twitter @kimgeiger