Doug Melvin will move to an advisory role when David Stearns takes over as general manager. Credit: Mike De Sisti

Sunday is Doug Melvin's last day on the job as general manager of the Brewers, and it's not how he wanted to go out.

Not with his team suffering one of the more disappointing years in franchise history — a wire-to-wire, out-of-contention season. Beginning with a 10-0 loss at home to the Colorado Rockies on opening day, the Brewers never spent a day in the playoff race.

"The performance just wasn't there," said Melvin, who will step aside into a somewhat nebulous advisory role with 30-year-old David Stearns taking over as GM. "There was no way to foresee that, from so many players."

If the Brewers had skipped spring training altogether and reported to Miller Park on April 6 totally unprepared, they couldn't have played worse. The hitters didn't hit. The pitchers didn't pitch. The fielders didn't catch the ball.

It was the trifecta of losing, and after only one month Melvin decided it wasn't going to work under manager Ron Roenicke. Never mind that Melvin had picked up the 2016 option on Roenicke's contract only one month earlier, believing the team would play better by his removing lame-duck status.

The losing actually began with five weeks remaining in the 2014 season, when a 9-22 collapse knocked the Brewers from their five-month perch atop the National League Central and completely out of the playoffs.

"I think last year was probably tougher than this year," said Melvin. "We were in first place for 152 days. That was tougher, not to make the playoffs. We played so well early."

Principal owner Mark Attanasio was none too happy about that pratfall, but after consulting with Melvin it was decided not to overhaul the roster. Only minimal changes were made to the core of the team, with disastrous results.

"We could have retooled last year," said Melvin. "But you don't want to do that with the talent we had.

"Oakland changed everything and finished in last place. San Diego made a lot of changes and didn't make it. Every situation is different. It depends on your ballclub.

"We felt with the pitching we had if people performed up to their norms we'd hang in there long enough. The bullpen has been good but the starting pitching struggled."

Because the losing started immediately and never stopped, Melvin has had the entire season to mull what went wrong and what could have been done about it, if anything. As with most failed seasons, there were no easy answers.

"There were a number of things, including performance and injuries," said Melvin. "Like any other year, we have to have players stay healthy and perform to their usual levels."

Injuries indeed took their toll, including catcher Jonathan Lucroy's broken toe, centerfielder Carlos Gomez's strained hamstring, second baseman Scooter Gennett's lacerated hand, shortstop Jean Segura's broken finger and pitcher Wily Peralta's oblique strain. But the free-fall already had begun, going back to the end of 2014.

Before midseason, it became evident it was time to retool, rebuild, reset — pick your "re" word — and start the process of trying to be competitive again. With a wild-card berth in 2008 and division crown in 2011, as well as 80- to 80-plus-win seasons in '09, '12 and '14, there had been no appetite within the organization to take such steps.

"It's hard to accept retooling," said Melvin. "I know Mark had trouble accepting that, too. He never really wanted to do it but sometimes you have to do it.

"I've always said even in the largest markets you have to do it. The Cubs had to do it."

Rebuilding plans can be long and painful. Cubs fans are feeling their oats this season but the previous five years were dismal for all involved. Houston wandered through the baseball wilderness for six years, including three 100-loss seasons in a row, before becoming competitive again in 2015.

"People think we've been bad for a long time but we weren't," said Melvin. "We were in the middle. That doesn't get you to the playoffs. Even Mark was saying it seems like we've been losing for three or four years."

There is no way to know how long it will take the Brewers to be competitive again. They took the first step in that direction with a series of trades in July that netted a nice crop of prospects. Toss in what appear to be strong drafts the last two years and the Brewers have pieces to plug in down the road.

Patience is the key to any rebuilding plan, and that is the fly in the baseball soup, according to Melvin.

"The biggest challenge is probably going to be patience," he said. "It's hard to be patient at times. This game requires patience but we live in an impatient world. There are a lot of teams getting back to the playoffs for the first time in many years.

"We have some good, younger players. That's good to see. I think we will have some good pitching. We do have to stay healthy. Now, we have to get back to having some all-star players. You have to have some big horses to carry you."

Asked how long he thought it would take for the Brewers to be good again, Melvin deftly dodged the question, not wanting to throw out a deadline that Stearns and Co. might not be able to meet.

"That will be up to David to figure out," Melvin said with a smile. "Looking at our club, we don't have any huge contracts that are in the way. (Ryan) Braun has a big extension (five years, $105 million) coming but he performed this year.

"We accomplished a lot with our trades in July because we got a lot of young players back. That's going to help moving forward. We've rebuilt the farm system with those trades and the last couple of drafts.

"We haven't had this kind of year for a while. It's hard every year when you don't go to the playoffs."

And never easy to get back.

Send email to thaudricourt@journalsentinel.com