Email letters, May 12, 2016

Guest opinion attacking ColoradoCare displayed alarming disregard for truth

Sunday’s guest opinion by Matthew Glans, attacking the proposed ColoradoCare Amendment #69, displayed an alarming disregard for truth and/or facts. The author’s incorrect premise is that ColoradoCare is a single-payer system. He goes on to misrepresent the characteristics of such systems. Medicare, the VA, and Indian Health Services will continue without modification under ColoradoCare.

When I came to the end of his harangue and found that Mr. Glans represents the Heartland Institute, I wasn’t surprised. The Heartland Institute was founded in 1984 as a right-wing “think tank.” Funded by the Phillip Morris Company, they began by extolling the “benefits” of second-hand smoke. In the 1990s, they took on the task of confusing the public about the nature and causes of climate change, work largely funded by the fossil fuel industry. History suggests that neither accuracy nor credibility is of primary concern to the Heartland Institute.

Addressing Mr. Glans’ many errors and misrepresentations would take more words that this format allows. However, I’d like to rebut one main point: ColoradoCare will NOT be a “government-run” system for financing health care. It is to be administered by an elected, non-partisan board of Colorado citizen directors, and will be independent of both executive and legislative branches of Colorado State government. This board will be charged with the task of making high quality health care available to all Colorado residents, in as cost effective a manner as possible. Under their direction, ColoradoCare will operate as a co-op – similar to credit unions or the Green Bay Packers.

In contrast, our current for-profit system for financing health care is run by corporate bureaucracies with incentives and goals that mainly benefit out-of-state executives and investors. I’m voting YES on Amendment #69 in November. You can learn more at ColoradoCare.org.

MARSHALL A. MARTIN

Grand Junction

New roundabout at I-70 and Horizon is efficient, quick and safe

Today was the opening of the roundabout at I-70 and Horizon Drive. Since I drive from Fruita to work in Grand Junction this is my exit and for years, I’ve had to wait for traffic lights and watch diligently for those drivers who like to speed through the caution lights.

Using the roundabout moves traffic so efficiently; it’s quicker and much safer. It’s amazing for months how the workers have used orange cones placed in strategic areas to guide the thousands of commuters and I-70 travelers to their destinations all the while working in very dangerous conditions.

I just wanted to give a shout out to all those who were involved with the design and construction of the roundabout: a job well done. Thank you!

JUDITH CHAPIN

Fruita



When it comes to sexual discrimination, the law says you can’t have it both ways

The issue of sexual discrimination seems to be a simple one.

People who open a business in Colorado want all of the protections of the government: good roads, taxes to support economic development, access to the civil and criminal courts (enforce contracts, collect debts, dissolve marriages, prevent burglary/theft/bad checks/trespassing/assault/murder, etc.)

Then if they have a personal bias against certain people (lesbians, gays, etc.) they want the government to look the other way when they engage in acts of bigotry.

The law (equal protection) says you can’t have it both ways. If you open a business, then, barring a problem with some particular person who may be causing problems on your premises, you have to serve all members of the public. You can’t open a business that serves the public and seek the benefits of doing so and be a bigot at the same time.



D.D. LEWIS

Clifton

We can solve health insurance crisis in this country with multi-part approach

I would like to weigh in on the subject of Obamacare. Some politicians are for it, some against it, while others want a single payer system run by the government. The fact is that everyone is missing the obvious solution. We can solve the health insurance crisis in this country if we are willing to put our minds to it.

What it would take is a multi-part approach. First, Obamacare should be drastically modified. The good parts of it should remain. Some of these are not allowing preexisting conditions to limit the coverage, the allowance of younger people to stay on their parent’s plan, and the necessity that everyone should carry insurance or face tax consequences. Some of what needs to change is allowing insurance companies to be nationwide, not just in their home state, eliminating the tax on medical devices, and less stringent rules for insurance companies that want to participate.

Second, Medicare should be extended to all citizens, not just those 65 or over, but with a higher premium for those under 65, in line with private insurance costs. And Medicaid should remain and still be available for those with low incomes. In this way, private insurance companies can still compete with government run insurance in the free market.

The rates for Medicare for those under 65 should be strictly in line with accepted market practices so that the system should always remain solvent and self-sustaining and is not considered a government handout or an entitlement program.

For those who don’t like mixing government enterprise with private enterprise, there are plenty of examples where government competes with private. For example, government bonds vs. corporate bonds; government transportation (Amtrak) vs. private transportation (United, Delta, etc.); U.S. Postal Service vs. UPS, Federal Express, etc. The list goes on.

A setup like this should allow for much more competition in the health insurance marketplace and costs should eventually come down. In addition, all the other related health coverage plans could remain in place, including flexible spending accounts and health savings accounts. If lawmakers could get behind such a plan, it would go a long way toward solving our runaway health care costs in this country.

ROBERT BENEDIK

Grand Junction

No scientific evidence suggests that anyone is born a homosexual

I am a retired biology instructor from a public high school in California.

In all my research and studies I have not found any scientific evidence, biological nor psychological, to warrant that anyone is born a homosexual. No researcher has found provable biological or genetic differences between heterosexuals and homosexuals that weren’t caused by their behavior. People tend to believe that their sexual desires and behaviors are learned. Early homosexual experiences influence adult patterns of behavior. Many change their sexual preferences and are now ex-homosexuals.

The Holy Bible clearly states animals reproduce after their kind. If there is a genetic abnormally, or mutation, it does not survive as normal animals do and they are not able to reproduce. Experimentation of such only has led to defects not improvement, whether it be animal, fish, bird, or insect. Human beings, unlike these creatures, are not driven by instinct but rather have a free will.

The Bible is not cruel but rather it is loving and kind. It is God’s instruction book how we can live lives that are pleasing to Him.

Research the statistics of those that live homosexual lives. Some of the problems they suffer are depression, higher incidents of breast cancer, AIDS, reduced lifespan, etc.

Every nation that has succumbed to immorality no longer exists as a nation today. A short list of these nations include Hittites, Babylonian, Roman, Persian, and Inca, etc.

It is easy to align America’s path with the examples above, particularly Rome, the civilization we have the most in common with. Morals continue to decline, slowly, sometimes unnoticed, as generation after generation become willing to accept lower moral standards. Looking at the historical record, it is quite easy to predict the ultimate outcome.

ROBERT W CARLSON

Fruita

Renewables are the future, and their rapid adoption is a moral imperative

In response to the May 8 editorial by Christian Reece:

Club 20’s assertion that the oil and gas industry is the source of 100,000 jobs in the state is a bloated statistic built on a mountain of sludge and industry hype. In 2011 the Bureau of Labor Statistics said there were about 22,000 industry jobs statewide. At that time there were over 70 drilling rigs operating in the state. Today there are only 13 rigs operating on the front range, perhaps another two operating on the west slope, with the rig count decreasing almost monthly.

Industry jobs have suffered a corresponding hit, and no relief is in sight since the market price of oil would have to double from its present price of around $43 a barrel for the extremely expensive and water intensive drilling technique known as horizontal fracking to become even marginally profitable. T Boone Pickens, an industry lion of yesteryear, has said fracking will never recover. He has been investing mightily in wind energy for years.

Indeed, many fracking companies have declared bankruptcy, many more declarations are expected in the next quarter, and asset write-downs are universal. Moody’s has rated Anadarko’s debt as junk bond quality. Anadarko was one of the largest drillers in the state. EnCana, another of the big three, held a fire sale of its assets on the Front Range in an attempt to raise debt-service cash.

Perhaps Club 20, like T Boone, should train its attention on renewables. In 2014 renewables provided about 724,000 jobs nationwide, oil and gas only 177,000. Solar alone provided about 208,00 jobs. Indeed, solar jobs are growing exponentially, with solar providing 40 percent of all new power generation in 2015. Renewables are the future, and their rapid adoption is a moral imperative if we are to avert the fearsome maw of climate disaster.

PHILLIP DOE

Environmental Director

Be the Change

Littleton



Justman should be commended for voting against bike path

I’d like to commend John Justman for voting against the bike path to the Colorado National Monument. If the bicyclists want a path, it’s about time they pay for it.

The ATV crowd pays an annual fee, supposedly for trail maintenance, and so far the most that I have seen is the forest service closing trails. Then I read that they are building new trails through virgin forest for bicycles. What’s with that?

STEVE THOMAS

Montrose