Tyler Templeton utilizes open running lanes in 178-yard, 4-TD performance

Gunner Javernick lays a stiff arm during the Ca単on City Tigers' 62-20 win against Cheyenne Mountain on Friday night at Citizens' Stadium. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Long drives, big holes and huge numbers were what the Ca単on City Tigers offense produced on Friday night.

The team converted 31 first downs as the offensive line created running lanes for the 'backs and the Tigers scored 62 points for the first time in more than a decade.

Ca単on City had little trouble with Cheyenne Mountain as it rolled to a 62-20 Foothills League win at Citizens' Stadium.

Tyler Templeton rushed for 178 yards and four touchdowns, Logan Nethercot threw for 237 in basically one half of play and Gunner Javernick hauled in 104 yards of receiving for two touchdowns.

The big game from Templeton had a lot to do with the offensive line, but also the read option the Tigers seem to be getting more comfortable with. It's complex, Nethercot said, but he reads multiple things before the snap and some during the play to decide whether to hand it to Templeton or throw it in the flat.

"Our quarterback is making great decisions," Tigers offensive coordinator Chris Coppa said. "He's got a big responsibility with what we're doing,"

The team also used its hurry-up offense more on Friday, something Coppa said the players do well with and enjoy.

"There's multiple options, and I love when we can speed it up, slow it down, speed it up, slow it down," Nethercot said. "You always want the upper hand, and I think that's what this offense gives us."

Got a Breather

The Tigers' previous four games had been against teams that are all currently ranked in the top 15 or were at the time of the game. During the stretch, the Tigers went 2-2 and learned how to prepare the right way.

That helped this week, Tigers head coach Tom O'Rourke said.

"I think it had to. Knowing that we had to get up mentally and physically and be locked in for the stretch we had there in the middle of the season that carries over," he said.

Trenton Stringari and Chris Pilafas pursue the ball carrier during the Ca単on City Tigers' 62-20 win against Cheyenne Mountain on Friday night at Citizens' Stadium. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Still a flaw

As well as the Tigers looked on both sides of the ball on Friday, they did struggle against the Indians' passing game in the first half.

Quarterback Mitch Guhl threw for 216 yards in the first half for two touchdowns. He also hooked up with receivers on big plays of 56 and 43 yards.

That was Indians coach Willie Roberts' plan, to utilize Nathan Resty's height as a weapon against the Tigers' secondary that has struggled this season. Resty caught five passes for 130 yards.

All the team's passing yards came in the first half, as Guhl was 0 for 3 with an interception in the second half. The team turned the ball over on its first three possessions of the second half then punted on its next two.

"We came out sloppy in the first half and the coaches got us in the locker room and told us we had to play harder," senior defensive lineman Devin Hill said. "We did a great job responding, we played well as a team."

Two to go

The Tigers (5-3 overall, 3-2 league) will host Palmer Ridge (3-5, 3-2) this week as the season winds down. They'll travel to Widefield (0-8, 0-5) on Nov. 1 for the season finale.

Two wins will almost certainly get the Tigers in the playoffs.