Yesterday, early education workers and thought leaders joined together at the North Carolina Child Care Coalition’s annual Early Education Forum to discuss ways to use research, policy, and advocacy to address the high cost of early education as well as to transform the early care and education workforce.

Those concerns are substantiated in a new Economic Policy Institute report that details the high cost of child care in every state. In the new report, It’s time for an ambitious national investment in America’s children, the authors outline the benefits of public investment in early childhood care and education (ECCE), to children, families, society, and the economy. They also propose that lawmakers enact critical public investments, including:

The public provision of early childhood education, including high-quality pre-kindergarten education;

Subsidies to allow parents to afford high-quality child care; and

Expanded public funding for home visits by trained nurses to help parents both before and after childbirth.

These recommendations would help address some of issues that attendees raised at the forum yesterday. Child care is one of the biggest expenses that North Carolina families face. It’s so sizeable that infant care in North Carolina now costs $2,677 more than in-state tuition for 4-year public college. High costs mean that many families cannot send their children to high-quality education centers—even for low-income families because long waiting lists persist for subsidies. That hurts children, families, and our economy.

Annual child care costs are $9,255 on average for a North Carolina family with an infant and $7,592 for a family with a four-year-old, according to the EPI report. Only a small chunk of families are able to absorb those prices and still be able to pay for food, rent, utilities and the other things that go into the family budget. The Department of Health and Human Services currently defines child care as affordable if it costs 10 percent or less of a family’s income (and has recently proposed an even more ambitious measure of 7 percent). By the current 10 percent metric, only 26.7 percent of North Carolina families are able to afford infant care.

If lawmakers were to cap out-of-pocket infant care expenditures at 10 percent of income, North Carolina’s economy would grow by 1.5 percent, or $7.1 billion, according to EPI. Nationally, these gains to gross domestic product would also boost federal tax revenue by roughly $70 billion annually, providing a very large base of economic support to finance this ambitious investment in America’s children. Such an ambitious public investment in early childhood would not only make it more affordable for families, it would raise wages for workers and increase quality in the early childhood sector.

Those improvements are needed in North Carolina, according to expert testimony at yesterday’s forum. ECCE professionals are earning wages that are too little to pay for the basics, according to Anna Carter’s research for the Child Care Services Association. The ECCE workforce has a median wage far below what it takes to make ends meet, standing at $16 per hour for Directors, $10.97 per hour for Teachers, and $9.97 per hour for Assistant Teachers. Wages for these workers have increased less than 50 cents per hour since 2011. Even worse, nearly 40 percent of educators need at least one type of public assistance to meet their household budget.

Many educators serving our youngest children earn too little to afford early childhood for their own children. A typical early childhood educator would have to spend 47.6 percent of her earnings to put her own child in infant care, according to EPI’s findings. A brave woman shared her experience with this reality at the forum. She has been an early education teacher for the last twelve years but her two-worker family income is too low for her to afford high-quality care for her two-year old son. It’s a shame but thankfully better policy choices can help her family and many others facing low-wages and high ECCE costs.

The evidence is clear, North Carolina must lead on early childhood investments and align the pay of educators in this field with what is needed to value this career, to meet the basics, and boost the economy.