Posted: Saturday December 13, 2014 --- 7:00 p.m.

Workers are left to wonder how long they'll be off the floor after a massive fire broke out at a cheese processing plant in Portage.

The fire started at Associated Milk Producers Inc. around 7 Friday night and wasn't put out till early Saturday morning.

The good news, no one was hurt and the plant shouldn't be out of commission for long.

Smoke billowed out of the AMPI cheese plant for hours overnight in Portage.

"Shock. Definitely a lot of shock still," said AMPI employee Alyssa Cotton.

The fire was contained to a dry storage warehouse. But firefighters from all across the area responded

Portage fire chief Clayton Simonson explained, "We probably had 25-30 different fire departments here throughout the night to help. We still have one strike team helping us clean up now."

Many plant workers were inside when the fire broke out.

"We were out on the line and we kept hearing people say there's a fire, there's a fire. They went over the loud speaker and said everyone needs to get out now," exclaimed Cotton.

The employees knew what procedures to follow and all acted quickly.

"We do monthly drills, how to get out quick, where our exits are," said Cotton.

The flames were put out around 6:30 Saturday morning. AMPI has two main goals in the days ahead.

"A. We can bring our people back and get them back to work as quickly as possible and b. produce products for our customers and fill their needs," said AMPI plant manager Donald Weideman.

As soon as the fire was put out the big job of clean up began. It was important to remove all the cardboard and other materials to prevent a flare up.

"We called in two bobcats to push all the product out the warehouse door. Then we're dousing that out to put the rest of it out," said Simonson.

After surveying the damage this morning, the plant manager received good news.

"All of the production equipment is in very good shape. It's a little dirty and needs to be cleaned up, but that's to be expected when you have a fire," said Weideman.

Dealing with a fire at any time can be difficult, but employees say they're especially concerned since it's the holidays.

"With Christmas a couple weeks away we want to get back to work. It's very hard on all of us," said Cotton.

"I expect that we're going to have some people missing a few hours here and there but my goal and plan is to have everybody back to work by next week," added Weideman.

The cause of the fire is still under investigation.

AMPI is asking all employees to not report to work until they're notified by human resources or their work supervisor.