Buy Photo Democrat Staci Appel, a candidate in Iowa's 3rd Congressional District, meets with the Register Editorial Board on Monday. (Photo: Kelsey Kremer/The Register)Buy Photo

Staci Appel wavered back and forth whether to run for Congress. Then she decided to plunge into Iowa's 3rd District race last July and she hasn't looked back since.

"I looked around and I thought we can do better, and I thought I could do better, and we need to do better in Congress. I think I can make a difference," Appel told the Des Moines Register's Editorial Board on Monday.

Appel, 48, a Democrat from Ackworth, served one term in the Iowa Senate, losing a 2010 reelection bid. She also worked as a financial consultant for 12 years with two major investment firms. She was born in Waterloo and grew up in Iowa City, where she washed dishes at the Robin Hood Room restaurant, which her parents operated.

She says she's proud of her work in the Senate, which included supporting a statewide ban on smoking in most public places, and a ban on texting while driving. She also cites her involvement in a bipartisan reorganization of state government under former Gov. Chet Culver, an initiative she believes could be duplicated in Washington, D.C., to help reduce the federal deficit.

"I am out there talking with voters every day. The number one thing they are talking about is that we need change in Washington. They are not just asking for it; they are demanding it," Appel says. "They want someone who knows how to sit down and work with folks and effect change and get it done, and I think I have the background to do it."

Iowa has never elected a woman to Congress, and Appel says it's about time to bring a woman's perspective to the state's delegation in Washington. As a mother of six children, ranging in age from 5 through 16, for example, she says she especially recognizes the importance of early childhood education; how children can be affected by second-hand smoke; and the safety benefits of using seatbelts in a motor vehicle's back seat.

Appel, who is married to Iowa Supreme Court Justice Brent Appel, is unopposed Tuesday in a primary for the Democratic nomination in Iowa's 3rd Congressional District, which covers 16 counties in southwest Iowa, including the Des Moines and Council Bluffs areas. She will face one of six Republicans vying in the primary in November's general election, which will decide the successor to U.S. Rep. Tom Latham, R-Clive, who is not seeking another term.

"I look forward to putting my record up against any of the six. I think middle-class Iowans want someone who will fight for them. I have a record of doing that in the Iowa Senate," she said.

The Republicans seeking the seat include state Sen. Brad Zaun of Urbandale, David Young of Van Meter, Joe Grandanette of Des Moines, Monte Shaw of West Des Moines, Robert Cramer of Grimes, and Secretary of State Matt Schultz of Truro.

Appel said she would love to have President Barack Obama come to Iowa to campaign for her, which would give her the opportunity to show the president Iowa's efforts on renewable fuels.

WHAT STACI APPEL BELIEVES IN

ABORTION: "I am pro-choice. I think a woman should be able to make her own decisions with her family and her doctor."

SAME-SEX MARRIAGE: "I support same-sex marriage. I think you should be able to choose who you love."

AFFORDABLE CARE ACT: "I think everybody needs to have access to health care. The Affordable Care Act was kind of abysmal the way it was rolled out," she said. She would not repeal the law, but would seek improvements, such as negotiating drug prices for Medicare recipients, similar to what is done by the Department of Veterans Affairs. Some provisions of the law, such as coverage for preexisting conditions and providing health care for dependents until age 26, are important and their loss would represent a step backwards for Americans, she said.

MINIMUM WAGE: She endorses Sen. Tom Harkin's proposal to raise the minimum wage to $10.10 an hour. Previous claims that that minimum wage increases would hurt the economy and eliminate many lower-paying jobs didn't prove to be true, she said.

IMMIGRATION: She supports strengthening border security, but also favors a pathway to citizenship for 11 million undocumented immigrants, saying they could "pay a fine and go to the back of the line" to wait for an opportunity to gain citizenship.

GUNS: She supports Second Amendment rights for gun owners, although she doesn't carry a gun. She also suggests loopholes should be closed on background checks. Background checks should be conducted every time a gun is sold in the U.S., she said.

ENERGY: She supports construction of the Keystone XL pipeline, saying it would help create jobs for Iowans and make the nation less dependent on foreign oil. She also says renewable fuels are "terrific for Iowa," helping farmers and the economy, and wind energy has been "fantastic" for the state.

CLIMATE CHANGE: She accepts the idea that climate change is caused by humans, saying, "I don't know that we can't afford not to deal with" the problem.

AFGHANISTAN/UKRAINE: "I am ready to bring our people home. They have been there a long time" in Afghanistan, although she acknowledges a residual American force may be needed. She suggests Russia should "back off" on Ukraine, although she said she doesn't hear Iowans talking much about foreign policy.

FARM BILL: She would have voted for it, but she also suggests Congress shouldn't have delayed action on the farm bill for so long.

FOOD STAMPS: "Cutting food stamps is probably not a good idea. We need to make sure that families are getting fed," she said. But government spending to help people receive training to allow them to leave welfare rolls probably makes sense, she added.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Democrat Staci Appel, a candidate in Iowa's 3rd Congressional District, met with the Register editorial board on Monday, June 2, 2014.

Read or Share this story: http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/politics/iowa-politics-insider/2014/06/02/appel-congress-iowa-third/9886373/