Large flames and thick smoke rise from a fire at the Cosmopolitan hotel-casino on July 25, 2015. (Source: FOX5 viewer)

Massive flames and smoke are seen billowing from the pool floor of the Cosmopolitan hotel-casino on July 25, 2015. (Source: Courtney Cyr)

Two people suffered minor injuries during a massive fire Saturday at the pool of the Cosmopolitan hotel-casino on the Las Vegas Strip.

The two-alarm fire was reported at 12:15 p.m. on the 14th floor of the resort property.

According to Clark County Fire Chief Greg Cassell, the blaze started in the pool area and quickly spread to surrounding landscaping, cabanas and furniture, sending massive flames and thick smoke into the air. The fire was limited to the outside of the building, but the smoke filtered into rooms above the scene, setting off smoke alarms on several other floors.

About 35 fire trucks and 110 firefighters were able to extinguish the blaze in about 35 minutes, Cassell said. One of the units was forced to break through a room to get to the fire so that they could start attacking the flames.

Cassell said two people suffered smoke inhalation. One of them was taken to a local hospital for treatment, while the other was treated at the scene.

Firefighters worked to clear smoke and water from rooms and floors surrounding the scene.

The cause of the fire is under investigation, Cassell said, which might take quite some time.

RELATED: View pictures of fire sent in to FOX5 Report It

Cassell said the fire quickly spread because of the fake palm trees used at the property, which are made mostly of Styrofoam and metal. It is common for resorts to use these materials for decorative items, like facades and plants, he said.

Massive fires at properties on the Las Vegas Strip are rare, but not unprecedented.

On Jan. 25, 2008, a large fire spread along the facade of the 32-story Monte Carlo hotel-casino, injuring 13 people.

On Nov. 21, 1980, 85 people were killed and 700 others were injured when a massive fire happened in the casino area at the MGM Grand. This remains the second-deadliest hotel fire in United States history.Two people suffered minor injuries during a massive fire Saturday at the pool of the Cosmopolitan hotel-casino on the Las Vegas Strip.

If you have pictures or videos of breaking news, email them to ReportIt@fox5vegas.com or upload them to our website at reportit.fox5vegas.com.

Copyright 2015 KVVU (KVVU Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.