ENLARGE Stand-up comedian Colin Quinn rehearses his new one-man show ‘Colin Quinn The New York Story,’ directed by Jerry Seinfeld, at Cherry Lane Theatre. Photo: Cassandra Giraldo for The Wall Street Journal

Comedian Colin Quinn wants to talk about race.

And in his new show at the Cherry Lane Theatre, he tackles the sensitive subject in a way that only a blunt-talking native New Yorker and “Saturday Night Live” alum can—without setting off a Donald Trump -style firestorm.

“Colin Quinn The New York Story” is a snappy, 75-minute monologue about race and ethnicity in the five boroughs. Neither polarizing nor politically correct, the show is rooted in his experiences growing up around different ethnic groups and appreciating those differences.

‘I don’t like the move towards a lack of ethnic identification. I feel it’s false. You want to celebrate all these cultures by homogenizing them?’ —Comedian Colin Quinn

As an Irish kid in Brooklyn’s Park Slope during the 1970s, he said, he ran around in a “polyglot” neighborhood, where each block had a different character shaped by blacks, Puerto Ricans and Italians.

“It was everything overlapping,” he said. “Not only was each block different; each bar, each store was different.”

Over breakfast in Lower Manhattan, Mr. Quinn, 56 years old, explained his problem with the prevailing view of race: Our culture at once embraces diversity, he said, but also imposes a counter-intuitive attempt to neutralize difference, which leads to a fear of talking about it.

“I don’t like the move towards a lack of ethnic identification. I feel it’s false,” he said in the same quick, clipped style he uses onstage. “It seems like a contradiction. You want to celebrate all these cultures by homogenizing them?”

He said he suspects that frustration is what has led to Mr. Trump’s popularity, even after the presidential hopeful’s infamous comments about Mexican immigrants.

“People are sick of overly careful language from every politician,” Mr. Quinn said. “So even if someone is stark raving mad, you’re hearing the real him.”

On a stage set that evokes a brownstone’s stoop, Mr. Quinn’s anti-homogenization effort runs through colorful anecdotes gleaned from his lifetime as a city dweller. The show is a rapid-fire version of his memoir, “The Coloring Book: A Comedian Solves Race Relations in America,” in which he has more room to tell longer tales, rich with detailed foibles.

Under his satirical gaze, no group is left out. And Hispanic, Asian, Jewish or Irish groups aren’t the only ones. White people come in for it, too: “I never thought I’d see the day when the ethnic group running New York was the nerds,” he writes. “The thug thing is gone, and inner-city kids are wearing Buddy Holly glasses.”

His book took a few years to write, he said, but the process sped up when he began using the material as stand-up.

“I like to be in front of the crowd and have them go ‘Yay!’ or even ‘Boo!’ ” he said. “It’s sensory deprivation writing a book.”

Mr. Quinn, who began doing stand-up in the 1980s before moving to writing and performing on TV, said he tried out some passages in Long Island, Brooklyn and Long Island City clubs, where the crowds might still be living in and among strong ethnic groups. Many Manhattan audiences, he finds, don’t quite live in the thick of ethnicity anymore.

The shift into a theater, he said, allows him to perform for audiences sitting rather politely in the dark, listening intently. By contrast, the stand-up crowd is “savage,” he said: “People are drinking. They like a lot more sex humor. Those late shows, it’s like lion taming.”

He chose the 179-seat Cherry Lane Theatre, home of his 2013 show about American history, “Colin Quinn Unconstitutional,” because its leafy West Village setting always meets with positive reaction.

“People say ‘I love that theater!’ ” he said. “I want to say…‘You love that block, too.’ It has some energy or something.”

Cherry Lane’s founding artistic director Angelina Fiordellisi said the theater’s location at 38 Commerce St. has a long, ethnic history itself, having hosted Jewish, Spanish and Italian families over time, including back when the area was still farmland.

Mr. Quinn’s show suits the theater, she said, not just comedy clubs, because it is more than jokes: “The laughter comes from the stories and characters he creates.”

Previews, which began July 9, sold out quickly, according to one of the show’s producers, Brian Stern, who said the run through Aug. 16 is about 70% sold.

When asked about the prospect of extending or transferring the show, even to Broadway, Mr. Stern said: “There is some exciting talk.”

ENLARGE ‘The laughter comes from the stories and characters he creates,’ Cherry Lane’s founding artistic director Angelina Fiordellisi said about Mr. Quinn’s show. Photo: Cassandra Giraldo for The Wall S for The Wall Street Journal

It wouldn’t be Mr. Quinn’s first trip to Broadway handling a serious, cultural subject with a satiric edge. In “Long Story Short” (2010), he addressed the history of the world, and with “An Irish Wake” (1998), he painted a verbal portrait of his Irish neighborhood. The full titles of both shows include his name.

“Long Story Short,” which also became an HBO special, was directed by Jerry Seinfeld, as is “New York Story.”

“He’s the opposite of me,” said Mr. Quinn of Mr. Seinfeld. “He’s meticulous.”

But with his show and his book, Mr. Quinn can be fairly described as meticulous in making his point—while nimbly avoiding controversy and keeping up a positive outlook. As he writes in his conclusion, “Here’s what the political correctness doesn’t see: the absurdity and beauty of New York City in all its crazy glory.”

Write to Pia Catton at pia.catton@wsj.com