The ProCon.org 2016 presidential election quiz lets visitors answer up to 45 questions and see in real time which presidential candidate had the same responses they did. New questions are added weekly.



The quiz shows positions held by candidates including Clinton, Cruz, Kasich, Rubio, Sanders, and Trump. Third party candidates (Libertarian, Green, and Constitution Parties) will be added after their nominating conventions.



The election quiz is based on months of ongoing research from the ProCon.org staff who reviewed candidate websites, interviews, speeches, articles, votes, books, and other sources to find each candidate's positions on more than 40 subjects. The topics covered include: gun control, ISIS, minimum wage, marijuana, Obamacare, climate change, affirmative action, and dozens more.



Jay Rakow, CEO of ProCon.org, said: "This quiz is the antidote to political advertising. Rather than listen to what each candidate or Super PAC claims the candidates say, people can read what the candidates actually said in response to very specific questions. It is a powerful tool that cuts out the political noise on the issues that matter most to people."



On the ProCon.org 2016 Presidential Election website, visitors can read the candidate statements, find the source for the quotes, see candidate position changes, and get related information including candidate biographies, FEC filings, political party histories, and fun resources including:



Side-by-Side Comparison Between Candidates on Key Issues - Compare 2016 presidential candidate positions on 40+ issues at a glance



Differences in Conservative and Liberal Brains - 20 peer-reviewed studies show how liberals and conservatives are physiologically different



Did You Know? - Little known facts about US presidential elections.



Candidate Finances – Funds raised, funds spent, and funds remaining according to the latest FEC data



The ProCon.org 2012 Presidential Election website was hailed by the New York Times as "the most comprehensive teaching tool for researching the candidate’s stance on issues.” ("Great Free Websites for Teaching Election,” Sep. 5, 2012.)



ProCon.org plan to add at least 30 more questions and candidate responses to its 2016 presidential election website by Oct. 8, 2016 – one month before Election Day.



For more information visit the ProCon.org 2016 election website at http://2016election.procon.org/ or take the candidate matching quiz at http://2016election.procon.org/2016-election-quiz.php