By Jose Serrano staff@latinospost.com ) | First Posted: Jul 27, 2015 05:12 PM EDT

Limberbutt McCubbins for President 2016 (Photo : Limberbutt 2016/ Facebook)

0 Subscribe to Newsletter!

As if there weren't already enough fat cats in Washington, a pudgy tabby named Limberbutt McCubbins is throwing his hat into the 2016 presidential race.

Limberbutt's owner Emilee McCubbins and her high school friend Isaac Weiss created a Facebook page shorty after filing a statement of candidacy with the Federal Elections Committee on May 6. Since, they've been inundated with interview request and online supporters who believe in the Kentucky feline's stance on social issues.

"Limberbutt McCubbins is a candidate we can all get behind. Meow is the time!" said McCubbins and Weiss in speaking with the Louisville Courier-Journal. When it comes to liberal voters, they might not be wrong.

Limberbutt advocates legalizing gay marriage, decriminalizing catnip, improving the country's space program, and passing legislation on the "Affordable Cat Act," which - like President Obama's Affordable Care Act - covers veterinary costs for pets who need to be spayed or neutered.

"And it even includes dogs," Weiss said. "We thought long and hard and said, 'You know what, this is not a country with discrimination anymore."

Equipped with "Limberbutt 2016" apparel and a growing social media presence - which inspired an independent YouTube video that takes shots at Hillary Clinton and a Facebook post assuring followers he will "beat Bernie Sanders in 2016" - Limberbutt is ready to hit the campaign trail.

For those wondering whether he is eligible, Weis and McCubbins have already looked into that.

"The Constitution doesn't say it has to be human years," Weiss said, referring to an FEC rule requiring candidates to be at least 35 years of age. "But it doesn't seem likely that he walked all the way to Louisville from Canada, or Mexico, or swam from Cuba."

Unfortunately for Limberbutt, there is no proven scientific method for converting cat years into human years. Only time will tell if this portly house cat will claw his way to the White House.

© 2015 Latinos Post. All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.