That British moralist and MSNBC anchor Martin Bashir is up to his mainstream rhetoric again. He went after self proclaimed tea party activist and writer Larry Klayman with help from MSNBC contributor Dr. James Peterson in a typical, badgering, interruptive, “just say racist” style attack from the liberal media.

In an Oct. 18 interview, Klayman, who spoke at the recent veteran led rally attended by Ted Cruz, and Sarah Palin among others, was attacked for his book and his comments on Barack Obama who he sees as putting Muslims ahead of Americans and as a man who cares little about his people.

Bashir not only asserted Klayman is a racist without anything to suggest it, but he went so far as to call Klayman’s anti-Obama opinions “delusional” and “a form of psychiatric pathology, an illness?”

Klayman’s book “Whores: Why and How I came to Fight the Establishment” was also a topic of contention. In it, he calls “those who sell out their nation for money, power and fame,” whores. Not shy about his claim, he told Bashir that both parties currently fit the bill.

“Who is the whore in your opinion. Is it Ted Cruz or Mitch McConnell?” Bashir asked in an effort to put words in Klayman’s mouth.

“Mitch McConnell has sold out the American people. So I would characterize him in that group because he does not represent the interests of the conservative movement, the libertarian movement, or for that matter, any other movement,” Klayman said, fighting to get a word in.

Bashir ran a clip of Klayman’s remarks at the recent rally during which Klayman said Obama “bows down to Allah,” and asked for the president “to put the Quran down, to get off his knees and to figuratively come out with his hands up.”

Bashir called those remarks “repugnant smears and slurs” and “the acts of a “rabble rouser.” He then asked Klayman “who’s the whore now?”

This despite the fact that Klayman explained that his remarks were metaphorical in nature and that the “clip was clipped,” so that his sentence was cut short.



Post navigation

[poll id=”128″]