Walters founded Sunny Jim's Candy Ranch on U.S. 34 with her husband

Edna Walters cuts into her cake Saturday during her 100th birthday celebration at First Christian Church in Loveland, while her friend Jeanette Saul looks on. ( JESSICA MAHER / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

In her 100 years, Mrs. Sunny Jim Walters can't begin to count how many times she's been asked, "What's your favorite candy?"

At her birthday party on Saturday, Edna Walters said the answer might also be her secret to living to be 100 years old.

"I just liked it all — chocolate, hard candy, brittles," she said. "I never did smoke, never drank, but I ate a lot of candy. That might be the secret."

Family and friends (and bowls of candy, of course) filled the First Christian Church in Loveland on Saturday to celebrate the life of Walters, who moved to Loveland in 1964 and brought Sunny Jim's Candy Ranch with her.

Edna and her late husband, Jim, met at the original Sunny Jim's candy shop in Joplin, Mo., where she was a chocolate dipper and Jim was an "all-round candy maker." The two married a few years later, and owned and operated Sunny Jim's Candy Farm in Missouri from 1933 to 1964.

"It was just our life; it's real trade work," Walters said. "There are very few chocolate dippers anymore."

In 1964, the couple brought their trade to Colorado, drawn to Loveland and the Big Thompson Canyon because they were looking for a place where they'd be able to take time off and close through the winter. As was appropriate, they swapped "farm" for "ranch" in the shop's name, and a Loveland landmark was born.

Advertisement

Forty years since Edna and Jim sold the store, it still carries Sunny Jim's name, survived last year's Big Thompson flood and still has a reputation for succulent sweets.

"I think the quality of it made it special," Walters said.

Edna and Jim lived next door to the shop on U.S. 34, where they had nearly constant visitors during the summers.

"For a kid, imagine your aunt and uncle having a candy store," Ned Mayes, Edna's nephew, said with a laugh.

Naomi Nottage, a family friend who would also visit as a child, said she'd help make almond bark and hard candies and was mesmerized by the process of making ribbon candy by hand.

"When I stayed there she'd let me pick a bag of whatever candy I wanted," Nottage said. "It was just like a wonderland."

Edna, who penned a candy cookbook in the 70s titled "Famous Candies from the Kitchen of Mrs. Sunny Jim Walters," kept up with her trade long after she stopped running the shop.

"At Christmas time we would always get big tins of all kinds of candy," her niece, Gale Lundberg, said. "It was really an art."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Maher at or maherj@reporter-herald.com