Phunware's founder and CEO Alan Knitowski. (Photo: Erich Schlegel for USA TODAY)

AUSTIN — Being in the hands of every person on the planet may seem like a lofty goal, even for the most assertive of mobile start-ups.

But that is an actual, documented objective at Austin-based Phunware, a mobile services and applications company with sights on world domination. If its current growth rate is any indicator, it's a wholly obtainable one.

"We're trying to reach every human being on Earth through every device on Earth through every application on those devices, whether we build them or not," Phunware founder and Chief Executive Alan Knitowski says. "We want to reach everyone, everywhere, across all devices and screens."

Knitowski, 45, launched Phunware in 2009 as a way to help corporations reach the rapidly growing field of mobile users. It became an early pioneer of Mobile as a Service (or MaaS) by building apps and mobile strategies for companies. Last year, It posted more than $22 million in revenue.

Today, the firm develops custom mobile applications for clients such as NBC Sports, Samsung, Cisco and WWE, and logs trillions of transactions a year in 190 countries and in more than 10 languages — and the numbers are growing.

Phunware is one of 10 finalists in USA TODAY's Entrepreneur of the Year contest. Profiles of the other contenders will run in the coming weeks, and a winner will be selected in December.

The company had a breakout year in 2014. Highlights include:

Securing a $30-million investment round to further expand its reach.

Acquiring Austin-based Digby, gaining vital mobile location-marketing capabilities, and Miami-based Simplikate, earning a stronger foothold in the mall, airport and luxury real estate mobile markets.

Growing from 57 to 189 employees, building out leadership, development, sales and marketing teams.

Launching unique apps, including the NBC Sports Live Extra application for the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympics, the Dallas Cowboys AT&T Stadium App and the music app REVOLT TV, in collaboration with Sean (P. Diddy) Combs.

Being named to Inc. 500's Fastest-Growing Private Companies in America (#82) and Forbes' list of America's Most Promising Companies (#36).

In a city like Austin, already crowded with start-ups and app designers, Phunware has managed to set itself apart in the mobile software and application field, and secure coveted funding.

A company milestone arrived earlier this year when Phunware handled the mobile apps for NBC Sports' presentation of the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympics. A team of designers and engineers worked round-the-clock for months leading up to the event, Knitowski says. The effort paid off: The app set the record for the most mobile viewers ever of a sporting event — more than 4 million — during the men's semifinal hockey match between Canada and the USA.

The company's key to success?

"You have to know what you want to be when you grow up," Knitowski says. "You want to have a vision large enough to become a public company."

Knitowski says he had that vision early in Phunware's development, when he realized mobile phones would be the main source of information for users across the planet. He built the company based on that philosophy, he says. That vision quickly crystallized as the percentage of Internet traffic coming from mobile devices grew from just 2% when he started Phunware to 60% today.

Entrepreneurs heading a start-up need to be prepared to put in long hours at the office and sacrifice many personal events — from dinners with a spouse to kids' little league games, says Knitowski, who lives in west Austin with his wife and four children, ages 9 to 15.

Tenacity and a good work ethic are his best defenses against bigger, better-financed competitors, he said.

"You have to be pretty audacious," Knitowski says. "No matter what your idea is and how well-intentioned you and your team are, you're always going to have less people, less money than others you're working against."

Besides reaching every mobile user on the planet, Phunware execs want to raise more money to foster the company's growth and are thinking about taking the company public next year. They'd also like to expand to markets in Europe and Asia, using the same template that's so far worked in the USA. Their goal: create networks and platforms seen on 50 billion mobile devices by the end of this decade.

"We've grown from a very small company to a much bigger entity," Knitowski says. "It's exciting to see what's coming ahead."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1uzZ2eb