Jared Silverstein poses for a picture with Grammy host LL Cool J. (Photo: Courtesy of Jared Silverstein)

Jared Silverstein is only a senior at Hillsborough High School, yet his accomplishments list years past his age. Feb. 8, Silverstein attended the 57th Annual Grammy Awards in Los Angeles. Silverstein participated in the Grammy in the Schools Grammy Camp, which is a program for which high school jazz musicians from across America audition. “They only take two drummers in the country,” said Silverstein.

“We arrived at the hotel in Los Angeles and had an initial dinner with the program directors as well as some important people from the Recording Academy,” explained the 17-year-old. The next three days consisted of eight-hour rehearsals to prepare the artists for the several performances that were planned. “We were rehearsing songs that we had arranged and brought ourselves to play out in California.”

Silverstein performed at Beverly Hills’ Spaghettini & the Dave Koz Lounge alongside nine-time Grammy nominated, Koz, himself, on Tuesday. He then performed at the Nokia Club with country-music artist Hunter Hayes for 1,700 people on Wednesday. Thursday morning, Silverstein performed in front of millions on CBS’s Entertainment Tonight, where he proceeded to meet surprise guest LL Cool J. Later that night, Silverstein performed at yet another club alongside flute master Hubert Laws.

Friday and Saturday, Silverstein and his friends were able to record an album at the Capitol Records studios, where Sam Smith and John Legend were recording in the studio next to them. Friday and Saturday night, Silverstein performed for the Recording Academy and the Grammy nominee reception, which Silverstein noted of the latter as being “absolutely incredible.”

On Sunday, “We went to go watch the Grammy pretelecast ceremonies, where most of the awards are given out. There I ran into Weird Al Yankovic, and ended up sitting a couple seats down from Neil Patrick Harris.” They then went to the Staples Center to watch the actual Grammy awards, where Silverstein cited as “really a once in a lifetime experience.” After the nationally watched award show, Silverstein performed at an after-party, which “was incredible as well.” The following day, he returned home to New Jersey.

Being a part of this program has allowed Hillsborough senior to be automatically accepted into the Manhattan School of Music. Silverstein also plans on auditioning for the Julliard Jazz program. “I have been 100 percent committed to being a full-time musician ever since the beginning of 2014, but this whole experience just made me want to work even harder.”

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1AjenO8