An unusually high number of capital murder cases are piling up in the area causing trouble for those on both sides of the courtroom.

This week two men were charged with capital murder for separate cases back-to-back in the same courtroom. Those two plus another pair of pending capital murder charges are leaving prosecutors and public defenders with an enormous workload.

"Unfortunately it's a busy time right now with these types of cases," says District Attorney Marc Bennett.

Capital murder is very different from first degree murder. Instead of 25 years to life in prison, it's life in prison without parole and possibly the death penalty.

Cornell McNeal is charged for the death of Latitia Davis at Fairmount Park in northeast Wichita. It's a capital murder charge because the killing stemmed from sexual assault.

The other three cases are also for capital murder because there were multiple killings.

Steven Edwards is charged with murdering an elderly couple near downtown Wichita last month. Vinh Nguyen is accused in a triple murder in east Wichita from this past summer, and four people are charged in the deaths of a Valley Center couple last year.

Both prosecutors and defenders say they are running into staffing issues with this many cases. Mark Rudy of the Public Defenders Office says his staff is having to team up to tackle the extra workload.

"Kansas doesn't charge that many cases, capital," says Rudy. "There's only 10 or 12 capital litigators in the state, so we're kind of at our limit right now. Hopefully nothing happens anytime soon."

The reason these cases take so much time is because there's extra steps when it comes to capital murder.

"If you actually go to a trial that actually involves capital murder and the state actually seeks the death penalty then there's another layer of filtering that aggravated factors have to exist," says Bennett.

Bennett says it could get worse considering the Carr brothers case is on hold until the U.S. Supreme Court weighs in. That could potentially come back to the state.