Don’t confirm Loretta Lynch

Brooklyn: I can think of two reasons U.S. Attorney Loretta Lynch should not be confirmed as the next U.S. attorney general: One, she’s pro-civil forfeiture. That’s where the goverment steals your money or property and never proves you broke any law, and you can’t get your money or property back. It’s called “robbery” by every other definition, and most Americans, both liberal and conservative, would say Lynch belongs in prison for this. Two, she continues to protect her pal Joe Hynes, Brooklyn’s utterly disgraced former district attorney, who broke a zillion laws for 24 years to protect serious criminals and frame innocent men. He broke more laws than you can count, but he’s also been dinner partners with Lynch, so she won’t touch him. Again, most Americans would say she belongs in prison for this, too. She took our paycheck and refused to do the job she was paid for or defend the Bill of Rights. That’s theft, too. But we know how totally crooked government is, so she’ll have no troubles with the Republicans or the Democrats. Because they’re all total crooks. Uchena Shorey

Fighting like a girl

Metuchen, N.J.: The plant’s question at Hillary Clinton’s press conference, asking her if there would be this uproar about her emails if she were a man, sounds like the same operative from the 2008 New Hampshire primary who shouted out, “Iron my shirt.” Hillary Clinton as victim. When all else fails, play the gender card. It’s what passes for accomplishments and policies with Hillary Clinton. Ron Perri

The same old Hillary

Brooklyn: My 2016 presidential election prediction is that even if Hillary beats this email scandal and wins the nomination, she’ll still fall in defeat to . . . Hillary Clinton! Johnny T. Sollitto

Computer joke

Brooklyn: Congress to Hillary: “Thanks for your server. ”Michael Balton

Beauty tip

New City, N.Y.: Dear Hillary: While I deeply admire you and hope you run for President and win, I feel you should spruce up your look a bit. Visit a L’Occitane en Provence boutique and try the Divine line of products. It will help your skin look renewed and less wrinkled, and you’ll be fit to look like a President. Just a thought. Christine Ierardi

Pantsuit paradox

Bronx: Does Hillary Clinton even own a skirt or dress? How unsightly can her legs possibly be? Jim Theobald

Letter of infamy

Oceanside, Calif.: The 47 GOP senators need to apologize for sending an open letter to Iran’s leaders — behind the backs of the negotiators and President Obama — which could have endangered the U.S., Israel and others. This was an obvious ploy, once again, to undermine the President and unravel an agreement that was close to being reached regarding nuclear weapons. It could also have interfered with Iran’s current assistance, along with other Middle East forces, in destroying ISIS. Iran’s foreign minister stated that the letter was a “propaganda ploy.” If it had been Democrat senators who did this, the GOP and Fox News would be yelling, “Treason!” Sharlene White

Broadcast standards

Franklin Square, L.I.: In his column of March 1, “Truth Be Told . . .,” TV Editor Don Kaplan states, “Brian Williams has a higher standard to meet than Bill O’Reilly” because O’Reilly “is nothing more than an opinionated talk-show host.” However, on every broadcast of O’Reilly’s evening program, the slogan “The spin stops here” is mentioned. As long as O’Reilly continues to use that slogan, and we are led to believe he will not condone any “spin” on stories, he must be held as accountable to the truth as Williams. Marilyn Miller

Broadcast standards II

Flushing: There should be a dress code for the people on TV. Men should wear suits and ties and the women should put away the sleeveless dresses until the winter is over. Dress for the season. Evelyn Zorovich

Get rid of this word

Hollis: It really annoys me to hear the N-word being used by anyone, especially from individuals of my race, such as African-Americans and African-Caribbeans, and, of course, individuals from other ethnic groups. I’m troubled by the rising use of the N-word and other slurs directed at black people, such as the University of Oklahoma fraternity and an almost octogenarian woman there using racial wording as “supposedly” part of a song lyrics. How about many members of my race (adults and even prepubescent youngsters) just stop with the N-word as a regular part of their daily vocabulary? This should include African-American radio and TV broadcasters and figures in sports and the arts joining in by calling to the end of the use of this word by everyone; friends and family too. So, my people, let’s not get bent out of shape when we hear nonblacks use a word that was created by other people to define our African ancestors, as they — white folks — also need to take heed and chastise members of their own group. Ali-Abdul Perez

Good Bramhall

Norfolk, Va.: Bramhall’s March 9 Ringling Bros./SeaWorld cartoon made our day. It’s so wonderful and so right. It’s on our bulletin board now. Thanks so much for seeing the clear connection, the absolute analogy, and making sure others see it too. Ingrid Newkirk, president, PETA

Rebate the taxpayers

Floral Park: City Controller Scott Stringer states that the city will have an extra $1.6 billion in cash over the next two years. Rather than put this in the general fund, this financial bonanza should be used for homeowner tax rebates which would help middle-class taxpayers like us, who are raising four young sons (ages 8-13). We appreciated the $400 rebate in past years by Mayor Bloomberg. This should be a priority for Mayor de Blasio! Jennifer and Gary Costanzo

Show your face

East Hanover, N.J.: How nice to see a terrorist revealed! The killers of ISIS hide behind their head coverings. Might they be ashamed of their behavior? Oh, that we could unmask all of them and be rid of such atrocities. Chetty Angelino

Slighting Joan

Northport, L.I.: I’m still annoyed that there was no mention of Joan Rivers’ passing at the Oscars. Who compiled the list — friends of Johnny Carson, or left-wing Democrats? She didn’t commit suicide or die of an alcohol or drug overdose, or of natural causes. RIP Joan (and also the Oscars!) Marguerite Boutin

Bad medicine

Hicksville, L.I.: To Voicer Diane Hombach: Obviously you were not affected by the Affordable Care Act in a negative way, as were millions of Americans, otherwise you would be singing a different tune. And what “folks with brains” are you referring to? I could have sworn Nancy Pelosi said, “We will have to pass it to know what is in it.” The law was based on lies which has financially impacted the working and middle class the hardest. The rich can afford it, and the poor barely pay for it. That means, once again, those in the middle gets screwed by the man, because we are the ones who are subsidizing the ACA. And soon we will be poor and then we can all be on the welfare rolls. Your party robs the working man blind, Ms. Hombach. Anybody with a paycheck is fair game for liberals — all in the name of social equality. John Gelormino

Kancel the Kardashians

Washington Township, N.J.: Kim Kardashian can’t act, can’t dance, can’t sing, but she can make an ass of herself. Richard O’Brien

Ditto

Bethpage, L.I.: Shame, shame on America for caring, watching or spending money on anything involving the Kardashian family. They are zero talent media hounds. Richie Peterson

Love it or leave it

Manhattan: I am not sure if President Obama loves America, but if he does love her, he sure has a funny way of showing it. Nicholas D. DeCurtis

Zapping ratepayers

Flushing: On Friday while driving, I spotted two Con Edison vehicles on the New Jersey Turnpike getting off at Exit 11. I believe Con Edison wants a rate increase so the people of New York can pay for their vehicles traveling out of New York. Steven Greene