Healthcare Costs.

Source: Images Money, flickr.com, Sep. 7, 2011 The debate over physician-assisted suicide drug costs has flared up as news about increases comes to light. Seconal (generic name secobarbital), the drug most commonly used for physician-assisted suicide, was originally developed by Eli Lilly and Company in 1934 as a sleeping aid, anesthetic, and anticonvulsant (stopping seizures). The drug cost less than $200 in 2009 for a lethal dose of 100 capsules. The price rose to $1,500 over the subsequent six years. After Valeant Pharmaceuticals International bought Seconal in February 2015, the price doubled to $3,000 for a lethal dose, a rise of 1400% in seven years.



Critics have pointed out that the raise in price corresponds with California legalizing physician-assisted suicide on Oct. 5, 2015, the fifth state to do so after Oregon, Montana, Vermont, and Washington.



Valent stated, "Seconal sodium is indicated for short-term insomnia, epilepsy, and pre-operative anesthesia. If it is being prescribed for off-label uses, it is not something for which the product is manufactured or intended. The price increase for the drug occurred shortly after Valeant acquired it, and months before California's assisted suicide law passed. The suggestion that Valeant raised the price to take advantage of a law that had not yet passed, for a use for which the drug is not even indicated, defies common sense."



David Grube, a family physician in Oregon, stated "It's just pharmaceutical company greed… I don't understand any rational way that this medicine costs $3,000. This makes me feel very cynical about the whole thing." He further stated that Seconal is not prescribed as a sleeping aid "as much or at all anymore" because of the potential fatal consequences if the drug is combined with alcohol or in the case of overdose.



In California, health insurance companies may opt to cover the cost of physician-assisted suicide drugs (and reports indicate that most will do so) and MediCal, the state's Medicaid program, will also cover the costs. Of the four other states, only Oregon offers Medicaid coverage for the drug.



Another drug can be prescribed instead of Seconal but it requires a compounding pharmacy to mix the $400 drug, which can be more of a hassle than a trip to a local chain pharmacy, so doctors infrequently prescribe the compound.



Find what the 2016 presidential candidates think about physician-assisted suicide.