Buy Photo The construction site of one of Affordable Housing Solutions affordable, energy efficient houses Friday, March 11, 2016, in Sioux Falls. (Photo: Joe Ahlquist / Argus Leader)Buy Photo

Christopher Hamilton knew he had to act fast.

A three-bedroom ranch home in central Sioux Falls had been on the market only hours, and cars were already lined up out front.

His real estate agent got him inside, helped him make an offer and seal the deal before the end of the day.

“I knew that it was going to go that day and I didn’t want to lose it to somebody else," said Hamilton, a 29-year-old structural engineer.

A tight housing market is forcing buyers to move fast, especially for homes priced under $150,000.

“It’s a 100-yard-dash to secure good homes in that price range,” said Marshall Selberg, a real estate agent with Lloyd Cos.

Sellers in the right neighborhoods and price ranges are seeing multiple offers within days or hours of listing properties.

Hamilton offered the full $116,000 asking price and beat out four others who made offers the same day.

Buy Photo The construction site of one of Affordable Housing Solutions affordable, energy efficient houses Friday, March 11, 2016, in Sioux Falls. (Photo: Joe Ahlquist / Argus Leader)

Home sales last month dropped from February 2015, but prices continued to increase. Those two seemingly opposing forces mask a pent-up, unsatisfied demand for housing that is steadily pushing the average home sale price upward.

Decreasing home sales isn’t a demand problem in Sioux Falls. It’s a supply problem.

“We’re selling what we have at a faster rate, but we can’t sell as many because we don’t have as many,” said Beth Jamison, an agent for Jamison Company Real Estate.

Jamison is also president-elect of the REALTOR Association of the Sioux Empire, which tracks housing trends in the metro area.

The association's February market report shows a drop in new listings from last year. Supply dropped across all categories except homes price over $300,000. The biggest drop was among homes listed between $100,000 to $150,000. The median sales price for a home in Sioux Falls increased to $170,363.

The association's report describes the level of competition for available homes as “profound.”

Hamilton bought a “fixer-upper” because he wanted something he could personalize. Besides, he said, new homes in his price range lacked character.

“They don’t start becoming nicely built and constructed until you are at about $400,000 to $500,000,” Hamilton said.

“It’s a 100-yard-dash to secure good homes [under $150,000].” Marshall Selberg, Lloyd Cos.

Finding new homes at a more affordable price is a struggle, said Harlan TenNaple, a real estate agent with the Solus Real Estate Group. That means that homebuyers such as Hamilton need to look at older homes closer to the core of the city.

“I’d have to say builders have built less houses in those lower price ranges for the last two years,” TenNaple said. “And they’re also having a hard time finding land to build on, which complicates it even further.”

Building homes is more expensive than it used to be, said Steve Van Buskirk, a developer for Van Buskirk Cos. Lots from the company usually go to homes starting at $275,000 or higher.

Buyer expectations have gone up when it comes to what they want in a house’s space and design. Making a new, energy efficient home with quality materials – all of that stuff adds up, Van Buskirk said.

“I think it’s pretty hard to get to a $100,000 house, no matter how Spartan the amenity package would be,” Van Buskirk said.

Homebuilders in Sioux Falls are less inclined to build for the lower price ranges because the profit margin is shrinking, City Planning Director Mike Cooper said. Materials, labor and even land costs are higher because of the increased demand for homes.

“It’s just with the growth of the city and the economy that the land costs and development costs have gone up,” Cooper said.

Developers are doing what they can in a market that makes it almost impossible to build affordable homes, said Wayne Wagner, housing development director for Affordable Housing Solutions.

Buy Photo The construction site of one of Affordable Housing Solutions affordable, energy efficient houses Friday, March 11, 2016, in Sioux Falls. (Photo: Joe Ahlquist / Argus Leader)

The Sioux Falls nonprofit builds new homes in the $120,000 to $130,000 range and sells them to families who make 80 percent or less than the median income.

His organization relies on federal and local funding to make homes affordable as local demand forces development costs “through the roof,” Wagner said.

And it’s not just the cost of materials or land creating the barrier. Builders of lower-cost homes can struggle sometimes to find workers. Plumbers and electricians will migrate to bigger, more expensive projects for a more stable source of income, Wagner said.

“It’s because things are good here, but it’s causing housing shortages,” Wagner said.

Wagner’s nonprofit can build about 10 homes each construction season, but it’s not even close to meeting the need.

Homes sell before they’re finished.

“We need to figure out how to expand our programs to do a better job,” Wagner said.

Limited supply has created a rush among first-time homebuyers or anyone else looking for a house in the lower price ranges. The result is quicker decision-making and increased competition.

A good listing that goes up on a Friday afternoon could get multiple offers by dinner time and sell by 9 p.m.

That’s exactly what happened recently to a $170,000 house in the popular Kingswood neighborhood in western Sioux Falls, TenNaple said.

“If people waited until getting off work, they were too late.” Harlan TenNaple, Solus Real Estate Group

“If people waited until getting off work, they were too late,” TenNapel said.

For potential buyers, it means submitting offers at or above the asking price, keeping daily tabs on the market and being ready to jump at an opportunity.

Hamilton felt that pressure when he bought in December, and that’s why he jumped when he saw a house that was asking for less than others in the same neighborhood.

“I think people are getting a little excited with the demand and asking way too much,” Hamilton said. “The houses that are on the market are, in my opinion, way overpriced.”

Competition can be frustrating for buyers. But it’s the result of a strong market that has continued to buoy home sales, Selberg said.

For sellers, demand means the standard off-season winter months are fair game.

Shanna Knutson, 35, put her home on the market in January, preparing to move her family to the Twin Cities. The house at 2401 Dartmoor Circle sold in three weeks to another family looking for a good neighborhood for kids.

“Especially considering it was January, things were moving pretty quick,” Knutson said. “We had a lot of traffic through here.”

Real estate agents hope the market will balance out itself out, but when?

Selberg is confident home builders will respond to market demands, despite the cost of land and materials. Last year, though, the city issued more than triple the building permits for homes worth more than $250,000 than for homes under that threshold.

And then there’s the weather variable. The recent supply might be obscured by a “phantom market” of sellers who don’t yet have a sign on their front lawn.

“Truly, what do we have for inventory?” Jamison said. “Well, a lot of those houses aren’t all back on the market yet.”

Meanwhile, with affordable homes still in short supply, potential buyers should be prepared to sprint.

BY THE NUMBERS

February 2016 home sales

compared to February 2015

9 percent drop in sales

$9,363 increase in median sale price

23 percent drop in available homes for sale

107 fewer homes available between $100,001 and $150,000

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1pmXMw7