Topics: Immigration, Immigration Reform, Ronald Reagan, Ted Cruz, The Republican Party, undocumented immigration, News, Politics News

While it is impossible to determine Ted Cruz’s true motivations, his sterling educational pedigree suggests his most horrifically demagogic statements are driven by a cynical quest for power. But at Tuesday’s Republican debate, Cruz displayed what must have been sincere confusion when he attacked Marco Rubio’s past support for “amnesty” by citing Ronald Reagan’s decisiveness.

“You know, there was a time for choosing as Reagan put it,” Cruz self-assuredly intoned. “Where there was a battle over amnesty and some chose, like Senator Rubio, to stand with Barack Obama and Chuck Schumer and support a massive amnesty plan.”

Is it possible that Cruz, the son of a Cuban refugee, is not aware that in 1986, Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act, which ultimately legalized the status of 2.7 million people? That wasn’t the only odd statement on immigration, which along with terrorism, and immigrant would-be terrorists, dominated much of the debate.

Defending his plan to “enforce the law” against immigrants, Cruz cited Bill Clinton’s administration.

“Do you know how many aliens Bill Clinton deported?” he asked. “12 million. Do you know how many illegal aliens, George W. Bush deported? 10 million.”

In fact, Bill Clinton forcefully deported, or removed, just about 681,000 immigrants. Another 9.7 million in the fiscal years covering his presidency were subject to “voluntary returns,” meaning by and large that they were turned back at the border. Cruz’s misleading statement, however, is a reminder of a greater truth that both Republicans and Hillary Clinton are doing their best to obscure: Both parties, in recent decades, have often had a pretty horrible record on immigrant rights.

In 1996, President Clinton signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA), which, among other things, allowed for the automatic removal of many undocumented immigrants without judicial review, mandated further increases in the size of the Border Patrol, and authorized the use of local police to enforce immigration law.

“The simple fact is that we must not and we will not surrender our borders to those who wish to exploit our history of compassion and justice,” Clinton proclaimed in 1993—at the very moment he was preparing to open the border wide to business under NAFTA.

The militarization of the border under Clinton—including major Border Patrol deployments to the El Paso and San Diego areas in Operations Hold the Line and Gatekeeper—wreaked havoc in binational communities from Texas to California and caused a huge number of migrants forced to cross through dangerous desert climes to die.

Deaths along the Southwest Border rose from 263 in 1998 to 380 in 2000, 454 in 2006 and 471 in 2012, according to Border Patrol. Their number of agents grew from 4,139 agents in fiscal year 1992 to 9,212 in 2000 and 21,444 in 2011.

It “created,” as Asian Americans Advancing Justice – Asian Law Caucus attorney Anoop Prasad emailed, “the enormous immigration detention system that we have today and expanded deportation grounds for Lawful Permanent Residents with criminal convictions.”

Democratic support for border militarization, says University of California, San Diego sociologist David FitzGerald, was a “response to prop 187 in California,” a measure that would have denied public services, including education, to undocumented immigrants if it hadn’t been blocked by the judiciary. Clinton was worried “that the unauthorized immigrant issue was just getting out of control and would come back and reflect poorly on the Democrats.”

It was Reagan’s IRCA, however, that first laid the foundations for future border militarization and mass deportation. The measure increased the size of the Border Patrol by 50 percent. It also created sanctions for employers who knowingly hired unauthorized workers. Rather than dissuading employers from hiring the undocumented, the measure, according to the Migration Policy Institute, gave bosses leverage to use their employees’ legal status against them.

Reagan’s successors from both major parties doubled down.

On immigration, George W. Bush was an ally of the Republican business class. He favored legalizing the status of big business’ undocumented workers and creating a guest worker program to provide them with a flow of second-class noncitizen labor. And he dramatically stepped up deportations to placate immigration critics on the right.