Wisconsin governor Scott Walker isn't exactly known for his common sense moves: after firing an aide for offensive Tweets against Hispanics early last week, he encouraged his donors to forgo Christmas presents for their children and donate to his campaign, and now, he's campaigning actively against Obamacare.

First, according to the New York Daily News, the governor's campaign offices sent out an email to their subscribers telling them to forgo Black Friday and donate to his campaign. "Instead of venturing into the cold this Black Friday, stay in and give your children a gift that will keep on giving," an email from the group, called Friends of Scott Walker, stated. "This year, we are celebrating the Holiday Season with a Black Friday special that is better than any deal found in stores. Donate $5, $10 or $25 to help Governor Walker get reelected and save your children from a future of double-digit tax increases and billion dollar budget deficits."

This bone-headed e-mail drew a firestorm of controversy, especially since Walker is up for re-election next year.

Then, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, his plan to sidestep Obamacare has passed its initial proposal in the Wisconsin assembly. This plan will sidestep Obamacare's online insurance market and still get subsidized coverage. The GOP governor's push comes as the Assembly voted, 64-32, Wednesday to approve Walker's separate proposal to respond to the troubled rollout of the federal health law by waiting to drop patients off state BadgerCare Plus health care coverage.

Walker's proposal has been able to get some traction and support from people on both ends of the political aisle -- Democrats and Republicans -- because of the Obamacare website having the number of problems that it's been having. "Basically, our number one concern right now should be getting folks health insurance. Given the website problems, that suggests the value of a pilot of the type proposed here," Jonathan Gruber, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who was deeply involved in the crafting of both the universal coverage law in Massachusetts' system and the federal Affordable Care Act.