NEW HAVEN >> How many members of Congress visit a chicken slaughterhouse as part of their research?

U.S. Rep. Rosa DeLauro, D-3, as chairwoman of the appropriations subcommittee that funds the Food and Drug Administration, twice has seen firsthand the working conditions and the near impossibility of spotting food safety issues in the poultry industry.

The movement of the birds on a conveyor belt has been about 140 per minute, but the plans are now to speed that up to 175, DeLauro said.

Added to that, federal inspectors are being let go and industry inspectors are setting the performance standards for contaminants. “We are giving over our jurisdiction to the industry,” DeLauro said.

Advertisement

“The industry has a chokehold. We are hamstrung. They don’t want any regulation. They don’t want any standards,” DeLauro said, as the FDA remains starved for funds,

The congresswoman said it is emblematic of what is happening “over and over again” across the government as watchdog powers are weakened.

DeLauro, 71, who is running for her 13th term in Congress, is known for her passionate approach to her job, particularly on food safety, social service and health issues. Her Republican opponent is James Brown of Stratford.

She said she still manages to get things done, however, despite the “toxic” atmosphere in Washington, D.C. The 113th Congress is on track to be least productive in 60 years, according to Roll Call.

DeLauro, in her 24 years in the U.S. House of Representatives, said she had plenty of philosophical disagreements over the years with her colleagues, but early on there was a different attitude about their role.

In 1990s, when Newt Gingrich was the House speaker, he and the congresswoman were not sharing the same talking points.

“But Newt Gingrich had, and I believe still has, a great respect for the institution and believes that it can make changes. ... So many of the new people who have been elected to the Congress in the last few years, they don’t believe in the institution. They have come to dismantle the institution. They don’t believe there is a role for what we do,” DeLauro said.

The congresswoman, with one short hiatus, has worked in government since she graduated from college, following in the footsteps of her parents, Luisa and Ted DeLauro, who were active in community affairs in New Haven were she grew up in the Wooster Square neighborhood.

She said the No. 1 issue remains the economy and there are a number of things she has advocated to move that along, including an infrastructure bank that would partner public and private resources for energy, transportation and other investments, creating jobs that can’t be outsourced.

DeLauro said she has helped get training funds for high school tech students to go into manufacturing jobs and tax credits for that industry.

Connecticut has been the recipient over the years of $82 million in TIGER grants all connected to construction projects and economic development in New Haven, Stamford, New London, Bridgeport and Waterbury.

What started as a $1 billion-plus national investment across the country is now down to $100 million in the House. “You can’t do anything with that,” DeLauro said.

With the world now facing the threat of Ebola, Congress fails to see the connection between funding for biomedical research until there is crisis, she said.

DeLauro said funds to the National Institutes of Health have been cut 10 percent; the Center for Disease Control is down 8 percent in its operating budget, while its preparedness budget is down 16 percent. In the Department of Health and Human Service, its hospital preparedness program has been cut 44 percent.

She said the lack of investment also applies to education and worker training.

“You can go down the line. This wasn’t the case in the past,” she said, pointing to the vote to cut off an extension of unemployment benefits.

“People are roadkill today,” DeLauro said.

Part of it she said is to oppose anything proposed by President Barack Obama.

“The immediate response is ‘no’ and it is a cynical reason, because the view is ... if there is chaos, if there is division ... then that inures to your electoral success come the mid-term elections,” she said.

Still, the congresswoman said, “you don’t get frustrated, you don’t get tired and can’t sit on the sidelines. You go around it.”

Last year, in dealing with the budget, she said she was able to get increased funds for mental health programs, Title I, special education, job training and early childhood funds.

Another success was stopping the purchase of Russian helicopters. “At the same time they are supplying Syria, at the same time we are looking at sanctions on Russia, how do we find our way clear to buying helicopters from them?” she asked.

On the trade agreements generally, DeLauro said “we shouldn’t be sending jobs overseas” given the disaster of 800,000 jobs leaving the country under NAFTA.

The proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement is essentially dead in the water given lack of transparency offered to the Congress on terms of the deal and the lack of guarantees on environmental and safety issues.

DeLauro said part of that agreement covers seafood from Vietman, where shipments have been stopped 200 times and the products found to have deteriorated or be contaminated with pesticides.

She said signing an agreement would mean its safety standards would be recognized as equivalent to the United States rules.

“As members of Congress, we do not have the whole agreement,” DeLauro said. “We need a new paradigm.”

On getting involved in Syria with the advancement of Islamic State militants, she said she is all right with airstrikes, but no U.S. troops. DeLauro would welcome a full-blown debate, but House Speaker John Boehner won’t call for one.

Her longtime presence in the Congress means some things take time. She started working on restaurants posting calories on their menus in 2003.

She said she was viewed as the “crazy aunt in the attic” on the issue, but she worked with the industry for years to get the changes because it is better for people’s health.

“You can go an look at it and say, ‘Hell, I have had such a bad day, I don’t care what it is, I’m just going to load up,’ or you say ‘this is better than this,’” she said of weighing the calorie count.

As she runs for a 13th term, DeLauro said: “I love what I do.”

She said it affords her the ability to participate in the essence “of what the Congress is about.”

“It’s real strength ... is its potential. It is startling. You take a look at it historically. Civil rights. G.I Bill. Social Security. Medicare. The Affordable Care Act — a triumph. The ability of sons and daughters of working families to be able to go to school. Education was only in the purview of the rich, not that long ago,” she said of government loans.

DeLauro said Congress doesn’t live up to its potential all the time, but at its best “it provides an opportunity for people to succeed.”