Obamacare health-insurance exchange could benefit many, but what about you?

Slightly fewer than half of those surveyed this month knew that tax credits would reduce health-insurance costs for low-income citizens. And only 51 percent realized an insurance exchange would be available in their state, according to Pew Research Center.

One of the biggest changes in the way Americans can purchase health insurance is a week and a half away. Yet the very people the new insurance exchange was meant to help are often oblivious to it.

To help clear the fog, experts answered questions about who will be most helped by the health-insurance exchange that opens Oct. 1. Will it be you?

What if I have health insurance now through an individual plan but not through an employer?

If your current coverage is expensive or inadequate, you may find a better alternative on the exchange, said Larry Levitt of the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit health-advocacy organization based in Washington. Use the marketplace to compare coverage, premiums and out-of-pocket expenses. If you find a better option through the exchange, you may switch.

About half of those who currently buy individual insurance will be eligible for tax credits, he said, so switching to the exchange could be advantageous. However, in some cases, consumers — especially those who don't have pre-existing conditions — might be better off staying on an old plan.

My spouse has health insurance through her employer; would I be better off going on her plan or joining the exchange?

It depends, said Amy Gordon, partner and health-and-welfare-benefits attorney for McDermott Will & Emery law firm in Chicago. Often you will be better off staying on a group, employer-sponsored plan. But you should explore your options on the exchange and compare coverage. You could come out ahead going through the exchange, especially after you factor in how much more you have to pay to add a spouse.

I'm 25 and out of school. I have a job, but it doesn't offer insurance, and it doesn't pay that much. Should I buy insurance through the exchange?

Young adults who have not reached their 26th birthday may stay on their parents' policy. If that isn't feasible, they may shop on the exchange. Young adults who have lower incomes can come out very well shopping for insurance on the exchange and are likely to get a tax credit, said Ron Pollack of Families USA, a nonprofit health-advocacy organization.

I am pretty healthy and single. Would I be better off not buying any insurance and paying the penalty?

That's a personal choice, Levitt said. In most cases the penalty initially will be lower than the cost of insurance, so it depends on how much each consumer values coverage.

The first year's penalty for not having health insurance is either $95 a year or 1 percent of adjusted income, whichever is greater, he said. So for an individual whose adjusted gross income is $20,000 a year, the penalty would be $200, Levitt said. Penalties are modest the first year but ramp up after that.

I'm a single male, age 45 and earn $40,000 a year. My company does not offer health insurance. Am I a good candidate to shop on the exchange?