Orthodox rabbi Moshe Gray, the director of a Jewish center at Dartmouth College, was inactive for years before he became a disciple of CrossFit. Now, the 36-year-old religiously (pun intended) exercises with the high-intensity core strength program five days a week, and he's hoping to inspire other clergy to do the same.

A video posted by Moshe Gray (@crossfitrabbi) on Sep 13, 2015 at 7:43am PDT

When Gray first started training, he was unable to do a full set of burpees before throwing up, The Blaze reported. Once he realized how out of shape he was, a new discipline overcame him. This new-found discipline (and muscle strength) inspired him to urge an international organization of Jewish students, called “Chabad on Campus,” to launch a pilot CrossFit program for other clergy. The program involved 30 participants, including Rabbis and their wives, and each participant received a medical check-up, personalized fitness goals, an online support group, and a subsidy for a personal trainer.

Fast forward a year later and participants have reportedly lost a combined 667 pounds, which averages out to 22 pounds per person. Yosef Kulek, the Chabad director at the University of Hartford in Connecticut, said within one year of starting the pilot program, he lost 22 of the 60 pounds he'd gained since starting his career.

CrossFit Rabbi Yosef Kulek's before and after photos show his one-year transformation. Photo courtesy of AP, Rabbi Yosef Kulek

“What people don’t quite realize right away is that Judaism and the Torah put a strong emphasis on taking care of your body and taking care of the gifts God gave us in this world,” Kulek told Blaze. “As clergy, it’s important for us to lead by example.”

Blaze cited that research continually shows "clergy members of all faiths are at a higher risk for obesity and other health ailments than other Americans." In fact, a study published in the American Journal of Preventative Medicine revealed social workers, clergy, and counselors were among the U.S. jobs with a higher obesity rates. One study published in Social Science Research revealed job stress, long hours, and low pay can fuel weight gain.

With food playing an integral role in religions of all kind, from Shabbat meals to Christmas dinners, it may be difficult to introduce healthier traditions and undo thousands of years of practice. But it won't be for Gray's lack of trying.

You can track his progress through his Instagram account, where he regularly shares progress photos and videos.