When the first open enrollment period was drawing near many health insurance agents were wondering if we would have a role in the sign up process. Less than two months before the beginning of open enrollment we were scrambling to get ready, attending meetings, completing training and getting appointed with all of the carriers on the exchange.

As the first day came to a close the health insurance agent forums were filled with opinions of the agents' frustrations with the website. As the season rolled on the list of frustrations grew. I participated in some of the conversations but many times I followed them just to see what others were thinking.

What were the major complaints that I saw?

One was agent information being deleted from client applications. Not having a way to track the status of our applications. The inability to correct simple mistakes without having to call the exchange and redo the entire application over the phone, which many times was a two hour wait and them another hour or more to reenter all of the information.

After spending a month calling dozens of places to hunt down all of my clients I felt there had to be a better way. I heard about Health Sherpa from Maryland Health Connection. I really liked the site and began using it just to give my clients an idea of what they could qualify for before we began the application process. I liked the tool so much that I sent an email to Health Sherpa just to thank them and let them know how much I loved their site. A few days later I was contacted by George Kalogeropoulos by email and was asked to give him my opinion on the site. I proposed to him the idea of a site with an agent portal that would make it easier for agents to track their business and correct simple mistakes in a timely fashion.

This past week June 3rd Ning Liang contacted me with a link to the new agent portal. I was excited to see that they considered the idea but I wanted to know what other agents thought of it. With the approval of Ning I shared the link and my original email with other health insurance agents in a few of my groups on Linkedin.

The 2 biggest concerns amongst the agents were the price and security of client information.