More than 100 artists participate in Pastels on 5th Saturday to chalk up sidewalk squares, raise funds for Alternatives to Violence

Kim Leszczynski works on a landscape at the Pastels on 5th event Saturday in Loveland. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Loveland artist Kim Leszczynski compared sidewalk art to a combination of painting and drawing.

Leszczynski used a paintbrush Saturday to blend the colors of an image of a Lake Loveland sculpture at sunset, and then drew on top to get in the details. Her canvas was a square of sidewalk during the fifth annual Pastels on 5th, named for its location on Fifth Street outside the Loveland Museum/Gallery. The museum is a co-sponsor of the event with the city of Loveland's Cultural Services Department.

"If you get too many colors, it turns to mud," Leszczynski said. "It doesn't look good, and I want bright colors."

The bright colors represented a sunset with a sculpture in silhouette in one of Leszczynski's favorite places in Loveland that reminds her of Michigan.

Kailee and DaLisha Verdeyen take a step back from their artwork to see what's missing Saturday. The Verdeyens joined dozens of others in creating art for Pastels on 5th in Loveland. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"I think it's great there's this lake in the middle of Loveland," Leszczynski said.

Painting Sidewalk Squares

Leszczynski joined more than 100 student, amateur and professional artists decorating sidewalk squares during the seven-hour event on the north and south sides of Fifth Street between Lincoln and Cleveland avenues. The artists were judged by the Pastels committee for first to third place and by the public for a People's Choice award.

Businesses sponsored the squares that were filled with images of animals, landscapes, designs and portraits in colorful patterns of blocks of art down the sidewalk.

Advertisement

This year, 98 businesses sponsored the squares, compared with 90 last year, generating $21,000 toward the amount raised as a benefit for Alternatives to Violence. The nonprofit provides 24-hour crisis intervention, emergency services and child and adult therapy and is building a safe house for abused women and children.

Other aspects of the event also generated funds for ATV, like $1 tickets for the People's Choice award and Walk a Mile in Her Shoes, the International Men's March to Stop Rape, Sexual Assault and Gender Violence. During the event, men registered to wear high heels and walk a mile to raise awareness about ending domestic violence in the community.

"We were looking for a fundraiser for ATV, something that fit the whole community," said Vicky Bryant, event coordinator for Pastels on 5th. "Loveland is an art town. We wanted to promote that and bring people to downtown Loveland. ... It's a win-win-win."

The Artists and Their Work

Robyn Bond walks her dog Runa through Pastels on 5th Saturday in Loveland. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Jeri Fry of Gillette, Wyo., doesn't consider herself an artist, but she came down to the event to participate with her daughter, Lacy Gangestad of Loveland. She drew Snow White's evil stepmother, figuring that with the favoring of princesses, she'd go to the "dark side."

"It's really difficult because I'm not an artist. I know there's techniques with water and brushes," Fry said. "I'm just using my fingers to blend."

Melanie Poston of Greeley chose an image of a peacock for her sidewalk canvas.

"I really wanted to do something colorful," Poston said about her peacock with its tail feathers in bright greens, yellows and blues.

Poston started with a rough sketch that she went over with a paintbrush to smooth the surface and then added more colors for vibrancy. With any of her mistakes, Poston, who does graphic arts, could not hit the delete button, she said.

"Once something is on the pavement, it's on the pavement," Poston said. "With pavement, I'm kind of going for it and hoping for the best."

For Kitty Love, the choice of subject was what she chooses every year, a dragon, because she calls herself "the dragon lady."

"I just wing it. I really don't have any technique. I do it for the fun," Love said.

Students from Thompson School District participated in the event, drawing on seven squares, including three for the Loveland Integrated School of the Arts program.

"Mountain View's done it before, but there's never been a huge district representation," said Candice Ingold, LISA coordinator. "We want to make sure the district has a creative outlet in the community. The adult artists are the mentors for up-and-coming artists, and (we want) to have artistic engagement."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm