Wendy Reed is a Democrat from Quartz Hill running for the 23rd Congressional District seat held by Kevin McCarthy, R-Bakersfield. The primary is June 7.

Ken Mettler is a Bakersfield Republican running for the 23rd Congressional District seat held by Kevin McCarthy, R-Bakersfield. The primary is June 7.

Congressman Kevin McCarthy, R-Bakersfield, is running for a sixth term in office. The primary is June 7.

Wendy Reed is a Democrat from Quartz Hill running for the 23rd Congressional District seat held by Kevin McCarthy, R-Bakersfield. The primary is June 7.

Ken Mettler is a Bakersfield Republican running for the 23rd Congressional District seat held by Kevin McCarthy, R-Bakersfield. The primary is June 7.

Congressman Kevin McCarthy, R-Bakersfield, is running for a sixth term in office. The primary is June 7.

There’s a lot of political daylight between the Democrat and Republican hoping to topple House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy this year. But on one thing they agree: McCarthy should be challenged.

He should have to answer for his record, say Democrat Wendy Reed of Quartz Hill and Republican Ken Mettler of Bakersfield.

There should be an airing of the issues, they say.

And, as Reed put it, the 800-pound gorilla in Kern County politics “has lost some weight” with locals who believe he’s more focused on his leadership role than representing his district.

“Even his own Republican base recognizes that involvement in political life, being a career politician, is very time-consuming and can really take you away from the matters of your district,” she said. “From what I understand, that appears to be true (with McCarthy).”

Related Info ALSO ON THE BALLOT... Gerald Morris of Rosamond, a Republican gun room salesman, said he suspended his campaign for the 23rd due to “dirty tricks” that so frightened his wife she didn’t want him to say he was married. He said “they” put a tracker on his car, followed him around, took down his flyers and hacked his computer. Who are “they”? “That’s a good question,” Morris said. He said he doesn’t know who did these things and he hasn’t asked authorities to investigate, saying culpability would be difficult to prove. 23RD DISTRICT CONTENDERS KEVIN MCCARTHY Party: Republican

Republican Age: 51 Occupation: 23rd District congressman Website: www.mccarthyforcongress.com Family: Married; adult son, daughter Political offices held: Kern Community College District trustee, 2000-2002; 32nd District assemblyman, 2002-2006; 23rd District congressman, 2007-present Education: Bachelor’s (1989) and master’s (1994) degrees in business administration, Cal State Bakersfield His backstory: McCarthy is a Bakersfield native who before his 21st birthday opened a deli, sold it and used the money to finish his college education. He went to work for Rep. Bill Thomas, R-Bakersfield, ultimately serving as his district director. McCarthy was elected to the Kern Community College District board in 2000. Two years later he was elected to the 32nd Assembly District seat, and became the first freshman elected Assembly Republican leader. In 2006 he was elected to replace Thomas and rose up the leadership ranks, ultimately to House majority leader in 2014.



Last year he dropped a run for House speaker.



Campaign finances: Raised $5.9 million as of March 31. $4 million on hand then; $10,000 debt. Quote: “If we went with what the House passed, it would be a better country.” KEN METTLER



Party: Republican



Age: 62 Republican62 Occupation: Independent businessman/owner of KLM Omni Inc., dba KLM Homes, KLM Land Services, and KLM Litigation Services Website: www.KenMettler.com Family: Married; two grown sons Political offices held: Kern High School District trustee, 2007-2010; Rosedale Union School District trustee, 1996-2006 Education: Bachelor’s degree in public administration, Cal State Los Angeles, 1973; master’s degree in public administration, UC Riverside, 1975 His backstory: Mettler is a South High School grad whose father was a gas plant operator for an oil company and mother a stay-at-home mom when he was young. After college he served in the Peace Corps in Nicaragua and tried to start a cattle herd there, but had to flee when communists took over. Mettler returned to Bakersfield to work for Tenneco Oil as an analyst in about 1977 and while there, met a vice president of finance for Tenneco West with whom he started Kaiser Mettler Development, which did land development. He ended up building home tracts and estimates he’s built 1,000 homes and lots in Arizona and California. Today he owns KLM Omni Inc., under which he operates KLM Homes (primarily building custom homes), KLM Land Services (helping people with oil leases and drilling rights), and KLM Litigation Services (acting as an expert witness on construction-related issues). Campaign finances: No money reported yet. Mettler said in an interview he’s raised less than $10,000. He said people are giving less than $200 each so their name doesn’t have to be reported. Quote: “I’m principle-driven. I’m not seeking a job. I’m not seeking perks. I’m not looking for a trophy. I’m running on principles and giving people a choice.”





WENDY REED



Party: Democratic Age: 60 Website: http://wendyreedforcongress.com Family: Married; grown son Occupation: Administrator, Antelope Valley Conservancy; business owner, Advant-edge, both Quartz Hill Education: Bachelor’s degree in communications (public relations emphasis, minor in economics), Cal State Bakersfield, 2004; master’s degree in public administration, Cal State Northridge, 2007. Her backstory: Reed grew up the only child of an English teacher father and artist mother on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. She listened to a lot of classical music as a child and wanted to be an opera singer. Early on she was a folk and rock ‘n roll singer and wanted to be a songwriter. In her 20s she realized that wasn’t going to work out and ended up “falling in love” with working with attorneys, in real estate and with computers. She came to the Antelope Valley in 1985, where she met her now-husband, got married, had a son and “started a business or two.” Reed ended up deciding to stay home with her son and on the side do freelance secretarial work with a company she started, Advant-edge. Campaign finances: Raised $18,390 as of March 31. $4,156 on hand then; $4,200 debt. Quote: “We need leadership that cares about human beings. That understands that in America we are all created equal. That’s what we meant. We didn’t mean that rich people are more equal than other people. We didn’t mean rich people got more votes than other people. We meant that by our inalienable right of birth, we are equal.”

Mettler sees the same kind of opening Virginia college professor Dave Brat broke through in 2014 when he unseated then-House Majority Leader Eric Cantor in the primary. Though Mettler and Reed recognize beating McCarthy is an uphill climb.

“I think the anger is even more today than it was two years ago,” Mettler said. “It’s anger against the establishment.”

McCarthy, meanwhile, isn’t taking anything for granted. He has a campaign headquarters, is running radio ads and says he’s open to debating his opponents if everyone can work out a date.

Time is running out, though, with the primary June 7 and absentee ballots having gone out this past week. The top two finishers, regardless of party, will go head-to-head in November.

“I want to be that voice to find the solutions and finish the jobs that we’re doing,” McCarthy said.

He rejects the notion he’s the “establishment,” saying he served only two terms in the state Assembly and hasn’t been in Congress nearly as long as his predecessor, 28-year Congressman Bill Thomas.

And McCarthy says he’s proud of how connected he stays with the district.

“I do tele-town halls almost every single month,” he said. “I come home every single weekend. Maybe I’ve missed two weekends this year. You cover and follow me. Have you ever seen me not be accessible?”

ON THE RIGHT

Mettler is a homebuilder and former Kern High School District trustee known best for his conservative politics and, some would say, antics.

He successfully advocated for posters with “In God We Trust” and other historical documents to be pinned up in all KHSD classrooms. He fought with a protester over signs dealing with Proposition 8, the 2008 voter initiative that banned same-sex marriage in California. And he was accused of coaxing a “Shannon” (Holloway) to run in the 2010 Assembly race to confuse people and take votes away from Shannon Grove (who won anyway).

Mettler says those controversies are old news and he has a far more relevant record as a businessman, school board member and political advocate. He says he’s a “principles-driven person” and wants “to live by those principles.”

They are fiscal responsibility, free markets, limited government and equal opportunity for all. He says he decided to run at the last minute, when nobody else stepped up, because “the people deserve a choice.”

“It’s incumbent upon us, when we disagree with our electeds, that we mount a challenge and let the people hear the issues,” Mettler said.

He’s most perturbed by McCarthy’s vote last December for the $1.1 trillion omnibus spending bill, which passed the House with 150 Republicans supporting it and 95 opposed, meaning he had to partner with Democrats.

That spending bill, Mettler said, gave President Obama $50 billion more than he requested and was so big that a lot of pork got in under the radar.

He criticizes McCarthy for not doing enough to defund the Affordable Care Act, immigration-related executive orders and Planned Parenthood.

“When you’re in the minority party you can say you tried,” Mettler said. “When you’re in the majority, more is expected of you.”

Mettler faults McCarthy for not offering up a more comprehensive alternative to the Affordable Care Act or doing more to tackle the country’s debt. And he was “infuriated” by McCarthy’s comments on Fox News last year tying the House Benghazi hearings to Hillary Clinton’s then-falling poll numbers.

Mettler has posted a Clinton ad highlighting the remarks on his website.

“I think Mr. McCarthy is a political animal and views the world as just a partisan quest when in reality, when you have Americans die that’s not political,” he said.

Mettler has a boatload of his own baggage, though.

He was criticized for spending too much time pursuing a social agenda at the high school district (he also helped lead the charge to change the names of the breaks from “Winter” to “Christmas” and “Spring” to “Easter”) and for punching a protester after wading through a rival encampment of demonstrators to confiscate altered “Yes on 8” yard signs.

He counters by pointing to substantive work he did at KHSD: helping start an academy to better prepare incoming freshmen for high school, fighting “social promotion” policies, asking for a series of financial audits, and advocating for single-sex physical education.

He says the 2008 scuffle was self-defense (he wasn’t charged criminally and won a civil trial by a 12-0 vote). And regarding Holloway says that “silly things happen during campaigns,” including his campaign computer being hacked during that crazy 2010 Assembly race.

ON THE LEFT

Reed says she had three goals going into her campaign. Making sure McCarthy had a challenger. Reminding people “what self-governing really involves,” like one man, one vote, taxation without representation, and equal treatment under the law. And third, having a good time.

She believes the 23rd District has a lot of needs that aren’t being met.

“We need resources,” Reed said. “Our job as congressmen is to bring home the pork. Where’s our pork? Where’s our money for healthcare? Where’s our money for roads? Where’s our money for education? Where’s our money for better environmental protections?”

Where would the money come from?

She says the government has allowed too many tax breaks for, and too much tax dodging by, the “super, super rich” who have bought politicians’ influence. Asked for specific remedies and how much money they would generate, Reed said:

“If we simply roll back some of those perks, we will greatly increase the taxes that are available,” describing the totals as “billions of dollars, tens of billions of dollars, by some estimates trillions of dollars.”

Reed also bemoans what she considers a political system unduly influenced by rich special interest groups. She says she’d fight it by advocating to reverse the U.S. Supreme Court’s 2010 Citizens United decision that prohibited restrictions on independent political spending and move toward publicly financed elections to help level playing fields.

“Ascending to governance, to represent the people in your district, should not be a pay-to-play system,” Reed said. “That is not democracy.”

She’d also bring back bank regulations, anti-trust laws and the Fairness Doctrine, which required broadcasters to produce balanced airings of matters of public importance.

Asked why 23rd District voters should replace someone with McCarthy’s clout with a political newcomer likely to be in the minority party, Reed said she’s not sure McCarthy still has a lot of power, that he’s really a leader and that the GOP will keep control of the House.

“I don’t see that Mr. McCarthy is influencing people from a position of leadership. I see McCarthy is doing the bidding of whoever those leaders are, who I assume are not in office. They’re not elected people. They’re people who pay to elect people.”

Who are those people?

“I don’t know. Who are the richest people?” she responded. “The Waltons, the Gates, Soros, the Koch brothers. They’re the richest, most influential people in our country.”

Reed has never held elected office but says she’s been an advocate for important causes for 30 years, including founding and managing a nonprofit that preserves wildlife habitat, and engaging citizens in government issues.

THE CONGRESSMAN

Asked what he’d do with another two years in office, McCarthy says he’d continue his work on oil, water, valley fever, getting Isabella Dam reconstructed, protecting Kern’s military bases and reducing the deficit.



He counts as a major accomplishment helping get the oil export ban lifted, and wants to pass pipeline reform to ensure companies can produce and move oil.

McCarthy wants to continue working on legislation to move water from the Delta down to the Central Valley and Southern California and to invest in more water storage. Then there’s continuing the fight against valley fever — a $7 million randomized study on how best to treat it is underway — and making sure reconstruction of Isabella Dam stays on schedule.

It took him two months, he said, just to get the feds to agree to rebuild a Forest Service building that has to be taken out.

“I had meetings to try to keep them on schedule every quarter,” McCarthy said. “If we did not hold them accountable, I don’t know that (dam construction) would be on track.”

Then there’s fostering the private space industry at the Mojave Air and Space Port and protecting Edwards Air Force Base.

In answer to his critics, McCarthy says he doesn’t like big omnibus bills, either, but last year’s became necessary to keep the government open.

While discretionary spending went up, mandatory spending (about 65 percent of the budget) went down, he said. Republicans passed reforms to Medicare, for example, that will save almost $2 trillion in the long run.

Included in the omnibus, he said, was the lifting of the oil export ban and money to reconstruct Isabella Dam, fight valley fever, continue research and development at Kern military bases and cut diesel emissions in the valley.

Of note, McCarthy said: House Republicans have cut discretionary spending by $887 billion since taking control of the body in 2011.

He took Mettler to task for saying in a widely distributed email that omnibus “provided full funding for Obamacare” when omnibus only deals with discretionary funding and the Affordable Care Act is mandatory spending. Mettler doesn’t know the facts or is trying to mislead, he said.

McCarthy also criticized Mettler for posting the Clinton ad on his website.

“I never said Benghazi was a political committee. It’s about four Americans who lost their lives and getting to the bottom of it,” he said.

“If Hillary wants to spin it and try to make it political, it’s unfortunate that someone like Ken, who claims to be a Republican, would go onto a Hillary site to try to help her.”

As for Reed’s notion McCarthy is doing the bidding of unelected people, the richest people in the country, he said some of the four names she listed are big, liberal fundraisers.

“She doesn’t know what she’s talking about,” McCarthy said. “I don’t think I’ve received money from any of those.”

An earlier version of this story quoted McCarthy as saying three of four groups of political donors named by Reed are liberal fundraisers. One of the three groups he cited, however, members of the Walton family, tend to give to conservative candidates and causes, according to a report based on campaign finance data by the group Making Change at Walmart. A look at 2015-2016 campaign finance data shows Arkansas Waltons giving to a mix of GOP and Democratic candidates.