Topics: Editor's Picks, Immigration, Life stories, Race, Business News, Life News, News

I was on my way to a construction job last month when I saw the flashing lights. I was being pulled over.

The officer stopped me not because of a dangerous crime, but because I was supposedly driving with my high beams on. “Failure to dim headlights,” read the ticket.

I felt around in my pocket for my daughter Yesenia’s crumpled picture, one of few possessions I brought when I crossed the border 17 years ago.

Missing from my pocket was a driver’s license. After nearly two decades in my adopted country, working endless construction jobs to sustain my family and contribute to the local economy, I am still not allowed to drive legally.

While everyone should have a driver’s license, failure to have one in Fayetteville, Georgia, isn’t just any crime – it can lead to a felony conviction.

My car stop and subsequent arrest that day was one of thousands taking place in Georgia every year, disproportionately involving people of color. Many of us, mostly Latino and African-American, go to jail or prison. For some, incarceration is coupled with thousands of dollars in expenses, leading to financial ruin. For others still, the punishment involves permanent separation from their children, siblings, friends and parents through aggressive deportation.

Paying thousands, going to jail and losing your family are steep penalties, especially considering the state of Georgia has rigged the rules barring undocumented men and women from obtaining a driver’s license in the first place. Conservatives in the legislature engineered the rules to disadvantage certain members of the community.

Starting in 2008, amid an anti-immigrant furor, the legislature passed a series of measures to make life miserable for immigrants. The hope was to make life in Georgia so painful for us that we would choose to leave our state rather than enduring the manufactured hardships imposed on us. One of the bills sought to forbid water utility companies from servicing in our homes. We would essentially lose access to running water at home. Another measure, the “felony driving law,” which criminalizes the lack of a driver’s license, has torn through communities like mine.