One of the two surviving crew members from a Flight for Life helicopter crash in Frisco Friday is in fair condition and the other is critical condition Saturday, said Centennial-based Air Methods, the company that operates the medical transport aircraft.

Their names are not being released at the request of their families, the company said in a statement Saturday.

The crash occurred shortly after liftoff near St. Anthony Summit Medical Center and killed the pilot, 64-year-old Patrick Mahany of Silverthorne.

The cause of the crash is under investigation by the Federal Aviation Administration and National Transportation Safety Board.

The helicopter was not on a medical assignment at the time of the crash, and it was not immediately clear what Mahany was doing.

“The helicopter was an operated EMS helicopter flight repositioning for a purpose we did not know yet,” Jennifer Rodi, a senior air safety investigator with the NTSB said at a Friday night press conference. “We understand that shortly after departure, the helicopter started to spin, or rotate, and subsequently impacted the ground.”

The investigation could take up to 10 months to complete, Rodi said.

The survivors were a flight paramedic and a nurse. One was rushed to St. Anthony Hospital in Lakewood and the other to the University of Colorado Hospital in Aurora.

Air Methods operates medical-transport flights in 48 states. The company issued a statement Saturday:

“St. Anthony Summit Medical Center and Air Methods would like to acknowledge the many brave individuals who assisted with the tragic crash of Flight For Life Lifeguard 2 on July 3. We extend our thanks to Lake Dillon Fire-Rescue, Summit County Sheriff Department, Denver Health’s Critical Incident Stress Team and St. Anthony Summit Medical Center’s Spiritual Care Team for their immediate response and support.

“The rescue effort moved swiftly to get necessary medical attention to those injured. We are cooperating with National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) and the Federal Aviation Administration to keep the area secured. We ask that you respect these efforts and containment of the site while the agencies complete the investigation.

“We are deeply saddened by the news that the Air Methods pilot, Patrick Mahany, was fatally injured. Our thoughts and prayers go out to his family. Two of the flight crew were injured in the crash and are currently being treated in Denver area hospitals; one is in fair condition and the other is in critical condition.

“The families requested that we refrain from releasing the names of the crew members at this time. We continue to pray for these individuals and their loved ones, and ask that the media respect their privacy during this difficult time.”

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch