Denver’s top government officials should generally — in fact, almost always — live within the city, but a formal residency requirement is unnecessary.

A group of citizens is drafting an initiative for next spring’s municipal election that could force Denver’s mayoral appointees to adhere to a residency requirement.

Residency does matter in some cases. It’s why elected officials who write the laws must live inside their cities or districts and abide by those rules themselves.

Many municipalities also mandate residency for various other government positions. Boulder, for example, requires its city manager and city attorney to live within the city.

A city has a problem if many of its top officials live elsewhere and don’t have to face personally the issues they deal with in their professional capacity.

The current initiative idea started when a group of residents read that Brad Buchanan, the director of the Department of Community Planning and Development, lives on a ranch near Strasburg. In addition to Buchanan, several other charter officers in Denver live outside of the city, including Fire Chief Eric Tade (in Thornton) and City Attorney Scott Martinez (in Golden).

Tade is even a councilman in Thornton, which makes you wonder how he can devote the attention required for his crucial Denver job.

Mayor Michael Hancock’s top adviser, chief of staff Janice Sinden, lives in Evergreen.

The current initiative still must gather 18,000 signatures to appear on the ballot and likely would be restricted to only top officials. We sympathize with the sentiment, but can imagine rare occasions when someone’s qualifications are virtually unique and yet the family situation makes relocation to Denver extremely difficult.

However, residency should be an informal criteria for employment in a top post, something weighted heavily by the mayor when making appointments.

Denver had a broad residency requirement for many years until voters curtailed it in 1998 and then abolished it in 2001. And for the most part, the residency of officials has not been controversial since.

Even so, the mayor should understand that residency can be an important factor in how the public perceives an administration.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.