April 03 --The fight over taxes in Spotsylvania County is pitting some teachers against the tea party and other conservative groups.

Spotsylvania Education Association members say more money for schools benefits the students, but some anti-tax conservatives think the teachers are using kids to get a pay raise. Both sides are urging their supporters to attend Tuesday's public hearing on the budget and tax rate.

Just this weekend, the tea party group Americans for Prosperity made phone calls to ask residents to oppose a tax increase at the hearing. In addition, Fredericksburg Virginia Patriots Chairman Michael Hirsch said the local tea party is supporting a 3-cent reduction to the real estate tax rate of 86 cents per $100 of assessed value.

Meanwhile, the Spotsylvania Education Association endorsed the School Board's budget proposal for an additional $12.6 million in local tax dollars.

But the Board of Supervisors nixed that spending plan when they voted to advertise the current 86-cent tax rate. That rate, if adopted, is effectively a tax increase because of rising property values in this year's reassessment.

In fact, about 53 percent of residential property owners would pay more in taxes even with a 3-cent reduction.

Supervisor Greg Benton , who is the swing vote on the tax rate, said he's thinking about supporting an 85-cent rate but hasn't made a final decision. Feedback from constituents has been split down the middle, he added.

"I do not have an agenda other than trying to do best for the county," said Benton, who was elected in November with the support of the Spotsylvania Republican Committee .

Benton is in a unique position because he and his wife both receive county paychecks. He is a county firefighter, and his wife, Suuzy, is a school nurse at Robert E. Lee Elementary .

If he receives more pay from the budget, Benton said, he will donate the extra money to charity. County Administrator Mark Taylor's recommended budget includes an average 2 percent performance-based pay raise for firefighters, deputies and other county employees.

"I don't want anybody thinking that I voted one way or the other for myself," Benton said.

The supervisors are scheduled to take a final vote on the budget and tax rate on April 12 . They can lower the advertised rate, but can't raise it.

This year's budget discussions have been more vitriolic than usual.

Some residents recently received an anonymous flier claiming Spotsylvania teachers make an average of $70,000 annually--much more than other jobs pay.

The flier pictures a man and a woman wondering how they will pay their bills if taxes go up for teacher raises. The 3-cent tax reduction backed by the tea party would save the average homeowner $73 .

"I guess we're going to have to get second jobs," the man states in the flier. "I sure wish politicians and teachers cared about us taxpayers."

The School Board requested $5.2 million for a 1 percent cost-of-living raise and a step increase on the salary scale for its employees. The budget also includes an additional 47 positions--about half of which would support special education services.

A document on the official county website says teachers earn $53,050 on average, or about $17,000 less than the flier states. That does not include the cost of health insurance.

Hirsch said the flier was distributed by a "group of concerned taxpayers" but that the local tea party was not involved. He said he thinks they want to remain anonymous.

School Board member Dawn Shelley wrote on her Facebook page that she was "saddened to see that a group of anti-school people are spreading rumors about the schools.

"They are using scare tactics to get their supporters to the public hearing," she wrote.

An anonymous website, schrooled.org, also features the flier at issue and other messages critical of pay raises for teachers. "Do any of our School Board politicians or school employees care about our financial situations?" the site asks.

The tax debate intensified in February after Spotsylvania Conservative Women's Coalition co-founder Dale Swanson --also a tea party member and a vice chair of the Spotsylvania Republican Committee --heckled a teacher who was formally addressing the supervisors. The teacher said she didn't know what her salary was or how much she pays in taxes to emphasize that her focus is on the students.

Swanson then told her, "You shouldn't be teaching if you don't know anything."

At their next meeting, the supervisors voted 5-2 to approve a resolution offering their "sincerest regrets" to the teacher for the "verbal assault."

Jim Thurber , who owns the schrooled.org domain name, also registered the website for the Conservative Women's Coalition . He declined to comment.

Jeff Branscome : 540.374-5402

[email protected]

___

(c)2016 The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.)

Visit The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.) at www.fredericksburg.com/flshome

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.