By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

Ohio’s labor force shrank last year while Gov. John Kasich’s Obamacare expansion put nearly half a million Ohioans on Medicaid.

From December 2013 through December 2014, Ohio’s labor force declined by 20,506, based on U.S. Department of Labor data. Enrollment in Kasich’s Obamacare expansion, which took effect in January 2014, had rocketed to 485,462 by December.

Kasich, a Republican, unilaterally expanded Medicaid after critics expressed concern about federal spending, future state costs, access to care and the workforce impact of putting able-bodied, working-age adults on Ohio’s largest welfare program.

Ohio’s labor force declined by 71,498 during Kasich’s first term, narrowly increasing in 2013 after dropping in 2011 and 2012. Kasich boasts of reducing unemployment, although lower unemployment rates have resulted partly from the state’s shrinking workforce.

A study published by the National Bureau of Economic Research in mid-2013 found Tennessee’s workforce participation grew after the state removed able-bodied, working-age adults — the same people added to Medicaid by Obamacare — from its Medicaid rolls.

The Congressional Budget Office affirmed in early 2014 that states implementing Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion would see their workforce participation drop because the expansion would “reduce incentives to work.”

“Ohio’s labor force participation is at near-historic lows due to many reasons including demographic changes and a troubling increase in prime working age adults receiving disability,” Greg Lawson, policy analyst at the free-market Buckeye Institute, told Ohio Watchdog via email.

Lawson pointed to Buckeye Institute research showing an increasing percentage of Ohioans ages 18 to 64 receiving government disability benefits.

“However, the Medicaid expansion does nothing to make this better. In fact, it is likely to exacerbate the underlying trend as research from both the non-partisan National Bureau for Economic Research and the Congressional Budget Office shows,” Lawson continued.

“Unless Ohio policymakers figure out a way to move people on Medicaid quickly off, we can expect less Ohioans bothering to look for jobs and further erosion of our long-term economic vibrancy,” he concluded.

According to Kasich, putting more Ohioans on Medicaid allows them to share in the state’s terrific economic recovery. Ohio’s job creation rate ranked 36th of the 50 states from December 2013 through December 2014.

Ohio’s seasonally adjusted total non-farm employment grew by 269,400 from December 2010 through December 2014, with net job creation during Kasich’s first term far short of Obamacare expansion enrollment in just one year.

In 2013, the year Kasich unilaterally expanded Medicaid under Obamacare, Ohio’s economy added only 51,000 jobs. In 2014, Ohio’s economy added 61,500 jobs while Kasich’s Obamacare expansion put 485,462 Ohioans on Medicaid.

With enrollment in his Obamacare Medicaid expansion likely to exceed 500,000 this month, Kasich insists his priority is helping people break the cycle of government dependence.

Kasich claims his Obamacare expansion is paid for with “Ohio dollars” and has nothing to do with Obamacare. Kasich is also promoting a federal balanced budget amendment, but his Medicaid expansion increased federal spending by more than $2 billion in its first year.

Kasich’s press secretary did not respond to a request for comment on the disparities between the governor’s rhetoric and the latest employment, labor force and Medicaid enrollment data.