AIR FORCE ACADEMY — As it turned out, there were two surprising — bordering on the amazing — turnarounds in Colorado college football this season, and the resilient Air Force Falcons on Friday won the showdown between the two.

Will Conant’s 39-yard field goal as time expired gave Air Force a 27-24 win over Colorado State at Falcon Stadium, ending the Rams’ regular season and their hopes to win the Mountain West championship.

The loss for CSU (10-2, 6-2) means that the winner of Saturday night’s Utah State-Boise State game in the Idaho capital will represent the Mountain Division in the league title game Dec. 6.

PHOTOS: Air Force beats Colorado State 27-24

“Give them all the credit in the world,” said CSU coach Jim McElwain. “They took the fight to us and deserved to win the ballgame. I felt they did a good job of controlling the line of scrimmage on both sides of the ball.”

If the Rams had won Friday, they would have won the division if Utah State beat Boise State, but now that goal is unreachable for CSU. Also gone is their long-shot chances of reaching a major bowl game as the highest-rated champion from a non-power conference in the College Football Playoff rankings.

With sophomore Nate Romine stepping in for injured starting quarterback Kale Pearson, Air Force pulled off the upset and closed the regular season at 9-3 (5-3 in the MW), a startling improvement from its 2-10 record in 2013. The Falcons were 6-0 at home and posted their third nine-win season in eight years under coach Troy Calhoun.

Romine, who started five times in the Falcons’ injury-plagued 2013, answered the call. He ran for 61 yards and, while only 6-of-15 passing, threw for 135 yards, with Garrett Brown catching five of his throws for 88 yards — including the key 26-yarder in the final minute that set up the winning field goal.

The Falcons’ 24-10 third-quarter lead disappeared as the Rams rallied back for the tie early in the fourth, but Air Force was resilient. With the game tied 24-24, CSU was driving toward a possible game-winning score, but the Falcons stopped the Rams’ Dee Hart for no gain on a fourth-and-2 from the AFA 42 with 38 seconds left.

“I’d call it again,” McElwain said. “If you can’t get a yard, you don’t deserve to win the ballgame, anyway. They did a great job at the point of attack and we didn’t stop ’em on defense coming back. You guys know me by now, I’m not here to get a participation ribbon, we’re going to go and try to win the ballgame.”

From there, the big play was Romine’s 26-yarder to Brown, and Conant’s kick was on target as the clock ran out.

“It puts a damper on it because you have an opportunity to have 11 wins and sweep the Front Range, which is something that hasn’t been done a lot at Colorado State,” McElwain said of the season. “So, yeah, it’s disappointing and yet, you know what, we’ve done some good things too and come a long ways. … I love those kids in that locker room, this staff, and the fans that came down here to watch the ballgame. I’m really sorry and disappointed that they’re going to go home with a loss.”

Under pressure on most of his throws, CSU quarterback Garrett Grayson was 23-46 for 366 yards and three touchdowns, and Biletnikoff Award finalist Rashard Higgins had 12 receptions for 193 yards and two TDs — including a tough catch at the side of the end zone for the 2-yard score with 10:58 left as the Rams pulled into the 24-24 tie. Grayson’s other TD was a 76-yarder to Xavier Williams.

“They’re a great football team, well-coached and they don’t make many mistakes,” Grayson said. “They outplayed us today. … Obviously, we wanted to be 11-1, but 10-2 is a (heck) of a record and I think we all should be proud of this team. I know I’m proud to be a part of it.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei

Game balls

Weston Steelhammer. The Air Force strong safety had an interception, and he was in on the fourth-down stop of CSU tailback Dee Hart during the game’s final minute.

Will Conant. Air Force’s kicker made both of his field-goal attempts, from 33 and 39 yards. The 39-yarder won the game for the Falcons.

Rashard Higgins. CSU’s star wide receiver added to his Biletnikoff Award contention with 12 catches for 193 yards and two touchdowns.

Terry Frei, The Denver Post

Amazing about-face

Air Force’s victory over Colorado State on Friday capped an amazing reversal from last season. After finishing 2-10 in 2013, the Falcons completed this regular season 9-3. The school’s record-setting seven-game turnaround is tied as the best in the nation with Western Michigan. The previous best turnaround at Air Force was in 1958, when the Falcons went 9-0-2 after going 3-6-1 the previous season.