Upstate hospitals are extremely busy this winter, so much so that one had to come up with a creative solution so no one gets turned away.

Dr. Howard Bean, with Mary Black Physicians Group, says flu isn’t the only reason for the high volume.

"I know it's been busy in the emergency room as well as in the hospital itself,” he said.

Bean says there are a lot of respiratory-type illnesses going around as well as allergies suffered in winter.

Spartanburg Medical Center has added a mobile medical unit, basically a large medical tent, to open up space for patients who need to see a doctor, but don’t need a hospital bed.

Spartanburg Regional Hospital System acquired the mobile medical unit after Hurricane Katrina.

It took six hours to put up the mobile unit on Monday, and patients started being cared for in the tent on Wednesday. The unit is equipped to hold up to 50 patients, but it currently set up to hold 20.

According to Dr. Chris Lombardozzi, SRHS is full to adult capacity. The emergency room has been holding patients that need beds and other patients that don't need beds.

Greenville Hospital System officials said in a statement: “The volumes in many of our GHS emergency departments have been higher the past two months than this same time last year.”

Health officials said, despite the high volume, the number of flu cases seems to be going down.

The AnMed system had 371 confirmed cases of flu in December and 173 so far this month.

The Greenville Hospital System had 654 positive tests in mid-December, compared to 181 as of Feb. 1.

Bean said, "From the flu standpoint we're on the downswing, hopefully."

If you think you do have the flu or just don't feel well, Bean says you can save yourself a lot of time by going to your doctor or even urgent or minor care.

"Certainly, the best use of the emergency room is for true medical emergencies with heart attacks, strokes, bad injuries, car wrecks and things of that sort," Bean said.

He also says it's not too late to get a flu shot.