Topics: abdellatif keciche, Adele Exarchopoulos, Blue Is the Warmest Color, class, France, Lea Seydoux, Entertainment News

“Blue Is the Warmest Color” is not just about sapphic sex. Some very potent intercourse takes place between a working-class high school student and an upper-class artist, but that is only half the story. “I actually believe that the other themes in the film, specifically the social class division — there’s a gap — are problems that are even more important in our society,” director Abdellatif Kechiche recently told Interview. Where the two lovers come from is essential to the thrust of his fifth feature. “[T]hematically, what really interested me the most was a love story between two women, or two people that came out of very different social milieus,” he said. “And to deal with the breakup, which is the result of belonging to different social milieus.”

A devoted practitioner of Renoirian realism, the filmmaker hired two actresses who shared his heroines’ socio-economic backgrounds. Léa Seydoux, granddaughter of the chairman of Pathé, “comes from an extremely wealthy, bourgeois, very comfortable milieu” and plays Emma. Relative neophyte Adèle Exarchopoulos, who “comes from something that is definitely much more modest,” plays Adèle. Kechiche admitted in The Guardian last week that he chooses working-class actresses like Exarchopoulos as a “political” move, saying “it’s a real satisfaction for me to bring them into a profession that wouldn’t have been open to them otherwise.” Though he denied a preference for either “Blue” character, Kechiche told Collider he felt an affinity for Adele in terms of “where she’s coming from in the social class – the proletarian working class that I grew up in and identify with and that she works and exists in.”

The class conflict that eventually ruptures the film’s romance mirrors the real-life war that recently erupted between Kechiche and Seydoux. In a now-infamous interview with The Daily Beast following “Blue’s” Cannes premiere, Exarchopoulos suggested Kechiche was disrespectful in the way he filmed her sex scenes with Seydoux and that he exercised “a kind of manipulation.” She said the stars “were really suffering” during a fight sequence in which Seydoux was encouraged to hit Exarchopoulos numerous times. “It was horrible,” Seydoux acceded and abruptly announced she would “never” work with Kechiche again. In a subsequent interview with The Independent, she added that the film’s sex scenes made her feel “like a prostitute.”

In response, Kechiche waged what appeared to be a class war, using Seydoux’s privilege as ammunition. In reference to her interview with the Beast, he reportedly told Canal+, “If Léa hadn’t had such a sheltered upbringing she would have never said that.” In an op-ed for the French website Rue 89, Kechiche criticised the 28-year-old actress for having “the arrogance of a spoiled child” and belonging to “an untouchable caste that turns her into a sort of ‘Princess and the Pea.’” He also accused her of hypocrisy. “If she really lived what she says, why did she come to Cannes crying, thanking, climbing the stairs, spending days trying on dresses and jewelry? What job does she have, actress or gala artist?” But the coup de grace came when he told Canal+, “Léa Seydoux is part of a system that doesn’t want me, because I disturb it.”

That system is French film and the disturbance, according to Kechiche, is his ethnicity. “Because of my social origins and my roots, I have a hard time getting judged like an artist,” the Tunisia-born Frenchman said in Telerama. Lia Brozgal, Assistant Professor in UCLA’s Dept. of French and Francophone Studies, said the “palpable and pervasive” tension between the French and North African (including Tunisian) immigrants stems from the lengthy war for Algerian independence, which lasted from 1954 to 1962. “Even today, many French feel deep animosity toward the Algerians — animosity rooted in the events of the war and its aftermath,” she said via email. “As if this weren’t already unfortunate, Tunisians and Moroccans, who make up a proportionally smaller number of North African immigrants than Algerians, nonetheless get lumped into the same camp.” In 2007, Kechiche admitted in Le Monde that his upbringing “was marked by the difficulties and racism suffered by a child of immigrants.”

Panivong Norindr, Associate Professor of French and the Comparative Literature Chair at USC, has written about Kechiche’s “political cinema” and agrees that the filmmaker’s background is the reason he is not often cited as a French auteur. “People want to peg him as an immigrant filmmaker, of ‘beur’ or Tunisian descent,” he said. “But he’s not didactic, he’s not moralistic, he doesn’t take the position of the victim.” According to Brozgal, the term “beur,” a colloquialism for those born in France whose parents emigrated from North Africa, “indicates a very low status, socio-economically.” Despite being a successful filmmaker, Kechiche reportedly still chooses to live in Paris’s “Arab town,” Belleville. “For me the important thing about living there is that it’s a working-class district,” he told the Guardian.