Insurance companies are a necessary evil for most Americans. Some people, though, are turning to alternatives called “health care sharing ministries,” one of which — Christian Healthcare Ministries of Barberton — is profiled in this New York Times story.



The piece looks at the case of Greenville, S.C., resident Theresa Bixby, 63, who learned four years ago that she had breast cancer. She had lost her job and insurance, and six months prior to the diagnosis joined Christian Healthcare Ministries.



The price was right — $45 a month for the cheapest plan — but the ministry makes no guarantees of payment.



Here’s how it works, according to the story:



Members send their monthly “gift” to an escrow account, which disburses payments for eligible medical bills, excluding costs like routine physicals, continuing treatment for pre-existing conditions or procedures that members have voted to exclude, like care for pregnancies outside wedlock.



Each time Ms. Bixby visited her hospital for tests or chemotherapy, she explained that she was a self-pay patient and a member of a cost-sharing ministry. Sometimes the receptionist nodded; sometimes she got a blank stare. The hospital never denied her treatment, but “I was getting a two-inch stack of bills every month, and threats that they would take me to collections,” she told me.



Christian Healthcare Ministries assigned her case to a “member advocate,” who negotiated discounts on her fees. These counted toward Ms. Bixby’s $5,000 deductible, so she paid out of pocket only for office visits. In the end, the ministry persuaded the hospital to lop $220,900 off a bill of $301,540 and reimbursed or paid directly the remaining $80,640.



The Times says the four main cost-sharing ministries in the United States, including Christian Healthcare Ministries and Independence-based Liberty HealthShare, have about 340,000 members. Could this model scale?



“This isn’t something that’s for everyone,” said Tony Meggs, CEO of Florida-based Christian Care Ministry, which runs a health care sharing program called Medi-Share.



That might be an understatement.



From the story:





Hot in Cleveland

Today, Medi-Share requires members to “live by biblical standards:” no tobacco or illegal drugs and no sex “outside of traditional Christian marriage.” Samaritan Ministries, with headquarters in Peoria, Ill., requires a pastor’s approval of medical expenses (and refuses to cover treatment for S.T.D.s unless “contracted innocently”). Liberty HealthShare, based in Independence, Ohio, is the only Affordable Care Act-exempt ministry open to people of many faiths. It asks them to affirm that “it is my spiritual duty to God and my ethical duty to others to maintain a healthy lifestyle.”

Cleveland is one of the best U.S. cities for single people, according to this story from Forbes.com, based on a new survey by San Francisco-based financial literacy site NerdWallet.



The list looks at something called “dating affordability,” which Forbes.com says is “calculated as the price of a three-course meal for two, relying on data from a user-generated cost-of-living information site called Numbeo, plus two movie tickets at a midrange restaurant, taken from the Council for Community and Economic Research.” It also calculates the median earnings for workers, taken from the Census, “to gauge the relative affordability of dating.” In addition it evaluates “date-friendliness” by calculating the number of arts and entertainment businesses and restaurants per 1,000 residents, plus “walk scores. . . to evaluate how easy it is to get around and meet people,” derived from a site called walkstore.com.



The final criterion: the percentage of the population 15 and over that’s unmarried, also calculated from Census Bureau data.



Cleveland is fifth by these measures, behind only Boston, Washington, Philadelphia and Baltimore.



Here is the data breakdown for Cleveland, which benefits from low costs for a date and lots of arts, entertainment and restaurant options.





This and that

The future is now: There’s an intriguing — and from Cleveland’s perspective, quite heartening — comment from a PricewaterhouseCoopers analyst in this Bloomberg story about an Atlanta developer’s new project.



The news service reports that Portman Holdings LLC, which has built high-profile properties such as San Francisco’s One Embarcadero Center, “plans to break ground in June on its first U.S. office development without tenant commitments in more than 25 years.”



The project is in Charlotte, N.C., “while builders such as Houston-based Hines and San Antonio, Texas-based USAA Real Estate Co. are also looking beyond the biggest U.S. cities and starting projects in smaller markets, even without tenants lined up,” according to the story. Such speculative ventures, Bloomberg says, “were shunned by developers after the 2008 property crash.”



Mitch Roschelle, a partner at the U.S. real estate advisory practice of PricewaterhouseCoopers, tells Bloomberg, “More jobs are being created in lower-cost markets. These markets are going to be hot in terms of investments and new developments.”





The story also notes that technology-related jobs were the key driver of office demand last year, according to Cushman. Smaller, lower-cost markets may benefit from the emergence of new companies in that space, Roschelle says.“More and more investors in startups don’t want them to be in Silicon Valley, where everything is super-expensive,” he tells Bloomberg. “They want them in places like Cleveland, where operational costs are very low, and that means more demand for office space in those places.”TheHill.com reports that a prominent environmental advocacy organization has found an ally in former U.S. Rep. Steve LaTourette.LaTourette is among a group of lobbyists at McDonald Hopkins Government Strategies working on behalf of the Environmental Defense Action Fund A bipartisan team at the firm will work on “climate related issues and initiatives,” according to disclosure firms submitted to the Senate, TheHill.com reports.In Congress, LaTourette, a Republican, “earned a 25 percent approval rating from another environmental advocacy group, the League of Conservation Voters,” the website says.But “he appears to have taken up the climate change mantle,” telling Bloomberg last year, “Climate change needs to be in the mix of all of our other discussions.”





You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about business and Northeast Ohio.