David Edwards, MD, Ph.D., is clinical service chief of Inpatient Chronic Pain Service at Vanderbilt. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights There is a 1/10 chance of being genetically inclined to addiction within our first exposure to a narcotic.

Pain treatment with only opioids is not modern medicine.

Talk openly to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist about ways to reduce pain without opioids.

We are all narcotic users or potential narcotic users, unless you are of the fewer than 1 percent who get through life in the United States unexposed. In Tennessee, we are together huddled in the epicenter of the worst prescription drug storm in history. Morphine, oxycodone, dilaudid and strong pain medicines like these are opioid narcotics. If you plan to use the medical system these days, be warned — you are going to be affected by changes that have come and changes that will come to limit opioid medication prescribing. I am sorry.

I am not sorry that we are limiting opioids, just that we created the problem we are now trying to fix. We physicians and society expected and demanded complete pain control. So we swung the pendulum too far, and now we must swing it back to save our lives.

For those who are not yet narcotic users, did you know that you have at least a 1/10 chance of being genetically inclined to addiction within your first exposure to a narcotic?

For those who previously used a narcotic, you made it through, but not unscathed. Your brain has been changed; it is now primed to want more.

For those on narcotics, you must be feeling the heat with all this attention! You are in pain and the medicine that takes it away for a time is being weaned down or stopped. There’s the stigma. There’s dependence, and then, yes, there’s addiction.

As a citizen patient, if I were you, this is what I would do to empower myself:

If I were to have a procedure or a surgery, first I would ask the doctor how long I should expect to take to recover. I would ask relatively how painful the procedure is expected to be and if I should expect to require strong pain medicines. Then I would tell the doctor that I expect to use all non-medication pain management strategies that are available and ask what they offer. I would always use non-opioid pain medicine options first, if available. If that hospital or clinic does not offer anything but opioids, I would look for another place to treat me. If I received a prescription and it was too large, I would ask for less. I don’t want them in my home if I can help it. I would expect a reasonable taper plan from my doctor to help me stop as soon as I can. It is inappropriate to expect to be on narcotics long after surgery.

If I needed them for longer, I would expect help coming off them.

You should expect modern medicine. Pain treatment with only opioids is not modern medicine. It puts you at risk of addiction, it changes your brain, it can steal away your job and your future. Opioid pain medicines in your house are proven worse than a loaded gun — they are lethal to your loved ones who use your pills.

Another thing you should expect is that your pain will not be completely gone. Surgery is painful. Thank goodness we do have opioids, and anesthesia, and other pain medicines for the times when nothing else will do.

Other countries get through surgery and manage chronic painful conditions as well or better than we do, and use fractions of the opioids, or none at all.

Today is a new day; speak up. You don’t need my permission, but I give it to you anyway. Talk openly to your doctor or nurse or pharmacist. There need be no animosity. Please accept that opioids are addictive, accept that many people abuse them, even if it isn’t you. But even if it is you — it is OK. Remember, we in Tennessee are in it together. Opioids do this to everyone, and we all need help breaking this habit. If this is you, expect help.

David Edwards, MD, Ph.D., is clinical service chief of Inpatient Chronic Pain Service at Vanderbilt.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Wk6PtN