Fast-growing young companies like Twitter are the gazelles among start-ups, but they are few and far between.

Twitter signage is draped on the facade of the New York Stock Exchange on Nov. 7, 2013, in New York, the day Twitter shares began trading publicly. (Photo: Mark Lennihan, AP) Story Highlights U.S. isn't creating enough start-ups on a fast-track for growth

More flexibility at the SBA, tackling student loan debt crisis could help

New measures to widen funding sources for start-ups seen as promising solutions

When Twitter raised $1.8 billion in one of the largest initial public offerings last year, investors and entrepreneurs celebrated.

Twitter's public reception provided more capital for it to grow and add workers, stimulating the economy. It will create wealth for many more shareholders if the company continues to grow over time. And, coming a year after Facebook's IPO, Twitter's successful offering primes investors' enthusiasm for future tech companies' offerings.

But Twitter's achievement highlights something missing in the U.S. economy: Why aren't there more Twitters?

Moody's Analytics chief economist Mark Zandi is quick to point out that the Twitters and Facebooks are few and far between these days. Data instead reveals fewer fast-growing new businesses and a nation creating them more slowly than in the past, especially in areas outside Silicon Valley. And Snapchat, Pinterest, Tumblr and other private companies valued highly by venture capitalists before they generate even $1 in profit can't be compared to the economic impact of a fast-growing, publicly traded company.

In testimony before the Senate Budget Committee in September, Zandi said that a lack of these fast-growing, jobs- and wealth-creating "gazelles," like Facebook and Twitter, is stunting U.S. growth.

In an interview last week, he told me that causes are a slower pace of technological innovation than say, in the '90s; emerging industries that are more automated, reducing the need for as many jobs, and changing demographics — people tend to start companies in their 30s and there are fewer of them today than in history. But he believes U.S. lawmakers would be smart to create policies that help spur the most innovative young companies.

Zandi's suggestions?

• More creativity at the Small Business Administration, like providing equity capital in partnership with private investment.

• Address the problem of high student loan debt, financially unstrapping young people with entrepreneurial ideas.

• Increase Internet infrastructure to encourage innovation in rural areas.

• Improve transportation and travel options to increase access to additional markets outside the USA.

• Address educational attainment to better prepare students to enter the business world.

• Loosen immigration policies to attract more foreign entrepreneurs.

There's no single winning policy, Zandi says. But, "the government can help improve the necessary conditions for start-ups to become gazelles."

Some policies are already in effect. General solicitation, a part of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act implemented in September, is letting start-ups more openly seek capital to fund their growth. Crowdfunding is expected to bring non-accredited investors into young companies, broadening the pool of money available to fund them.

Several weeks ago, the Securities and Exchange Commission released a proposed set of rules for a "mini-IPO," a lesser-known element of the act expected to help promising start-ups grow faster and quicker.

It would allow companies to raise up to $50 million in a pre-IPO public market without having to register in every state where they hope to raise money.

A champion is Daniel Gorfine, director of financial markets policy at the non-profit Milken Institute. He believes this new option will give young companies a bridge between private investment and the public markets, and early experience in making securities filings and public disclosures, potentially speeding them along to a full IPO. It also allows the public to participate in a company's success sooner and gives venture capitalists an earlier exit option, freeing up their dollars for more investments.

"Now, venture capital money can only exit through an IPO and merger and acquisition," Gorfine says. "If you create this additional exit, where earlier in the life cycle a company can access a public market, venture capitalists have more money to invest in other companies and there is more risk-taking if they think they have better exit strategies."

But others believe that post-recession gazelle creation is only a matter of time, with or without the government's help. A study by research firm CB Insights, analyzing companies that are prospects for future IPOs, shows 590 potential public companies today, up from 472 a year ago.

CB Insights co-founder Anand Sanwal calls that "a healthy pipeline."

And venture capitalist Aileen Lee says another wave of innovation is coming as companies figure out how to make money on mobile devices. Her firm Cowboy Ventures is studying 39 start-ups over the past decade that public or private market investors valued at $1 billion or more. "Unicorns," she calls them.

"I don't think we're in a lull," she says. "We're in an amazing period of technology adoption and innovation."

But, so far, neither can name another Twitter or Facebook on the horizon.

So do we wait for the 20-somethings to become 30-somethings? Or will policymakers attempt to match the pace of innovation of decades past?

Laura Baverman is a Raleigh, N.C.-based business journalist covering start-ups and entrepreneurship for regional and national publications. She previously covered entrepreneurship for the Cincinnati Enquirer, a Gannett newspaper. Baverman can be reached via e-mail at lbaverman@gmail.comor Twitter @laurabaverman.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1lpQ8dw