The Obama administration is coercing Americans to pay for abortions through Obamacare and then concealing the payments from the ones who are being billed, charges a letter to Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell and others in Washington.

The letter is from the Alliance Defending Freedom, the Charlotte Lozier Institute and the Family Research Council.

Also addressed in the letter is the U.S. Office of Personnel Management, because of rules it intends to impose regarding Obamacare and the mandatory payments for abortions.

“Although federal law prohibits taxpayer subsidies for elective abortions, regulations under the Affordable Care Act prevent disclosure of the abortion surcharge to customers, who then unknowingly pay the fee to cover elective abortions,” according to a statement the organizations released this week.

“No one should be forced to pay a secret fee to cover other people’s elective abortions,” said ADF Senior Counsel Casey Mattox. “The Obama administration needs to stop deceiving the American people and coercing them to fund abortion. No matter where a person stands on abortion itself, everyone should be able to agree that this type of intentional and illegal deception is wrong and should stop.”

FRC and the Lozier Institute have collaborated on a new website, called Obamacareabortion.com, which monitors the problems with coerced abortion funding. The site explains the Government Accountability Office found “1,036 of Obamacare policies sold in 2014 included abortion on demand.”

Get the book that documents the grounds for bringing an impeachment case against Barack Obama, in “Impeachable Offenses.”

“Unfortunately, it took many months and a government watchdog report to finally identify the abortion-covering plans for 2014,” the site explains. But, “Now for 2015, the problem continues. Due to a lack of transparency in Obamacare, Americans are again finding it difficult, or even impossible to clearly discern whether the Obamacare plan they are considering includes abortion. This is critical information since individuals purchasing plans that include abortion are required to pay a hidden abortion surcharge. Through the surcharge, a portion of each individual’s insurance premium goes into a fund used to pay abortion on demand.”

Read all about the strategy that has been used successfully to rid communities of abortion, in “Abortion Free: Your Manual to Building a Pro-life America One Community at a Time.”

The site reveals what information is available about coverages state-to-state but notes the information available on this site is “severely limited by the Obama administration’s failure to make abortion coverage information easily available.”

The letter from the organization says: “If Americans are to be forced off their existing, chosen insurance plans and into the ACA insurance exchanges regulated by your agencies, they should at least be entitled to full disclosure of the contents of the plans on those exchanges and what they are paying for. Unfortunately, the proposed rules do not protect consumers, and in fact may continue to mislead them into enrolling in abortion-including plans and paying for others’ abortions in violation of their conscience.”

It continues: “Whatever one’s views of abortion, the current exchanges and plans regulated by your agencies do not protect any ‘right to choose’ abortion coverage. In fact, they leave many Americans without a choice that fits both their health needs and respects their right of conscience. They deceive and compel Americans to pay for others’ elective abortions. This is unconscionable and within your power to correct.”

The letter says the Obamacare law requires the calculation of the average actuarial value and collection of a “separate payment” for abortion “for any plan that includes coverage of abortions which federal taxpayer dollars may not be used (all abortions except those for reasons of rape, incest, or the life of the mother).”

But the federal agencies have set up rules “to collect only a single payment.”

“These rules have effectively mandated secrecy of abortion coverage and the abortion premium surcharge,” the letter said.

“Indeed, in some states the problem is even more serious. As you are aware, and as the Government Accountability Office has confirmed, in Hawaii, New Jersey, Rhode Island and Vermont, every ACA plan available for purchase via the state’s health insurance exchange includes elective abortion coverage.

“This regime of secrecy – especially in those states where there is no choice of a plan without elective abortion coverage – is particularly offensive because participation is enforced by the ACA’s individual mandate,” it continues.

What the groups have found is that “even for trained professionals who know exactly what information they are trying to find, it is a Herculean, and sometimes fruitless, task” to find out whether policies include abortion coverage.

Remarkably, the letter explains, some people trying to find out whether abortion was covered by their insurance were “referred” to Planned Parenthood.

That leaves Americans “in the dark – in no small part because your agencies have forbidden illumination of abortion coverage and the surcharge that accompanies it.”

The federal government needs to not just be transparent about abortion coverage options, but consumers “should be permitted to opt out of abortion coverage and payment of the abortion premium surcharge for all plans,” the letter says.

Read all about the strategy that has been used successfully to rid communities of abortion, in “Abortion Free: Your Manual to Building a Pro-life America One Community at a Time.”