More Stories

Michiana's Doctor Shortage - Part 1: The problem hits close to home

"There simply are not enough slots within this country or within the state of Indiana to accommodate all our really bright graduates," says the Interim Director of the Indiana University School of Medicine in South Bend.

Indiana University opened its medical school in South Bend more than 30 years ago in the basement of Haggar Hall on Notre Dame's campus and trained doctors of the future there until 2005, when a state of the art facility opened its doors at the corner of Angela Boulevard and Notre Dame Avenue.

Dr. Marfurt says the problem is not attracting students, "The undergraduate students have responded nationally to the call for the need for more physicians and we are enjoying a record enrollment, not only nationally, but locally at the IU School of Medicine."

Among those who have answered that call is Indiana University Purdue University graduate Rachel Macias of New Carlisle who is now a fourth year medical student at IU. She explains what drew her to a career in medicine. "I liked biology, I liked anatomy and those types of things so I went with that intention to college, that I would be a pre-med student and from there it just kid of snow balled and I found I love it."

Michelle Kerr from Shipshewana, also in her last year of medical school at IU, had an inkling at an early age that medicine might be in her future saying, "In a fourth grade journal I wrote, when I grow up I want to be a doctor. I also said I wanted to become a basketball star or a softball star, so I think we know where I ended up."

Both bright students, waiting to hear next month whether, after four years of med school, they will even be matched with a residency program to continue their dreams of becoming doctors.

A match that doesn't come for up to a thousand who still risk spending tens of thousands of doctors to go to medical school.

Dr. Dale Patterson, Director of the Residency Program at South Bend's Memorial Hospital explains, "We'll have a lot of people who spend a lot of money on medical school, who have a lot of debt, who are trained to be doctors who can't get licenses and can't practice, who have to find different areas of work in order to pay back their student loans."

And that astronomical cost, with no guarantee, is one of the reasons we are seeing fewer students going into primary care, where there is the biggest shortage, and picking a specialty.

Marfurt says there are many reasons for a projected shortage of more than 130,000 doctors in the U-S by 2025, just ten years. "It's a perfect storm of multiple factors, we have an increased population and we have an increasing aging population." He adds the Affordable Care Act also means more people are looking for doctors. " We've now added maybe 40 million additional people, previously uninsured to the insured rolls."

But Dr. Marty Wieshhaus, in charge of the residency program at St. Joseph Regional Medical Center in Mishawaka says you can't blame the shortage on the Affordable Care Act, which tried add some new residents over a five year period.."I think it brought our attention to it. Unfortunately there was no funding for those ten thousand positions. So While well intentioned, until we get the funding for that it's not going to help the U.S."

So these doctors training our residents in Michiana are working with numbers frozen in time since 1996, with a growing population.

Dr. Patterson says, "We'd like to open up the number of residencies we now have, but we can't go beyond that number."

Dr. Wieschhaus agrees, "Right now we do not have enough funded residency slots to train those that are applying , nor the need we're going to have for years to come."

And Patterson points to the debt medical students face, "A lot of students have a lot of debt when they come out and if you go into certain specialties like orthopedics, dermatology, your pay is much higher than it is in primary care."

Rachel is hoping to match next month with a residency in plastic surgery. She says while working through various rotations, it became her passion. "I really found I like working hands on in the OR, I really felt at home there."

Michelle, who was focused on adult neurology, found her passion working with kids. "I ended up doing neurodevelopmental disabilities in pediatrics at Riley Children's Hospital in Indianapolis in July and after two days of being back with the kids I just knew I couldn't fight that urge to be a pediatrician by training any longer"

But the moment of truth for them comes in March when they find out whether they match with a residency.

Both admit being nervous but confident.

Michelle says, "It's just casting a wide net to make sure you get enough interview and then hopefully you get the match you want." Rachel added, "There are 65 integrated plastic surgery residencies across the country and this year I have applied to all 65."

But unless Congress lifts the cap on residency training the Association of American Medical Colleges says the shortage will only get worse leaving an aging population.

Dr. Wieschhaus agrees saying, "You're going to have a tough time finding a physician."

I-U expects to get 6,000 applications for medical school this year for only 345 positions statewide.

Tomorrow night Just Before Six we continue Michiana's Doctor Shortage by looking at whether Michiana is in better shape than other areas of similar size.

And Dr. Wieschhaus has some interesting ideas on how the private sector may have to get involved in helping solve the doctor crisis.