Roanoke, VA - All three area health care groups including HCA, Centra and Carilion have all fully implemented Electronic Medical Record systems in accordance with the Affordable Care Act.

The Affordable Care Act is something we've all become at least a little bit familiar with since the Obama administration implemented it.

One less familiar aspect of ACA is forcing medical professionals to change the way they keep records in order to qualify for certain federal Medicare incentives. It's called the Electronic Health Records Incentive Program and medical professionals we spoke to say it is making a big difference.

On Friday about a dozen nurses at Carilion Roanoke Memorial Hospital were learning how to navigate the Electronic Medical Record software. A project that has been coming together here for the past six years.

"There was a lot of training to do. Basically going from a paper record to an electronic record,"said Tara Wiedeman who is in charge of the training.

While the transition wasn't easy, she says it is already paying dividends in quality of care.

"We are really a huge proponent of not only making it more efficient for our employees but making it so they can have a better repertoire, or toolbox, so they can help and communicate with patients more effectively," said Wiedeman.

Dr. Michael Jeremiah oversees the project at Carilion. He says in the end it is all about patients having a smooth transition in care.

"Moving from the ambulatory setting or outpatient setting... or to another hospital, or across state lines, then they are able to have the right information to make their care as seamless as possible," said Jeremiah.

The changes also include portals where patients can take care of much of their medical business from home, using apps like Carilion's "MyChart" or Centra's "HealthyU."Nearly 90,000 Carilion patients are already signed up.

"Questions, concerns. If they want an appointment," said Jeremiah.

While access is part of this so is efficiency; from reducing unnecessary procedures, to keeping drug addicts from doctor shopping, to allowing patients to get basic medical advice from home.

"It's invaluable. I mean it really has changed a lot of how we use that information and have it available right when we need it," said Jeremiah.

Most, if not all, medical facilities should have EMR fully operational by 2016 as mandated by law to avoid penalty.

The next challenge will be getting the various applications, the different healthcare groups use, to talk to one another. Making seamless and secure transfer of medical information as easy to do from across the country as it is within your own hospital group.