Courtney Merhege (Photo: Courtesy photo)

The Community Foundation of Southern New Mexico, a charitable resource linking donors with community needs, is growing to better serve the community.

On Oct. 26, Courtney Merhege will join the team as assistant director of development and communications after being appointed by new Executive Director Jennifer Cervantes.

“I’m really excited to focus on community engagement and stewardship,” Merhege said. “The breadth and depth of the community foundation’s work is incredible and having an opportunity to be a part of this kind of an organization is so meaningful.”

Merhege received her bachelor of arts in communication studies with a minor in journalism and marketing and a master of arts in educational administration from New Mexico State University. Before her new role, she served as a community and alumni relations coordinator for the NMSU College of Health and Social Services, and prior to that, assistant development officer for the NMSU College of Business.

Merhege, a lifelong New Mexico resident, has been an active member of the Las Cruces community for six years. She has been involved in the CFSNM as a planning committee member for the organization’s major fundraising gala event and serves on the board of the Junior League of Las Cruces.

In her new role, Merhege will use her experience in donor and community outreach to build important relationships and partnerships central to the CFSNM mission. “Courtney brings a level of enthusiasm, dedication, and keen awareness that will be a tremendous asset to not only the Foundation, but our community as well,” Cervantes said. Merhege will also highlight the good works of the CFSNM, connecting community members, organizations, and donors through various channels as well as provide information on the various initiatives of the CFSNM, including the Unified Prevention! (UP!) Coalition which works to reduce underage drinking and substance use by youth and young adults; the Ocotillo Institute which focuses on social justice; Place Matters, which supports health equity; and School Based Health Centers, which provide accessible, affordable health care to adolescents in school settings.

“My focus will be strategic and comprehensive, allowing us to do more for southern New Mexico,” Merhege said. “I look forward to sharing the important work that is being done.”

The CFSNM is a charitable resource linking donors with community needs. Interested donors are encouraged to call the Community Foundation of Southern New Mexico at 575-521-4794 or visit www.cfsnm.org to contribute to programs and organizations serving our community.

Read or Share this story: http://lcsun.co/1N13Cvu