TRENTON — Hospitals shelled out more money than any other New Jersey industry in trying to sway lawmakers and the Christie administration in 2013, a year of upheaval created by the Affordable Care Act and a flurry of sales and mergers, according to a report released Thursday.

In all, lobbyists spent $60.2 million, or 3.8 percent more than they did in 2012, the state Election Law Enforcement Commission’s said. New Jersey’s hospital industry spent $4.5 million, 25 percent more than the previous years, followed by the $4.3 million by unions, and $3.6 million from the insurance industry.

No industry faced more change and uncertainty than hospitals in 2013, lobbyists and health care executives said. They furiously shopped around for new partners to cushion themselves against the funding cuts that will help pay for the health care law. At the same time, suburban and urban hospitals were fighting against each other over a tax that would have given select local and county governments authority to impose a tax on hospital revenue for five years.

All the clashes boil down to the simple fact that the industry is dependent on public funding, said Rick Pitman, executive director of the Fair Share Hospital Collaborative, which represented 27 suburban hospitals that spent $194,500 to defeat the tax legislation.

"How do you make it work? Lobbying is part of battling to get your fair share," Pitman said.

Dale Florio of the Princeton Public Affairs Group — which, at $9.4 million was the top earner for the 11th straight year — described the health care market in the age of Obamacare as "the wild, wild west."

"Insurers and providers are looking for new ways to deliver care," said Florio, whose firm represents hospitals and the state’s largest insurer, Horizon Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey. "You can agree or disagree with the President’s plan, but it has gotten everybody’s creative juices flowing. Oftentimes that means more business opportunities for firms like ours."

Jeff Brindle, the Election Law Enforcement Commission’s executive director, speculated that overall spending on lobbying was also spurred by proposed gun-control legislation and the successful passage of a minimum-wage hike.

"Lobbying helps crystallize issues for our elected officials and the public, and helps decision-makers weigh the pros and cons of legislative action or inaction," Brindle said.

Hospitals also were represented on the list of spending by special interest groups. The industry’s largest trade group, the New Jersey Hospital Association, spent $628,337, and Hackensack University Medical Center spent $508,500 in 2013, according to the report.

The hospital association lobbied on many issues key to the industry's future, from the state budget, to the lack of mental health treatment services, to the expansion of Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act, association spokeswoman Kerry McKean Kelly said.

"Fiscal policy is important because healthcare providers need reimbursement and revenues to survive and continue caring for individuals," she said.

Hackensack spokeswoman Nancy Radwin said lobbying helped "support efforts as they relate to the ever-changing healthcare landscape," as well as the effort to open HackensackUMC at Pascack Valley.

The state’s largest teacher’s lobbying group, the New Jersey Education Association, spent $3.3 million in 2013 — topping all special interst groups for the third time in five years, the report said.

American for Prosperity, a conservative group formed by the Koch Brothers whose former director in New Jersey, Steve Lonegan, ran for U.S. Senate last year, entered the top 10 list of spenders among interest groups by shelling out $951,233.

The group’s state director, Darwyn Iwicki, said he doesn’t consider it as lobbying in the traditional sense, in which "everyone else has their own agenda and fiefdom, protecting their handouts."

He said it advocated for laws and policies to create jobs, reduce state spending and lower property taxes. "Ultimately we are protecting Joe Taxpayers who don’t know why their taxes go up every year," he said.

AARP New Jersey ranked fourth in spending last year, with $717,148, the report said. Tackling issues such as utility rate hikes, Its lobbyist, Doug Johnston said the money is spent "challenging the most powerful legislators and corporations in the state."

By testifying at public hearings and communicating with its 1.3 million members, AARP has successfully reduced rate hikes sought by some utility companies, Johnston said.

"Utility consumers in New Jersey have been assaulted with rate hike requests at the Board of Public Utilities," Johnston said. "AARP advocates to ensure ratepayers don’t have to pay a penny more than really necessary for their home utilities."

RELATED COVERAGE

• See which special interest groups spent the most to influence NJ lawmakers, Christie

• Wolff & Samson tops million dollars in lobbying in 2013, new report shows

• More Politics