Buy Photo Asbury Park High School graduates participate in commencement at Paramount Theater in the city on June 23. (Photo: file photo)Buy Photo

The school district's widely criticized graduation rate dropped to 49 percent this year and officials say one key to improving it is by better tracking the many students who leave the district.

Asbury Park High School Principal Reginald Mirthil said in an interview Thursday that the school district has struggled to locate the students who leave Asbury Park schools before their senior year.

Asbury Park school admins answer your questions live at forum Thursday

That loss, he said, creates a graduation rate that doesn't reflect the students who transfer to other districts without notifying Asbury Park schools or transient families who leave the state or country.

In 2013, the graduation rate was 51 percent.

"It's not that we aren't graduating students," Mirthil said. "You can't educate a student that's not here."

The class of 2014 started its freshman year with 136 students and there were 75 students remaining when they reached senior year, said Mirthil, who also announced these numbers before the school board last week.

Out of that group, 81 percent of the seniors met the requirements to graduate in June, he said. The bulk of the students who left the district before senior year went unaccounted for, Mirthil said.

Buy Photo Some 61 students in Asbury Park High School’s Class of 2014 left the district between their freshman and senior years. (Photo: DOUG HOOD/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

The Department of Education said it mandates school districts to keep proof of transfer students in grades 9-12 so the graduation rate is more accurate.

Superintendent Lamont Repollet said the school district takes full responsibility for those students who slipped under the radar or dropped out.

Repollet said he recently a hired a new supervisor of guidance who will oversee all the counselors in Asbury Park schools. That person "will put the processes in place to make sure all the students are accounted for," he said.

He also wants the district to take a closer look at the high school drop-out rate by identifying the children who are leaving Asbury Park schools and reach out to them.

More accountability

But tracking students and increasing the graduation rate is only half the battle.

The school district has faced a plethora of challenges in recent years including low test scores and lagging academic performance, according to the state Department of Education.

Only 2 percent of the students who took the SAT achieved scores of 1550, according to the state's school-by-school performance reports. The report indicated Asbury Park High School had a composite SAT score of 962, well below the state average of 1512.

Repollet said under his administration, building principals will be held more accountable for the shortcomings of each school.

Lessons to fix Asbury Park schools

He charged Mirthil and the other district principals with drafting a comprehensive plan that outlined the problems in their respective schools and possible solutions.

"Like anything I want to give the community and board of education the sense that we have a plan and therefore they can hold us accountable," Repollet said. "Everyone is going to know exactly what we have to do."

Literacy is also a growing concern for school officials.

Sancha Gray, the district's newly appointed director of curriculum, said Thurgood Elementary School introduced a plan to raise student reading levels. It specifically targets those at-risk students who are reading below their grade level.

"The plan includes the infusion of programs that will help increase fluency and recognition of sounds and letters so that students can move forward in terms of comprehension," Gray said.

Meet Asbury Park superintendent Lamont Repollet

Bradley Elementary School introduced something similar, focusing on letter recognition charts for pre-kindergarten students, Gray said.

In 2013, the district's fiscal monitor released a report saying about 54 percent of Asbury Park fifth-graders entering middle school were reading at a first-grade level.

Gray said she did not have an updated statistic on the fifth-grade reading levels.

Thurgood is also proposing a pilot program that addresses disciplinary issues in an alternative classroom setting, Gray said.

In that classroom, students would receive both instructional and behavioral support. This program would help the school cut back on suspensions.

"If the students are not physically in the building then we can't educate them," Gray said.

8 tips to prepare for college

Asbury Park Middle School administrators are looking to improve technological skills among students, Gray said.

She said the school would like to train students with computer skills such as keyboarding. This will be helpful when students take the Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers (PARCC) assessment that requires an essay.

Repollet said he expects to start seeing results by the 2016-17 school year.

"The fact is that we are a failing district," Repollet said. "Over time, the plans will start to develop and next thing you know, you will see student achievement."

Nicquel Terry; nterry@app.com; 732-643-4023

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1qTyo0c