ADVERTISEMENT

Consumers who waited until the eleventh hour to purchase health insurance might run into some delays and snags, but many of the complications will work themselves out.

If you were one of the people who waited until late Sunday to purchase your coverage before open enrollment officially ended, you might run into some temporary obstacles. Confirming your enrollment in the insurance plan may not be immediate, because companies are facing thousands of last minute applications. During the open enrollment period, many insurance companies can confirm acceptance of your enrollment the same day.

“In past years, it has actually taken weeks before some insurers were able to confirm enrollments for new customers,” said Nate Purpura, vice president of consumer affairs at eHealth.com, an online health insurance exchange based in Mountain View, Calif. “As you can imagine, this can cause serious confusion and frustration.”

The deadline day crush always brings out the procrastinators and a “shocking number” of people wait until the very last day of open enrollment to sign up, he said. This surge in enrollments has only overwhelmed government websites and officials have made allowances in the past, but “you can’t count on it,” Purpura said.

“Private online marketplaces like eHealth may be a better bet and there are offline means of enrolling for some consumers,” he said.

Coverage Begins March 1

The earliest your coverage can begin is March 1, which is simply business as usual, said Purpura. The coverage for insurance applications received before the 15th day of any given month will generally start on the 1st of the next month. This mean that coverage for applications received later than the 15th of any given month usually begin on the 1st of the month after next.

“That’s the way health insurance works, and it typically takes between two to six weeks for coverage under any new plan to start,” he said.

Where Is Your Payment?

Simply signing up for a plan means your coverage could face even more delays. Health care coverage does not actually start until you pay for it, so if you failed to include a means of payment for the first month of coverage such as a credit card, your coverage could be delayed.

“If it’s not received in a timely manner, it’s possible that your enrollment may be discarded,” Purpura said. “The timeframes required for initial payment can vary by insurer. Your health insurance coverage will not be in effect before your payment is received.”

Delays with receiving your ID card from your insurance company should also be expected, because they may not be able mail out the new cards immediately. If it is getting close to March 1 and you still do not have your ID card, call the insurance company who can give you the membership number or other information such as the group number to give your health care provider. Another option is to create an account from the insurance company's website and obtain a temporary ID card which you can download and print.

If you are facing an emergency and must see a doctor before you even get your ID, just save the bill and then file a claim later once you receive it, said Jack Hooper, CEO of Take Command Health, an online health insurance exchange based in Dallas. It’s an extra headache, but as long as your plan is approved, you’ll be able to work everything out,” he said.

While insurance companies often take the brunt of the complaints, many consumers, even ones in the healthcare industry drag their feet, and sign up only when they are faced with a looming deadline or need to see a physician.

One woman who is a nurse called Hooper on December 24 and said she needed to purchase insurance for her elective hip surgery on January 4. Not only did she miss the December 15 deadline for coverage to start on Jan. 1, but she was aware of this surgery for several months, Hooper said.

“Our second worst client this year was a doctor who tried to sign his family up for insurance on December 30 for a January 1 start date,” he said. “It just goes to show that sometimes health professionals don’t even know how to handle health insurance.”

Even insurance companies can lose data and one company lost 48 applications this year, Hooper said.

“Thankfully, we had records and were able to get it resolved, but if they lost 48 of ours, there’s no telling how many others they lost,” he said. “Luckily, we were able to catch it and get it fixed.”