A call-in debate turned ugly Thursday on C-SPAN's "Washington Journal" when a California Republican used the N-word to refer to President Obama.

Identified as Anthony from San Diego, the caller warned Republicans to stick to a moderate agenda following their success in the midterm elections during the open phones portion of the program.

"I would just like to say, that the Republicans -- and I'm a Republican -- please do not overreach," the caller began. "I know they're going to overreach but I'm telling you, if you advocate for the repeal of Obamacare and you get too extreme, then Hillary Clinton will be elected President in 2016."

"This is about race," he added.

"The Republicans hate that n----- Obama."

C-SPAN host Steve Scully quickly ended the man's rant and apologized to viewers.

"Okay, I'm gonna stop you there," Scully said in reference to the slur. "We're not gonna use that kind of language."

"You can certainly make your point, but you cross the line when you use language like that," he added. "And so to our viewers and listeners, I want to apologize."

A representative for C-SPAN said that the network does not use a delay for calls into their programs.

"The live, town-hall format of our call-ins can occasionally give rise to calls that contain factual inaccuracies or distasteful language," according to an explanation of the show format on the C-SPAN website.

"Fact-checking for live viewer calls is impractical, something of the nature of the beast. Regarding distasteful language: When a caller makes ad hominem attacks or uses indecent language or obviously racist language, program hosts are certainly permitted to step in. Given that this involves quick judgment during a live television production, it's an imperfect process. The network does not endorse any comments made by our callers, or, for that matter, our guests," the description added.

The network did not bleep out the racial slur in video of the program that was posted to the C-SPAN website.

llarson@nydailynews.com