The city's cash-strapped public hospital system will have to bring in hundreds of thousands more patients to overcome its dire financial troubles, Health and Hospitals Corp. President Ram Raju said Tuesday.

In a speech to hundreds of hospital workers, Raju pledged to increase the number of patients using the system’s 11 hospitals and other facilities to 2 million annually by 2020 from the current 1.4 million. And he said the hospitals corporation would double the number of people enrolled in its MetroPlus health insurance plan to 1 million during the same period.

“The Health and Hospitals Corp. must and will survive,” he said. “We are essential because immigrants, the uninsured and the undocumented have never stopped coming to New York. And it is absolutely essential that there be a place that welcomes them as they seek care and treatment.”

The hospital system has been bleeding cash for years, and faces a $753 million deficit next year, which will balloon to $1.5 billion by 2019.

The hospital system has been bleeding cash for years, and faces a $753 million deficit next year, which will balloon to $1.5 billion by 2019. Pitured is Woodhull Hospital in Brooklyn. (Jeff Bachner/for New York Daily News)

And because of Obamacare, the agency faces deep cuts to federal aid traditionally funneled to hospitals that care for large numbers of uninsured patients. Under that law, the Health and Hospitals Corp. expects to lose $180 million in 2017, and a total of $3 billion by 2024.

At the same time, hospital officials expect they’ll still have to care for many people who can’t get insurance despite Obamacare, particularly undocumented immigrants.

Bringing in more patients who have insurance or can pay for care will help offset those cuts, Raju said.

He said Obamacare had an upside, because many of the city hospitals’ uninsured patients now have insurance to cover their care — yet that also means they have the option to go to other hospitals and the city system will have to fight to keep them. (Sunshine Steven)

“Traditional sources of funding are eroding and may disappear altogether,” he said.

He said Obamacare had an upside, because many of the city hospitals’ uninsured patients now have insurance to cover their care — yet that also means they have the option to go to other hospitals and the city system will have to fight to keep them.

“They have a newfound option to seek care wherever they choose,” he said. “The marketplace will dictate which hospitals will remain open, which hospitals will struggle and which hospitals will close.”

Drawing in more patients will require giving them a better experience at hospitals, Raju said. He proposed changes like cutting wait times for appointments and adding more night and weekend hours.