BILL MAHER: Last Friday was Valentine's Day and I did a little humorous, I thought was a little humorous blog on my blog. And I said I had been in love with MSNBC, which I am still actually in love with MSNBC. But I tongue in cheek said, you know, I'm going to have to break up with you because you've become obsessed with another man, Chris Christie.



It was my way of saying -- this is coming from affection -- that I love this network, but I thought that they were a little over the top in how much they were covering this story. And I see even this week -- I watched it, as I do every week, and a lot of the shows, it is the first story, the top story, every night. It's two months into this scandal and I just wonder if it is too much. That's all I was asking. And since we have a representative here…



RACHEL MADDOW: Would you like me to talk about it?



MAHER: Please do.



MADDOW: Here's the thing: I am totally obsessed with the Christie story, unapologetically, and will continue to be obsessed with it while amazing things in that story continue to happen. It may be more coverage than you what, but I sort of thought when Rod Blagojevich had President Obama's Senate seat to sell and he got a wiretap saying, 'It's bleeping golden,' and he tried to sell it to the highest bidder and then it turns out he was going to screw the Cubs unless the Tribune fired writers who were criticizing him, I thought that was the political corruption scandal, like the Gonzo scandal of my day. This is just as good.



MAHER: But you didn't cover the Blagojevich --



MADDOW: Are you kidding?



MAHER: -- as much.



MADDOW: You have no idea how much I covered Rod Blagojevich.



MAHER: Well, the network didn't.



MADDOW: I, I --



MAHER: It wasn't the top story everyday for two months.



###



MAHER: Back to Chris Christie coverage. First of all, I opened the charge because this was a comedy piece and I didn't -- because it's comedy, you don't always have room to include everything. I should have said, yes, this is not the same as Benghazi. I made that analogy. But I said this is your Benghazi. Benghazi is nothing. There is no scandal there. This is an actual scandal. It's just that it's not Watergate. He's not the president. He's not even a guy who himself said he's going to be running for president. He's a New Jersey governor who did something bad. He closed lanes on a bridge. Bad. But is it really that bad?



And if it was a Democratic governor not close to New York City, the media capital, would we be talking about it? (HBO's Real Time, February 21, 2014)