Senate Finance Committee members asked the Department of Health and Hospitals on Monday (Dec. 7) to produce a report outlining Louisiana's options for expanding Medicaid, to be delivered by Jan. 1.

Monday's meeting was the second time the committee has met about the rising costs of health care in Louisiana since the legislative session ended in June. The tone of the meeting was noticeably different than the committee's Oct. 24 session, when Medicaid expansion was not even mentioned by name.

But since that meeting, Democrat John Bel Edwards was elected governor on a promise to expand Medicaid to more than 300,000 uninsured state residents. That has shifted the conversation to a more pragmatic discussion over the costs and benefits of a new health care policy in Louisiana.

State Sen. Francis Thompson, D-Delhi, told officials that there should be a clear plan outlining how Medicaid expansion can save the state money.

"At least it would be a base to start from," Thompson said. "One thing I recognized very clearly: We are not getting percentage-wise what other states are getting. And I would like to make sure we have a plan in place that is time-sensitive -- that makes absolutely certain we maximize the dollars for health care in Louisiana."

Ever since Gov. Bobby Jindal announced in 2013 that he'd reject the option to accept federal Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act, legislators have spent little time understanding the complexities of the state's Medicaid program. Even if they had spent time discussing the program, legislators have said, any attempt to expand Medicaid would have been met with a gubernatorial veto.

Knowing that Edwards has made Medicaid expansion among his highest priorities, they spent two hours Monday going over the program's costs, expressing concern over federal reductions in funding for the former charity hospital system and exploring what other states have done to customize their expanded Medicaid program.

All of that discussion comes amid worries over a $530 million shortfall in Louisiana's current Medicaid budget, driven by higher-than-expected enrollment in the Bayou Health insurance program that serves mostly children and pregnant women. The state's share of that shortfall is $190.5 million, which DHH undersecretary Jeff Reynolds said was being addressed "with the current administration and look forward to working with the new administration coming in" to find a solution.

DHH officials plan to meet with Edwards' transition team members on Monday.

Enrollment could surge for Medicaid expansion too, Senate Finance members were warned, with more than 300,000 uninsured people projected to qualify for the program.

Another 200,000 who are paying for private insurance could qualify for Medicaid and switch providers, Senate Finance committee members were told. That raised questions about how other states have absorbed such a large number of patients, and the effect it will have on primary care.

"That is a concern of mine," Reynolds said, explaining that some doctors could be discouraged from seeing Medicaid patients because the rates for Medicaid are lower than Medicare. "We need to look at and see if there's a way to maximize the funding under this program to incentivize providers to provide care."

Legislators also expressed interest in getting more information about how other states have customized their Medicaid programs. Arkansas, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Montana and New Hampshire have all obtained approval from the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services to alter their plans in some way.

Responding to a question from Sen. Eric LaFleur, D-Ville Platte, about ways to encourage people to buy private insurance -- something other states have done using Medicaid waivers -- Reynolds said that Medicaid expansion could be an opportunity to "revamp" the state's health care model as a whole.

"I think everything's on the table," Reynolds said. "This in my mind is a chance to look at the entire system, see what makes sense, if it makes sense to put this new eligibility group -- other states have done that. I think we need to look at the legacy system and the new expansion system" with an eye toward improving patient outcomes.

"Do you think we can do that in less than a year?" LeFleur asked, referencing the time needed to seek federally approved waivers to customize the Medicaid program.

"It's on the top of my transition list," Reynolds said.