Don't fall prey to Obamacare scammers

Con artists have found ways to exploit the new health-care law.

The president's grand undertaking is as confusing as it is controversial . And that makes it a perfect opportunity for con artists.

If you don't know much about Obamacare other than most people must have health insurance or pay a penalty, you're not alone.

"Fraudsters are blessed with what I like to call a 'misplaced ingenuity,' " Richard Goldberg, assistant consumer protection director at the U.S. Department of Justice, said at a forum on how to prevent fraud, hosted Thursday by the Federal Trade Commission.

Lowlifes posing as government employees already have duped people into divulging their bank accounts and Social Security numbers under the guise of signing them up for Obamacare. Other people have been tricked into buying fake policies through fake websites.

Officials fear the scams could spike when state and federal health insurance marketplaces open for business Oct. 1 and people try to sign up for coverage.

If you're among the estimated 1.3 million Pennsylvania residents who are uninsured, proceed cautiously when shopping for coverage through the marketplaces.

If you follow these basic rules, you should be safe: Get your information from official sources. Don't provide personal or financial information to callers or door-to-door solicitors. And don't pay anyone to help you shop for insurance or help you enroll in a plan through the government's marketplace.

Remember, you can buy insurance outside Obamacare on your own at any time.

Pennsylvania has chosen not to set up a state marketplace where you can shop for insurance. That means you must shop through the federal marketplace, at http://www.healthcare.gov. Once you choose a plan on that site, you will be redirected to the insurance company's website to arrange to pay your premiums.

If you don't have Internet access, you may call the health insurance marketplace at 800-318-2596.

Pennsylvania has set up a website, pahealthoptions.com, with information but it will redirect you to the federal site to shop for coverage.

If you look closely at those Web addresses, you'll see the potential for confusion. The federal site has the familiar dot-gov suffix telling you it is a government site. Pennsylvania's website uses a generic dot-com address but also is a government site.

Gene Sherman of Bethlehem already found himself on the wrong website while looking for Obamacare information.

Looking for healthcare.gov, he ended up instead at healthcare.org, a private site providing health insurance information and advertising for insurance carriers and brokers.

"The two have such similar names, people could easily mistake it for the real thing," Sherman told me in an email.