The Batten School hosted a debate for candidates vying for a seat on the Fifth District

Congressman Robert Hurt is not seeking reelection to his Fifth District seat. Wednesday night, for the first time, people got to hear from five of the six candidates hoping to take over that seat.

One of Wednesday's moderators says this year's elections are especially important because the presidency, both houses of Congress, and the Supreme Court all hang in the balance.

A debate at the University of Virginia drew voters to hear from Fifth District candidates hoping to replace current Congressman Robert Hurt.

Moderators from UVA’s Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy asked candidates about policy issues that affect the Fifth District as well as domestic and foreign policy.

“We're 15 years and growing in a war that we've spent $4 trillion and we not only lost that war but we're deliberately backing our enemies. We armed Al Qaeda on no less than three fronts,” said Michael Del Rosso, Fifth District candidate.

Candidates talked about how they planned to work toward bipartisanship and on what issues they could not work across the aisle.

"If you compromise on core principles, then you do not have core principle. Having said that, over the last five years, I've worked with Democrats on bills like eliminating seclusion and restraint in our elementary schools,” said Thomas Garrett, Fifth District candidate.

“What I would butt heads on with the speaker would be on issues such as immigration, issues such as Planned Parenthood funding with taxpayer dollars. A lot of these are the issues that are really riling up the American people, which is what we're seeing in the presidential races,” said Andrew Griffin, Fifth District candidate.

Moderators also asked candidates where they'd want to see the government either grow or shrink.

“One of the most important things we have to remember is that we the people create jobs. Government does not create jobs and the most important thing we can do is get government out of the way of our small business people, out of the way of our entrepreneurs,” said Joseph Whited, Fifth District candidate.

“I'd like to see the department of education gone. I'd like to see the EPA gone and health care, stop and think about this. The reason why I was so opposed to health care, Obamacare, from the get go, we have veterans dying and they're dying under federal care,” said James McKelvey, Fifth District candidate.

Democrat Jane Dittmar is also running for the Fifth District. She couldn't come to Wednesday’s debate because of a conflict.