If there was an overriding theme to tonight’s culinary Pecha Kucha, it centered on seeing potential where nothing seems to exist – a description that apparently also describes the average chef refrigerator.

Butcher & Bee’s Michael Shemtov, the first speaker at the event jointly sponsored by the Charleston Wine + Food Festival and Charleston Creative Parliament, disabused his audience of the notion that chefs eat as well as their diners do. “You’re going to end up having an orange and drinking a beer for dinner,” he said during his overview of one day in a restaurateur’s life. Emcee Brooks Reitz of Leon’s confirmed he had pickles for dinner.

Later, filmmaker Thibaut Fagonde projected a slide of his refrigerator, empty save for a jar of Dijon mustard. (The conceit of Pecha Kucha is a speaker is allowed to show 20 slides, and talk about each of them for 20 seconds.) Unlike his restaurant-bound peers, though, he explained away the situation by saying his family relied on fresh groceries for supper, rather than stockpiling them in advance.

Beyond the home kitchen discussions, Pecha Kucha gave participants a platform to talk about their interests, passions and hopes for the local food-and-beverage industry.

“It’s really scary, but it’s fun,” baker Amy Robinette said, urging listeners to chase their creative ambitions in the culinary field. “Go out and pursue it boldly,” Shemtov advised at the close of his talk, compellingly illustrated by GoPro footage of baking, delivery rounds and meetings.

Architect David Thompson screened before-and-after photos of his various restaurant projects, including Indaco. “Sometimes you see daylight when there are no windows,” he said. He also touched on The Ordinary, which was a carpeted bank with a drop ceiling and vinyl tile when he started renovation work. “It’s a shame you don’t go to The Ordinary during the daytime,” he said, alluding to the light pathways he uncovered.

Festival director Gillian Zettler took the stage, candidly addressing her 2014 miscarriage for the first time in a public forum. Zettler said the episode left her without an appetite, which was slowly reawakened by the Charleston culinary community, starting with Charleston Grill’s Mickey Bakst, who took her out for cupcakes.

“It wasn’t just an act of kindness, it was an act of hospitality, she said, concluding, “Be kind to strangers, because you never know when they’ll need it most.”

Chef Frank Lee echoed Zettler’s praise for the city’s food-and-beverage professionals.