Ridiculous taxes

Regarding the article "Rauner decries high taxes in Mundelein." He would probably have a coronary if he came to Waukegan. I live in a $200,000 house and pay over $10,000 in taxes. Now that's ridiculous.

Too big, too small

Paper too big, print too small. Can't find anything — so we canceled.

Happy customer

My husband and I love the News-Sun with it's expanded features. We're just very happy to have the paper the way it is now.

Rebuttal?

I'm so disgusted upon reading the letters to the editor from the woman in Lake Bluff who is an expert on everything.

Well done, Dave

Awesome photo of the JRW team with our president. Yes, so sad that the kids are bearing the brunt of what the adults should be burdened with. Even more sad is that they probably don't really understand what happened. What would the outcome throughout the season have been for all the other little league teams that competed against them? How would the individual JRW players have affected their real neighborhood teams outcomes if they played on them? The adults aren't constantly in the media or spotlight when they, in reality, are the issue. Thank you David Rutter for your rules of life that should apply to everyone in life regardless of whether it is sports, work, school, parenting or just being a human being.Your articles are wise and a pleasure to read.

One party rule

So Boehner and the RINO's (Republicans In Name Only) followed McConnell and caved on funding Homeland Security on March 3. Remember this date when 5 million jobs are given to illegals through Obama's work permit program. Remember this date when our welfare systems are flooded with 5 million illegals. Remember this date when 10 million more illegals flood the border so that they can get amnesty too.The RINO's are no better than Democrats and this travesty proves that we really have only one political party which is the party of keeping their cushy jobs.

Rise up

Our freedom is being affected every single day. We send all of our tax money to Washington where they think they can strong arm us into doing whatever they want us to do. It's just like Obamacare which is going to become ration-care. If you want to rise up against the Democratic machine, not only is the IRS going to be on your tail, but the death panels are going to favor the younger people instead of the old.

Revisionist history

Regarding the article in the TOTC about the North Chicago Jewel store needing repair. Roofing back then were a dime a dozen and that's not the story I heard.

Broken axle

In response to the TOTC article "Bus driver's kids." After reviewing the picture of the bus that rolled over, the reason it rolled over was a lack of maintenance. One of the springs on the axle was completely broken.

Robbed out of business

In response to the article in the TOTC about the North Chicago Jewel needing a new roof. My son worked for that store and it's true, they were being robbed blind.

Beware of scammers

I've never had any problems with phone scams before but two days in a row now I've gotten calls stating they're from the IRS. I called them back and they wanted the last four digits of my Social Security number which I didn't give them. The man got very nasty with me and said some foul words. I'm just hoping you publish this so the older people don't fall into this scam.

Twitter @newssun

Editor's Note: Talk of the County is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, please tell us! Call us at (312) 222-4554 or email talkofthecounty@tribpub.com