BOULDER — After finishing fifth as the top American at the Kona Ironman triathlon last year, Timothy O’Donnell waited at the finish line for his fiancée, Mirinda Carfrae, to arrive. When she did, winning the women’s title for the second time, Carfrae rushed to embrace her exhausted beau.

“She sees me and I see this look in her eye,” O’Donnell recalled with amusement recently. “She’s coming right at me and I’m like, ‘Oh, no, please don’t jump.’ She jumps right into my arms. I’ve just finished the race too. I was like, ‘Uh, I’m going to drop her.’ I could feel my quads just locking up. Luckily I didn’t drop her.”

Married last December, the Boulder couple is going back to Kona for the Ironman World Championships on Oct. 11. And this time they have high hopes that O’Donnell will become the first American man to win since Boulder’s Tim DeBoom did it in 2001 and 2002.

“I can’t think of anything I want more this year,” said Carfrae, an Australian. “I’ve won the race and I’d love to win again. I’ve put in as much preparation as I can. But after winning last year, my second time winning in Kona, all I really want is for him to find that success and know what it’s like to finish in first place.”

O’Donnell, a graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy, is fitter than he was last year. And he has a new coach — Ironman legend Mark Allen, who won Kona six times.

“After last year’s finish, a lot more people have taken notice,” said O’Donnell, 33. “A lot of people come up to me genuinely, like, ‘We want you to win. We want an American to win, we want it to be you.’ Knowing that people are really excited that I have the chance to do that, it’s pretty motivating.”

That brings pressure, though, and a lot of things can go wrong in a race consisting of a 2.4-mile ocean swim, a 112-mile bicycle ride and a marathon run (26.2 miles) in the oppressive heat and humidity of Hawaii. O’Donnell plans to use the expectations of others as fuel.

“It’s all how you spin it internally,” O’Donnell said. “There’s a lot of energy and excitement that other people have toward me, being able to do this. I need to use their energy and bolster my performance from them. I just feel stronger, because I know I have the support of so many people.”

O’Donnell was a record-setting high school swimmer in Pennsylvania before going to Annapolis, where took up triathlon at the suggestion of his older brother, a fellow Midshipman. After he graduated in 2003, the Navy sent him to grad school at UC Berkeley to get a master’s degree in ocean engineering. He continued to compete in triathlons, winning the U.S. under-23 national title.

The Navy supported O’Donnell’s bid to make the 2008 Olympic team, sending him to train as a resident at the Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, but he finished sixth at the Olympic Trials and failed to make the team. After that he left the Navy to pursue triathlon full time and began to think about switching from the shorter Olympic distance to Ironman and half-Ironman races.

“I sat on the fence for a year and a half, almost two years,” he said. “Being a swimmer growing up, that’s all there is, right? The Olympics. As a kid I watched Janet Evans and Matt Biondi, that’s what I wanted to do, I wanted to go to the Olympics. But my running wasn’t quite (good enough).”

He began dating Carfrae the summer of 2009, and that fall he went to Kona with her.

“Going down to the finish line at midnight, just the whole race experience, it was overwhelming,” O’Donnell said. “I got really excited. I’m like, ‘This is kind of what I want to do.’ “

It took him a while to commit, but he finally devoted himself fully to the Ironman after competing in an Olympic distance event in South Korea a week after the 2010 Ironman, where Carfrae won her first title.

“There were about 10 people standing around, watching in this fishing village that just reeked of rotten fish,” he said. “I said, ‘What am I doing here? This doesn’t excite me the way Ironman does.’

“You can’t sit on the fence. If you want to make the Olympic team, or you want to win Kona, you have to be committed. I said, ‘If you could do one thing in the sport, what would it be?’ I said to myself, ‘I want to win Kona. Maybe I could make the Olympic team, (but) I’m not going to win a medal,’ just didn’t have that leg speed. I said, ‘Let’s commit.’ “

If he doesn’t win Kona this year, he should have other opportunities. He’s probably got another five to 10 years at the top of the sport if he stays healthy and hungry.

“I got out of the Navy — gave up a great job with benefits, awesome pension — and went all-in because it’s one thing I want to do, win Hawaii,” O’Donnell said. “It’s what I put all my energy into. The American thing is important as well. I was the top American last year, so I think I’m in a good spot to try to be that next guy to (win) it.”

John Meyer: 303-954-1616, jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer