Retired city workers deserve benefits, too

Re “Retired San Bernardino police oppose cuts to pension” (Jan. 5):

San Bernardino City Attorney Gary Saenz said, “The city must favor its workforce to continue functioning as a city.”

Does our city attorney not realize our current workforce is the city’s future retirees? Are the promises being made to the current workforce going to be broken after they retire such as the city has done with the current retirees?

How does our city attorney propose that the city keep and maintain a loyal and dedicated workforce when the active employees are standing by and watching the city break the promises it had made to past city employees?

What guarantees do the current city employees have that San Bernardino won’t take away their earned pensions when they retire in the future? I know several former city employees who have accepted employment with other municipal agencies for that exact reason.

Mr. Saenz, our retirees deserve the same treatment as our current employees and no employee group should be favored over another.

— Joe Leon, San Bernardino

The irony of Ted Cruz signing up for Obamacare

It is amazing how Republicans can speak from both sides of their mouths and not blink an eye over it.

Sen. Ted Cruz and the rest of the Republican presidential hopefuls have been shouting from the rooftops that one of the first actions they will take if elected president would be to repeal the Affordable Health Care Act popularly known as Obamacare.

I was therefore surprised to learn that when Sen. Cruz was forced to go off his wife Heidi Cruz’s very generous health insurance coverage from Goldman Sachs, where she works, he gleefully signed up for health insurance through the same Obamacare he has been vowing to repeal.

Am I missing something here? If Obamacare was terrible as Sen. Cruz and the Republicans would have Americans believe, why would he sign up for it? Apparently what is good for Sen. Cruz is not good for the millions of Americans who cannot afford health insurance.

— Charles Blankson, Fontana

Lawsuits won’t bring back those lost in Dec. 2 attack

Re “Family of San Bernardino terror attack victim files $200M claim” (Jan. 22):

The San Bernardino shooting on Dec. 2, 2015 was a terrible catastrophe to many people; not only the victims and their families, but for all who live in this area.

Advertisement

I watched as many people gave their support and dug deep into their own pockets to give their money to help those who lost their loved ones. One was even given an automobile.

That said, we now see some of the victims’ families turn around and filing suit! I ask myself, against whom? What amount of money can ever buy back their loved ones’ lives? Who is to blame? Surely, not the city or the county, or even the state. The first responders did a marvelous job in possibly saving other lives.

I am certain those who have so willingly and sacrificially donated toward these particular families must be now asking themselves if they should have been so generous. I know that’s what I would be doing.

What a sad state of affairs we have become when all we think about is suing. I am of the older generation, and back in my day, we never sued people, especially when there really is no one (alive) at fault, as in this terrible situation.

The ones who should be sued (if one must sue) are dead. They’re the ones to blame. Not any of those who remain alive and have come forward to help all these families.

— Barbara Campbell, Bloomington

Uber drivers feel the crunch with fare cuts

I have been with Uber now for over seven months. Driving has been a good stopgap for me after I lost my job. For the most part, it has been a pretty good experience. However, I really don’t understand this latest large rate cut by Uber.

I live in the Inland Empire where the fare went from $1.10 per mile to $.64 — which is 42 percent. After expenses this averages out to around $10 per hour, which is hardly livable. Imagine Uber executives or any other employee losing 42 percent of their income.

Wouldn’t it make more sense for a multi-billion dollar company to bear most of the cost rather than on the backs of their drivers who are doing most of the work and actually generating the income?

A better idea would be to give out coupons with temporary discounts to attract new passengers and to encourage current customers to continue using Uber.

I know that I, my son, and probably other friends will not be able to continue driving. Other drivers will probably stop. Uber’s decision not only hurts their drivers but will hurt or inconvenience their passengers.

— Lance Asbra, Rancho Cucamonga