Jennifer Barrett Sryfi, director of community programs at the New Jersey Hospital Association, coordinates enrollment for the health exchange and Medicaid. As the March 31 deadline nears to enroll in a private health plan, the association is spreading the word there is no deadline for Medicaid and NJ FamilyCare.

Q: How is the Affordable Care Act different from NJ FamilyCare and Medicaid?

A: The plans available on the ACA’s online marketplace at healthcare.gov are open to anyone lawfully present in the United States. In addition, some adults within certain income requirements — between 138 and 400 percent of the federal poverty level — and who do not have access to affordable, essential coverage may qualify for tax credits and other subsidies. Medicaid and NJ FamilyCare, on the other hand, are specifically state-run programs that serve those who earn even less.

Q: How do I know if I am eligible?

A: I mentioned the income guideline — below 138 percent of the federal poverty level. To give people a rough idea of what that means, it equals $15,857 for an individual and $32,499 for a family of four. Some websites, like Get Covered America and NJ Helps, provide online calculators to help people check for eligibility. Consumers also can talk with an ACA navigator or certified application counselor — NJHA employs certified application counselors across the state., and they are providing individual enrollment assistance beyond March 31.

Q: Are there enough doctors who take NJ FamilyCare and Medicaid?

A: This remains a concern. In general under the ACA, and particularly for Medicaid, there have been reports that show a shortage of available physicians, especially in primary care.

It can vary further by region, by health plan selected and by type of specialty needed. For any enrollee that has trouble finding a physician, I would encourage them to find a primary care medical home with their local federally qualified health center. Find one here.

Q: Do I need a computer to sign up?

A: Technically no, but in reality signing up for NJ FamilyCare or Medicaid is really geared toward online applications at their web site.

RELATED COVERAGE

• Obamacare in NJ: Four out of five enrollees have paid their premiums

• Obamacare enrollment push glosses over next year's fines, some say