Russ Feingold is back, which at the very least will delight political junkies, and make the 2016 political season even more interesting than it already promises to be.

Feingold announced in a short video Thursday that he's going for a rematch against Sen. Ron Johnson, the businessman who upset the then long-standing incumbent Feingold in 2010. As Craig Gilbert noted in a Thursday article, a Johnson-Feingold race would be a rare rematch of Senate opponents and would offer voters a stark ideological contrast.

It would easily rank as one of the top Senate races in the country in 2016, fiercely contested by both parties.

But questions await the former senator.

Feingold lost the election in 2010. What makes him think he can win this time?

Feingold did lose the election — and handily. But 2010 was an off-year election when Democratic turnout traditionally is lower in Wisconsin. It also was a wave year for the Republicans, which Johnson, Gov. Scott Walker and state Assembly and Senate Republicans rode to power. Second, Johnson is completing his first term, traditionally a good time to challenge a senator.

But weren't Feingold's liberal ideas dispatched along with him in 2010? He still lost — and that means his ideas didn't carry the day.

That's certainly true of the majority of voters who came to the polls that year. But it's equally true now that Feingold sees an opening. The latest Marquette University Law School Poll has Feingold leading Johnson by 16 percentage points.

Now, we don't believe for a minute that this race will be a blowout for either candidate; it likely will be much closer. But Feingold clearly has ample reason to believe he can win.

Here's what we'd like to see: A vigorous debate over the radically different world views of these two men.

Johnson and Feingold represent, as well as any two candidates anywhere in the country, the arguments for on the one hand limited government and free enterprise and on the other an active government that tries to balance the scales. Wisconsin voters need to hear both of these arguments clearly stated. If that debate actually happens and the candidates don't retreat behind their slogans and sound bites, a Johnson-Feingold rematch would be good for the state, which needs a good airing of the issues.

We also encourage others in both parties to get into this race. While Johnson and Feingold represent distinct positions, there are other viewpoints in that broad middle between those two that deserve to be heard. A more moderate Republican or a more moderate Democrat could bring fresh ideas that voters might find appealing.

In any case, we look forward to the debate.