Planned Parenthood is facing intense criticism after its top doctors were caught arranging for the sale of body parts from aborted babies. But that hasn’t stopped pro-abortion President Barack Obama from thanking the abortion business.

Late Friday, Obama released a video thanking organizations and activists who helped put Obamacare in place and he made sure to include a thank you for Planned Parenthood, even though it is involved in the sale of aborted babies.

Pro-life activist Jill Stanek has the video and more about it and the shout out the abortion corporation gave Obama for thanking it in his video:

President Obama has a long-standing, super close relationship with Planned Parenthood, most clearly exemplified by his willingness in 2011 to shut down the federal government rather than allow the abortion giant to be defunded. Obama hasn’t stopped with his own turf. He has also blocked state efforts to defund Planned Parenthood. The quid pro quo is obvious: Planned Parenthood spends an inordinate amount of money and engages its vast grassroots network to get pro-abortion candidates elected; then they as pro-abortion legislators hand money back to Planned Parenthood, the most recent example being the Obamacare funding stream. Thus, on cue, Obama included Planned Parenthood in a July 24 video thanking enablers for keeping Obamacare afloat. Thanks for the shoutout, @POTUS! We’re excited to help people enroll again starting on November 1! http://t.co/26rxo0WO0K #Obamacare — Planned Parenthood (@PPFA) July 24, 2015

As Stanek notes, the Planned Parenthood thank you occurs at :54 on the video:

In her first public interview since two top Planned Parenthood doctors were caught arranging for the sale of body parts of aborted babies, Planned Parenthoo0d CEO Cecile Richards defended selling aborted babies and attacked pro-lifers.

In the wake of the two shocking videos showing top Planned Parenthood doctors arranging the sale of body parts form aborted babies, the Senate will vote soon on legislation that would de-fund the Planned Parenthood abortion business. A total of 9 states have already launched an investigation including Massachusetts, Kansas, Missouri, Arizona, Indiana, Ohio, Georgia, Texas and Louisiana and members of Congress have launched an investigation as well.