Construction on a third water tunnel bringing water from reservoirs in upstate New York to Manhattan and then to the other four New York City boroughs has been going on for 43 years and it's not yet done. One segment (ending under Central Park in the middle of Manhattan) has been completed.

Tunnel 3 is to provide back-up to Tunnel 1 which hasn't been repaired or cleaned in about 100 years. Construction of Tunnel 3 began in 1970.

Forty-three years later, they're not done yet. Assuming that government has't become any more efficient since then, we can expect ObamaCare to be finished by some time after 2056.

The best programmers are not working for the federal government or even the private companies hired by the federal government. First, these are not necessarily the best programming companies. Rather, they are probably those companies that are best at getting federal contracts. Which means those who pay "bridge tolls" to the Obama Administration and the Democratic Party.

Second, we can be sure that the very best programming talent is working at companies like Apple, Google, Amazon, Facebook, Twitter, Microsoft, eBay, PayPal, Intuit, Blackboard, Salesforce, IBM, Oracle, Cisco, Ariba, Cegedim, GXS, Concur Technologies, Electronic Arts, Autodesk, SunGard, Unisys, DATEV, Adobe, Yahoo, Hewlett Packard, Dell, Samsung, investment and industrial companies, university computer departments and the hundreds of smaller businesses in the computer-internet universe. And, the remaining five-star programmers who are not currently working at one of those companies are busy creating their own businesses. The left-overs are likely to be the ones working on ObamaCare.

Thomas Lifson adds:

Can you imagime the phone calls from President Obama to his major campaign donors at Google and other high tech companies, asking them for their top tech whizzes? What is it worth to Google, a company that faces major anti-trust concerns, to hold a marker from President Obama, and by extension his loyal ally Eric Holder, who runs the Department of Justice and its antitrust division?

Since the president is planning to address the nation today on the website fiasco, I wonder about the visuals being planned, and can't help but recall his transparently ridiculous address on the passage of Obamacare, featuring purported doctors clad in lab coats:





Will today's address be accompanied by a bunch of nerdy-looking guys with pocket protectors?