Last week things got pretty heavy on the regulatory side of investment crowdfunding so it is kind of nice to get back to talking about some cool and creative projects.

Most of the crowdfunding campaigns we cover at Crowdfund Insider are about small companies or startups that are looking to raise some early capital or validate a product or service prior to market roll out. Rewards based crowdfunding has become a great part of a young company’s capital stack – need we say more?

I don’t know about you but I have hundreds of passwords and all too frequently I struggle to remember them. I hate to have them saved by my browser or on my computer so I use another more protean method that is not very efficient. Security is paramount as the internet is just a really scary place these days when big companies like Target and HomeDepot have been easily hacked and customer information stolen.

Well the team at EveryKey have come up with a simple, yet elegant solution for password management and authentication. Their approach, now that I look at it, is pretty inevitable. EveryKey is a wearable bracelet that acts like a universal key. Just program the wristband to recognize devices or web pages and once you are within a defined proximity the EveryKey acts as a universal access control. Even better the wristband is great looking; practicality married with function. Crowdfunding now on Kickstarter and nearing its funding goal of $100,000.

Roost launched their campaign on Kickstarter a couple of days ago and the campaign easily breezed past their funding goal. This “smart battery” project set out to raise $50,000 but that number was quickly bested and seems poised to cruise much higher.

So what exactly is a smart batter? It is a 9 volt standard battery that is connected to the internet. What Roost let’s you do is take “dumb” devices and make them smart. The project creators from California are using the typical smoke alarm as their test case but my guess is they have other concepts forthcoming. For the smoke alarm scenario Roost gauges battery levels and notifies when it is time to replace. Beyond that you can easily monitor the status of all of your alarms and receive a warning on your smartphone when one has been activated.

Eventually everything will be interconnected. We all know it is coming. Roost is using a simple method to add new features to existing appliances – something that is way less expensive then upgrading alarms to all new devices.

What do I know about shoes? Very little – except you invest in the best as your feet are important since you use them a lot.

This crowdfunding campaign out of Denmark is for stylish women’s shoes that incorporate an interesting insole to make high heeled shoes comfortable. The orthopedic design claims to force the foot to walk “anatomically correct” reducing stress and improving comfort. Makes sense to me.

Roccamore (fortress of love) as the company is called, was created by Frederikke Antonie Schmidt. She is a trained shoe designer who has worked with some big brands including MaxMara, Elisabeth Franchi, Chie Mihar and more. Frederick has had her work appear on the pages of Vogue Italia, Danish Elle and other publications. Recently she decided to return from Italy to go back to school in Copenhagen and now she has founded roccamore. Crowdfunding now on Kickstarter, roccamore was recently blesssed as a staff pick. Check out the pitch video below.

Everykey is the wristband that replaces keys and passwords. It’s sleek, easy to use, and can be deactivated at any time.

Everykey is an innovative universal access device for everything that requires a physical key or password. The Everykey wristband is an attractive Bluetooth enabled band that allows immediate access to a user’s password-protected electronics such as a smartphone, tablet, or computer, as well as physically locked items including doors, car doors, bike locks, and other controlled access devices.

When the Everykey wristband is within range of a user’s device, the wristband will allow the user to bypass that device’s password or physically unlock it automatically, eliminating the need for complicated passwords and cumbersome keys.

Everykey also manages a password keychain, which can be used to seamlessly log the user into their online accounts when they’re close to one of their devices. When the wristband goes out of range, the device automatically re-enables security mechanisms so it is safe and secure when out of trusted hands.

Everykey utilizes military grade encryption, allowing only you access to your personal property and accounts. Like a credit card, you can instantly disable your Everykey if it ever gets lost or stolen.

Retrofit your way into an intelligent, connected home. Your Smoke Alarm + Your Smartphone + Our Wi-Fi Smart Battery = Peace of Mind.

Why We Think a Smart Battery is…Smart.

No More Chirps!

First of all, we hate those middle-of-the-night, low-battery chirps from our smoke alarms. Anything that eliminates those for the rest of our lives is smart in our book!

Smartphone Notifications Away from Home

Beyond eliminating chirps, we want to know our family, pets, and homes are safe. A notification to our smartphone in the event of a smoke alarm sounding seemed just the thing.

Designer shoes with orthopedic insoles that provide optimal support, while forcing your foot to walk anatomically correct.

We want to show women all over world that style and fashion doesn’t have to be compromised for a comfortable pair of shoes. Based on orthopedic insoles, we have designed a contemporary collection of beautiful shoes, you can wear every day, wherever you are. Roccamore shoes adapt to your lifestyle, so you won’t have to make sacrifices any more.

Wearing high heels for an entire day can be torture, with biting pain in your feet and lower back, but we promise that those days are over. You will never have to carry a pair of flats with you again, refuse to dance at a party, because it’s too painful, or simply walk home barefoot. There is another way, we promise!