PROVIDENCE, R.I. — If nothing else, the Denver Pioneers wanted to be a “hard out.” Captain Grant Arnold said massive disappointment from not winning the national championship would be tempered by playing well in defeat.

Maybe DU played too hard, because a massive neutral-zone check by its best player led to the Pioneers’ downfall.

DU gave it all it had Sunday in a 4-1 loss to Providence College in the NCAA Tournament East Regional final. The Friars, who added two empty-net goals after breaking a 1-1 tie with 5:01 left, advance to their first Frozen Four since 1985.

Providence defenseman Tom Parisi scored the game-winning goal on the power play at 14:59, and in the last minute of senior Joey LaLeggia’s major penalty for contact to the head. LaLeggia, the Pioneers’ best player who scored their lone goal, made a big center-ice hit on Steven McParland and was ejected with 9:23 to go in a 1-1 game at the Dunkin’ Donuts Center.

Just before the game-winning goal, DU’s Evan Janssen clanged a shorthanded shot off the Friars’ goal post. Providence called its timeout and scored off the ensuing offensive faceoff.

PHOTOS: Denver vs. Providence in NCAA hockey tournament

“I was just trying to impede him from getting to the middle of the ice,” LaLeggia said of McParland, who was shaken but not seriously injured. “I stepped up, definitely didn’t intend to hit him in the head. I don’t know what the referees saw but all I know is I did not intend to hit him in the head. But I haven’t seen the replay. I don’t think I’ve ever got a hit to the head before.”

LaLeggia, a 2014 All-American who won every major individual National Collegiate Hockey Conference award for a defenseman, and was the NCHC player of the year, is expected to sign with the Edmonton Oilers this week. Oilers general manager Craig MacTavish and president Kevin Lowe were at the game.

“It’s terrible but I’m extremely proud to be a Pioneer,” LaLeggia said of his final college game. “I can’t thank the school for what they’ve done for me over the last four years, and I can’t thank my teammates, my brothers who I love, enough. It’s a tough one to swallow but I love Denver.

The Friars (24-13-2) will join Boston University and North Dakota at the nearby TD Garden in Boston April 9-11. Denver finishes with the same record and is denied its first Frozen Four berth since winning back-to-back national titles in 2004 and 2005.

Second-year DU coach Jim Montgomery is 1-2 in the NCAA Tournament but his most recent team had the makings to win it all.

“Really proud of the team I was able to coach this year. From day one they gave me everything a coach could ask for, and our staff. It was a pleasure to coach,” Montgomery said. “And to our seven seniors, I can’t thank them enough. They won a NCHC championship (2014) and have added to the great tradition of Denver hockey. We played hard right through (the end).”

Montgomery did not agree with LaLeggia’s penalty, and will continue to teach his defenseman to make hits in the neutral zone as a counter attack. The NCAA has cracked down on any hits that lead to head contact.

“I guess you’re supposed to back off and let a guy come attack you, instead of angling the puck like I’ve taught them,” Montgomery said. “Joey LaLeggia did everything I asked of him on that play and unfortunately there was head contact.”

Freshman Tanner Jaillet finished with 20 saves for Denver. Junior Jon Gillies had 23 for Providence, the No. 4 regional seed that upset No. 1 Miami (Ohio) 7-5 on Saturday after the Pioneers beat Boston College 5-2.

Arnold, a junior forward and emotional leader, had his first two goals of the season against BC. “Anytime you lose a game to end your season, it’s hard. We played hard for 60 minutes and were attacking like Coach Montgomery said. I thought we could have done a little better job in front of Gillies. … The seven seniors made my job a lot easier, being a junior captain. I’m not lying when I say I’d go to war with any of those guys. Those guys are warriors.”

DU took control early but Providence had the two best chances of the second period. First, Friars winger Trevor Mingoia put a shot off the crossbar during a stretch DU couldn’t win a faceoff. And in their ensuing power play, center Noel Acciari back-handed the puck on net from beside it, and it trickled in off Jaillet.

Denver’s penalty was to senior wing Larkin Jacobson, who was called for elbowing. DU outshot PC, 18-15, after two periods, but nearly all of Gillies’ saves were relatively easy. Getting shots through were a problem; PC blocked 13 through 40 minutes and 24 for the game.

LaLeggia scored a power-play goal midway through the third period to tie it, banking a shot off the glass and Gillies in dramatic fashion.

LaLeggia is considered one of DU’s best defenseman in the past 20 years.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers