Call 12 for Action saved consumers more than $863,000 in two weeklong special reports on medical billing and insurance problems that left ordinary people struggling against a health-care system. The stories helped consumers get life-saving medications, exposed how an insurer broke state law, highlighted glitches in the Affordable Care Act system and explored the confusing web of regulations surrounding emergency care for veterans. (Photo: Getty Images)

Over the past week, Call 12 for Action exposed how an insurer broke state law, highlighted a glitch in the Affordable Care Act's online marketplace, explored the confusing web of regulations surrounding emergency care for veterans and and saved three Arizonans $263,000.

In a special report titled "Health-Care Nightmares," Call 12 for Action documented the struggles that many Arizonans experience every day with medical providers, disability insurers and government regulations, sometimes with devastating financial consequences.

Call 12 for Action got a insurance company to reverse its demand for a $12,000 reimbursement from a quadriplegic whose monthly disability payments had been cut to almost nothing. It echoed a mother's plea to another insurer to provide formula to her 10-year-old boy, who would starve without it. It helped a woman navigate the government's online insurance system. It negotiated with a bank to dismiss a veteran's $225,000 lien.

Response to the stories was immediate. People offered donations, legal assistance, financial advice and messages of prayer and goodwill. While some Arizonans reacted with compassion, others were quick to echo the frustration often voiced by those who were helped.

Formula case

"There's a reason why you were put on the Earth, and that was to help that little boy," a caller named TR said in a phone message about 10-year-old Rowan Taylor, whose formula was cut off. "That's one of the most amazing things I've read in my whole life, and God bless you for doing it."

The formula Ronan Taylor, 10, must ingest through a feeding tube costs $19,980 a year. The Taylor family’s insurer, UnitedHealthcare, capped payments at $5,000, despite a state law saying it was responsible for the full amount. A call from Call 12 for Action produced full payment. (Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

Rowan's plight resonated most with readers. He was diagnosed at age 6 with a disease that causes white blood cells to attack protein in his esophagus. Essentially, he is allergic to food. His diet consists of an expensive formula that he ingests through a feeding tube.

Each can of formula costs $45. The Taylors spend $19,980 in a year on formula. State law says the insurer has to cover it. But for the second time in four years, UnitedHealthcare capped the Taylors' benefits at $5,000. When his parents went to buy the formula, the pharmacist told them they would have to write a check.

UnitedHealthcare said a computer error was the reason the Taylors got cut off this year and in 2010. But Donna Taylor said she got no response from the company until Call 12 got involved.

Former Arizona Sen. Susan Gerard, who sponsored the legislation requiring insurance companies to pay for special formula, said the story will help.

"It will help the Taylor family and many more families," she said in an e-mail. "I was so disappointed to learn that insurance companies are still trying to cut life-saving benefits for children."

MORE: Health Care Nightmares, Day 1: Insurer denies coverage of child's special formula

Clash over ER bill

The story of a veteran's clash over emergency care at Banner Goldfield Medical Center prompted a similar response from veterans and their families. They told stories about being billed for emergency services that they thought would be covered by the VA.

Navy veteran Jim Nolsheim looks over his medical bills in his motorhome. Nolsheim had been receiving cancer treatment from the VA. He collapsed and was taken by ambulance to Banner Goldfield. He says he insisted that he would only accept care if the hospital billed the VA. Banner instead billed him. (Photo: Rob Schumacher/The Republic)

James Nolsheim, 67, collapsed last year outside of his RV in east Mesa. He was taken by ambulance to the emergency room, where he said he told anyone who would listen to send his hospital bills to Veterans Affairs. Administration. .

Instead, Banner billed Nolsheim's Medicare, leaving him responsible for a co-pay of thousands of dollars in medical costs. Banner officials maintain that they told Nolsheim they could not bill the VA. Nolsheim said that never happened. He said if anyone had told him that, he would have walked out of the hospital.

The story shows the complexity of regulations facing veterans when they wind up in the emergency room. A VA representative said the confusion is widespread and a serious issue for the VA.

"This is not a one-off situation," VA spokeswoman Jean Schaefer said Thursday, two days after the story was published. "It may not be clear to veterans or health-care providers how they are reimbursed."

Nolsheim said he believed that because he was being treated by the VA for esophageal cancer that it would pay for his emergency hospitalization. He said that Banner officials never told him they weren't billing the VA and that by the time he found out, the deadline for filing a claim had passed.

But VA officials said Thursday that Nolsheim would not have been covered because he had Medicare coverage.

Holley Niethammer of the VA Southwest Health Care Network said laws prohibit the VA from paying claims if the veteran has other insurance.

She said the law allows the VA to cover veterans' emergency claims as long as the veterans had VA care within 24 months; needed to go the ER based on a lay person's understanding of an emergency; if their claim was made within 30 days of their ER visit; and if no other insurer would cover the claim.

Veterans who are more than 40 percent disabled with a service-related condition are covered for any ER visit at any facility regardless of the cause.

Niethammer said if Nolsheim had gone to the VA, his emergency medical costs would have been covered.

Nolsheim insisted that Banner never told him it couldn't or wouldn't bill the VA. Banner officials say they followed all guidelines and were clear about his obligations.

"Despite our documentation, he disagrees with our position," Bill Byron, Banner vice president of communications, said in a statement Friday. "We have treated Mr. Nolsheim with the respect he deserves at every encounter and want to work with him to make the payment of his deductible as easy as possible."

Several people said they wanted to help Nolsheim, who lives on a fixed income of about $1,800 a month.

Jennifer Sodaro, a semi-retired lawyer, said she was moved by Nolsheim's challenge.

"I would like to help him address this problem, as my gift to him for his service to this country," she said.

MORE: Health Care Nightmares, Day 2: Veteran clashes with Banner Health over bill for emergency care

Veteran wiped out

Nolsheim was the first of two veterans profiled in the Call 12 for Action series. The other was Howard "Butch" Gatling, who went to the VA in Long Beach, Calif., for help in 2009 when he was dying of emphysema.

Howard “Butch” Gatling (top) of Peoria, who received a lung transplant at UCLA after the VA wouldn’t see him, checks his medications with partner Daphna Hilderbrand in Costa Mesa, Calif.<252><137,2014/11/13,Williams/c Allen1>d.<137><252><252> (Photo: Robert Anglen/The Republic)

The 70-year-old veteran said he was told to come back in two years. Using private insurance and his own money, Gatling took on the costs of paying for his out-of-pocket medical expenses.

Between his illness and the Great Recession, he lost cars, Phoenix rental properties, a boat and his California ranch.

A successful construction manager for most of his life, Gatling burned through $4 million in savings and today lives from one Social Security check to another. He resides in a mobile home he purchased in Southern California in order to be close to doctors at UCLA, where he received a lung transplant in 2012.

Call 12 for Action waded into Gatling's finances and found a host of unpaid debts, including a $225,556 lien over Gatling's foreclosed ranch. Finding a solution for the couple involved the cooperation of bank executives, a collection agency, a financial planner and an attorney.

BMO Harris Bank agreed to dismiss the lien, clearing the way for Gatling and his longtime partner, Daphna Hilderbrand, to refinance their the Peoria home and lower payments on the mortgage, which also was in arrears.

Call 12 for Action also helped erase a $2,283 lien filed by a homeowner's association. The total, $227,839, represents one of the largest amounts Call 12 for Action has helped save an individual consumer.

Call 12 for Action has reached out to a financial planner and attorneys to help provide Gatling and Hilderbrand with advice.

MORE: Health Care Nightmares, Day 5: Veteran who needed lung transplant left in financial straits

12K demand

Vanessa Montgomery never wanted to be featured on television. She had no desire to tell her story. But the 35-year-old quadriplegic said she had nowhere to turn when MetLife threatened to cut her disability payments and demanded immediate payment of almost $12,000.

Vanessa Montgomery, made a quadriplegic from an attack by her then boyfriend 13 years ago, along with her mother. (Photo: John Samora/The Republic)

Montgomery was 22 when her boyfriend shot her in the throat, severing her spine. Since 2001, she has taught herself how to talk, use her limbs to manipulate keyboards and regain her independence. Last year, she and her 17-year-old daughter moved into a house built for them by Habitat for Humanity.

They got by on $1,855 a month from disability and Social Security payments until MetLife determined two months ago that Montgomery had been overpaid and sought to recover thousands. They reduced her $598-a-month disability check to $50 a month. Montgomery feared she would lose her home.

Call 12 for Action contacted MetLife. Officials quickly agreed to dismiss the $12,000 claim and increase her disability payments to $230 a month.

People expressed outrage over Montgomery's situation in calls, e-mails and in online comments.

At the same time, they praised Montgomery's spirit and attitude.

"She sounds like a very positive person, considering all she has been through. I wish her the best," Greta Mang posted in an online comment.

MORE: Health Care Nightmares, Day 3: Insurer hits quadriplegic with $12K demand

Marketplace glitch

The Affordable Care Act's health-care marketplace opened its second enrollment season on Saturday.

Almost a year ago, an Avondale woman's trip to the emergency room exposed an early glitch in the government's online insurance marketplace.

Cathy Johnson was in agonizing pain from shingles when she was taken by ambulance to the hospital. She found herself in a predicament Americans were promised was impossible under the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: Michael Chow/The Republic)

When Cathy Johnson, 62, sought to enroll in the system last year, the marketplace rejected her application and told her she she should seek coverage through the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, the state's version of Medicaid.

AHCCCS, however, determined she made too much money and referred her back to the marketplace. She was looping between those two systems, with no way to get insurance from either, when she was hospitalized with shingles in January.

The emergency room bill totaled thousands of dollars that Johnson didn't have. Her only income is about $42 a day serving as a caretaker for her husband, who is legally blind and has heart issues.

Johnson said the marketplace in February allowed her to sign up for insurance, but insurers would not agree to cover the claim or erase the bill unless she paid thousands in premiums.

Cheryl O'Donnell, the Arizona State Director for Enroll America, a non-profit group focused on helping people sign up for insurance under the new health-care laws, said officials are aware that the screening system had glitches at the time Johnson was denied.

She said because of the glitch, Johnson fell through the cracks of the health-care system. O'Donnell encouraged Johnson to file a complaint through the healthcare.gov.

Johnson said late last week she is still waiting to hear back.

The story sparked an online debate about Obamacare.

"And no one saw this coming?" David Greatorex wrote in an online comment. "I can only (hope) that the ACA gets repealed and someone with some smarts can come up with a better plan."

Others defended the marketplace and pointed out flaws with private insurance companies.

"Amazing, huh?" Robert Warrington wrote. "There were never, ever problems with insurance or medical-care billing prior to the (ACA)."

MORE: Health Care Nightmares, Day 4: Costly ER trip reveals insurance marketplace glitch

Health-care nightmares

Call 12 for Action has been helping consumers with health-care access and billing issues. Read last week's series at call12.azcentral.com.

Inside: Top stories of 2014

The Call 12 for Action team helps consumers resolve disputes with all types of companies. Read notable stories from the past year. Volunteers and reporters have assisted with bad movers, veterans struggling with bills and repairs, difficult bus tours, health-care costs and more. A24-39

Here to help

Have a problem with your health-care bill? Call 12 for Action's trained volunteers are available.

Call 602-260-1212 between 11 a.m. and 1 p.m. Monday through Friday with all your paperwork handy.

Save time and fill out a client form online. First, go to business.azcentral.com. Click on "Call 12 for Action" on the left side of the page. Then, click on "File your complaint against a business here."

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1qLDCpn