FORT COLLINS — Naturally, senior wide receiver Joe Hansley still hears the wonderment in voices.

If he’s not wearing his Colorado State football backpack around campus, not many are going to think he plays football. He knows if he’s hanging round with teammates, especially guys he says are “stereotypical” football players, folks wonder why the little guy is hanging out with the football team.

Recruited when Steve Fairchild was CSU’s coach, Hansley was met with some curiosity when Jim McElwain came on campus. It happened again when Mike Bobo arrived. What all of them have found is the little guy — all 5-foot-10, 180 pounds of him — can play the game.

“I got used to it. In high school it was that way,” said Hansley, who was the Colorado Gatorade and Scout.com prep player of the year after finishing his career at Highlands Ranch. “People knew who I was in Colorado, but bigger schools outside Colorado didn’t really recruit me, so I’m pretty used to it. I guess it drives me a little bit when people overlook me. But when Coach Bobo came in, he was a new coach and I obviously wanted to show him what I had.”

Which is what Hansley has done every step of the way. In his first preseason camp, he pushed his way into the rotation as a freshman, then turned a short pass into a 32-yard touchdown against CU in his first collegiate game, and he has been making big plays for CSU ever since.

While he may have never been “the guy” for the Rams, he has always been that guy for the team when it comes to making plays.

He has made so many of them that he’s threatening to enter CSU’s top 10 in career catches, receiving yards and touchdowns. He enters the final five games of the regular season with 126 catches for 1,699 yards and 11 scores. He needs 15 catches, 175 yards and three touchdowns, respectively, to enter the record book, lists that are filled with players who were the main target for part or most of their career with the Rams.

“That’s the old statement, you don’t judge a book by its cover, and a football player is a football player; they come in all sizes,” Bobo said. “He is that. I’ve said it. He’s dependable, he’s got good hands, he runs great routes and he’s tough. He’s a tough football player. He’s probably one of our best blockers.”

Eye on… The Aztecs

San Diego State (5-3, 4-0 Mountain West) at Colorado State (3-4, 1-2), 1:30 p.m. Saturday, CBSSN

For the record: The Aztecs have a four-game winning streak. They are coming off a 48-14 victory over Utah State.

Streaking: The Aztecs have held 11 consecutive conference opponents to fewer than 400 total yards. That’s the longest active streak of allowing fewer than 400 total yards in major-college football.

Who’s hot: Junior running back Donnel Pumphrey has four consecutive 100-yard rushing games and has rushed for a touchdown in six consecutive games. He is averaging 113.8 yards per game.

Who’s not: San Diego State’s offense has struggled on third down this season, converting only 38 percent. That ranks 81st in the nation.

Key stat: In their last four games, the Aztecs have outscored opponents 45-0 in the first quarter.

FYI: Rocky Long is the only active head coach in major-college football to also have the title of defensive coordinator.

Irv Moss, The Denver Post