Denver International Airport saw its busiest May ever — the third month in 2014 to set a record for the number of passengers using the airport.

Overall traffic increased by 2.1 percent in May compared with the same month in 2013. More than 4,563,000 passengers passed through DIA in May, up from 4,470,000 in May 2013.

The year-to-date totals are also up 2.1 percent over the same period in 2013.

“Southwest and Frontier both saw strong increases in origin and destination traffic while United saw an acceleration in connecting traffic — all of which helped fuel two consecutive months of record-setting passenger traffic at Denver International Airport,” airport CEO Kim Day said in a news release.

Perhaps, but Denver-based Frontier Airlines stole the show for May traffic. After Frontier’s traffic at DIA plummeted 14.4 percent in 2013 — largely because of the carrier’s scaling back of its flight offerings — the carrier’s traffic spiked in May by 6.2 percent over the same month a year ago.

It is the first reported data since Frontier changed its business model from a low-cost carrier to an ultra-low-cost carrier at the end of April.

“This growth is primarily attributable to the continuing evolution of our business into an ultra-low-cost carrier,” said Tyri Squyres, Frontier’s vice president of marketing. “By offering a new, very low fare product, we are able to stimulate new demand for travel amongst current customers as well as discover a new audience who previously could not afford air travel.”

January and April saw record traffic at DIA.

Meanwhile, United Airlines saw a 1.8 percent increase while Southwest Airlines’ overall traffic decreased less than 1 percent.

“International traffic at DIA also continues to strongly outpace previous years, and May signaled the start of the peak season for transatlantic travel,” Day said.

“We remain on pace to have a very strong year as we enter the height of the busy summer travel season.”

International passenger traffic increased by 18.8 percent over May 2013, a month before United launched its Denver-to-Tokyo route.