Robyn Norris, 48, with her son Liam, 18, and daughter Bronnagh, 21.

TO ROBYN Norris the prospect of three-hour daily roadtrips to treat her breast cancer was too much to bear.

The tyranny of distance and the strain on her family made the decision to have her breast removed an obvious one. And the schoolteacher from Dungog, in the Hunter Valley, says she’s one of the lucky ones.

Many patients from NSW rural communities have to uproot their families, spend their savings on long-distance treatment or simply die earlier than they should.

Our bush heartland is dying of neglect.

HEAL THE BUSH: The sick state of health in the bush

HEAL THE BUSH: Rural cancer patients dying early

EDITORIAL: Rural health drive critical to health equality

Rural Australians grow the food we eat and generate $32 billion of the nation’s exports.

And yet those Australians living in the bush and on farms in remote areas die three years earlier than their city cousins do and suffer lifetimes of poor health because of cruel neglect built into our national medical-care system. Many patients from NSW rural communities have to uproot their families, spend their savings on long distance treatment or simply die earlier than they should.

Some babies are born by the roadside because 70 per cent of rural maternity units have been closed. Women like Mrs Norris have their breasts and ovaries removed because it’s too hard to get to the city for cancer treatment.

Medical specialists don’t bother working in country areas. General practitioners get better incentives to work in Cairns than in Gundagai.

And families are driven into debt to pay the crippling costs of travelling to Sydney for live-saving care for their children.

All these problems can be fixed — and they can be fixed relatively easily.

Today, The Sunday Telegraph launches a campaign asking state and federal governments to make small but significant changes.

Initially we will focus on cancer treatment, maternity facilities, doctor shortages and the ­inadequacies of government assistance programs.

Robyn opted for a mastectomy in March this year over breast conservation and radio therapy because travelling to and from Newcaslte for five days for five weeks was just too much

This week the focus is on the poor level of cancer facilities outside metropolitan hospitals and regional centres. Every cancer diagnosis is shattering — but where you live makes a real difference to your chances of survival.

Rural cancer patients are up to 30 per cent more likely to die than those living in the city because they can’t access radiotherapy treatment needed to control their cancer.

The Sunday Telegraph has identified a number of rural towns that need a radiotherapy centre to help cut the cancer death rate in the bush.

It costs just $7 million to put in a linear accelerator to ­deliver the treatment and $750,000 a year to staff it — a pittance in the context of a ­national health budget worth $140 billion per annum.

More than 70 per cent of country birthing units in NSW have closed down and the ­opportunities to attract GPs with obstetric training are rapidly diminishing.

Health experts say state and federal governments should create specialist obstetric training facilities in the bush, as well as forcing all specialist trainees to work in the bush, and qualified doctors to spend a certain period each year working in a rural town as a condition of keeping their Medicare provider number.

Heal the Bush

Many bush patients are forced to travel to Sydney to see a medical specialist — but the NSW government’s pitiful travel subsidies are equal to “what it costs to put your pet dog in a kennel,” according to Dr Ian Roos, spokesman for CanSpeak, a cancer patient lobby group.

The government reimburses desperately ill patients just 19 cents per kilometre of travel in their private car — and pays just $43 per night for accommodation in Sydney — just enough to afford a bed in a crowded backpacker dorm.

Federal incentives are ­designed to encourage doctors to work in the bush — but a Sunday Telegraph investigation has found a doctor who relocates to Cairns or Townsville will get double the money on offer for a doctor who moves to Orange, Gundagai or Deniliquin.

The Coalition made a pre-election promise to help get doctors into smaller towns where they are most needed. Federal Assistant Minister for Health Fiona Nash said she lived in a rural community, so appreciated the challenges.

Her spokeswoman said the differences in cancer survival outcomes were also influenced by differences in stage of presentation, lifestyle differences and varying socio-economic status.