HEMPSTEAD, N.Y.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Hofstra University and North Shore-LIJ Health System today announced the launch of the Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Graduate Nursing and Health Professions, expanding their successful medical school partnership to meet the increasing need for nurse practitioners and physician assistants to deliver community-based health care.

Pending state approval, the school will offer a three-year, part-time program leading to a Master of Science degree in nursing as a family nurse practitioner or an adult-gerontology acute care nurse practitioner.

Kathleen Gallo, PhD, MBA, RN, FAAN, senior vice president and chief learning officer at North Shore-LIJ Health System and an associate professor of science education at the Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, has been appointed founding dean of the nursing school.

In addition to nursing, Hofstra’s two existing programs in Physician Assistant Studies – a dual degree program and a graduate program – will be housed in the new school. The Physician Assistant Studies graduate program is ranked #70 in the nation, according to the 2016 U.S. News & World Report Best Graduate Schools report.

“This is a natural next step in our partnership with North Shore-LIJ Health System,” said Hofstra University President Stuart Rabinowitz. “Meeting the need for accessible, high-quality health care requires well-trained medical professionals of all types. The Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Graduate Nursing and Health Professions, together with the medical school and our School of Health Sciences and Human Services, will help build a comprehensive network of health care options that will serve our region for decades to come.”

The Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Graduate Nursing and Health Professions will continue the innovative, holistic, patient-centered approach pioneered by the medical school, an educational model that focuses on treating people, rather than illnesses, and emphasizes community-based care.

“Through this new School of Graduate Nursing and Health Professions, we are taking another bold step toward redesigning both medical and nursing education to reflect the rapid changes occurring in the way healthcare is accessed, delivered and paid for in this country,” said North Shore-LIJ President & CEO Michael J. Dowling. “In keeping with our hands-on approach to education, North Shore-LIJ’s 19 hospitals, more than 400 outpatient facilities, our simulation center and all other resources across the health system will be available as learning laboratories for students in this innovative new program.”

The number of nurse practitioners in the United States has doubled over the last decade, from 106,000 in 2004 to 205,000 in 2014, according to the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. And the Bureau of Labor Statistics, citing the impact of healthcare legislation, increased emphasis on preventative care and an aging population, projects the number of jobs in advanced nursing roles, including nurse practitioners, will increase by 31 percent by 2022.

Nurse practitioner and physician assistant are ranked among the top 10 best jobs in 2015, according to U.S. News & World Report.

“With the Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine and this new school focused on the training of future nurse practitioners and physician assistants, we have a unique opportunity to pursue an interprofessional education curriculum different than any other in the New York area,” said Dr. Gallo. “As our population continues to age and as more people become insured as part of the Affordable Care Act, nurse practitioners and physician assistants will both be key in meeting the growing demand for care."

Dr. Gallo brings to the new school a blend of scholarly, clinical and management experience. At North Shore-LIJ, Gallo is responsible for leadership development throughout the health system. She has more than 25 years’ experience in emergency nursing, and previously served as the health system’s director for emergency medicine and vice president for emergency medical services.

She also serves on the boards of the American Association of Colleges of Nursing Futures Task Force, the American Nurses Foundation Board, the National Advisory Council on Nurse Education and Practice for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. She is a fellow of the American Academy of Nursing and the New York Academy of Medicine, and is a distinguished scholar and fellow of the National Academies of Practice.

To view a video about the Hofstra North Shore-LIJ Graduate School of Nursing and Health Professions, please click HERE:

Hofstra University is nationally ranked and recognized private university in Hempstead, NY that is one of only two universities chosen to host consecutive presidential debates (2008 and 2012). At Hofstra, students get the best of both worlds. Our campus, with its ivy-covered buildings and lush green quads, is 25 miles from New York City and all its cultural, recreational and professional opportunities. We offer small classes and personal attention, with the resources, technology and facilities of a large university, including the Maurice A. Deane School of Law and the Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine. Hofstra University is a dynamic community of more than 11,000 students from around the world who are dedicated to civic engagement, academic excellence and becoming leaders in their communities and their careers.

North Shore-LIJ Health System is one of the nation's largest health systems, delivering world-class clinical care throughout the New York metropolitan area, pioneering research at The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, a visionary approach to medical education highlighted by the Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, and healthcare coverage to individuals, families and businesses through the CareConnect Insurance Co. Inc. North Shore-LIJ cares for people at every stage of life at 19 hospitals and more than 400 outpatient physician practices throughout the region. North Shore-LIJ’s owned hospitals and long-term care facilities house more than 6,400 beds, employ nearly 11,000 nurses and have affiliations with about 10,000 physicians. With a workforce of about 54,000, North Shore-LIJ is the largest private employer in New York State. For more information, go to www.northshorelij.com.