Recommended Reading Journal Sentinel book editor Jim Higgins highlights things worth reading, in print and online SHARE

By of the

I'm reading and commenting on a story from The Library of America's recently published 'John Updike: The Collected Stories' each Wednesday until I finish the collection or give up.

In "A Gift From the City," John Updike establishes a satirical tone in the opening sentence: "Like most happy people, they came from well inland." In the case of Jim, a young husband and successful product/packaging designer, that's way, way inland, meaning Minnesota.

Jim and his wife Liz live in the City, meaning New York, but Jim in particular is not quite OF the city yet. This may be reflected in his panicky response when Liz, on the phone, tells him a young Negro (hello 1950s!) pressed the buzzer of their apartment, taking semi-coherently about coming from North Carolina and needing money for his family. Liz gave the man $10 (a big handout for 1958); he promised/threatened to come back Saturday to thank her husband.

"His recent fortunes had been so good, James had for months felt some harsh blow was due." He had been placating fate by giving to beggars every day -- between one and two dollars a day "to Salvation Army bell ringers, sidewalk violinists, husky blind men standing in the center of the pavement with their beautiful German shepherds, men in crutches offering yellow pencils, mumbling drunks anxious to shake his hand and show him the gash beneath their hats, men noncommitally displaying their metal legs in subway tunnels."

"He must wear," Jim thinks, "the aureole of the soft touch."

The Negro will return more than once to their apartment. Most urban natives would recognize immediately that they are being conned and send him on his way. But Jim, not completely at home in the city yet, lacks the spine to do so and resents the man. He also resents his wife for getting them in this fix: "He had been raised to believe in strong women and recessive husbands." The money is not the issue here -- Jim is seen as doing well at work, even getting a bonus during the story. It's the entanglement that Jim can't cut himself out of: "And the angrier he grew at the Negro, the less he wanted to see him, the more he dreaded him, an opponent invincibly armed with the weapon of having seem him as a fool."

The Negro, by the way, is never named in the story, keeping him firmly in the convenient symbol/Other category, and diminishing the story's potential quality.

"A Gift From the City" was published in the New York on April 12, 1958. It was selected for annual "Best American Short Stories 1959" anthology (which also includes the Philip Roth story, "The Conversion of the Jews").

Please join me Jan. 1 to consider "Intercession," the first of many golf stories that Updike would publish.

Previous blog entries in this series (titles with a double asterisk would go in my hypothetical Best of John Updike collection):

"Incest"

"A Trillion Feet of Gas"

"The Lucid Eye in Silver Town"

"Sunday Teasing"

** "His Finest Hour"

"Who Made Yellow Roses Yellow?"

"Snowing in Greenwich Village"

"Toward Evening"

"The Kid's Whistling"

"Dentistry and Doubt"

** "Tomorrow and Tomorrow and So Forth"

"A Game of Botticelli"

"Friends From Philadelphia"

"Ace in the Hole"

"An Introduction"