Loveland Housing Authority is building new units for formerly homeless veterans, flood survivors and working families

The Loveland Housing Authority plans to start construction in August on a 70-unit affordable housing development for formerly homeless veterans, flood survivors who lost their homes in the 2013 flood and working families who qualify.

The Edge — a $20 million development with one-, two- and three-bedroom units —will be built near east 15th Street and Boyd Lake Avenue.

The Housing Authority was able to secure $2,139,234 in federal and state low-income housing tax credits, $2.7 million in Community Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery funds for the project and $1.2 million in fee waivers from the city.

Executive Director Sam Betters said the authority is working with its investor partner now and has the capital structure of the project identified.

Construction on the development is expected to take a year, with some of the first units potentially being available after 10 months of construction.

Housing Authority officials say rental rates in Loveland are at the highest they've ever been while vacancy rates are the lowest, according to survey results. The Housing Authority has 2,700 families and individual households on it's wait list.

"The reality is it puts a very small dent on our wait-list," Betters said. "In terms of changing the dynamics of the affordable need in the community, it's not going to do that."

But, he said, it's important to keep in mind that every "increment" helps.

Advertisement

Director of Housing Moofie Miller said 10 of the units will be reserved for veterans who are transitioning from temporary housing into permanent housing. Referrals for these units will come from Rocky Mountain Human Services — funded through the Veterans Administration, other governmental agencies and private partners— whose staff members work with homeless veterans and provide services to them.

Miller said the goal for the veterans' units in the project — where they'll have their own separate building — is for them to serve as a self-managed complex.

They'll have a community room where they can have group meetings and develop relationships with one another.

"It takes a veteran to understand a veteran," Miller said.

The Housing Authority plans to form partnerships for veterans' services for those who live in the complex — House of Neighborly Service provides emergency food and clothing; Habitat for Humanity offers budgeting and home care classes; and a potential partnership with Hearts and Horses would offer therapeutic riding. And, community members have already stepped up and offered donations. A volunteer program is also in the works.

"We've received a lot of interest from the community," Miller said. "I'm excited that I really strongly believe that the community's going to embrace this and veterans are going to feel appreciated and supported."

The hope, Miller said, is the veterans will move from homelessness to transitional housing to more permanent housing, such as the Edge, to then even their own homes, such as those from Habitat for Humanity.

The 60 other homes will be considered workforce and flood victims housing (High Park fire victims can also apply), split into six different buildings.

Betters said many flood and fire survivors either lost their homes or haven't been able to go back, and this housing development will go toward making Loveland more sustainable.

"We're really excited," Betters said. "This is going to be the first family project for quite some time."

Rental rates will be based on income. Section 8 vouchers are accepted. For more information on the Loveland Housing Authority or how to apply to its units, visit lovelandhousing.org.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.