It’s the Wall Street equivalent of speaker of the House.

Regulating the big banks — a task that falls to the superintendent of New York’s Department of Financial Services — is getting a rep as one of the most thankless, unpopular and politically fraught jobs in the financial industry.

Five months after Ben Lawsky stepped down from the position, and with acting superintendent Anthony Albanese expected to leave at the end of this year, Gov. Andrew Cuomo is struggling to line up a permanent replacement to lead an office that has brought in billions to the state’s coffers, sources told The Post.

There are a couple of reasons why the position has gotten a bad rap recently.

First, potential candidates were turned off after reports surfaced last month that Cuomo was meddling with Albanese’s independence, such as demanding approval before subpoenas are issued in any investigation, sources said.

“It was always intended from the beginning that Mr. Albanese would be in the acting superintendent position on a temporary basis and that he would return to the private sector,” said Matt Anderson, a DFS spokesman.

“All enforcement decisions have been and are made independently by the Department of Financial Services.”

“Despite efforts to defang New York’s top financial watchdog, Cuomo is said to be on the hunt for a bulldog criminal prosecutor.”

Cuomo created the state agency in 2011, a move that put more power and money into his hands. With the ability to revoke bank licenses in New York, the new regulator could extract big penalties from the financial industry.

Initially led by Lawsky, the DFS aggressively went after big banks and was at times accused of overreaching.

When France’s BNP Paribas was targeted by US prosecutors for illicit business with Sudan and Iran, Lawsky led the charge and collected $2.2 billion for the state, the largest piece of the total $9 billion settlement.

The banks are now pushing back, using lobbyists to lean on the governor’s office to pick a kinder, gentler superintendent, sources said.

There’s also the perception that Lawsky, who now runs his own firm advising companies about regulatory compliance and lectures part-time at Stanford University, had a hard time landing a job at a big law firm due to unpopularity.

“If they think you’re being unfair, they’ll definitely hold a grudge,” said one attorney in private practice who represents some banks. “Rightly or wrongly, that was the perception about Ben [Lawsky].”

Sources close to Lawsky, who declined to comment, insisted this was not the case and that he intended to start his own consulting firm before leaving the DFS.

Despite efforts to defang New York’s top financial watchdog, Cuomo is said to be on the hunt for a bulldog criminal prosecutor.

Among those considered are Sean Coffey, a partner at Kramer Levin and a former federal prosecutor, and Michele Hirschman, a partner at Paul Weiss and a former DFS prosecutor. Both have signaled that they don’t want the job, sources said.

Neither returned requests for comment.

Other names that have been floated include: Jonathan Schwartz, JPMorgan Chase’s investment bank’s former general counsel; Bridget Healy, ING’s top lawyer; and Hector Gonzalez, a former federal prosecutor.

The governor’s office is “conducting a robust and thorough search for the right person to ensure DFS’s strong enforcement of the rules of the road for Wall Street continues and lead the agency into the future,” said Dani Lever, a spokeswoman for Cuomo.