Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey will keep its phone lines and retail locations open late as the Feb. 15 open enrollment deadline looms for individuals and families to purchase a 2015 health insurance policy under the Affordable Care Act.

The federal Department of Health and Human Services announced that, through Jan. 30, more than 216,000 New Jerseyans have purchased 2015 health insurance at HealthCare.gov, where government subsidies are available to defray the cost of coverage.

According to HHS, more than 80 percent of New Jerseyans who have purchased plans at HealthCare.gov qualified for subsidies.

Open enrollment for 2015 plans began Nov. 15, and HHS reported that, as of December 2014, 61 percent of New Jerseyans who enrolled via HealthCare.gov got coverage for $100 or less a month, after federal subsidies. The subsidies are based on income, and phase out completely at four times the federal poverty level, or $46,680 a year for an individual and $95,400 a year for a family of four.

Click here to subscribe to the NJBIZ e-newsletters

Horizon said it’s conducting an “Insure-A-Thon” to accommodate consumers still shopping for health insurance coverage for 2015.

Individuals who want to purchase health insurance and determine if they qualify for a federal subsidy can speak with a Horizon sales agent by calling (866) 260-3667. As part of the Horizon Insure-A-Thon, phone agents will be available during the following extended operating hours beginning Friday: From Friday to Wednesday, 8 a.m. to 10 p.m.; from Thursday to Feb. 15, 8 a.m. to midnight.

Horizon’s four shopping mall locations also will offer extended hours to meet with consumers and help them enroll. Horizon has mall locations at Woodbridge Center; Jersey Gardens in Elizabeth; Newport Center in Jersey City; and Willowbrook Mall in Wayne. Horizon’s mall hours will be: from Monday to Thursday, 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. and from Friday to Feb. 15, 10 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.



At the Horizon Connect Center, located in the East Gate Square Shopping Center in Moorestown, individuals can walk in to get answers to their health insurance questions and receive face-to-face help with purchasing a policy. Horizon Connect will be have the following extended hours, beginning this weekend: Saturday: 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Sunday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Feb. 13, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Feb. 14, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.; and Feb. 15, 9 a.m. to midnight.



“Horizon is committed to working with consumers one-on-one to answer their health insurance questions and help them purchase a policy that meets their needs and their budget,” said Joseph Albano, vice president of consumer and dental markets.

This year, New Jerseyans can choose from five health insurance companies on HealthCare.gov, up from three last year. The insurers now offering coverage in New Jersey are: Horizon; AmeriHealth New Jersey; Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey; Oscar Insurance; and UnitedHealthcare.

HHS said New Jerseyans can now choose from an average of 45 plans, up from 26 in 2014.

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

1,700 to lose jobs as a result of Izod Center closure

RWJ Foundation puts another $500M toward childhood obesity fight, bringing its total commitment to $1B

Christie signs bill merging NJSEA, Meadowlands Commission