SPRING HILL — Fire Station No. 1 opened its doors Friday to showcase a recent remodel that was made possible through an $11,000 donation from Lowe’s Home Improvement.

“Lowe’s Heroes” is an annual employee volunteer program, which provides thousands of hours of community support each year. Employees are encouraged to adopt a volunteer project through a local nonprofit or public school. The employees at the Highway 31 Lowe’s in Spring Hill chose to give Fire Station No. 1, located at 440 Beechcroft Rd., a slick, new upgrade.

“Lowe’s is 100 percent dedicated to being part of the community, growing with the community and showing that,” said Lowe’s store manager Mike Behrens. “That’s what these projects are about. It’s not about anything, but just being a partner with the community.”

Sixteen Lowe’s employees worked alongside SHFD firefighters, who volunteered during their off-duty time to complete the project, which took around two weeks. Together, they applied a fresh coat of paint on the station’s walls, installed kitchen cabinets and counter-tops, refinished the truck bay floor, put up new ceiling tiles, built a custom desk at the front entrance, and installed new door hardware and kick plates.

The paint used was donated by Olympic Paints &Stains.

The donation will end up saving the station around $15,000 of its yearly expenses, Spring Hill Fire Chief Terry Hood said.

“You should have seen it before, the walls were yellow and you walked in and it was just like a day-care,” Hood said.

He said the way the fire station got involved with the Lowe’s Heroes program came after he went in to buy a new front door for the Spring Hill station, which he said had a gap in it, which was causing grass to blow in.

“One thing led to another, and they said ‘Here’s what we do for the community,’ so that’s how we came about doing it, because we replaced the front door,” Hood said. “So, it’s kind of funny how things happen.”

Other donors for the Fire Station No. 1 project included local restaurants and grocery stores — Jet’s Pizza, Papa John’s of Spring Hill, Amigos Mexican Grill, Publix and Chik-Fil-A — who provided workers with free meals.

Lowe’s Heroes have also completed other projects in the Spring Hill area, including “beautifying” Eden Park with a new fountain and building dugouts for the baseball fields at Heritage Park.

Behrens said in 2013, Lowe’s donated $1.75 million, which included rebuilding projects in Arizona, Colorado, Illinois, Oklahoma, Texas and other states impacted by destructive fires, floods and tornadoes.

“It’s just nice to be able to give back,” Behrens said. “It’s nice for us to be able to have the freedom to do something like this and give back to the community, especially the folks that when something happens to us, they’re responding to us.”