It’s official. As part of the NHL’s two-game Stadium Series next season, the Avalanche will face the Detroit Red Wings on Saturday night, Feb. 27, 2016 at Coors Field.

The NHL’s Winter Classic will be Boston vs. Montreal at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough.

The other Stadium Series game will be Minnesota-Chicago at the University of Minnesota’s TCF Bank Stadium on Sunday, Feb. 21.

The Avalanche issued a news release in the wake of the league announcement, quoting team president Josh Kroenke and executive vice president/GM Joe Sakic.

“We are incredibly proud and excited to be hosting this extraordinary event,” said Kroenke. “The Coors Light NHL Stadium Series has been very successful, and we are honored to be part of it. We would like to thank the National Hockey League for selecting our organization. I’m especially happy for Avalanche fans, who have been instrumental in our team’s success since arriving in Denver.

“The outdoor game will be the headline event of our franchise’s 20th anniversary season in Colorado, with many other great events planned throughout the year.”

Said Sakic: “This is a great day for our organization and our fans. Playing in an outdoor game will be an amazing experience for everyone. To have this game in the state of Colorado, in a terrific venue like Coors Field, is something we are truly looking forward to.”

At the All-Star Game weekend in Columbus, commissioner Gary Bettman touched on the game at his news conference Saturday, noting, “where better to play a Coors Light NHL Stadium Series than at Coors Field. And that game will be played in prime time.”

The NHL and the NHL Players Association also announced that the World Cup of Hockey will return for an eight-team tournament in Toronto from Sept. 17 to Oct. 1, 2016. The eight teams: Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Russia, Sweden, United States, Europe (other European nations), and North American Youngstars. The latter will be players from the U.S. and Canada who are 23 and under.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei