Terry Ashe, executive director of Tennessee Sheriffs’ Association (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Law enforcement is fighting an ever-growing battle against prescription drug abuse.

This is a complex problem with no easy answers; new abuse-deterrent medications may be first step.

The "Opioid Abuse Reduction Act" (HB 403) has been passed by the Senate, awaits House vote.

The scope of prescription drug abuse in Tennessee is staggering.

There are an estimated 69,100 Tennesseans addicted to prescription opioids, according to the state Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services.

There's further evidence that Tennessee is facing an epidemic:

In 2012, prescription opioids became the No. 1 substance for abuse in Tennessee – besting alcohol for the first time;

The number of ER visits for prescription drug poisoning increased 40 percent from 2005 to 2010.

Drug-related crimes have increased 33 percent from 2005 to 2012.

As the former sheriff of Wilson County, I started the 15th Judicial District Drug Task Force because we were seeing increased drug trade in Wilson as well as Jackson, Macon, Smith and Trousdale counties. Over time, prescription drug trafficking continued to increase.

In my role as executive director of the Tennessee Sheriff's Association, our member sheriffs and other law-enforcement professionals are fighting an ever-growing battle against prescription drug abuse. The cases may run from the individual, who first started the habit stealing pills from a friend or relative and now steals to pay for his or her drugs, to the "doc-shopping" addict to the for-profit "pain clinic."

Most of us are familiar with these medicines, among them are Vicodin, Percocet and Hydrocodone. You may have been prescribed one of them after surgery or know a relative who takes them for chronic pain. But there are those who are getting high by crushing and snorting, chewing or shooting up these pain medications.

This is a complex problem with no easy answers, although the new abuse-deterrent medications may be a first step. This is new technology, approved by the FDA, which allows these medications to be manufactured in a way that makes the opioid useless if crushed to snort or mixed with water to inject.

Taking a look at these new medications – along with the overall prescription drug abuse problem – is part of pending legislation in the Tennessee General Assembly. The "Opioid Abuse Reduction Act" (House Bill 403) would establish a working group, set up by the Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services, to look at the issue of opioid abuse in Tennessee – focusing primarily on TennCare patients. For years, we have seen a growing number of lower-income individuals who abuse opioids and who are more likely to sell these pills to pay for their habit.

This bill has been passed by the Senate and is expected to go to the full House for a vote soon. The legislation will also study the latest data about opioid abuse as well as the direct and indirect costs as well.

There is no single study effort that will solve this critical problem, but it will help raise awareness of the issue and identify techniques to fight the crisis.

What it will take is Tennesseans coming together – law enforcement, doctors and nurses, state government, the faith community and concerned citizens – to work together to end this devastating epidemic.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1ynmMGE