Governor Chris Christie (R-NJ) stabbed President Obama in the back over the weekend, claiming that after six years, we still “don’t know” whether Obama cares about the United States.

This is coming from the man who knows that President Obama cares about the U.S. because Obama put aside all partisan differences when Christie’s state was hit by a devastating hurricane, and even gave the Governor access to him 24 hours a day in case Christie needed anything.

Reporting for CNN from Nashua, New Hampshire in a piece titled “Christie: ‘We don’t know’ whether Obama cares about the U.S.”, Cassie Spodak wrote:

“I feel like we really have had a President for the last six and a half years that we still don’t even know,” Christie said at a town hall event in Exeter, New Hampshire. “We don’t know what he really believes in. We don’t know what he really is willing to fight for. We don’t know whether he’s really willing to fight for anything.” Christie added: “We don’t know who he really likes or dislikes. We don’t know whether he really cares about his own party, or the other party, or about the country.”

We don’t know what Obama stands for? Really? President Obama has made it perfectly clear what he stands for, and unlike Governor Christie, Obama actually stands for those things even when the heat is on.

Chris Christie was all about President Obama when he needed something for his state, but now that he is losing support for his hopeful bid for the GOP nomination, Chris Christie is all bluster and projection. It is Christie, of course, who is demonstrating someone who does not stand for their principles, when he stabs Obama in the back questioning the President’s patriotism.

We don’t know if Obama is willing to fight for anything? LOL. See Obamacare. That was a bit of a fight. It made a stir. It’s still making a stir. So, count one for the rest of the country knows that Obama is willing to fight for affordable health insurance for everyone.

What is Christie willing to fight for? His state? Yes, but now that he got what he wanted, he’s all mean girl in the hallway — no spine, no backbone. No courage to stand for what he really believes in.

We don’t know who Obama likes? Yes, it’s true, the President isn’t someone who makes decisions based on personal emotions. He doesn’t run around bullying school teachers like Christie does. And in Christie’s circles, this is a sign of strength — bullying a constituent. So it follows that because Obama doesn’t make it a habit to bully people like a crude school yard child, Christie isn’t sure who he “likes”. President Obama is a person of ideas, not personalities. He’s a thinker. But he is also a man of decisive action, who made the call to get Bin Laden. We aren’t sure who he likes? That’s just weak tea politics.

Chris Christie is suffering from a string of high profile investigations and accusations, so naturally he is turning to Obama hate to save himself. If he just hates Obama enough, and accuses the President of not loving America, Republicans will love him.

And what does that say about Republicans? They don’t seem to care what a candidate stands for — so long as the candidate will act like a school yard bully tossing rocks at the President. The GOP seems to know no bottom for juvenile, childish behavior. Chris Christie is proof of that.