Ex-stripper Renee Talley shows and tells the horror of her botched butt implants she was once able to flip inside-out.

Ex-stripper Renee Talley shows and tells the horror of her botched butt implants she was once able to flip inside-out. E! Entertainment/YouTube

During a midlife crisis, men and women may seek a new sports car, a love affair, or even plastic surgery during this period of self-reflection. A 45-year-old former Las Vegas stripper was no exception to the rule, as she sought to make a drastic change to her appearance during the transitional phase. Renee Talley’s desire to plump her rump ended in botched butt implants. A viral video shows her flipping them inside-out, putting her and her backside in the spotlight.

“I went through a little midlife crisis and I wanted the volume and fullness back at the top of my butt,” said Talley, on the latest episode of E!’s Botched. In 2010, six months after Talley got plastic surgery, she noticed the silicone injections began to backfire, and she started to develop health issues. The silicone spread up to her back and back down her legs, leading to an undetermined autoimmune disease.

Autoimmune diseases following silicone or paraffin implantation are rarely encountered complications of plastic surgery. In a 1990 case study, a 42-year-old woman developed clinical and immunological features of systemic lupus erythematosus 11 years after silicone augmentation. Although it is unclear what autoimmune disease Talley has developed, she recalls having a lot of fatigue and a lot of “pain and sensitivity” in her butt. “I was having stomach issues and bathroom problems and it progressively got worse,” she said.

Doctors advised Talley they would have to remove the silicone and some tissue that would leave her with “some deformities,” the NY Daily News reported. Relentlessly, Talley fought to get implants to fill the space, which eventually led to her viral video in 2012 where she put her hands underneath her butt, explaining: “This is my implant flipping backwards. I don't think an implant's supposed to do that. It shouldn't be able to flip.”

Talley confesses she was being vain, and now hopes that her horror story will make other women think twice before doing anything drastic to change their appearance. “I don’t really look in the mirror at myself anymore because I’m not happy with the way my butt looks,” she said. “Once you ruin it, you can’t go back and fix it.”

The American Society of Plastic Surgeons reports 10,000 buttock augmentation procedures were performed in the U.S. in 2013, up 16 percent from 2012.