Sign up for the newsletter: http://on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup

ISRAEL PULLS FORCES FROM GAZA AS CEASE-FIRE BEGINS: Israel withdrew all its military forces from the Gaza Strip early Tuesday, a military spokesman said. The pullout, which finishes an Israeli ground operation that began July 17, was completed before a 72-hour cease-fire agreement between Israel and Hamas went into effect at 8 a.m. local time, the spokesman said. But the cease-fire remained fragile. The Israeli Defence Forces said a barrage of 20 rockets was fired into Israel around the deadline. A Hamas-run news station reported that two houses were hit by Israelis in northern Gaza.

Reuters

No previous cease-fire in the conflict has lasted more than a day, but U.S. officials said they are hopeful that this one will work. Both sides are under pressure to stop fighting. Israel said it has destroyed more than a third of Hamas’s estimated arsenal of 10,000 rockets and razed more than 30 tunnels, and at least 260,000 of the territory’s 1.8 million people have been displaced, the U.N. said. The U.S., meanwhile, has upped its pressure on Israel in recent days to scale back the operation and negotiate a durable cease-fire. Nicholas Casey, Adam Entous and Joshua Mitnick report.

CAROL E. LEE’S EARLY HIT: FORECASTING PRESIDENT OBAMA’S FINAL TWO YEARS IN OFFICE

With the prospect of a Republican takeover of the Senate looming, the White House is quietly mulling potential silver linings of such a dynamic during President Barack Obama‘s final two years in office. While it’s hard to find anyone in the administration who sees any upside for Mr. Obama if the GOP controls both chambers of Congress–certainly no one is making a public case–one optimistic view of a GOP-controlled Congress is that maybe Mr. Obama would finally be able to cut some deals. Read Carol E. Lee’s full post in Washington Wire.

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

HOSPITALS CASH IN ON NEWLY INSURED: A rush of newly insured patients using health services has boosted hospital operators’ fortunes but has racked up costs that insurers didn’t anticipate, corporate filings and interviews with executives show. People are getting more back surgeries, seeking maternity care and showing up at emergency rooms more frequently, boosting income for hospital operators. At one health-care company, patient volumes rose 4% in the second quarter compared with a year earlier, while uninsured inpatient admissions slid 22%—and earnings rose 37%. Christopher Weaver reports.

Bloomberg News

UKRAINE VOLUNTEER LIES IN DONETSK PRISON: A wounded Ukrainian volunteer is being held by pro-Russian separatists in a basement in Donetsk, Ukraine. His jailer, Oleg Mamiyev, is a Russian citizen, with a kickboxing background and combat experience in Russia’s war with Georgia in 2008. Mr. Mamiyev is part of a chaotic insurgent movement that, with Moscow’s help, has brought to east Ukraine the kind of warfare—featuring assorted militias, artillery, tanks and trenches—that calls to mind World War II and the 1990s Balkan conflicts. Philip Shishkin reports.

WHY WATERGATE LIVES ON: Why has Watergate, even 40 years after President Richard Nixon‘s resignation, remain seared into the collective American memory? Gerald F. Seib writes that it forced changes in the country’s political course that live on today. Watergate’s legacy, he writes, is the age of cynicism that persists today.

Everett Collection

ALSO IN THE NEWS: A last-minute deal between two of Colorado’s top Democrats would keep anti-fracking measures off the ballot in November … Nearly one in four U.S. banks said they had eased mortgage-lending standards for borrowers with strong credit in the second quarter … A man who recently returned from West Africa with symptoms consistent with the Ebola virus is being tested for the disease in New York City … Former White House press secretary James Brady, who was shot during the 1981 assassination attempt on Reagan, died Monday.

–Compiled by Rebecca Ballhaus

NEIL KING JR. (VIDEO): WHY AFRICA IS IMPORTANT TO THE U.S.

President Barack Obama has invited leaders from nearly 50 African nations to Washington for a reason: Six of the ten fastest-growing countries are in Africa as is much of the world’s untapped oil and mineral resources. It’s also an untapped resource for U.S. goods. But, Africa is also drifting away from the U.S. and toward China. WSJ’s Neil King Jr. explains what U.S. leaders hope to accomplish this week at the U.S.-Africa Summit.

HERE’S A LOOK AT THE DAY AHEAD

–AFRICAN LEADERS SUMMIT: The first ever U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit in Washington, D.C., continues through Wednesday. Discussions on trade, security and governance are planned. Read a brief guide to the event in Washington Wire.

–ECONOMY: The Commerce Department releases factory orders for June at 10 a.m. EDT; The Institute for Supply Management releases its service sector index for July at 10 a.m.

–PRIMARIES: In Kansas, Republican Sen. Pat Roberts will finally see if the unforced errors he’s committed will cost him a chance for a fourth term. Mr. Roberts has led radiologist Milton Wolf in all of the state’s polling, though Mr. Wolf has narrowed the gap in recent weeks. In Michigan, Republican Rep. Justin Amash, known as “Dr. No,” will see if he was able to persuade Michigan voters to say yes to his re-election campaign.

WHAT WE’RE READING AROUND THE WEB

Daniel Bekele, Africa director at leftist Human Rights Watch, argues in Foreign Policy magazine that when it comes to Africa, the U.S. tends to put good governance and human rights on the back burner while emphasizing trade and fighting terrorism – including during the White House’s U.S.-Africa Summit, which has left activists “on the outside looking in at a time when independent voices are under sustained attack in so many African countries.”

Louise Sheiner, a senior fellow at Brookings, argues that growth in health-care spending, which has slowed in recent years, will likely resume once economic recovery is well under way because changes in national health spending correspond with changes in the Gross Domestic Product. But, she writes, “We still don’t fully understand why [Medicare] spending growth has declined so much.”

Robert Samuelson writes in the Washington Post about the anxious generation: parents of millennials who worry that the economy is endangering the future of their offspring and other young adults. “As parents, our sense of self-worth depends heavily on the success and happiness of our children. These seem increasingly imperiled,” he writes.

The child refugee crisis is a U.S. problem now because the drug-linked violence the children are fleeing is in large part the U.S.’s fault, writes Charles Kenny for Bloomberg Businessweek. “Anti-drug policies in the U.S. and Europe have not succeeded in curbing drug use or in raising drug prices, but they have considerably increased crime and violence worldwide.”

In WSJ’s Think Tank, Michael O’Hanlon writes about the risks in focusing on withdrawal from Afganistan. “The U.S. has fought this frustrating war for more than a dozen years. We should not lose patience at such a late, but still crucial, stage.

MILESTONES

U.S. trade with Africa is less than one-fifth the volume of its trade with Europe, and 60% the level of China’s trade with Africa.

America’s merchandise exports grew 37% to 13 Asian countries other than China between 2009 and 2013, according to a report by the MAPI Foundation, while China hiked exports to those countries by 85%.

TWEET OF THE DAY

@DanaPerino: RIP James Brady. What an example of public service he set in the briefing room named after him. He’ll be sorely missed & fondly remembered.

@AriFleischer: Sad to hear the news about James Brady. I never met him, but all briefings are held in the James Brady Briefing Room. May he rest in peace.

FEEDBACK: Welcome to the new Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter, the Journal’s morning rundown of the biggest news stories and exclusive features from Washington on politics, policy, financial regulation, defense and more. Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.

SIGN UP: Capital Journal Daybreak, straight to your inbox http://on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup