Snow continues falling in and around Denver after a cold front moved into the area Saturday morning.

The storm reached the metro area around noon on Saturday. According to the National Weather Service, up to 3 inches of snow could accumulate this afternoon, with an additional inch falling later this evening.

A NWS forecaster warned the snow would “definitely” impact the roads through Sunday morning.

“The roads will be pretty icy,” he said.

As the storm moves east, northerly winds up to 35 mph are expected in the plains, with snow accumulation up 4 inches. With a solid snow cover already present, blowing snow and dangerous driving conditions are likely.

By early evening, Interstate 70 was closed between Limon and Hays, Kan. There is no estimated time for reopening, according to the Colorado Department of Transportation.

U.S. 287 closed for several hours Saturday afternoon in both directions between Eads, Colo. and the Oklahoma state line. Northbound lanes reopened shortly before 9 p.m., however, southbound U.S. 287 remained closed from Lamar to the Oklahoma state line due to icy and snowy conditions, per CDOT.

U.S. 285 was also closed around 2:45 p.m. for several hours in both directions north of Conifer near Doubleheader Ranch Road after a series of accidents Saturday afternoon, during which an off-duty Jefferson County Sheriff’s Deputy was killed directing traffic.

U.S. 285 reopened at about 7:20 p.m., according to CDOT.

The weather caused about 60 flight cancellations at Denver International Airport as of about 5 p.m., many of them regional flights to mountain towns, according to airport spokesman Heath Montgomery.

About 1,500 flights will pass through DIA Saturday, and there should not be any significant impact from the weather, Montgomery said.

Travelers are asked to check flydenver.com for delays and more information.

The storm is expected to taper off around midnight with clear skies overnight, according to the NWS, although the temperature will remain below zero on the plains.

Through the weekend, there is an additional chance of snow in the mountains with strong winds in the foothills. By Monday, though, temperatures should return to seasonal levels, with highs in the 40s.

The Colorado Department of Transportation is alerting travelers about likely congestion on the Interstate 70 corridor Saturday and Sunday between Silverthorne and Denver.

Saturday, the worst traffic is expected between 11 a.m. and 6 p.m. CDOT at 1 p.m. reported delays of about an hour between Silverthorne and Denver, with snowy, wet or icy roads from Grand Junction to Limon. Safety metering is currently in effect.

Traffic on Sunday is anticipated to be even worse. Last year, delays of more than an hour were common between 9 a.m. and 8 p.m. As such, CDOT is urging travelers to return to Denver outside these peak travel times.

Anna Gauldin: 303-954-1666, agauldin@denverpost.com