There is something very tempting about forcing illegal aliens into the tender clutches of Obamacare bureaucrats, but I’m doing my best to remain strong.

Right now illegal aliens are specifically prohibited from Obamacare coverage by federal law, unless they are seen driving to the emergency room in a car with an Obama/Biden 2012 bumper stick on the rear. Then they get free medical care and in-state tuition. (Not really, but who knows what the future holds?)

But neither federal law nor an empty treasury is stopping California State Sen. Ricardo Lara from submitting a bill that will cover illegals. Under Lara’s proposal, illegals would be allowed to apply for coverage under Medi-Cal, the state’s home-grown Medicaid plan.

Illegals making $32,000 a year with a family of four would get free coverage. Make more than that and the family could experience the joys of buying insurance under Covered California, which is the state-administered Obamacare exchange.

In a refreshing change from Obama administration actions, this bill is actually constitutional, if you overlook the fact legislators are undermining the rule of law by passing a bill that conflicts with federal immigration law. Under Federalism the Constitution allows states more legislative flexibility than the federal government has.

Unless the state law is in opposition to federal law and unless Barack Obama is in office. Federal law is supposed to prohibit illegal immigration so a law that encourages what the feds prohibit should be ruled unconstitutional. But not in the looking-glass world of Obama. In that alternate reality Arizona’s law that aided enforcement of federal immigration statutes was ruled unconstitutional, California’s act that undermines federal law by encouraging illegals to stay will have smooth sailing.

In keeping with standard Democrat fiscal policy there is no price tag on the measure. Nothing is too expensive for Democrats expressing compassion with our tax dollars. Anthony Wright, executive director of the Health Access special interest group, explained in the Sacramento Bee, “The idea under this bill is to extend the same level of help that the Affordable Care Act provides but to all Californians. It's about fairness and inclusion for all Californians.”

The only problem with that explanation is illegals most certainly aren’t Californians. They are Mexicans, Guatemalans, El Salvadorians, and the like, but not California citizens. But to Lara and his allies that fact doesn’t even constitute a technicality, because he’s certain people who are California citizens won’t object to being taxed more to cover the medical bills of long-term trespassers.