Sioux Falls, SD

A bit of a chill in the air this past week reminds us colder weather patterns aren't too far away.

Now that Labor Day is over and the first 30s of season have arrived in KELOLAND, it's only natural that a few of you would beg the question, what's coming this winter? I'll let Scot put together that forecast over the coming weeks, but one factor he and all of us here in the Storm Center are watching is the El Niño event in the Pacific.

El Niño can be described as weather phenomena that affects weather patterns world-wide driven by above normal sea surface temperatures near the equator in the Pacific Ocean.

It's one factor of many we watch for the winter, but certainly one of the most dominate. The latest picture of ocean temperatures shows the well developed El Niño going on right here in the central Pacific. Notice other areas of the Pacific Ocean are also warmer than normal.

Why is this important? This is the strongest El Niño for late summer since 1997. If this trend continues, it should help deliver warmer than normal temperatures from the northern plains into Canada during the heart of winter and cooler than normal conditions across the southern part of the United States. Keep in mind many details have yet to be worked out of the forecast, but it will prove interesting to watch.

Forecast {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.