Arkansas Works too valuable to lose

From Nancy Lewis,

Mountain Home

As an independent insurance agent, it has been my privilege to try and help people navigate the maze of our insurance system, including the Private Option, or Arkansas Works, if the program is renamed.

A man called a couple of years ago and screamed at me that I shouldn’t be selling “that stuff.” He said, “You ought to be selling annuities.” My reply was, “Sir, how can I sell an annuity to someone working 20 hours a week for minimum wage? But she can now go to the doctor instead of sitting in the in the Emergency Room if she has a health need.” He continued to rant, so I politely ended the call.

My point is this, that everyone I’ve talked to knows we should have never been saddled with the “Affordable Care Act.” However, it appears Arkansas made the best of a bad situation and has worked to have a system in place which benefits a lot of people and local hospitals as well. The last estimate of people enrolled is around 250,000.

Regardless of what some legislators say, that is a substantial number of constituents who need representation. We are fortunate to have a viable hospital in Baxter County. In other places, people have to drive hours to reach a hospital because their local hospital was forced to close, and the delay often has tragic results.

Having also been involved somewhat in the political aspects of the question of the Private Option, I have seen firsthand what some people will do to get elected. Not everything done was ethical or admirable, and I was sorely disappointed to witness some of the things that transpired. I pray our representatives will consider all the demographics of their constituencies and not just the people who contribute to their campaigns.

In closing, I would like to say I support Governor Hutchinson and the members of the legislature who are trying to do the best for the people of Arkansas, because that’s who they were elected to serve.

More answers needed from VA

From Gene and Rose Sadoski,

Mountain Home

My husband and I are very upset about the change of management in our Mountain Home VA clinic. It has served us well for a long time.

We suspect this change came about surreptitiously and in secret.

Why was our local provider not give a chance to bid? Senator Boozman’s office told us that Congress has no influence over what the VA Administration does or decides, but he did try to intervene. Other legislators we contacted did not get back to us after we left messages.

We called various VA-Little Rock offices, which did not provide any insight to this situation. Those who did answer, said we needed to call some other offices. Some of the other offices that we contacted have not responded so far.

Where does the answer lie? With these type of responses, we can only suspect deception and subterfuge.

We are counting on The Baxter Bulletin to dig further.

Read or Share this story: http://www.baxterbulletin.com/story/opinion/2016/04/25/letters-editor/83498824/