In case you missed it earlier this week, the New York Times published an extensive piece detailing how U.S. soldiers serving in Afghanistan have been told to ignore rampant sexual abuse of young children, mostly boys, by Afghan allies because "it's their culture." U.S. soldiers were not only told they would be punished for intervening or stopping a sexual assault, they have been punished for doing so.

Green Beret Charles Martland was discharged from the Army after roughing up an Afghan military commander who admitted, and laughed about, being a child rapist.

After an Afghan police commander admitted to repeatedly raping a little boy after chaining him to a bed for seven days, he was brought on base for questioning by Army Special Forces. When the commander laughed about his atrocities, in addition to beating the boy's mother when she tried to intervene and stop him from assaulting her son, he got roughed up.



Now Sgt. 1st Class Charles Martland, a Green Beret with 11 years of outstanding Army service, is being kicked out of the military as a result of doing the right thing.



Even as the U.S. military denies reports that American troops were told to ignore Afghan child abusers, an 11-year Green Beret who was ordered discharged after he confronted an alleged rapist was informed Tuesday that the Army has denied his appeal.



Sgt. 1st Class Charles Martland earlier this year was ordered discharged by Nov. 1. He has been fighting to stay in, but in an initial decision, the U.S. Army Human Resources Command told Martland that his appeal “does not meet the criteria” for an appeal.



“Consequently, your request for an appeal and continued service is disapproved,” the office wrote in a memo to Martland.

Last night Republican Rep. Duncan Hunter, who has been in contact with the Department of Defense about the case, discussed the appeal denial on The Kelly File.

"Imagine this, you're a 20-year-old kid and you're serving your nation and on your U.S. base you actually see child rapists and pedophiles and hear the scream of little boys at night and you're told it's an Afghan criminal issue," Duncan said. "They were allowing this to happen because they don't want to offend the wrong people. There is a shameful lack leadership and morality in the Army."

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

Unbelievable.