"The American people understand intuitively that it's none of the government's business who they're calling, when they're calling them, who calls them, how long their calls last," Lee said on the Senate floor Tuesday. "The American people intuitively understand what graduate researchers have confirmed, which is that this type of calling data, even just the data itself — not anything having to do with recorded conversations — just the data reveals a lot about an individual, about his or her political preferences, religious views, marital status [and] number of children the person may have."

NSA observers say that changes to the domestic surveillance program will have minimal effect on the agency's Utah Data Center in Bluffdale because the bulk of the information stored there is foreign.

Approval of the measure, already passed by the House, to reform the NSA's actions was a victory for privacy advocates who had raised concerns about government overreach under the guise of national security. But it didn't go far enough for some.

Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., had held up passage of the USA Freedom Act and a short-term extension of part of the now-expired law that allowed the NSA to collect and store the metadata, a move that caused a two-day suspension of the agency's ability to cull the information.

Paul had heralded the expiration, albeit temporary, as the better protection for constitutional rights.

"While some will use fear and intimidation tactics, I believe there is nothing that prevents our intelligence community from continuing to safely guard our nation, while also respecting our Constitution," Paul said in a statement Sunday.

Against the wishes of House GOP leaders, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., attempted to amend the measure Tuesday to give the NSA a full year to comply with the changeover, direct phone companies to alert Congress if they change record-retention policies and to kill a provision to allow privacy advocates to argue against the government's case before a secret court. All three amendments failed.

McConnell — who had fought to simply reauthorize the data collection part of the Patriot Act — said before the vote that changing the law would be a "resounding victory" for former NSA contractor Edward Snowden, whose leaks sparked outrage over the NSA's activities.

"It is also a resounding victory for those who plot to attack our homeland," McConnell said, adding that "It surely undermines American security by taking away one more tool from American war fighters at exactly the wrong time."

Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, joined McConnell in voting against the measure, having unsuccessfully tried to whip up support for McConnell's amendments during Tuesday's GOP luncheon.

"Our terrorist enemies continue to present a clear and present danger to our nation's safety," said Hatch, who as a former head of the Judiciary Committee after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks was a chief architect of the Patriot Act. "We must use a broad array of information-gathering tools to be successful in thwarting their plots and preventing future attacks."

Hatch specifically lamented the passage of the provision that allows privacy advocates to argue against the government in hearings before the secretive Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court.

"Such an approach threatens to insert left-wing activists into an incredibly sensitive and already well-functioning process, a radical move that would stack the deck against our law enforcement and intelligence communities," Hatch warned.

Other lawmakers, of both parties, strongly disagreed, arguing that Americans support reforming the NSA's sweeping information collection, and that the change would have little impact on national security.

Rep. Chris Stewart, a Utah Republican who sits on the House Intelligence Committee, said he was pleased that the Senate passed the House version of the USA Freedom Act without amendments that would have delayed its ultimate passage.