Denver’s City Park was a sea of purple — the official color of the Alzheimer’s movement — as at least 8,000 runners and walkers turned out Saturday at the Walk to End Alzheimer’s.

The Alzheimer’s Association holds more than 600 annual walks nationwide to raise money for the support, care and research of the disease, making it the world’s largest event supporting Alzheimer’s needs.

Saturday’s event marked its 25th year in Denver. More than 60,000 Colorado residents are living with Alzheimer’s disease, according to 2010 U.S. Census data.

Annabel Bowlen — wife of Broncos owner Pat Bowlen, who stepped aside as the team’s CEO in July due to Alzheimer’s disease — cut the ceremonial ribbon to start off the event. Annabel Bowlen, along with family and friends, called themselves Team Super Bowlen and collectively raised more than $68,000.

“This one’s for Pat,” the team said before crossing the starting line.

“People are here today for very personal reasons. Some walk to support the cause and a vision of a world without Alzheimer’s disease; others are here to support someone living with the disease or honor someone they have lost to Alzheimer’s; and some people walk because they have Alzheimer’s disease,” Linda Mitchell, CEO of the Alzheimer’s Association of Colorado, said in a news release.

Beth Christie waited near the starting line for the race to begin. Christie wore a photo of a smiling woman, her grandma Ruth, pinned to her purple shirt that read, “I walk for Ruth.”

“My grandma died of Alzheimer’s,” Christie said. “She had it for 20 years. I’m here today to honor her memory.”

While registration for the walk was free, participants were encouraged to donate to the cause. The Alzheimer’s Association set a $1 million fundraising goal, and officials said 80 percent was reached by Friday. Same-day registration would soon indicate whether the goal was met.

Beth Ryan was prompted to attend the walk for her mother, who suffers from Alzheimer’s disease.

“It’s a hideous disease. There’s no rationalization. You watch this person you love deteriorate,” she said.

Alzheimer’s disease is characterized by disrupting loss of memory, reason, judgment, and often personality changes, according to the Alzheimer’s Association.

Ryan struggled caring for her mother and could not find adequate support until connecting with the Alzheimer’s Association and Denver’s Clermont Park, a continuing care retirement community locally owned by Christian Living Communities.

“The people there are so kind and caring,” Ryan said.

Now, she is grateful that her 89-year-old mother has the attention she needs and hopes Alzheimer’s disease begins getting the attention it deserves.

According to the Alzheimer’s Association, the disease is the sixth-leading cause of death in the nation.

“There needs to be a lot more interest in finding a cure. The disease is so poorly funded by the government,” she said.

Caroline Tysseland is a registered nurse at Clermont Park’s Adult Day Services. Her passion for creating dialogue and awareness about Alzheimer’s brought her to the walk.

Tysseland said she loves her job but is saddened to see an increasing number of Alzheimer’s patients, some as young as 50, in need of care.

“We would like to see political and social change to make a difference and find a cure for Alzheimer’s. It is out of control. We need to be looking for the best practices around the world to help cure this terrible disease,” she said.

A Walk to End Alzheimer’s also took place on Saturday in Colorado Springs. Walks were held earlier in the month in Fort Morgan, Grand Junction, Greeley, Larimer County, Montrose, Pueblo, southwest Colorado and Sterling.

Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-954-1223, ehernandez@denverpost.com or twitter.com/literally_lizzy