After a four-hour hearing, the state’s osteopathic medicine board did not revoke a Tulsa pain physician’s medical license but rather gave him three years probation.

Dr. David Moon, a pain management doctor based in Tulsa and Las Vegas, was given three years probation and will be required, among other things, to complete a substance abuse assessment; check the state’s prescription drug monitoring system on every patient who receives prescription for a scheduled drug; and complete educational courses on record keeping and also on prescribing narcotic painkillers and other scheduled drugs.

Members of the state’s Board of Osteopathic Examiners, which regulates physicians who practice osteopathic medicine, or DOs, voted unanimously Wednesday afternoon after a lengthy meeting and about an hour in executive session.

What happened

The board issued its complaint against Moon after he was arrested in the McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas in April 2013, board records show. Airport workers discovered narcotics and an unregistered gun in Moon’s luggage, according to Oklahoma and Nevada medical board records.

Moon’s attorney Jim Priest said at Wednesday’s board meeting that the Clark County district attorney did not press charges after that arrest.

“We’ve talked about the Nevada incident, and frankly, I don’t think that’s within the province of this board to take any action on it,” Priest said. “The Nevada board has taken action on it, but I think it’s clear from the totality of the evidence...that was much ado about nothing...There’s never been any suggestion or indication that he’s selling pills or pushing pills or getting pills inappropriately.”

Originally, the board’s complaint against Moon included language from a Nevada anesthesiologist who reviewed seven of Moon’s patient medical charts and concluded that Moon’s Nevada clinic “appeared to function as a Schedule II, III, and IV prescription writing facility and not as a bona-fide medical clinic, rehabilitation or pain center, as advertised.”

However, the board agreed with Moon’s attorney to strike that language from its complaint.

Record-keeping issue

At Wednesday’s hearing, Moon told the board about the stressful day that led up to his arrest at the airport.

Moon operates clinics in Tulsa and Las Vegas and frequently travels. That day, he was almost late to the airport and hadn’t had a chance to register the WWII antique gun in his luggage that belonged to his mother’s late husband, he said.

Moon said he had his family members’ prescriptions in his bags because he usually carries them when traveling. He had former patients’ prescriptions because Nevada had recently changed how physicians could dispose of the drugs, he said.

The board also asked questions about a 2008 prescription that Moon had with him for hydrocodone.

A month after his arrest, Moon tested positive for the drug, board records show. Board investigators searched the state’s prescription drug monitoring program and did not find a valid prescription for the drug, according to records.

Additionally, board members asked several questions about Moon’s record keeping.

After Moon’s arrest, board investigators went to his Tulsa office and asked for 31 patient medical records to inspect.

“None of the patient records inspected were complete, nor did any of them fully comply with Board rules for prescribing narcotics,” according to the board’s complaint.