Topics: classical music, Feminism, Marin Alsop, Vasily Petrenko, Life News

Of the many, many professions that suffer from a surfeit of dumb sexism, today let us add orchestra conducting.

Vasily Petrenko, the principal conductor of the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain and the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, had some strong opinions this week about Marin Alsop’s forthcoming history-making performance as the first woman ever to conduct London’s esteemed Last Night of the Proms concert. In a conversation with the Norwegian paper Aftenposten, Petrenko mansplained that orchestras “react better when they have a man in front of them” because “a cute girl on a podium means that musicians think about other things.” With great scientific authority, he added, “Musicians have often less sexual energy and can focus more on the music,” and “When women have families, it becomes difficult to be as dedicated as is demanded in the business.”

It’s a weird rant, to say the least. As backward arguments against women’s advancements go, it doesn’t even make sense. Did Petrenko, who ostensibly works with musicians all the time, forget that orchestras are made up of men and women, gay and straight people? Or did he think that the mere presence of a female, any female, has the same disabling effect on everyone she stands before? Petrenko didn’t do much to unmuddy his statements when he issued a clarification on the Oslo Philharmonic Web site, explaining, “What I said was meant to be a description of the situation in Russia, my homeland. This situation is worsening with some new initiatives of the government. I deeply respect that many musicians, for example the famous violinist Gidon Kremer, feels the same way about the situation there.” The outspoken Gidon Kremer certainly doesn’t seem any opponent of female advancement – this summer he announced an October Berlin concert “in support of the innocent victims of violence and human rights violations in Russia,” including the members of Pussy Riot.

Petrenko went on to say, “Taken out of context I understand that what I said can very easily be perceived in the wrong way. I have the outmost respect for female conductors, for instance the extraordinary talented conductor Marin Alsop and the famous Veronika Dudarova. I’d encourage any girl to study conducting. How successful they turn out to be depends on their talent and their work, definitely not their gender. I also want to add that my beloved wife is a choral conductor.”

So were his remarks just a case of something lost in translation – the thoughts of a Russian, speaking to the Norwegian press, misinterpreted by the British one? Was he commenting on sexism — or simply perpetuating it? It’s hard to say, though it’s worth noting that even within the same newspaper on the same day, Petrenko’s “cute girl” comment has also been interpreted as “sweet girl.” Regardless, however, it’s certainly safe to say that speculating on the sexual “energy” of musicians and the relative sweetness or cuteness of the individual leading in front of the orchestra is wildly inappropriate at best.