GRAND RAPIDS, MI - On Wednesday, Jan. 28, Grand Rapids Public Schools will co-host an enrollment fair for health coverage with Get Covered America (GCA) at City High Middle School.



There are less than three weeks remaining in the current Affordable Care Act open enrollment period, which ends on February 15. The public can sign up for new health coverage, renew or change existing coverage, with free, in-person enrollment assistance.

Federally certified assitances will be available to help West Michigan residents through the enrollment and renewal process, according to a release.



The event follows a Jan. 16 visit by U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Region V. Director Kathleen Falk at the GRPS administration building, where she held a press conference that included Erin Knott, Michigan director of Get Covered America and Mayor George Heartwell.

Related: 'The time is now' to enroll under Affordable Care Act, group urges as deadline nears

In the first year of enrollment, the uninsured rate in Kent County dropped from 16 percent to 10 percent, Knott said. Health care agencies are holding enrollment events and providing application assistance in an effort to reach those who remain uninsured.

Officials stressed the importance of combining local resources to help maximize the number of enrollment opportunities consumers have before the deadline.

Using new enrollment data released by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) this week, an Enroll America analysis shows that 17,873 Kent County residents have enrolled or reenrolled in health coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace as of January 16, according to a press release.

A total of nearly 300,000 Michiganders have now enrolled statewide. Nearly nine in 10 (89 percent) are said to be receiving financial help to lower premiums.

To RSVP, please email sdhanak@enrollamerica.org. City High Middle School is located 1720 Plainfield Ave. NE. The event is in the computer labs from from 4 to 7 p.m.

Callie Melton is the West Michigan organizer for Get Covered America: 616-443-4744

Cmelton@enrollamerica.org.

Monica Scott is the Grand Rapids K-12 education writer. Email her at mscott2@mlive.com and follow her on Twitter @MScottGR or Facebook