CLEVELAND – Hospitals in northeast Ohio say they are well prepared to handle a mass casualty event, such as the terrorist bombings that killed at least 34 people and injured more than 106 others in Brussels Tuesday morning.

Islamic State claims responsibility for bombings

But federal funding for training and supplies has been cut by over 50 percent in the last decade, raising questions about preparedness in the future.

"You have to be concerned," said Beth Gatlin, director of emergency preparedness at the Center for Health Affairs, an advocacy alliance that works with 34 Northeast Ohio hospitals to promote vital health care initiatives.

The center receives annual federal grants from the Department of Health and Human Services to help hospitals respond to cataclysmic events that range from tornadoes to terrorist attacks.

The regional hospital association began receiving the money in 2003 in response to 9/11, Gatlin said.

"We were receiving close to $2 million then," she said. "Now we're down to $800,000."

Those grants are dispersed to 27 acute care facilities in Cuyahoga, Ashtabula, Geauga, Lake and Lorain counties, Gatlin said.

The positive spin on the lack of funding is that Congress believes healthcare facilities are on top of their game when it comes to preparing for and responding to acts of mass destruction.

"The hospitals are well-prepared," Gatlin agreed. "But the cuts bode badly for maintaining training and equipment."

Ron Dziedzicki, chief operating officer at University Hospitals and a major general in the U.S. Army Reserve, wants to see the federal dollars restored. "But I'm not going to use it as an excuse to not be prepared," he said. "You have to do the mission regardless of your funding."

Dziedzicki describes the staff and department heads at the newly minted Level 1 trauma center – and the 18 other hospitals in its regional system – as well-trained in emergency response scenarios.

As are all the local healthcare institutions. They hold monthly emergency management team meetings. They practice regional drills – plane crashes, active shooter events -- coordinated by the Center for Health Affairs. They engage in action review protocols that involve studying natural disasters such Katrina or terrorist attacks like the Paris shootings last November, to identify strategies that might help mitigate such tragedies.

After reviewing footage of the Boston Marathon bombing in April 2013, for example, Dziedzicki said they noticed a lot of the wounded had lost limbs, and there was a lack of tourniquets to stop the bleeding.

University Hospitals then bought 2,000 Combat Application Tourniquets – which it also distributed to first responders such as the University Circle Police Department, Dziedzicki said.

The cut in federal funds makes such acts of preparedness harder, Dziedzicki said.

It also could affect the ability of regional hospitals to respond appropriately to a mass casualty event.

"While we have the necessary equipment now, who's to say there wouldn't be something we need in the future and the funds aren't there to pay for it," said Wendy Hoke, spokeswoman for St. Vincent Charity Medical Center.