For military couples, starting a family can often come with its own unique challenges. But some local organization are working together to make sure that while troops are serving, the ones they leave behind are being served as well.

"January 29th hopefully. He kicks so much he might try to come early," Anisha Ramirez said of her son on the way. "We're gonna call him Christopher Michael Ramirez."

For moms and moms-to-be Saturday's Star Spangled Baby Shower was a celebration that might have otherwise gone unmarked.

"We got here in August," Ramirez said of her husband's recent assignment to Eglin Air Force Base. "I'm not actually gonna have a baby shower this time, because we're so far from family."

"Being in the military, being a military wife, and your husbands deployed or your family is not close to your installation and you don't get to have a baby shower," Brittany Wade said. She is the community liaison for Operation Homefront, which organized the baby shower.

"I think more my husband has challenges," new mom Amanda Meza said. "Because I'm with her all day, so he doesn't really get the same connection because being in the military he's away from her a lot."

Operation Homefront aims to make sure that while one spouse is serving away from the home or even on American soil, their families are still taken care of.

"We're also going to be giving informational resources, so they'll have those in the future," Wade said, referencing the presentations made by local leaders of the Red Cross and Healthy Start Coalition. "And it's also a great opportunity to meet other military moms which doesn't happen that often."

"I didn't think that I would be getting brand new stuff," Meza said. "I just thought it was gonna be this little thing."

The women were treated to lunch and heard from several organizations on proper CPR, what not to eat while pregnant and appropriate car seats. They were also given prizes and plenty of baby supplies. A photographer also provided free maternity photos. The event was sponsored by Booz, Allen and Hamilton.

"I'm shocked because, you know, I didn't expect anyone to do so much for us," Ramirez said.