Angelina Jolie’s brave decision to remove her ovaries and fallopian tubes in her continued quest to reduce her risk of cancer is being hailed as an inspiration for women. But it isn’t for everyone.

The Oscar-winning actress revealed in her op-ed in The New York Times that she took the drastic step so her children will never have to say, “Mom died of ovarian cancer.”

Jolie, whose mother died from the disease in 2007, said she underwent the surgery last week, two years after she underwent a double mastectomy because she carried a mutation in the BRCA1 gene. “It is not easy to make these decisions,” she wrote. “But it is possible to take control and tackle head-on any health issue.”

Over 14,000 women in the U.S. alone died from ovarian cancer last year. Here’s what to know to avoid being a statistic.

WHAT IS THE BRCA GENE?

The BRCA gene, which both men and women have, fixes abnormal DNA in the body. But when the BRCA gene is mutated, “a person is more likely to have abnormal DNA that leads to the development of cancer,” says Dr. Marleen Meyers, the Medical Oncologist and Director of the Survivorship Program NYU's Perlmutter Cancer Center.

In general, women have an 8% chance of developing breast cancer by age 70, and 12% before age 85. However women who have a faulty BRCA gene have a higher risk, upwards of 60%.

Men can also have the BRCA mutation, which means they are both at a greater risk of developing breast cancer and could pass it to their children.

WHY JOLIE CHOSE SURGERY

Patients who learn they have the BRCA mutation have three options: Surveillance (regular blood tests and sonograms), medical management (taking medication to ward off cancer) and surgery, says Dr. Susan Klugman, director of reproductive genetics at Montefiore Medical Center.

"But the best protection against ovarian cancer is the surgery (Jolie) had," Klugman says.

However, a woman not ready to give up her reproductive capabilities may find that surveillance or medical management is a better alternative.

Unfortunately, while doctors have excellent screening methods for breast cancer — including mammograms, ultrasounds, MRIs and more — there are limited resources for catching ovarian cancer.

“That’s why we generally encourage that after (women with cancer risk) finish childbearing they remove their ovaries and fallopian tubes,” says Meyers.

“My patients feel a tremendous sense of relief and are quite happy with their decision to remove their ovaries because they have seen what ovarian cancer looks like,” says Dr. Jill Whyte, a gynecologic oncologist at the North Shore-LIJ Cancer Institute. “They know they have taken a huge step to prevent this disease.”

EARLY MENOPAUSE

Jolie, 39, is starting menopause 10 years younger than the average woman. The earlier a woman begins menopause, the more symptoms she’ll likely have, says Meyers, adding that the average age is 51. Following the removal of her ovaries, Jolie can now expect hot flashes, night sweats, skin changes and sleep issues. While the hormone replacement regimen she’s already begun can counterbalance those symptoms, it’s not for everyone.

Jolie can have the replacement because her breasts have been removed; women who have their breasts and start hormone therapy have an increased risk of breast cancer because they’re adding more estrogen to the body, which could increase their risk of cancer.

THE PROCEDURE IS COSTLY (BUT COMMON)

The laparoscopic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy that Jolie had can cost up to $3,000, according to FairHealth Inc., which collects healthcare claims data. And that’s not including the costs of anesthesia and the patient’s stay at the hospital, which will vary per individual.

But most insurance companies will cover these costs once they find a patient has the faulty BRCA gene. And anyone without insurance can get coverage through the Affordable Care Act, says Dr. Carol Brown, a gynecologic oncologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.

“Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, there really shouldn’t be a situation where someone needs to pay out of pocket for this,” she adds.

A full genetic test can cost more than $3,000, while tests for specific mutations are usually a few hundred dollars, Whyte says. Some, but not all, insurance plans will cover this.

But don’t be too quick to jump into blood tests. Concerned patients should first talk with their personal physician about their family history of cancer. They should then consult a genetic counselor who can talk them through the complicated and possibly pricey process.

“Don’t feel rushed into things,” she says.

WHAT ARE THE ALTERNATIVES?

There isn’t as much scientific research on the effectiveness of non-surgical preventive measures, says Dr. Mark Rosing, the director of the obstetrics and gynecology at St. Barnabas Hospital in the Bronx. However, they should still be considered.

Birth control pills have been found to decrease a woman’s risk of developing ovarian cancer, even if she has the BRCA mutation. But a woman needs to stay on the pill for at least five years to reap that benefit.

Some women stick with the CA-125 blood test, which monitors ovarian cancer by looking for proteins in the blood. Jolie said she gets this test once a year. They can also get transvaginal ultrasounds to screen for ovarian cancer, Rosing says.

Taking a natural approach is an option but not ideal, adds Meyers.

There are lifestyle changes a patient can make to mitigate their menopausal symptoms, however, like sticking to a Mediterranean diet and lowering their BMI if they are overweight since it’s not just ovaries that are making estrogen. “Fat cells make estrogen and very often you can cut hot flashes if you decrease the body’s fat level,” Meyers says.

She adds that while some women opt for plant-based hormone therapy, it’s not necessarily a safer option because it mimics estrogen and may have the same deleterious effects.

Jolie, 39, had a double mastectomy in 2013. (Joel Ryan/Invision/AP) Angelina Jolie and children go to the Sydney Aquarium. (KIRBAN / Splash News) A bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is one option for women who have a family history or are at high risk of ovarian cancer. (shironosov/Getty Images/iStockph/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

JOLIE IS STILL AT RISK

Jolie will have to remain vigilant as she is still at risk for other cancers like colon, pancreatic and skin.

Her risk, though, of developing peritoneal cancer – caused by cancer cells in the abdominal lining – is less than 1%.

“If we took out all your teeth you can’t get a cavity, but you can still get gum disease,” gynecological oncologist Dr. David Fishman, the director of the Mount Sinai Ovarian Cancer Risk Assessment Program, explains in an analogy.

Patients who have their ovaries removed before natural menopause, which usually happens between ages 45 and 55, also have a greater risk of osteoporosis.