Immigrants, the poor and minorities win big under ACA: 10 findings

Immigrants, the poor and minorities saw historic increases in insurance coverage in the first full year of the Affordable Care Act, a New York Times analysis has found.

The analysis was based on census data from 2014, the first year main provisions of the ACA went into full effect.

Here are 10 findings from the analysis.

1. Immigrants of all backgrounds — including legal residents who are not citizens — had the sharpest rise in coverage rates, according to the analysis.

2. Of the 8.7 million who got health insurance in 2014 under the ACA, 1.2 million were not citizens.

3. Almost a third of the increase in adults with insurance came from Hispanics. That was the single largest share of any racial or ethnic group, the New York Times notes.

4. Still, Hispanics remain the least insured Americans, with only 67 percent having coverage in 2014, the analysis found. The New York Times attributed that, in part, to so many illegal immigrants being uninsured.

5. In all, minorities made up two-thirds of the increase in insured adults in the U.S., and 70 percent of the increase in private insurance, according to the analysis.

6. The analysis also found low-wage workers, who did not have enough clout in the labor market to demand insurance, saw sharp increases. Coverage rates rose for cooks, dishwashers, waiters, hairdressers and cashiers.

7. Additionally, minorities, who disproportionately worked in low-wage jobs, had large coverage gains.

8. Minority men who work as groundskeepers and janitors saw substantial gains in 2014, rising to 59 percent insured, up from 51 percent in 2013. Hispanic male construction workers rose to 43 percent insured, from 36 percent in 2013.

9. Part-time workers gained insurance at a higher rate than full-time workers, and high school graduates gained it at double the rate of college graduates, according to the New York Times.

10. Adults living in households headed by relatives, such as siblings or cousins, gained insurance at double the rate of those in traditional households.

More articles on finance and revenue cycle management:

Massachusetts plans big overhaul of Medicaid program: 8 things to know

Florida governor signs law limiting balance billing: 5 things to know

Geisinger patient refund policy spurs at least 1 health system to consider the idea

© Copyright ASC COMMUNICATIONS 2016. Interested in LINKING to or REPRINTING this content? View our policies by clicking here.