If football were a game of one-on-one between quarterbacks, maybe Philip Rivers would be more invested in his Broncos counterpart. As is, he’s more concerned with defenses than fellow passers.

But Rivers is 12 years into an NFL career and he’s seen quarterbacks come and go like a three-and-out. And, as the only quarterback to play a full game Sunday afternoon in Denver, Rivers certainly had an opinion about the Broncos’ switch from Brock Osweiler to Peyton Manning.

“Brock didn’t really turn the ball over because of bad decisions. It wasn’t like he was stinking it up out there,” Rivers said after Manning replaced Osweiler in the second half. “But, you have a guy who hadn’t been a backup in a game since 1994 who’s one of the best of all time.”

BOXSCORE: Broncos vs. Chargers

Rivers completed 21-of-35 passes for 228 yards and two touchdowns while getting pressured throughout as the Broncos took advantage of a banged up San Diego line.

Osweiler, too, had trouble staying upright behind a porous front. But he topped Rivers in passing yards in a little more than two quarters — 14-of-22 for 232 yards, one touchdown and two interceptions — before he was pulled after the offense committed a fifth turnover. Technically, Osweiler gets a victory on his career stat sheet as the starting quarterback, moving him to 5-2, though the Broncos trailed 13-7 when Manning was inserted.

“Brock was put in a tough spot,” Rivers said. “He did a heck of a job to get them here.”

PHOTOS: Pictures from Denver Broncos-San Diego Chargers game

Manning, who led the Broncos to scores in four of his five drives before kneeling down on a sixth to end the game, threw for 69 yards on five-of-nine passing in his first action since Nov. 15.

“He made some good throws,” Rivers said of Manning. “But they ran the ball for the most part. Did it give them a spark? Sure. The place went crazy.”

Immediately after Manning entered the game the Broncos’ running game perked up.

Rivers, if anything, was surprised Manning didn’t start. The Chargers prepared last week for both Manning and Osweiler and they ran through scenarios of how each might enter or exit the game, according to their coach, Mike McCoy, a former Broncos offensive coordinator.

“I thought Peyton would start the game if he dressed,” Rivers said. “I was happy to see Peyton back out there. I didn’t want to see him go out that way.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or @nickgroke