MUSKEGON COUNTY, MI – With the Affordable Care Act website functioning more efficiently since its fall debut, Muskegon-area health and social services groups say they are finally advancing local enrollment efforts.

“The website started out very, very rocky,” said Stevi Riel of the Muskegon Community Health Project. “But now, we’re beginning to ramp up our successful enrollment.”

Just recently, a client stopped by the storefront community benefit to show off his new insurance card, Riel said.

“He was so excited he wanted to show it to us. That felt good,” Riel said.

Nearly 7,000 Michigan residents applied and selected health insurance plans since the federal marketplace debuted on Oct. 1, according to U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) figures released this month.

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services spokesman Richard A. Olague said on Thursday that countywide enrollment figures were not available.

Citizens who want coverage to begin on Jan. 1 must enroll by Dec. 23 and pay their first month’s premium on time. Federal officials extended the December deadline by a week in response to Healthcare.gov website failures.



Riel, the Health Project’s Community Benefit Operations manager, said the Mercy Health-affiliated nonprofit is among many groups that make up Enroll West Michigan, a new coalition made up of regional health and social services agencies.

The collective, which includes Muskegon Family Care, United Way of the Lakeshore and other entities, convened in August and has become a steering committee for reaching the area’s vulnerable population, she said.

In the days leading up to October, community members canvassed Muskegon-area neighborhoods to tell residents where they could find in-person help.

Some of those locations include the Health Project, Hackley Community Care Center and Hackley Public Library and come with the guidance of Certified Application Counselors, often known as CACs.



The aides can help with plan comparisons and with determining eligibility for government-funded subsidies that could reduce monthly premiums.

At the Health Project, clients often print out the plans from the Healthcare.gov website, review the material at home and then return to finish enrollment, Riel said. The portal allows consumers to compare and select private health insurance plans and gives them the opportunity to see if they find lower insurance costs before committing to a plan.

Addressing concerns, misconceptions

Riel said clients are most concerned about if their doctor and medications will be covered and if they will be able to afford the monthly premium.

Virginia Graham, a specialist and Certified Application Counselor at Hackley Community Care Center, said in addition to those concerns, people are curious about the tax penalty for citizens who do not meet essential coverage requirements by March 31, 2014.



Also known as the “individual mandate” and “individual responsibility payment,” the fee will cost citizens either $95 per adult or 1 percent of their annual income. Officials said the fees will be collected on federal tax returns and will increase annually.

“There’s a lot of concern about it, but what I hope is that people understand there are many exemptions,” Graham said.

Some of those exemptions will be extended to people with extremely low income, federally recognized tribal membership and religious beliefs that oppose the government’s programs.

After the March deadline, individuals must have a qualifying life event to receive insurance through the federal exchange. Eligible circumstances could include moving to a new state or experiencing a major income and household changes, such as divorce.

Graham, along with another Certified Application Counselor whose outreach and enrollment work is funded by an U.S. Health Resources & Services Administration grant, has traveled to libraries, churches, food trucks and other places to spread the word that help is available.

Graham said the counselors perform a lot of education and assessments when offering enrollment assistance, including a client’s understanding of the Affordable Care Act.

“Many, many people are not aware that ‘Obamacare,’ as it is called, is a law and not an insurance plan. Many components of the law are already in place,” Graham said. “The health insurance marketplace is only one part.”

One of those segments includes an optional Medicaid expansion provision, which Michigan lawmakers passed in September.



Described as a key component of the Affordable Care Act, the Medicaid provision is expected to help low-income adults gain access to preventative care.

Beth Scheel, patient advocate at Hackley Community Care Center, said people can visit Healthcare.gov on their own but they should know help is available.

“Sometimes, two minds are better than one in some circumstances,” Scheel said.

The federally certified counselors can help consumers navigate cancellation notices and find prescriptions not covered by their plans.

Finding help

Graham, who also works with Head Start and 21st Century After-School programs at Muskegon Public Schools, said the counselors can visit local churches and other community gathering places. This year they have visited Spring Street Baptist Church, New Hope Baptist Church and Zion Blue Lake Baptist Church, Graham said.

Riel said about 30 certified counselors affiliated with Enroll West Michigan can help Muskegon County residents with their questions and applications.

“There are many agencies working to get people the people information that they need,” Riel said.

Mary Murphy, the assistant director at Hackley Public Library, said the downtown facility has become a partner in Enroll West Michigan by affirming its role as the “go-to” place for consumer health information.

The library has set up two special computer workstations for use by patrons and Certified Application Counselors, Murphy said.

“We already have computers. We have tech assistance. It’s a natural place for people to get help to get enrolled,” Murphy said. “The programs seems to be picking up some steam, but people aren’t rushing in just yet.”

The HHS on Thursday announced some steps federal officials are taking to ensure people will experience a smooth transition.

Those steps include urging insurers to accept premium payments through Dec. 31 for plans set to begin on New Year’s Day.



The HHS has also advised companies to refill prescriptions covered under previous plans during January and to treat out-of-network providers as in-network to ensure continuity of care for acute episodes or “if the provider was listed in their plan’s provider directory as of the date of an enrollee’s enrollment."

HHS secretary Kathleen Sebelius said officials will give people enrolled in the federally run Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan a chance to extend coverage through Jan. 31.



Michigan lawmakers last week also initiated Affordable Care Act-related protections for citizens. The Michigan House approved several bills that could become effective in March, including laws on premium changes.

Hackley Public Library recommends registration by phone but some walk-in times may be available. For more information or to request an appointment, call 231-722-7276 or Virginia Graham of Hackley Community Care Center at 231-733-6795.

Affordable Care Act marketplace enrollment is also available by telephone at 1-800-318-2596.