FAIRBANKS, Alaska (AP) - Water is an important coffee ingredient, which is why Alaska Coffee Roasting Co. is trucking water to its new coffee stand location inside the Museum of the North.

The coffee house began operating a coffee stand July 1 inside the University of Alaska museum. Unlike their predecessor at the museum, the business hasn’t been satisfied with using a filter to remove the minerals from the university water.

They’ve been bringing water up the hill from their main location on Geist Road, although they are considering installing a purification system at the new location, said general manager Sarah Posma.

Pickiness about water is just one of many ways that Alaska Coffee Roasting Co. is particular about its coffee. As the name suggests, the business roasts its own coffee.

It also sells roasted beans at the Geist Road store and at the Fairbanks Sam’s Club. But there are no plans to get into the wholesale coffee line more seriously.

“We’re really about being vertically integrated and quality centric. We don’t have the structure that Kaladi Brothers (in Anchorage) does where they wholesale to a whole lot of cafes,” Posma said. “We don’t want to do that. We want to make sure we have control of the product and make sure it’s represented properly.”

Coffee roasting businesses weren’t nearly as common in Fairbanks in 1993, when Michael Gesser founded Alaska Coffee Roasting Co. down the street from its current home on Geist Road.

Gesser is from New York and came to Fairbanks during the pipeline boom.

He still owns the business, but he is often in Europe traveling with Alexander Rossi, a Formula One race car driver the company sponsors, Posma said.

Alaska Coffee Roasting Co. is popular with students at nearby West Valley High School. Posma, one such student, started working as a barista after graduating and was promoted to general manager in 2008.

In her experience, Fairbanksans’ taste for coffee has improved in recent years.

“People are embracing more of the coffee drinks rather than the milk and sugar drinks,” she said. “It’s nice to see that people really appreciate a black coffee or an Americano and are steering less towards the white chocolate mochas with extra caramel and whipped cream.”

Her own tastes have followed a similar progression.

As a student her favorite drink was a raspberry mocha. She now drinks pure espresso.

The business buys its coffee from distributor Royal Coffee in California. One of their most popular coffees is usually Ethiopian Yergoshef, a coffee from a mountainous region in the Horn of Africa where coffee once grew wild and is now cultivated.

The expansion on the university campus isn’t the first for ACRC. In 2011, the business expanded in a different direction, to North Miami, Florida.

That branch was opened by Gesser’s sister who lives in Florida, and with a few climate-related adjustments to the menu, the store is almost identical to the Geist Road location.

Floridians like the Alaska-owned business although they’re sometimes puzzled by the business’ tropical location, Posma said. Occasional vacationing Fairbanksans stop by the Miami location for a taste of home.

The new Museum of the North location has been popular so far, although it’s been getting slower at the museum as tourism season winds down, she said.

The business hopes to make the museum a popular study spot for students.

___

Information from: Fairbanks (Alaska) Daily News-Miner, http://www.newsminer.com