Hospital (Photo: File photo)

South Dakota’s nonprofit hospital systems are adapting to new rules unveiled by the federal government that seek to protect low-income patients from aggressive debt collection practices.

The U.S. Department of the Treasury finalized the rules last month. Nonprofit hospitals knew the rules were coming, and many of the provisions were included in the 2010 Affordable Care Act, giving them time to phase in the changes.

Nonprofit hospitals are granted tax-exempt status under the premise that they will serve the poor within their communities. Hospitals that fail to follow the new rules could lose their tax-exempt status.

Emily McMahon, the deputy assistant secretary for tax policy at the Treasury Department, announced the new requirements in a blog post.

“Charitable hospitals represent more than half of the nation’s hospitals and play a key role in improving the health of the communities they serve,” McMahon wrote. “But reports that some charitable hospitals have used aggressive debt collection practices, including allowing debt collectors to pursue collections in emergency rooms, have highlighted the need for clear rules to protect patients.”

The new rules require charitable hospitals to disclose financial assistance policies for low-income patients. They are prohibited from aggressive collection methods, such as garnishing wages or reporting debt to a credit agency, until they’ve made reasonable efforts to determine whether a patient might qualify under the hospital’s charity care program. And the rules prohibit hospitals from charging low-income residents more for necessary care than patients who would have been billed through insurance.

The rules also require hospitals to assess their communities health needs every three years. And they provide benchmarks on whether they should provide translation services to non-English speakers.

Officials with Sanford Health, Avera Health and Regional Health say they are already complying with significant portions of the new rules and are reviewing them to determine if the systems need to do more.

The three systems use federal poverty levels to determine when patients qualify for discounted or free care. Hospital officials say the financial assistance programs offered by their health systems are prominently displayed in writing.

Julie Norton, the senior vice president of finance at Avera McKennan, said Avera’s mission is rooted in a gospel ministry to serve those in need. The Catholic system, she added, supports access to health care for all.

“We believe that’s a basic right,” she said.

Avera screens patients for potential charity care cases. Patients who are at or below the 400 percent federal poverty level can qualify for charity care, and Avera also uses a point system that evaluates other expenses, including student loans and rents, to determine if patients qualify. The system also has a policy of waiting 120 days before turning an account over to collections.

In its last fiscal year, Avera provided $22,098,628 in charity care.

At Sanford, patients can receive a total write-off of their bill if they are at or below 225 percent of the federal poverty level. Patients between 226 percent and 375 percent qualify for partial write-offs, said JoAnn Kunkel, the chief financial officer.

Torrey Sundall, Sanford’s enterprise executive director of patient financial services, said the hospital has a policy of waiting 240 days before turning unpaid accounts to collections.

“We make every reasonable effort during those 240 days to determine if a patient qualifies” for charity care, he said.

In 2013, Sanford reported $44,933,239 in charity care.

Regional Health provides complete write-offs for patients at 200 percent of the poverty limit, and partial writes offs for those above that level, said Chief Financial Officer Mark Thompson. Thompson said he believes Regional is in compliance with the new government rules.

But Regional is also under pressure to re-evaluate the amount of charity care it can provide, he added. Unlike the two health systems in eastern South Dakota, Regional has a larger mix of patients on government programs, and others who are uninsured. It’s why Regional supports expanding Medicaid to the state’s working adult population.

In its last fiscal year, Regional provided $17.7 million in charity care.

“The question is whether we can continue to afford that level of charity care,” Thompson said.

Persons in family/household Poverty guideline For families/households with more than 8 persons, add $4,060 for each additional person. 1 $11,670 2 15,730 3 19,790 4 23,850 5 27,910 6 31,970 7 36,030 8 40,090

2014 POVERTY GUIDELINES FOR THE 48 CONTIGUOUS STATES

AND THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1JSHVbi