The Leon Family! “The grass wasn’t as green on the other side....I didn’t have the same team of support, the family aspect of looking out for each other was missing, and I wasn’t provided the same training opportunities that I had with IPA,” said Leon.

IPA Family, LLC (IPA) announced the return of one of its top insurance producers, Jeannette Leon, to its organization. Leon has been a licensed health insurance advisor for more than eight years and has flourished in the health and life industry.

As the health insurance industry began to change in the face of the Obamacare-era, many insurance companies began to alter their business models. When this shift started, Jeannette felt she could earn a more lucrative income as an insurance advisor for a larger marketplace. To her surprise, she encountered some disadvantages.

“The grass wasn’t as green on the other side. Brokers contracted with other companies may earn a little more money on advances, but I didn’t have the same team of support, the family aspect of looking out for each other was missing, and I wasn’t provided the same training opportunities that I had with IPA,” said Leon.

She returns with new certification that will help her assist clients shopping both on and off the Obamacare exchanges. Through the Department of Health and Human Services, Leon sought education and training on the federal health care marketplace and became a certified insurance advisor. Her desire to help clients make the best choices drove this decision. Now, she is equipped to once again offer her services to IPA Family clients as well as new prospects that have entered the marketplace during the open-enrollment period.

Leon is not coming back alone. Inspired by their mother and her experiences in the industry and with IPA Family, her children Ashley and Kevin Leon are also joining the organization.

“I’m honored to join a company that welcomes me and is so willing to work with someone who is in the early stages of learning about the industry,” said Kevin. “Although I set appointments for my mother for many years, I am excited to now have my own business to help others like she has.”

Leon has historically been in the top ten for IPA sales in the country, and together the family is looking forward to rebuilding this level of excellence in their local community. An office in the Bradenton / Sarasota area will open soon, and announcements will follow with location and career opportunities.

If you live in the Bradenton / Sarasota area and need health or life insurance advising or want more information on the Affordable Care Act and how it will affect you and your family or your business, contact Leon at 407-929-5815 or visit her HealtheDeals website.

In the state of Florida, IPA’s Centers of Excellence are located in Tampa, St. Petersburg Brandon, Bradenton, Cape Coral, Clearwater. Englewood, Ft. Meyers, Lakeland, Naples, Parish, Riverview, Sarasota, Venice, Ft. Lauderdale, Miami, South Florida, and surrounding areas.

About IPA Family, LLC (IPA)

IPA Family, LLC, a member of The IHC Group, is a national marketing organization that distributes major medical insurance plans and other health insurance plans and consumer benefit association membership programs across the nation. IPA’s trained professional sales associates, referred to as the “IPA Family,” provides information and a product portfolio that can meet the needs of most small business owners and self-employed individuals and families. Headquartered in Tampa, Florida., IPA has an excellent reputation as an accredited organization with the Better Business Bureau (bbb.org).

About The IHC Group

The IHC Group is an organization of insurance carriers and marketing and administrative affiliates that has been providing life, health, disability, medical stop-loss and specialty insurance solutions to groups and individuals for over 30 years. Members of The IHC Group include Independence Holding Company, American Independence Corp., Standard Security Life Insurance Company of New York, Madison National Life Insurance Company, Inc. and Independence American Insurance Company. Each insurance carrier in The IHC Group has a financial strength rating of A- (Excellent) from A.M. Best Company, Inc., a widely recognized rating agency that rates insurance companies on their relative financial strength and ability to meet policyholder obligations. (An A++ rating from A.M. Best is its highest rating.) Collectively, the companies in The IHC Group provide insurance coverage to more than one million individuals and groups.

We encourage you to visit us on the following social media sites:

Facebook: Simply search IPA Family

YouTube: TheIPAFamily

Twitter: Subscribe to us @IPA_Family