Anne McCune, chief operating officer at Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and Stanford Children's Health, will be a key contributor at the second annual U.S. News Hospital of Tomorrow leadership forum. (Photo: Business Wire)

STANFORD, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford and Stanford Children’s Health announced today that Anne McCune, chief operating officer, will join other top health care experts and policymakers at the second annual U.S. News Hospital of Tomorrow leadership forum to address the critical challenges facing the hospital industry today. The summit, to be held October 6 – 8, 2014, in Washington, D.C., aims to develop strategies and solutions that will better equip hospitals for the future.

McCune’s presentation will focus on Catering to the 21st Century Consumer, a topic that aligns with the goals of this C-level health care event, and is scheduled for Tuesday, October 7, from 4:00 p.m. – 5:15 p.m. EDT. This and other forum sessions will highlight the innovations and techniques that are helping hospitals navigate the rapid changes brought on by the Affordable Care Act.

McCune’s involvement in Hospital of Tomorrow is a natural fit and an exciting collaboration with U.S. News & World Report, a nationally recognized publisher of health care content and analysis. McCune’s expertise in the area of consumer demand fully supports this year’s forum theme, “Reinventing Health Care,” and will help advance ongoing efforts to provide hospitals with the best and next practices for maintaining the highest standards of care.

Brian Kelly, Editor and Chief Content Officer of U.S. News & World Report, also expressed his enthusiasm and high regard for McCune and the rest of Hospital of Tomorrow’s distinguished speakers. “The combined impact of these leading thinkers is unsurpassed,” he stated. “We’re fortunate to have the benefit of their expertise, insight and experience to further our work toward improving patient care and preparing hospitals for tomorrow’s health care landscape.”

In its first year, Hospital of Tomorrow drew more than 500 hospital and health care executives, medical experts, policymakers, insurers, consumer advocates and industry analysts from across the U.S. Participation is capped to ensure maximum effectiveness and maintain an intimate, productive working environment. This year’s event will be held at the Washington Hilton in Washington, D.C., October 6 – 8, 2014. To learn more, visit U.S. News Hospital of Tomorrow.

About Stanford Children’s Health and Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford

Stanford Children’s Health, with Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford at its core, is an internationally recognized leader in world-class, nurturing care and extraordinary outcomes in every pediatric and obstetric specialty from the routine to rare, for every child and pregnant woman. Together with our Stanford Medicine physicians, nurses, and staff, we deliver this innovative care and research through partnerships, collaborations, outreach, specialty clinics and primary care practices at more than 100 locations in the U.S. western region. As a non-profit, we are committed to supporting our community – from caring for uninsured or underinsured kids, homeless teens and pregnant moms, to helping re-establish school nurse positions in local schools. Learn more about our full range of preeminent programs and network of care at stanfordchildrens.org, and on our Healthier, Happy Lives blog. Join us on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and YouTube.

Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford is the heart of Stanford Children’s Health, and is one of the nation’s top hospitals for the care of children and expectant mothers. For a decade, we have received the highest specialty rankings of any Northern California children’s hospital, according to U.S. News & World Report’s 2014-15 Best Children’s Hospitals survey, and are the only hospital in Northern California to receive the national 2013 Leapfrog Group Top Children’s Hospital award for quality and patient care safety. Discover more at stanfordchildrens.org.

About U.S. News Hospital of Tomorrow

U.S. News Hospital of Tomorrow, produced by U.S. News and World Report, brings together the country’s top medical executives, experts and thought leaders, with the goal of providing best and next practices to hospitals to maintain the highest standards of care and equip them for success during uncertain times. The second annual event will be held in Washington, D.C., October 6 – 8, 2014. Connect on Google+ and Twitter for the latest information and updates.