Texas GOP congressional heavyweights Pete Sessions and Bill Flores spoke to the McLennan County Republican Club on Thursday, with both expressing interest in becoming the new speaker of the U.S. House in the wake of John Boehner’s sudden resignation.

But more than anything, they stressed the importance of Republicans, both conservatives and moderates, remaining united in their efforts to restore American “exceptionalism” in the world and erase what they called the malaise of a Barack Obama presidency.

Flores, R-Bryan, whose congressional district includes Waco, introduced Sessions, a Dallas Republican who grew up in Waco, as the lawmaker whose influence helped turn around the fortunes of the sagging GOP in 2010, when it regained control of the U.S. House.

As chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, Sessions announced that with their newfound strength in numbers, Republicans’ first order of business was to “retire” then-Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, a progressive Democrat from California.

It did, but longtime U.S. Rep. Chet Edwards, D-Waco, “was one of the first casualties” of the Democrats’ loss of power, Sessions said. His comment brought applause from about 100 people attending the luncheon in Knox Hall at the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum.

Edwards lost to Flores, one of 89 GOP newcomers elected in 2010 and now head of an influential conservative bloc in the House. He left Thursday’s meeting early because he teaches a class at Texas A&M University, he said.

Sessions said having a House speaker from Texas would serve the state well, but indicated that attention has focused on Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan, the former GOP presidential nominee widely considered the best person for the job.

Ryan, who has said he does not want to be speaker, reportedly is at home in Janesville, Wisconsin, weighing the pros and cons amid pressure from top party leaders. Congress is out of session, giving Ryan and his colleagues in the House time to digest the events of recent weeks that included Boehner’s announcement of his resignation and a decision by his heir apparent, Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, to abruptly remove his name from consideration.

Sessions, 60, said he can understand why the popular Ryan might have reservations about assuming the speakership, considering the infighting that continues among Republicans that could jeopardize the political future of anyone taking the job.

At 45 years of age, “Paul Ryan has a lot of future left,” said Sessions, adding, “We could end up with a Texas speaker.”

Flores, 61, has released a statement to fellow House members, saying, “I am humbled to have my name mentioned as a potential candidate, and I am considering the pursuit of the speakership in response to those requests.

“If we all spend enough time on our knees praying for each other, we can heal our divisions and truly work together to restore America to the ‘shining city on a hill’ that President Reagan challenged us to become.”

Passing bills early

Weighing in on the specifics of his agenda for Republicans and their new House speaker, Sessions said he wants to avoid the chaos of getting legislation passed at the last minute, without constituents knowing its full impact.

“I want the public to know six or seven weeks out what’s going to happen,” Sessions said.

He said the Affordable Care Act is harming business and industry that now pay more in premiums for less in health coverage. He wants Republicans not to merely vow to repeal the health care law but to come up with a marketplace-driven alternative.

He covets immigration reform, but not simply as it relates to America’s southern border. He said 60,000 Asians annually arrive in the United States with the intention of having children who will provide family ties to this country.

He recommends that American citizenship be denied to babies born in this country unless at least one parent is a legal citizen.

Sessions said military growth under Obama has stagnated even as the world has become more dangerous and that military men and women often are sent into harm’s way without a properly defined mission or strategic outcome.

“We must stop this social experimentation with our military,” he said, concluding that a fractured Republican Party can do little, but one that sticks together “is in a position to accomplish great things.”