County license could require energy-efficiency plan

BOULDER -- Some medical marijuana businesses in unincorporated Boulder County could grow and sell marijuana for recreational use, under regulations that Boulder County commissioners will consider Tuesday.

If you go Marijuana licensing regulations What: Boulder County commissioners will consider allowing county-licensed medical marijuana businesses to also apply for licenses to grow or sell marijuana and marijuana-infused products for recreational use. The meeting will include a public hearing. When: 3:30 p.m. Tuesday, Oct. 22 Where: Commissioners' third-floor hearing room, Boulder County Courthouse, 1325 Pearl St., Boulder Additional information: The proposed regulations are available with the Oct. 22 meeting agenda at http://tinyurl.com/bocomeets2013.

Under the proposed rules, only establishments that had or applied for county medical marijuana licenses before Oct. 1 could seek to expand into the retail recreational marijuana market.

If those already-operating medical businesses get the appropriate state and local approvals, they could begin selling growing and selling marijuana products for recreational use as early as next January.

Any other would-be recreational marijuana businesses would have to wait until at least Jan 1, 2015, to apply for licenses to operate in unincorporated Boulder County, under a moratorium the commissioners also will consider.

Advertisement

The regulations for recreational marijuana businesses would be similar to those Boulder County has in place for medical marijuana businesses.

The new rules would, however, include provisions the county staff said are intended to prevent or discourage youths' purchases of marijuana and marijuana-infused products from retail shops.

Anyone under the age of 21 would be prohibited from being inside any retail marijuana store, even if it's also a medical marijuana dispensary. Establishments doing selling medical and retail marijuana would have to verify the age of everyone entering the business with an electronic ID scanner.

Recreational marijuana receipts would have to include notices that it's illegal to transfer or sell marijuana to anyone under age 21. Recreational marijuana shops could operate only between the hours of 8 a.m. and 7 p.m., and there'd be specific Boulder County limits on the display and advertising of marijuana.

The proposed regulations also would also establish energy-efficiency requirements for all marijuana growing and cultivation operations. Anyone seeking a county license for growing operations would have to submit a "sustainability plan." Fifty percent of the growing operation's energy consumption would have to be offset within one year, and 100 percent after two years.

In Boulder County, 39 medical marijuana businesses operate in unincorporated Boulder County, including seven dispensaries, 23 growing operations and nine facilities manufacturing marijuana-infused products.

Only two -- an infused-products manufacturing facility and a growing operation -- have obtained county licenses. The other 37 are allowed to operate during a review of their conformance to licensing requirements or county land-use, zoning and building rules.

Last month, Boulder County's Land Use Department staff sought a 10-month moratorium on accepting applications for recreational marijuana business licenses, saying that long of a time-out was needed to make sure county regulations conform to the hundred pages of recently promulgated state regulations about retail marijuana sales.

County commissioners, however, decided on Sept. 27 to instead impose a 22-day moratorium, which ends Tuesday.

John Fryar can be reached at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com.