Topics: 2016 Presidential Campaign, 2016 presidential candidates, 2016 Republican primary, New Hampshire, new hampshire 2016, New Hampshire primary, Republican Party, Ted Cruz, Elections News, Politics News

SALEM, N.H. — Ted Cruz in person, on the campaign trail, is a study in contrasts. What I principally mean by that cliché is that Cruz makes a more plausible human being when seen up close than in his animatronic television appearances, but he does not resemble a human being who came into the world by the usual method. He’s both cute and sinister, a highly discordant combination. He’s like a marzipan man brought to life by the kiss of a magic fairy, stuffed into overly tight blue jeans and sent toddling into middle-school cafeterias in the middle of nowhere to answer strange hypothetical questions about Fidel Castro attacking ISIS. It’s all somewhat convincing, but you can still tell that under the 3-D printed clothing and the right-wing talking points, he’s sugary and delicious.

Another contrast I observed on Friday evening during Cruz’s town-hall appearance in this strip-mall suburb just north of the Massachusetts border is the one between the idea of Ted Cruz, fearless conservative warrior who has electrified the true believers of the right, and the real Ted Cruz who eventually showed up. Close to 300 potential voters and about 60 journalists packed into an overheated schoolroom here to meet the surprise victor of the Republican caucuses in Iowa, the firebrand who seeks to unite the evangelical and libertarian strains of the Republican Party and who prides himself on being loathed by the bipartisan Washington establishment.

Some of the actual civilians who showed up were merely curious. Some had driven long distances to ask highly specific questions of the potentially heartbreaking or bee-in-bonnet variety, like the Castro-ISIS person or the man who suspected his brother had died after being overmedicated in a V.A. hospital. (He was one of six African-Americans in the crowd, a higher number than I expected.) Some were truly psyched, like the heavily tattooed biker-looking guy in the back of the room who kept throwing out supportive comments in a thick Yankee accent suggestive of a Mark Wahlberg character. What should Cruz do on his first day in office? “T’row Hillary in jail!” (This comes up so often the candidate has a stock response: “She may already be there!”) People in Washington say Cruz is unlikable because he hates big government! “Ya musta hit the tahget theah, Ted!”

In any event, what all these people encountered was one of the most boring and tin-eared political performers of recent memory. (Although I probably shouldn’t say that yet: I’m catching Jeb Bush over the weekend.) Cruz and his surrogates repeatedly seek to compare him to Ronald Reagan, and his stump speech harps on the supposed parallels between the late 1970s and today: A struggling economy, Russia and Iran on the rise, a despised Democrat in the White House who has dragged the country to a low point. (I won’t waste your time rebutting any of that.) But whatever else you want to say about Reagan, he was a natural public speaker with genuine warmth and charisma, who connected easily with people.

Ted Cruz has lab-grown GMO charisma-type product. He is a former Ivy League debater who has delivered his stump speech a zillion times, and has developed what is supposed to feel like a natural rhythm, with jokes thrown in at appropriate moments. He is undeniably working hard out here, but it all feels forced and difficult, like cramming squishy marzipan thighs into starched Levi’s. Where the jokes about Cruz being a robot or an alien come from is the miasma of unease surrounding the whole performance. This is a guy who quotes compulsively from “The Princess Bride.” Not from a Frank Capra movie or a John Wayne movie or “Hoosiers.” ”The Princess Bride.” He’s a right-wing think-tank nerd, who should be trading quips with friends over a $180 dinner in Georgetown instead of talking to strangers in a New Hampshire town whose main drag, in 2016, features a store for ham radio enthusiasts. (Ham radio and “The Princess Bride” kind of go together, am I right?)

Cruz had moments on Friday evening when he hit on something the audience really wanted to hear: They love the flat tax, and they really, really hate the Iran nuclear deal. But those applause lines almost seemed to happen by accident, and Cruz barely seemed to notice. He said the phrase “flat tax” once, got the big Pavlovian cheer he was looking for and hurried on, perhaps because he is intelligent enough to know that even if by some awful mischance he is elected president he will never, ever get such a thing passed. He got pretty worked up about the evils of Iran and ISIS and “radical Islamic terrorism,” without ever mentioning that ISIS and Iran are mortal enemies (as he surely knows), and the crowd loved his promise to “rip that Iran arms deal to shreds” on his first day in office. Which is another thing he couldn’t actually do.

But Cruz has the policy wonk’s tendency to veer off onto extended tangents — about Muammar Gaddafi and Libya, in this case — that seem intended to prove how much smarter he is than everybody else, and every time that happened you could feel the energy drain out of the room a little more. Hearing the marzipan man promise to rain merciless death on distant, theoretical enemies is cool. Hearing him deliver a tendentious lecture about how Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton screwed everything up in Libya and Syria (said lecture drawing about equally from Paul Wolfowitz and Henry Kissinger) is not nearly so fun.