Marine’s family gets $350K in mold lawsuit involving Norfolk military housing

$350K awarded to Marine’s family in mold lawsuit in Norfolk military housing that was infested with mold, according to the family’s lawyer.

The figure was described a “disappointment” to one of the family’s lawyers, who had sought $8 million in damages and asked the judge to substitute a larger number. In the alternative, the lawyer would like the judge to order a new trial and set aside the verdict.

Noting how the jury found Mid-Atlantic Military Family Communities, a subsidiary of Lincoln Military Housing, negligent for the mold, Stephen M. Smith said, “I think there was confusion among the jurors,” because the housing community was also not found to be in violation of the lease agreement. “It’s contradictory.”

On Thursday a spokesman for Lincoln Military Housing declined to comment.

The lawsuit involved the family of the Gunnery Sgt. Joe Federico and the Mid-Atlantic Military Family Communities.

During the two-week trial in the U.S. District Court, Smith blamed the mold at the Norwich Manor complex for a variety of illnesses, including the claim that the mold caused the family to suffer permanent brain damage.

U.S. District Judge Raymond Jackson initially ruled that the complex’s defense attorneys failed to provide damning evidence to the plaintiffs in a timely fashion. He ordered the defense attorneys to stipulate at trial that mold was found in the property and remediation was required.

The defense was free to argue that the mold was not the cause for the injuries in question and that the complex owners made a reasonable initiative to fix the water problem.

Additional lawsuit among former tenants are expected, and Smith said 19 people have filed and more people are calling daily.

“Hundreds. This may be going on for years and years,” said Smith.

Source: Marine’s family gets $350K in mold lawsuit involving Norfolk military housing

Photo credit: pilotonline.com

Join the Discussion