PEOPLE

Dr Mitchell Brown

Pueblo native Brian P. Brooks recently was named executive vice president and general counsel of loan guarantor Fannie Mae based in Washington, D.C. Brooks previously was vice chairman and chief legal officer of OneWest Bank in California.

“Brian is an outstanding complement to our leadership team as we focus on supporting the economic recovery, improving our company and building a sustainable housing finance system,” Fannie Mae CEO Timothy J. Mayopoulos said in a statement.

Brooks is a 1987 graduate of East High School and a graduate of Harvard University and the University of Chicago law school.

Mitchell Brown recently joined Rocky Mountain Eye Center. He will work at the center’s Pueblo and La Junta offices.

A graduate of Brigham Young University and the University of Houston, he is certified by the American Board of Ophthalmology and specializes in primary vision care, ocular disease, pediatric and low vision care. He is fluent in Spanish.

“I chose RMEC because of their outstanding commitment to eye care for every member of the family. I want to be a part of a leading eye care center that puts the care of their patients first,” Brown said in a statement.

Family physician Dr. Jan Dunn recently joined Kaiser Permanente’s Pueblo North Medical Offices.

Previously a staff physician with Touchstone Health in Pueblo for three years and Evans Army Community Hospital at Fort Carson, she is a graduate of the Herbert School of Medicine in Bethesda, Md. She served as a medical officer in the U.S. Army for 13 years.

She is recognized as a diplomat by the American Board of Family Medicine.

•••

HONORS

St. Thomas More Hospital in Canon City was among several Centura Health hospitals for quality excellence and clinical outcomes in specialty care by Healthgrades, an online consumer advice service.

•••

NOTES

Job fair

Pueblo Community College will host a job fair from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Nov. 5 at the school’s Fortino Ballroom.

An estimated 40 representatives from area companies are expected to attend. Attendees are encouraged to bring copies of their resumes and be prepared to meet with potential employers.

For more information, call 549-3036.

Job search workshops

Pueblo Workforce Center will host the following free job search workshops at the center at 212 W. Third St.: “Email job search,” 2 to 4 p.m. Wednesday, Nov. 12 and Nov. 26; “Interviewing,” 10 to 11 a.m. Thursday and Nov. 13; and “Keys to Success,” daily sessions, 9 a.m. to noon, Nov. 3-6 and Nov. 17-20.

PEDCO board

Pueblo Economic Development Corp. is accepting nominations for four seats on its board of directors that come open in January. Nominees must be full voting members of the nonprofit business group.

For more information, call 544-2000.

•••

CALENDAR

Nov. 5

Latino Chamber “Coffee Break,” 8:15 a.m., Rocky Mountain Eye Center, 3954 Sandalwood Drive

Nov. 6

Latino Chamber “Happy Hour,” 5 p.m., Canon National Bank, 101 W. Fifth St.

Nov. 7

Small Business Appreciation Luncheon, 11:30 a.m., PCC

Nov. 19

Latino Chamber seminar, “The Affordable Care Act,” noon, 215 S. Victoria Ave.

Nov. 22

Big Bear Brewfest, Convention Center