I t’s almost too easy, binding the bookends of Walter Lowe Jr.’s life on a stage. He began his adult journey in the repertory theaters and coffeehouses of 1960s San Francisco — and here he is today, a 67-year-old playwright with a leading role in community theater in Keene.

Write in a few characters, title it “Auld Lang Syne” and there’s your magnum opus, come full-circle.

Lowe would laugh at this connotation. Oh, it’s all sweet-sounding and orderly and somewhat true, but it’s like peeking at him through a pinhole. His story is much more profound and compelling: sometimes dark and meditating, certainly pioneering — even titillating, if being an editor at Playboy in its 1980s heyday qualifies.

And that’s merely a summation of the first half of his life. When he turned 60, he earned the designation Professor Walter L. Lowe Jr., Ph.D.

The book on Lowe is cosmopolitan. He’s interviewed famous personalities from Norman Mailer to Brooke Shields; he’s edited the works of deep thinkers such as Alex Haley (“Roots,” “Malcolm X”) and Ralph Ellison (“Invisible Man”). He asked the late Chicago mayor Harold Washington 20 questions. He refers to Hugh Hefner as “Hef.”

He was the first African-American hired as a news reporter at the Chicago Sun-Times, in 1971. On his first day, he walked by a veteran reporter’s desk who handed his typewritten story to him, thinking Lowe was the copy boy. “I said, ‘What’s this?’” Lowe recalls.

He was the first African-American editor at Playboy. When Hefner, the publisher of Playboy and a strong supporter of the human rights movement, learned he had no African-Americans on staff, he brought in new human resources leaders. “And they were given the assignment, go out and find a black editor,” Lowe says.

The play Lowe wrote in two months, “Auld Lang Syne,” isn’t an autobiography but is mostly construed from real-life experiences — his and those of people he’s encountered — yet he’s cryptic in offering an exact description.

He says it’s a play about lost or suppressed memories that resurface and affect the lives of his characters. He invented the personalities one by one, writing his own role the first night, bringing another character to life the second night, and so on, until the cast reached five.

“For some reason I had the impulse to start writing a play last year,” Lowe says. “I’m really not sure where that came from.”

Directed by Kim Dupuis and put on by the Edge Ensemble Theatre Company of Keene, it features sexual tension and graphic language. Opening night is Nov. 14 at Keene’s Heberton Hall.

And don’t bring the children, warns Ray Mahoney of Keene, a longtime actor in local community theater who brings one of the characters to life.

Lowe may be a playwright newbie, but he has expert credentials when it comes to relationships and families.

He dove into academia after a 21-year journalism career, prompted by what he calls a mid-life crisis. Though he retired from full-time teaching this year, he’s an adjunct professor in the marriage and family therapy program of the applied psychology department at Antioch University New England Graduate School in Keene.

He and his wife, Hana, a native of Czechoslovakia, also have private marriage and family therapy practices in Swanzey. Lowe earned a Ph.D at age 60 from Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind., and a master’s from Purdue University Calumet. He’s lived in the Monadnock Region for 7½ years.

Proudly influenced by his father

Lowe is a Midwesterner and admittedly a bit conflicted by the lack of diversity in New Hampshire. He was born and raised on the south side of Chicago, where racism was prevalent. His father, the first African-American insurance broker in Illinois, had a significant influence on him.

Walter Lowe Sr. was at first banned from owning his own brokerage because he was black. He fought for his rights, writing a letter to Adlai Stevenson, the former Illinois governor, Secretary of State and two-time Democratic presidential candidate. Stevenson backed him up, saying he saw no reason why the elder Lowe couldn’t have his own brokerage, documents that today are in the Chicago Historical Society.

His father also wrote occasional columns and essays in the Chicago Tribune, in a forum titled, “Voice of the People.”

“Back then, there were no black faces in the Chicago Tribune, not even periodically,” Lowe says. “Dad would say he really would have liked to have been a writer.”

Theater appealed to the younger Lowe and he eventually set out for San Francisco State. He played Jimmy, the young sailor in “A Taste of Honey,” wrote and directed one-act plays, played guitar in coffeehouses and bars. He returned to Chicago and got his undergraduate degree at Roosevelt University, picking up freelance work such as writing for airline magazines.

“Something I wrote caught the attention of the editor of the Sun-Times showcase section,” says Lowe, who was hired to write about movies, books and theater. When the news section was looking for its first African-American reporter, the 23-year-old Lowe got the job.

The copy boy story on his first day notwithstanding — “This veteran reporter saw me walking past and just handed me his copy thinking I was the copy boy because many copy boys in the newsroom were black” — Lowe had a positive experience.

Ray Brennan, often described as the prototype scotch-swilling, chain-smoking, big-city newspaperman, supported Lowe as he wrote about issues affecting the rough-and-tumble south side of Chicago. Brennan, who covered Al Capone’s tax evasion trial and interviewed Capone in jail, was nearing the end of his 45-year career.

“There was a lot of pressure because you’re so conspicuous,” Lowe says. “But when I left, there were six (African-Americans on staff).”

Lowe moved on to Playboy and stayed there for 15 years. The editors, he says, were serious journalists who interviewed many of the top newsmakers in the late 1970s and ’80s. He interviewed numerous stars — and was part of the rotation of editors on site of pictorial shoots — but it’s the writers he remembers most.

Indeed, if you truly bought Playboy for the articles, you’d come across Lowe’s work.

Lowe edited the last four Playboy articles by noted novelist and essayist James Baldwin, who in 1985 wrote, “Evidence of Things Not Seen,” about the Wayne Williams child murders in Atlanta.

“I had an opportunity to meet and work with all kinds of interesting people,” Lowe says.

One life ends, another begins

Lowe has a son and daughter with his first wife, but hit what he calls a mid-life crisis. His 20-year marriage broke up, his children moved in with him in Gary, Ind., and his father died at 94, all within a year. He had been commuting to Chicago for Playboy and decided to give that up.

“I was getting home at 7 or 8 o’clock and I had kids getting out of school at 3, and that was a recipe for disaster,” he says.

In order to spend more time with his children, he got a job teaching high school English for three years in the Gary, Ind., school system. He became certified and started taking courses in mental health. Most importantly, he was home for his kids, who today live in Hampton, Va., and the Chicago area.

“There was no running around and getting in trouble because they knew I was going to be home,” he says.

Some troubling incidents pushed him deep into the mental health field. He met a number of “very disturbed young men” in Indiana, but the state’s overburdened mental health system didn’t have the resources to help them. He remembers two young men in particular who were referred to family therapy, which had a waiting list of 75 families.

“In that year, both committed murder — one killed three people in a roller rink, the other beat his uncle to death,” Lowe says. “It really disturbed me in that these horrific crimes they committed, I knew a therapist could have made a difference.”

Inspired, he entered the master’s program at Purdue University Calumet and earned his degree in the early 1990s, though he laughs over being unable to remember which year. There’s a plaque on the wall someplace in his house, he jokes.

He went to work in a residential treatment facility for adolescent males, putting in more than 50 hours a week. There, he met his wife, Hana, who also was intrigued by marriage and family therapy and eventually opened her own practice. Lowe lasted about five years in the residential treatment center.

“I got burned out,” he says. “I thought it would be really nice to get into academia and teach.”

He was accepted into the doctorate program at Purdue, which was paid for through a minority scholarship. Upon earning his Ph.D, he began to look for a place to teach and Antioch popped up. “They made me an offer and my wife and I moved here 7½ years ago,” he says.

Settling into the Monadnock Region

Lowe has always lived in or near cultural meccas, where diversity is the norm. It’s the first time he’s lived in a mostly white community and he has found it, well, different. He says they love the area and especially the outdoors. He has become engrossed in fishing, noting the cleanliness of the environment and the clarity of the area’s lakes and rivers.

His first foray into local theater came through a chance meeting with Scott Saxby, the Edge Ensemble’s lighting technician. The company in 2012 was looking for someone to play Hoke in “Driving Miss Daisy” alongside local actress Catherine Behrens. Lowe says he’s been told he even looks like Morgan Freeman, who played the lead role in the movie.

Lowe loved playing Hoke and, with his creative juices flowing, out came “Auld Lang Syne.” The play is edgy and, like the name of the theater company, Lowe says Dupuis has run with it. She is producer and director; rehearsals are ongoing with opening night a little more than a month away.

Last spring Antioch threw Lowe a retirement party, but he says he’s still a ways from slowing down. His private family therapy practice has been burgeoning since he retired, and he has no plans to stop any time soon.

As for the title of his play, “Auld Lang Syne” is commonly connected with New Year’s Eve, yet it was written in the 1700s, two centuries before it became a holiday tradition. Even Billy Crystal famously wondered what it really means in the movie “When Harry Met Sally.”

Lowe isn’t giving it up. Come see the play, he says. Just don’t bring the children.