Workplace wellness programs, one of the pillars of the national health care overhaul, are increasingly popular among employers who believe they can help control costs and workers who see them as a perk.

But experts caution that wellness programs vary greatly and question whether many versions actually improve health, let alone save money.

Some features of successful programs include long-term planning, significant incentives to participate and rigorous evaluation. Wellness programs typically include weight loss and smoking cessation programs, fitness rooms or subsidies for gym memberships, walking paths, drug and alcohol abuse programs, stress management and online support systems that include tips for healthier living. Increasingly they include monetary incentives to get people to participate.

Surveys show that about half of U.S. employers offer some kind of wellness program, and the number is growing. In 2012, nearly half of employers without a program said they intended to introduce one, RAND Corp. reported last year.

Employers overwhelmingly trust wellness programs to make employees healthier, reduce absenteeism, improve productivity and ultimately save money. A survey released in September by the Kaiser Family Foundation — nonpartisan, nonprofit think tank focused on health issues — found that 71 percent of companies think wellness programs are very effective (28 percent) or somewhat effective (43 percent) at controlling escalating health care costs. It's their most favored strategy, the survey found, more than narrowing provider networks or tightening managed care or even increasing employee cost-sharing.

Life Fitness, a Rosemont-based company that sells commercial fitness equipment, launched a wellness program about a year ago that includes treadmill desks, workout rooms, group training classes, a walking track, a running club and a soccer club, among other activities. Program manager Melissa diLeonardo said she believes the program will be "the catalyst for a cultural shift in our office, creating stronger and healthier employees and, in turn, making Life Fitness a stronger and healthier company."

The Affordable Care Act provides employers with grants and technical assistance to encourage wellness programs. It permits employers to offer financial incentives for achieving health-related goals, such as stopping smoking or losing weight. And it calls for a 40 percent tax on expensive benefit plans starting in 2018, motivating some companies to start looking for ways to lower costs.

But Janet Coffman, associate professor of health policy at the University of California at San Francisco, pointed out that these programs had become increasingly popular before the act went into effect. "It's analogous to putting a car on a train that was already running down the rails," she said.

Despite their growing popularity, evidence for the effectiveness of wellness programs is spotty.

Last year a congressionally mandated study by RAND Corp. found that workplace wellness programs have a minimal effect on companies' bottom lines. Workers who participated had health care costs averaging $2.38 less per month than nonparticipants in the first year of a program and $3.46 per month less in the fifth year — savings too small to be statistically significant.

Still, health care costs rose more slowly for program participants than nonparticipants, offering hope "that a reduction in direct medical costs would materialize if employees continued to participate."

RAND's Dr. Soeren Mattke, lead author of the study, pointed out that wellness programs that target lifestyle changes in healthy people — say, eating less and exercising more — need to be studied separately from disease management programs, which help sick employees deal with their illnesses. The latter target a smaller slice of workers who are at much higher risk of landing in the hospital.

"Disease management can save you money," he said, "but lifestyle management cannot." That is because the overweight worker of today might be retired by the time he develops heart disease, and not every smoker gets lung cancer. "You have to enroll a large number of people to avoid a few illnesses," Mattke said.

In another study, Mattke and colleagues looked at the lifestyle and disease-management components of PepsiCo's wellness program over a seven-year period. They found that continuous participation yielded an average reduction of $30 in health care costs per member per month. But when they looked at the two components separately, it emerged that disease management reduced health care costs by $136 per member per month (driven by a 29 percent reduction in hospital admissions); lifestyle management barely contributed to the overall savings.

Dr. Kevin Volpp, director of the University of PennsylvaniaCenter for Health Incentives and Behavioral Economics, cautioned against drawing overarching conclusions from the RAND study. "It's misleading to conclude that wellness programs don't and can't work," he said.

For one thing, Volpp said, much of the RAND data came from only five companies, none of which had used outcome-based incentives. "But even if it had looked at a broad swath of U.S. employers," he said, "it could only show what happened in the past. The science of motivation has greatly improved in recent years."

Steven Noeldner, a partner at Mercer, the large benefits consulting firm, said programs that employ "best practices" see a 2-to-1 return on investment over the course of three years. Some of those practices include having a multiyear strategic plan, specific goals and targets, effective behavior modification programs, meaningful incentives, a rigorous evaluation process and effective communication across multiple modalities.

"Having a workplace culture that supports and encourages good health" is also important, Noeldner said.

Coffman agreed: "You have to have things in the work environment — healthy foods in the cafeteria, places for people to exercise — to help people stay healthy and reinforce what they're learning in a wellness program."

Some programs clearly do work. Johnson & Johnson, with 125,000 employees worldwide, has 35 years of experience with a wellness program that has saved the company millions of dollars.

A 2011 study published in the journal Health Affairs found that the average annual per-employee savings were $565. And while estimated annual growth in total medical spending was 4.8 percent for comparable companies, J&J's costs went up only 1 percent a year.