World Why Women In India Keep Dying From An Operation That Takes Only 15 Minutes CREDIT: AP

Last week, an surgeon in India has been accused of using a bicycle pump to inflate the abdomens of 56 women undergoing sterilization operations. No deaths have yet been reported. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Rout admitted to the BBC that he’s used the pump as stand-in for a more sophisticated medical device and “never been a mishap or complication.”

The entire state of Odisha has shut down its sterilization operations after a human rights’ group revealed the dangerous substitution: unlike a bike pump, the appropriate medical pump uses carbon-dioxide and also monitors how much is present.

Dr. Rout’s justification of his use of the pump as an “affordable and convenient alternative” gets at the bigger problem in India: the massive task of curbing pregnancy rates in the soon-to-be most most populace country in the world despite the persistent issue of poverty. India is home to a third of the world’s poorest people, but the government has for decades worked to keep them from multiplying through controversial programs often targeting the most marginalized.

In 1952, India became the first country to introduce a nationwide policy for population control. The policy was imbued with infamy in 1975 when civil liberties were suspended by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and a mass sterilization program carried out. In the span of two years, more than eight million Indian were sterilized, many in exchange for compensation, and others simply forced.

Four million Indians were sterilized over the last year, according to state officials, all but 100,000 of them men. The women –- who generally have less of a say in making decisions on having sex or producing children — are offered compensation for undergoing the procedure which might be as little as $10.

The rewards are not always so paltry. According to a 2011 report by Human Rights Watch, one state offered a free car to anyone who opted for sterilization, another promised gun licensees to men who men who underwent the procedure.

Health workers, on the other hand, are threatened if they do not meet certain targets. Often hired from the impoverished communities where sterilization efforts are focused, such risks carry extra weight.

One health worker from a slum in Gujarat told Human Rights Watch that her supervisors insisted insisted that she bring in one woman every month to be sterilized, telling her, she said, “’Go bring them from wherever you want, it’s not our business. Find them.” She also said that she was told, “’Until a woman agrees for the operation keep hounding her.’”

Those managing the sterilization operations are often pushed by government quotas. For instance, in the state of Odisha where the bike pumps were used, one doctor told The Times of India, “The state was aiming to sterilize 160,000 women and 20,000 men this financial year.”

The vast majority of those, he said, are people in makeshift camps where sterilizations are conducted one after another.

And that’s another part of the problem. Official state policy holds that doctors spend no less than 15 minutes on each sterilization operation. But the rules and the rewards are at odds. Since doctors are paid by the number of sterilizations they perform, they are want to rush things along.

In Chhattisgarh, 12 women died after botched sterilizations in a single weekend last month. Although autopsy reports have shone their cause of death to be medications tainted with rat poison, the focus on the sterilization camp revealed that operations there were at a dangerous pace.

One individual suspended from his medical practice because of the incident told the Indian news channel NDTV that the team had a target of 40 sterilizations, “But the number of operations held on Saturday was double that figure.”

Dr. R.K. Gupta, who reportedly performed 83 operations on that day was arrested in connection with the deaths of 15 women in two separate sterilization camps.

“It was not my fault – the administration pressured me to meet targets,” he told NDTV.

And so the finger-pointing comes full circle.

As G. Pramod Kumar of First Post, an Indian news site, writes, “The officials, who lure [women] in with cash and incentives, are also under pressure from their bosses to show numbers of people whom they have made reproductive duds. This is Emergency-style draconian population control that India said it had given up. India’s own numbers show that it doesn’t work either. But we still do it.”

The figures show that birth rates are exponentially lower in areas where literacy rates are higher. But that kind of shift takes time – and sterilizations clock in at 15 minutes each — and that’s when they’re done by the book.