Topics: AlterNet, cdC, ebola, Liberia, West Africa, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

While fears and rumors are spreading faster than the Ebola virus in the U.S., the past few days have shown that America’s hospitals are not well prepared to deal with a spreading outbreak and are rushing to fill in gaps as mistakes emerge.

This week’s news has shown that even major hospitals and their staffs have not been sufficiently trained nor equipped to detect the virus or handle patients with it. That’s been seen in the third case that arose at a prestigious Dallas hospital—the eighth largest in Texas—where a second nurse in a team of 100 that treated Thomas Eric Duncan, a Liberian who died of the virus, became infected from that care-giving.

Compounding that development was the fact that federal health officials overseeing the nation’s Ebola response gave permission to a nurse to fly on a commercial jet to Ohio after she reported a low-grade fever. The nurse has since been taken to a special infectious disease center in Georgia, with biohazard isolation rooms and other protocols that are not commonly found in most hospitals.

“They are learning infection control on the fly,” DeAnn McEwen, chief of infection control for National Nurses United, the country’s largest union of nurses, said on Wednesday, saying both federal officials and hospitals have been far too lax.

One infectious disease specialist contacted by AlterNet who runs that department for a major urban hospital made these and other similar points earlier this week, which have been borne out as hospitals across the U.S. begin to look at more thorough protocols than previously recommended by federal officials.

The infectious disease specialist’s major points are:

1. Most American hospitals are not equipped to handle Ebola. They are not like Emory University or the country’s handful of bio-containment centers. They don’t have the space suits, isolation rooms, and training to deal with Ebola patients.

2. Nobody knows how the Texas nurses got the virus when treating Duncan. They didn’t have the training or precautionary gear, even after the Presbyterian Hospital emergency staff failed to correctly diagnose Duncan at first and discharged him.

3. Initial assurances by the top officials at the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that they have the situation under control were not true, just as instituting airport screening of travelers will not do much to identify carriers.

4. Physicians are concerned about doing too little—and doing too much, because they do not want to be seen as racially profiling potential victims or feeding into what has already been negative stereotyping of West Africans in media.