Fargo - In most major U.S. cities, the cost for an MRI scan of internal organs and soft tissues ranges from $1,694 to $3,624, according to the website CompareMRICost.com.

Here in Fargo, patients could pay just $448 for the procedure with the arrival earlier this year of Premier Medical Imaging, a company that provides MRIs, CT scans, ultrasounds, X-rays and mammograms on a cash-only basis. Cash, credit or debit card payment is required in advance of the procedure.

Dr. William F. Wosick, a radiologist with Premier, said the company can offer lower prices because it has eliminated the administrative costs associated with billing insurance.

“We take out the middle man, which generates so much cost in the whole health care industry today,” Wosick said.

The company’s services benefit patients who have high deductibles, high co-insurance or no insurance. The cost can be applied to a deductible in most cases, but it is up to the patient to submit the paperwork to his or her insurance.

Wosick said the business model was developed in response to the changing health care environment following the enactment of the Affordable Care Act.

Cathy Krueger, Midwest regional manager and MRI imaging specialist for Imaging Solutions, said health care is really not “affordable” when you consider what people are paying for premiums and deductibles today. Imaging Solutions is the parent company of the Institute of Diagnostic Imaging, the entity Premier contracts with locally to take scans.

“With people being ‘forced’ to purchase insurance, premiums have gone up substantially. Deductibles are typically $4,000 to $6,000 for a single (person) and over $13,500 for a family. Even after deductibles are met, people are still paying 20 to 30 percent co-insurance,” Krueger said.

She said people sometimes forgo important procedures because of cost.

How it works

Premier Medical Imaging is a company headquartered in Scottsdale, Ariz., that contracts with existing imaging facilities in North Dakota, Minnesota, Nebraska, Illinois, Iowa and Alabama.

In Fargo, patients get their scans taken at the Institute for Diagnostic Imaging, a company that has taken scans for private physicians, Sanford Medical Center and Essentia Health locally for years.

The technician uploads the scans to a system that allows Premier Medical Imaging radiologists like Wosick to study them and generate a formal report that is given to the patient or his or her regular health care provider. In some cases, Wosick will also meet in person with the patient to discuss the results.

“We have some of the finest technology available to us, and we really focus on bringing world class service to patients who come to us to help solve some of their medical imaging questions or diagnostic issues,” Wosick said. “All patients are the same to us. It doesn’t matter if you’re young or old, rich or poor.”

In addition to low cost, Premier is also known for being able to schedule appointments quickly and for their fast turnaround time for results. Most are available within 48 to 72 hours.

Regardless of someone’s insurance situation, Krueger advises people to be more proactive when it comes to making smart medical decisions. She reasoned that people get estimates for large expenses like home or car repairs. Why not do the same for health care?

“You have to treat health care as a consumer. You should seek out the best pricing and quality of care, and know you have a choice,” Krueger said.

Most people think their only option of where to go for a procedure is where their doctor tells them to go, but that is not the case, Wosick said.

“We are proud of the quality of the studies we produce,” he said. “We consider it a privilege to work with patients, who are the ultimate health care consumers, as well as other health care providers or partners in this wonderful thing we call health care today.”

BUSINESS PROFILE

What: Premier Medical Imaging

Address: Offices of the Institute of Diagnostic Imaging, 2829 S. University Drive, Suite 102, Fargo

Phone: (844) 551-6910

Website: http://premiermedicalimaging.net