Venezuelan-born Elsa Elena Escobar learned to make her dulce de leche-filled cookies in 1972 when she first moved to America.

She came here to attend Oklahoma State University, and her friend, whom everyone called Grandma, taught her the recipe.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

"We called her grandma because she was very, very nice to me," Escobar said.

Grandma was from Argentina, Escobar explained, and the recipe is a variation of the alfajor cookie that is popular in South America.

"She taught me to make it, but I made several adjustments to the ingredients because some things would be hard to find here," she said.

Escobar returned to Venezuela after receiving her master's degree but came back to live here in 2007. She has five grandchildren, and everyone in her family loves the cookies, she said.

"I like cooking, and everybody likes my cooking, so when I saw the contest in the newspaper, I decided to take the risk," Escobar said.

She was excited to hear that her cookie was selected for the contest sponsored by Hiland Dairy and the Tulsa World. And she is also celebrating her daughter's graduation this week from OSU with a master's degree in engineering.

"There has been lots of good news this week," Escobar said.

DULCE DE LECHE AND COCONUT YO-YO COOKIES

1 2/3 cups all-purpose flour

2 1/2 cups cornstarch

1/2 teaspoon baking soda

2 teaspoons baking powder

16 tablespoons butter (2 sticks minus 2 tablespoons)

3/4 cup white sugar

3 egg yolks plus 1 whole egg

1 tablespoon cognac or milk

1 tablespoon vanilla extract

1 tablespoon lemon zest

1 can dulce de leche (make it yourself or look for it in the Latin American or international food aisle, or near the sweetened condensed milk)

1 package coconut flakes

1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees.

2. Line cookie sheets with parchment paper.

3. Using a stand or electric mixer, beat butter until smooth and fluffy. Add sugar, eggs, cognac or milk, and vanilla extract.

4. In separate bowl, add dry ingredients (flour, cornstarch, baking powder, baking soda and lemon zest); mix, then add to other mixture.

5. Mix the dough for 2 minutes, and take it to a floured board; put it together. It should be soft and easy to handle.

6. Cut in 3 or 4 pieces. Roll each piece with a floured rolling pin to 3/4-inch thickness, and cut with a very small round cookie cutter.

7. Place on prepared cookie sheets 1/2 inch apart. Bake for about 8-12 minutes. Keep an eye on them; they should be white. Do not over-bake.

8. Let them cool. Open the can of dulce de leche, and fill the flat side of 1 cookie with a teaspoon or so of the cream. Cover with another cookie to make a yo-yo form. Press the 2 cookies gently so part of the filling shows by the border.