Now that the 2013-2014 legislative session has concluded, I have begun to reflect on the many legislative and policy successes I have enjoyed in my fourteen [years] as a member of the California State Legislature.

I was proud to have taken an active role in helping the Legislature pass an on-time balanced budget, spearhead efforts to achieve economic development through private sector job creation, and address water quality and infrastructure needs in California.

I am immeasurably grateful for the faith, trust and support of our great community and the hard work of my dedicated staff and supporters.

As Chair of the Senate Elections and Constitutional Amendments Committee, I pushed forward an aggressive legislative portfolio aimed at fundamentally reforming elections by better protecting voters, strengthening the ballot initiative system, and reducing the number of disqualified vote-by-mail ballots. I also advanced numerous good governance reforms to bring sunshine to state and local government, minimize undue influence, prevent political corruption, encourage greater public participation, and ensure that taxpayer dollars are spent wisely.

As Chair of the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee, I worked to better protect and improve benefits for California’s military, veterans, and their dependents, championing legislation to expand healthcare, jobs, and educational opportunities for veterans and members of the military, arguing that California can and must do better.

When California faced the Recession and the possibility of economic collapse, I was proud to work in a bi-partisan manner with two administrations to begin to restore property tax equity to Orange County.

Together, we have pulled ourselves out of the worst depression in history. California’s unemployment level is dropping; the state budget is projected to see a modest growth of approximately $5.6 billion in 2014-2015. Our rising home prices and numerous new building permits show our state is well into recovery.

California also continues to lead the nation in implementing the federal Affordable Care Act. Today, 5 million uninsured Californians now have access to indispensable health services. Our economy is now recovering faster than most other states’ and we’ve even reclaimed our title as the world’s eighth-largest economy.

Due to term limits, my time in the California Legislature is now coming to an end. We have had many successes and there is no doubt in my mind that California’s future is bright and that the best years are still ahead.

Thank you so much for giving me the honor and privilege to serve you. I look forward to continuing to work with you, though in a different capacity, once my current term in office concludes at the end of this month.

As always, I thank you for your support and am grateful that you have continued to entrust me with this privilege. For that I remain forever grateful.

The article above was released by outgoing California State Senator Lou Correa, a Democrat who represented California’s 34th State Senate District. After redistricting, that District includes Anaheim, Fountain Valley, Garden Grove, Huntington Beach, eastern Long Beach, Los Alamitos, Midway City, Orange, Rossmoor, Santa Ana, Seal Beach, Sunset Beach, and Westminster. Orange County Supervisor Janet Nguyen will represent the District in the next session.