By Emma Lamberton | Vermont Watchdog

Vermont’s Green Mountain Care Board has begun negotiations with the federal government, preparing for the 2016 go-ahead for Gov. Peter Shumlin’s all-payer health care waiver.

“At the end of December 2016, Vermont would no longer have a global commitment waiver for Medicaid,” GMCB Chair Al Gobeille told Watchdog. “The goal would be to negotiate with the federal government to get a series of waivers for Medicare and the global commitment for Medicaid to begin Jan. 1, 2017.”

The controversial all-payer plan will set rates for all Vermont health care providers through a pre-negotiated budget with commercial insurance companies, as well as the federally determined funds of Medicaid and Medicare. While the state already sets reimbursement rates for Medicaid, a separate waiver is necessary to control rates for Medicare, which are set by the federal government. Both federal programs significantly underpay for services, forcing commercial insurers to pick up the tab through higher premiums.

If granted, the waivers would make Vermont similar to Maryland, the only state with an all-payer waiver from the federal government. Maryland has used its waiver for hospitals since the 1970s to ensure Medicaid, Medicare and commercial insurers pay the same reimbursements for the same care. Through its waiver, Maryland receives an extra $1 billion in federal funds annually.

Dr. Daniel McCauliffe, a private dermatologist at Rutland Skin Center, warns against taking the “all-payer” program at its name.

“I think it is very, very important to emphasize that when we talk about the all-payer waiver, it is a name like the Affordable Care Act,” he said. “It’s a name that says one thing but doesn’t really tell you what it’s all about.”

McCauliffe, who has for many years lectured and written about health care reform, warned that the new system, with the state setting annual funding for hospitals and other care providers, necessarily results in rationed care to avoid going over budget.

Gobeille disagrees. A global budget is one of many tools that could be used to run the all-payer system. The Board has “not told the federal government anything we would do yet,” he added.

With the new system, the GMCB would review budgets given to them by provider entities and set their approved expansion rate. After having their budgets approved, providers would then negotiate for that rate with commercial insurance companies, while receiving set funds from the federal government.

Can providers be negotiated down from their original requests? “Absolutely,” Gobeille said. But he added that rate negotiation has been going on for the last thirty years and is not new to Vermont health care.

Gobeille emphasizes that the state will not be handling funds, simply setting rates.

A major issue surrounding the all-payer waiver has been whether the state will directly control Medicare funds. Gobeille is emphatic that is not the case. “Medicare, as of yet, is not willing to hand money over to state government the same way as Medicaid.”

“They are, however, willing to turn money over to insurance companies, which is called Medicare Advantage, and they have announced Next Generation, which is a program where they’re willing to turn over money to providers,” he said.

When asked if Vermont Health Connect would be a part of either program, Gobeille said that was not on the table, since VHC is a state entity.

While the state cannot control where the federal government sends Medicare funds, it still has access to those numbers and can take those funds into account when setting provider budgets.

While McCauliffe opposes the all-payer waiver, Gobeille and the rest of the GMCB have been consulting with health care providers since the program began, implying that other health care professionals may not be as skeptical as McCauliffe.

“We’ve created these programs with them,” Gobeille said. “There are things that they’ve applauded immediately, things they’ve hated, things they want altered. We’ve tried to be responsive to them every step of the way. The perception the government is doing this is completely erroneous, meaning we are facilitators.”

“For federally qualified or hospital health care providers, this program had better well be fantastic, because it’s all based upon them; meaning Medicare created a program where primary care doctors had to want to participate,” he said.

However, McCauliffe argues that Medicare’s track record in recruiting participants is less than exemplary.

“In 2009, Medicare decided they were going to cut payments to cardiologists by 45 percent for many of the things they do in the office. But if they went to work for a hospital, they would actually get a 5 percent increase,” McCauliffe said. “The difference between working in private practice or a hospital is a 50 percent spread. So of course they all went and worked for the hospital.”

And that was not the only federal discrepancy. “Primary care doctors working at federal clinics got paid 58 percent more than private practice for Medicaid ,” he added.

With that sullied federal history in mind, McCauliffe is concerned private physicians will continue to face funding discrimination, and may disappear altogether from Vermont with the all-payer waiver budgeting system.

“There are fewer and fewer private physicians every year. The federal government, through Medicare payment policy, has set up physicians to leave private practice and work for federally qualified clinics,” he said.

In retrospect, McCaulife said, these payment discrepancies can be seen as red flags for government control of Vermont health care, and the upcoming all-payer waiver. When providers are part of large organizations, budgeting becomes easier. Bureaucratically, it is complicated to cut out portions of the budget for private physicians and practices.

Foremost, Gobeille insists, the GMCB is working with the needs of providers and patients in mind. “We had to do a lot of research into what every party needs,” he said. “It has been an exercise in understanding.”

Contact Emma Lamberton at elamberton@watchdog.org