This second trail will connect the Loveland Recreation Trail to the Fossil Creek Trail in Fort Collins

Barb Sangetta and husband Sam Sangetta enjoy a morning ride on Independence Day, Saturday. The pair are excited to see the new section of the Colorado Front Range Trail when it is created in 2016 and say it will make their biking around town much easier. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

A second paved recreation trail from Loveland to Fort Collins will be built in 2016, thanks to a $450,000 grant awarded by the Colorado Department of Transportation and a $350,000 grant from the Colorado Department of Parks and Wildlife.

On the web Visit cityofloveland.org/trails for more about Loveland trails or http://www.larimer.org/openlands/regional-trails.htm for county regional trails.

The first link from Loveland to Fort Collins was announced on June 24, when Great Outdoors Colorado said that Larimer County would receive a $999,550 grant for the Longview Corridor Trail that will connect Loveland's Sunset Vista Natural Area trail to Fort Collins' Cathy Fromme Prairie along Taft Avenue, or Shields Street in Fort Collins.

That first project is using a $1 million grant from the Colorado Department of Transportation and a shared cost of $2 million among Larimer County, Loveland and Fort Collins.

The second link, a 2.2-mile Colorado Front Range Trail/Loveland to Fort Collins Connection, will also fill the gap between existing trails in Loveland and Fort Collins. The Front Range Trail will connect Loveland's Recreation Trail near Boyd Lake State Park to Fort Collins' Fossil Creek Trail.

The Longview Corridor Trail will provide a connection between the cities on the west side of Colorado 287 and the Colorado Front Range Trail will provide that connection on the east side.

Advertisement

James Dangle of Loveland will appreciate that. Dangle was riding east with his grandson Noah Parker on the Loveland Recreation Trail by Boyd Lake.

"That would be great. I'm looking forward to that," he said while stopping to catch a breath and take a water break with his grandson.

Dangle usually takes County Road 11C north after leaving the Boyd Lake trail so he can meet up with the Power Trail in Fort Collins.

He said his grandson would be able to ride with him into Fort Collins when the new trail is created, which will go along County Road 11C, Carpenter Road, and meet up with the Fossil Creek Trail.

Barb Sangetta, who lives with her husband, Sam Sangetta, between Carpenter Road and the east-west bound Loveland trail, said they currently have to navigate through neighborhoods and Cottonwood Plains Elementary School to get to the trail. They were also out for a morning ride on Saturday headed through Boyd Lake State Park.

"The more you can ride off the streets, the better you are," Sam said.

"When they did Trilby down there - the Power Trail - that was wonderful," Barb added.

This map provided by the city of Loveland shows the dotted lines where the new Colorado Front Range Trail Loveland to Fort Collins connection will go. The blue dotted line is Loveland's part and yellow is Larimer County's section. (Special to the Reporter-Herald / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

According to the press release, the Front Range trail has been in the works since 2002 when Loveland and Fort Collins officials identified the need as part of an initiative to develop a trail system from Wyoming to New Mexico.

"We're excited to get this project going since the Colorado Front Range Trail has been in the works for more than 13 years now," said Janet Meisel-Burns, senior park planner with the City of Loveland, in a press release.

The project is estimated to cost $1,012,666. After the grants worth $800,000, the project will be paid by Loveland, Fort Collins and Larimer County based on the proportion of trail construction in each jurisdiction.

Visit cityofloveland.org/trails for more about Loveland trails or http://www.larimer.org/openlands/regional-trails.htm for county regional trails.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.