Topics: david duchovny, Editor's Picks, gillian anderson, the x-files, TV, Entertainment News

My original take on “The X-Files” was akin to Andy Warhol’s dismissal of “Saturday Night Live”: “If you’re home on a Saturday night,” the Pop artist once asked, “Why are you home on a Saturday night?”

The suspense hit, co-starring David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson as mismatched FBI agents, premiered on Fox on a Friday, Sept. 10, 1993, and that night, decades before the advent of the DVR, I was far too busy to watch. I was celebrating my 24th birthday, which was not until Oct. 2.

Of course, I became aware that there was a show called “The X-Files” that was something of a to-do, because this was an era when it was harder to avoid a pop phenomenon, an album or a film once it moved to the cultural fore, but I could not have been less interested in it. I was too young and having too much fun. The only X that I cared about was something that we Brooklyn hipsters all called “E” (only cops and housewives on TV called it “X”) and the only file that mattered was the one I used to carve out lines on the top of a hand-drying blower in the bathroom of some graffiti’d Lower East Side bar.

If I happened to catch an episode, and I did watch a few, it was either because I was in the hospital or waiting in a taxi station in Williamsburg (where I lived in a $300-a-month loft on Grand Street … talk about the supernatural). Maybe I was still in some woman’s apartment after going home with her — on a Thursday. Some Fridays it was on while I was talking about religion or why Jon Spencer Blues Explosion sucked (or were great) in a strange, cramped kitchen with several other young men and women since the Thursday before that. Cocaine, a — not the — drug of choice at the time, did not make me paranoid; in fact, it accomplished the opposite effect. Blow made me 100 percent certain that I was right about everything: politics, sports, music, my own talent. The only truth that was out there was the guy with more coke. I wouldn’t be able to spot a UFO because we had no sky in New York in the ‘90s, anyway, just a banner of filmy, starless blue black tarpaulin (perfect for the flying of black helicopters but fly away, just don’t blow away the pile with your rotors, por favor). A freakin’ werewolf could have been sitting next to me on a stool at the Library Bar on Avenue A, but that too would require looking left or right instead of straight at the cute, blond art student/bartender.

Cut to nine seasons, 202 episodes, and a few dramatized Chupacabra sightings later, and I was no longer in my carefree 20s. Mulder and Scully were gone and so was my youthful bravado: disappeared in an instant like Mulder’s poor sister. My once-flourishing writing career was about as successful as that of the Smoking Man’s.