Angles and Tangles Hair Salon will close Dec. 31 but merge with the Hair Shop in South Amboy

Pictured in photo (L to R): Kenny King, Denise Macholl, Denna Woznica-Fuentes, Jan Starozytnyk, Elizabeth Lang-Jones & Leeann Doerer. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF SHARON CONDIRACCI) Story Highlights Woznica-Fuentes priorities have shifted to her young children.

Angles and Tangles Hair Salon will merge with the Hair Shop in South Amboy.

Angles and Tangles Hair Salon located at 152 Main St., will close on Dec. 31 after 22 years in business.

In a telephone interview, owner, Denna Woznica-Fuentes said, "she is greatly appreciative to all her customers and patrons for supporting her business for so many years. Without them I could not have survived as long as I did."

After being in business for more than two decades, Woznica-Fuentes no longer wants to manage the salon because in recent years her priorities have shifted to her young children. She commented, "Working late every night is inevitable in the hair industry and gives me less time to be with my family, so I decided it was time to end this chapter of my life and begin a new one in the new year that will be accommodating for both me and my kids."

Woznica-Fuentes also added that although she would still need to work after her business closed she didn't know what she would do, until an idea of merging her staff with another salon came to mind. This would allow her to be able to continue to do what she loves and her staff would not be out of work.

This idea, which will soon become a reality, is a win-win for everyone; especially Maryann Lavery-Minnella, owner of the Hair Shop located at 339 Main St., South Amboy, who happily agreed to take on board the Angles and Tangles team. Lavery-Minnella, is very excited for Denna and her employees. She stated, "This merger is going to change my business in a positive way. With more than 50 years of combined experience both our salons have, I look forward to the added business it will generate and have no doubt that 2015 is going to be a great year for all of us!"

On a final note, Woznica-Fuentes noted that clients can continue to call the salon for appointments at 732- 651-1124 because the number will remain active for several months after the merger.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1AgfMag