Beth McDonough

Updated: 02/17/2016 1:01 PM

Created: 02/16/2016 9:28 PM

A group of Minnesotans, 55 and older, feel like they were duped into turning over their assets.

They claimed they learned about it after signing up for affordable health care coverage in the state's insurance exchange.

That includes Julie Gelle of Sandstone. At 62, she's old enough to retire, but too young to qualify for Medicare. She not only needed, but like everyone else, was required to get health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

"I didn't go into the insurance exchange to look for a free handout. I'm not poor or destitute," Gelle said.

Gelle used MNsure to get coverage and didn't think about it again, until a friend alerted her about some fine print.

Language on the last page of the application states, "If you're 55 and older, Minnesota must recover the health care costs paid for Medical Assistance members."

Medical Assistance is Minnesota's version of Medicaid. The state puts a lien on an estate and it goes into effect after a Medical Assistance member dies.

To find out if there's a lien against your assets, contact the State Recovery Unit at (651) 431-2670.

For Gelle, the future bill is $16,000. "You think about it every waking minute," she said.

For Rick Rayburn of Finlayson, the bill is even higher: $30,000. "Well, it's like somebody kicked me in the gut," he said.

The Department of Human Services oversees the Medical Assistance program and last year recovered $34 million.

In a statement Tuesday, the department said, "Information is posted in the application and renewal process, in a managed care guide, plus yearly communications."

Sen. Tony Lourey (DFL) is drafting a bill to introduce next month in the legislature that removes the estate claim provision for folks on Medical Assistance.

"It's not an intended consequence," he said.

Rayburn, Gelle and others pray it passes or their loved ones will have to pay up.

Both families canceled their policies and don't have insurance.

The Department of Human Services says the recovered money ends up in the state's general fund, along with counties and federal government accounts.

The Minnesota Legislature passed the lien law and the Department of Human Services oversees it. The idea is that people with assets should help contribute to the cost of health care coverage. Anyone signed up for Medical Assistance cannot pay the debt before they die, the law doesn't allow it.