Itzel Hernandez, left, and Bryant Ramirez, get instruction from Jay Peteranetz. Peteranetz, of Pop Culture Classroom, was teaching an afterschool class of comic-creation and storytelling at Sanchez Elementary School in Lafayette. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Nine students at Lafayette's Sanchez Elementary lay on the floor as their story began, before sitting up to signal a change.

They went to one knee, stood up and them jumped up and down, as high as they could, to go from rising action to the climax.

The students were getting a lesson in comic book structure from artist Jay Peteranetz, who led the afterschool "Storytelling Through Comics" workshop through Pop Culture Classroom.

"The goal is an understanding of comics and how they work — the vocabulary, character creation and how we can solve problems in a fantastic context," Peteranetz said. "We want to show kids how fun and exciting reading can be."

Pop Culture Classroom, which also produces Denver Comic Con and is directed by Boulder Valley school board member Sam Fuqua, is a Denver-based education nonprofit that develops curriculum and promotes literacy through comics lessons.

Comic-creation and storytelling workshops are taught in classrooms throughout metro Denver and in after-school programs, community centers and correctional facilities — including a current workshop that's being taught at the Boulder County Jail.

"Pop culture can provide a unique and engaging hook for students," said education director Illya Kowalchuk, a former Boulder Valley Middle School teacher. "Research shows that when students are engaged and feel personally attached the educational outcomes improve."

Advertisement

He said for kids always told where to go and what to do by adults, a comic superhero is a chance to be in charge.

"It can be exciting to feel like an omnipotent being," he said

At Lafayettte's Sanchez Elementary, students used a worksheet to create a comic character, figuring out a name, friends, tools, superpowers, weaknesses, influential past events and a nemesis.

Then they started to write, creating four-to-six panel comics.

Peteranetz, a lead teacher with Pop Culture, helped the students come up with ideas and offered advice, steering one away from having the bad guy win — but noting that a cliffhanger ending with the hero losing works when the good guy wins in the next installment.

Fourth-grader Clayton Hobbs created a superhero who derives his strength from lollipops.

"I like comics because I really like reading and villains and superheroes," he said. "I like the details."

Fifth-grader Seito Tandberg, who was writing about a hero who saves a planet, said he wants to learn to draw comics because "they're fun to read and interesting."

His favorite hero is Batman.

"He's the coolest," he said. "He doesn't have a superpower, other than how intelligent he is."

Another fifth-grader, Anthony Portillo, came up with a hero who's a mix of human, alien and robot.

"I love comics," he said. "They have more action and pictures than other books."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa