The Reno area has seen its Medicaid enrollment nearly double this year — one of the biggest jumps of any metro area nationwide. (Photo: Scott Sonner, AP)

RENO — For Carolyn Oatman, enrolling in Medicaid this year was "a dream come true."

Uninsured since she lost her job five years ago in this desert gambling city, Oatman, 57, often couldn't afford the drugs to control her asthma and high blood pressure. She would sell her blood plasma to scrape together enough money to see a doctor.

Since she signed onto Medicaid, her care is free, including her medicines. But there's a downside: It can take two months to get a doctor's appointment at a community health center, or it's an all-day wait if she just shows up.

Such delays are a result of the surge in newly insured patients seeking care as Nevada became one of 26 states to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act in 2014. The Reno area has seen its Medicaid enrollment nearly double this year — one of the biggest jumps of any metro area nationwide.

The experience of this self-proclaimed "Biggest Little City in the World," where glitzy hotels abut gritty neighborhoods of pawn shops and strip clubs, demonstrates the promise and pitfalls of expanding Medicaid, the federal-state insurance program for the poor.

Though happy to have coverage, many new enrollees have been frustrated by the lack of providers willing to see them, which can mean long waits for care, according to interviews with patients, doctors and health officials.

New Medicaid enrollee Carolyn Oatman of Reno leaves a Community Health Alliance clinic after dropping off a lab specimen. (Photo: Phil Galewitz, Kaiser Health News)

Sometimes, when Oatman needs to see a doctor in a hurry, she drives to the nearest emergency room — getting care where it costs taxpayers the most.

"I love it on Medicaid because now I can go the emergency room when I need to and don't have to worry about the bill," she said.

Physicians and clinics that treat the poor say they've been overwhelmed by new patients, many of whom suffer from multiple chronic conditions.

"We are struggling to keep up with demand for care," said Chuck Duarte, the state's former Medicaid chief who directs Community Health Alliance, the region's largest federally funded community health center.

He said he's worried the problems will escalate when the second Obamacare enrollment period begins Nov. 15.

NEVADA SIGNED ON EARLY

Nevada Gov. Brian Sandoval was the first Republican governor to embrace Medicaid expansion after the Supreme Court made that provision of Obamacare optional for states in 2012. In December 2012, Sandoval estimated about 78,000 Nevadans would gain Medicaid coverage starting in 2014.

In fact, Medicaid enrollment grew from 330,000 Nevadans in September 2013 to more than 601,000 in August 2014 — an 82% increase, according to state figures. That compares with average enrollment growth of about 20% in the states that expanded the program.

Among the reasons for the rapid take-up in Nevada were its high uninsured rate and previously stingy Medicaid guidelines, which excluded childless adults and covered jobless parents with dependent children only if their households made below 24% of the federal poverty level, or about $5,700 for a family of four.

The new enrollees turn out to have far greater health needs than the mothers and children who previously dominated the Medicaid rolls, said Eric Lloyd, chief executive of Amerigroup of Nevada. Amerigroup has seen more cases of advanced heart and lung disease, diabetic complications and advanced cancers. Mental illness and substance abuse problems are also way up, he said.

Duarte said the influx of Medicaid patients seeking services has exacerbated the region's long-standing shortage of doctors and other health providers. "It's a combination of lack of providers and doctors unwilling to take these patients," he said.

Without enough exam space and providers to keep up with demand, the health center, which saw 26,000 patients last year, turns away hundreds of patients a week seeking immediate care, he said.

"We've been told by our Medicaid managed care organizations that we have several thousands of their members waiting for their first appointment," Duarte said.

A LIFE 'BACK ON TRACK'

New Medicaid enrollee Karen Silverman. (Photo: Phil Galewitz, Kaiser Health News)

Even so, there are individual success stories.

Karen Silverman, 61, is one of those. Working as a parking lot attendant without health coverage, she often could not afford the drugs to treat her high blood pressure and diabetes.

"I would forgo my cholesterol or blood pressure medicine, so I could afford my insulin," she said. "It was scary, but I had no choice."

Since enrolling in Medicaid, she pays nothing for prescription drugs or doctor visits. After several months of taking her medications regularly, her diabetes and blood pressure are better controlled and she has started walking again.

"I feel as if my life is back on track," she said.

She is not the only one. In the past year, Duarte says, more of the health center's patients controlled chronic health problems as they became insured. For example, about 73% of hypertension patients have their blood pressure under control, compared with 64% a year ago.

Amerigroup and UnitedHealthcare, the managed care plans the state pays to take care of most Medicaid enrollees, point to many such stories, even as they acknowledge the challenges of increased demand. "We are doing the best we can with the available provider network," Lloyd said.

NEVADA'S DEARTH OF DOCTORS

Such physician shortages are not confined to Nevada, but the issue is particularly bad here. The state ranks 48th in the nation for its number of active physicians per capita — largely the result of big population growth, having just two medical schools and relatively few medical training slots.

The shortage has meant doctors focus on treating higher-paying patients with private insurance or Medicare.

Duarte said the situation worsened because the state cut Medicaid payments to providers several times in the past decade to help balance its budget.

To entice providers, the health law increased Medicaid pay for primary care doctors in 2013 and 2014 to the same levels paid by Medicare. In Nevada, that meant a nearly 30% pay hike. But federal money runs out at year's end.

Andrew Pasternak, a family physician in a more upscale part of Reno, sees 400 Medicaid patients, up from 20 the year before. He warns he may stop if his payments are cut.

"It's a huge worry," he said.

Nevada Medicaid Director Laurie Squartsoff said the state may step in to maintain the higher pay rates next year. The state is also trying to add residency training slots and expand the use of telemedicine, she said.

Kaiser Health News is an editorially independent program of the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/ZR7rNU