TRENTON — UnitedHealthcare this month began terminating contracts with physicians across the nation who participate in the Medicare Advantage plans, alarming doctors who say the move will disrupt their relationships with patients and make care harder to find.

A UnitedHealthcare spokeswoman said the company is dropping 10 to 15 percent of its physicians nationwide, although she declined to say how many are affected in New Jersey. Doing so will save money and improve care, spokeswoman Mary McElrath-Jones.

"With the many changes happening in health care, we are building a network of health care providers that we can collaborate with more closely to have the most positive impact on the quality of care for our members," McElrath-Jones said. "Ultimately, our network has to be more focused around the needs of our members. This will encourage better health outcomes and ultimately lower costs. "

The Medical Society of New Jersey, a physician association, doesn't have a count of how may have been terminated but estimated the decision affects at least hundreds of doctors and potentially thousands of patients when the contracts end in February. The physician groups are trying to get the word out now because Medicare's open enrollment period ends Dec. 7, and United has not yet informed its customers their doctors won't be available, the Medical Society's Chief Counsel Melinda Martinson said.

"They told us patients would not be informed until after the (doctor) termination process ran its course," Martinson said. "We are concerned that this is after open enrollment ends. They acknowledged our concerns and agreed to keep talking to us."

The letters, which physicians said started arriving last week, said their contracts would end Feb. 1, 2014. "Given the significant changes and pressures in the healthcare environment, we have undertaken a review of our network and are making changes to its composition."

Walter Wynkoop, who is part of a five-doctor pulmonologist practice in Ocean County, said he and his partners have sent a letter to the 180 patients who will be affected by UnitedHealthcare's decision next year. "It won't have a huge impact on us. Our concern really has more to do with our patients -- patients we have had relationships with going on a decade," he said.

Wynkoop said they have appealed the decision, which he called "a curious move that I don't understand. . . In my opinion, they are just using the turmoil of Obamacare as an excuse to ratchet down on their provider network," Wynkoop said.

The U. S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is required to evaluate the major changes to insurance networks to insure there are enough doctors in all geographic areas and across specialties.

A statement from Medicare officials said they were evaluating the changes UnitedHealthcare is making. "We are currently working with United to review the data and criteria they used in their own analysis and will be conducting a separate analysis for any areas about which we are concerned," according to the statement.

The federal government's "role is to ensure network adequacy and monitor that the (insurance carrier) is notifying providers and affected members according to the required time frames: 60-day advance notice to providers and 30-day notice to beneficiaries," according to the statement.

UnitedHealthcare said its decision will not cause a doctor shortage.

"We believe our networks will continue to exceed accessibility standards and have taken care to ensure our members have access to a broad choice of primary care physicians and specialists, right down to the county level," McElrath-Jones said. "We have conducted outreach to area providers that will remain in network to confirm their capacity to take on additional patients."

Letters are on the way to United's customers with recent claims to "help individual members understand their choices," she said.

The Medical Society wants to do its own evaluation to determine whether patients will have enough doctors in the plan to serve the need. "The physician-patient relationship is significant and important, and the patient should be able to choose," particularly if the patient is suffering chronic medical conditions or long-term illnesses, and United's decision disrupts long-term relationships , she said.

Medicare Advantage plans are provided by private insurance companies and offer more variety and benefits than Medicare coverage. Physicians in UnitedHealthcare's network who participate in Medicaid, traditional Medicare and commercial plans are not affected.

David Knowlton, president and CEO of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, a consumer advocacy group, said a lot of health insurance companies are changing their plans and prices before a flood of new people are expected to obtain insurance next year through the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. The fear is that young and healthy people will pay the fine rather than buy a plan, creating an expensive pool of sick people to cover, Knowlton said.

"Everybody is trying to hedge their bets. No one wants all the sick folks," he said.

RELATED COVERAGE

• New Jersey employers scaling back the most on health insurance contributions: ADP study

• Obamacare to end health plan used by 100,000 New Jerseyans

More Politics