Estatley, a website, shows what search words are most popular by state. (Photo: Estatley image)

Pantaloons?

Confess: You’ve Googled it, haven’t you?

A recent Estately blog study of Google Trends from the 50 states has revealed some disturbing facts about New Jersey’s Internet search habits. We’re tops in the nation for such search terms as: Bon Jovi; Britney Spears; cure for baldness; girdles; New Jersey jokes; pantaloons; six-pack abs; Teletubbies; and thumb wrestling.

You can’t question Sayreville native rocker Jon Bon Jovi’s appearance on the list. Platinum record seller, rich guy, great hair.

But what’s the deal with thumb wrestling?

Seriously, you have to Google that? OK, there is a Thumb Wrestling Federation website where you can buy merchandise such as T-shirts and hats but the site carries a warning: “Remember, you need your parent’s permission to buy things online.” (That warning disappears in five seconds, by the way). This tells us “who” in New Jersey might be searching for thumb wrestling, but the “why” remains a mystery.

Nor can we figure out our search obsession with Britney Spears or “cure for baldness.” Well, if you’ve been to the mall at 11 a.m. on a Tuesday, perhaps you can get a clue. New Jerseyans, according to the research, seem to be inordinately concerned with our appearance. We also like to Google “girdles” and “six-pack abs.”

Where do “Teletubbies” fit in? Those little creatures that infants watch when they’re drooling into their dry Cheerios are just plain weird. Here’s what’s even weirder: Those infants can’t type yet, so it’s folks too old for Teletubbies who are Googling them.

Then there’s that pantaloons thing. It makes sense. Really. Pantaloons isn’t just an obscure term for vintage ladies undergarments. It’s also an Indian fashion retailer, and Asian Indians are the largest group of Asians in New Jersey, according to the U.S. Census.

“While weaving its magic across lifestyle segments, Pantaloons caters to the discerning and trendy Indian consumer,” the company’s website says.

The Estately list is manipulated a bit. The bloggers entered hundreds of oddball topics in the Google search engine and then tallied the totals for each state. So while Kentuckians may be the most prone to searching “demonic possession,” it doesn’t mean that tons of folks there are worried about Old Scratch tapping into their cerebral cortexes.

Nonetheless, it is interesting that Maine folks are partial to “cat pics” and “how to roll a joint” and some people in Maryland have a thing for David Hasselhoff.

Among all the Garden State search results, however, there is one that is confusing: “New Jersey jokes.”

We live here. Shame on you if you don’t already know the jokes. Go back to searching for girdles. Or just suck it in…

Read or Share this story: http://www.mycentraljersey.com/story/news/local/middlesex-county/2014/05/22/nj-search-web/9452097/