Gaven Guess works toward a technical fall against Centauri's Juanito Romero during the Tiger Quads on Saturday at the Tiger Dome. Cañon City took second place. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Cody Killis, bottom, wrestles Centauri's Jareb Aziz during the Tiger Quads on Saturday at the Tiger Dome. Cañon City took second place. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

The Tigers had their chances to win their home tourney for the second time in three years on Saturday, but a few close matches went Centauri's way.

The teams entered the Tiger Quads' final dual on Saturday both with 2-0 records, and Centauri triumphed with a 46-29 decision.

Cañon City was down 27-24 after Cody Simms pinned his opponent. With five matches to go, the Falcons earned two pins and two decisions to close it out.

"I thought we wrestled really well. We kind of hung in there with them," Tigers coach Duff Seaney said. "We're young and we get guys in position but don't know how to finish, but it's all right."

When the two teams wrestled earlier this season, the Falcons won by a 50-21 score.

It was the second straight year that the Tigers have taken second place to Centauri in the home tournament. Two years ago, Cañon City won the event.

Gaven Guess and Anthony Abbott each went 3-0 on Saturday. Cañon City wrestlers who went 2-1 were: Simms, Ricky Garcia and Blake Repshire.

The Tigers started the day by beating Vista Ridge 63-13, then they beat Pueblo East 57-24.

The Eagles were one of only two teams to beat the Tigers in the South-Central League season, but Seaney said the Eagles had a few kids miss the bus Saturday and didn't have a full lineup. They gave four forfeits to the Tigers, and the Tigers were 7-3 in the wrestled matches.

The Tigers' attention is now squarely on Friday, the opening of the two-day Region 2 tournament to be held at the Colorado State Fair Event Center. There will be 17 teams competing. The top four finishers in each of the weight brackets will qualify for state to be held next week at the Pepsi Center in Denver.

"I'm as ready as I can be," Guess said after his perfect outing on Saturday. "I'll work hard this week, but this is the best I've wrestled this season I think."

When asked how many wrestlers he expects to qualify for state, Seaney said: "I have no idea. I hope we can qualify three or four. I think our top end is maybe five or six, and our bottom end is zero. If we don't wrestle well, we could have nobody go."