WHEN Colin Sandler was in high school in the mid-1980s, her grandparents legally separated after 45 years of marriage. This was not because their marriage was troubled, but because her grandfather had fallen ill and medical bills threatened to consume their entire life savings and all their income, leaving Ms. Sandler’s grandmother penniless.

The separation, as Ms. Sandler recalls it, allowed her grandfather to qualify for Medicaid and her grandmother to stay solvent. Ms. Sandler, now an elder care consultant in Cortland Manor, N.Y., says that in those years divorcing was a mainstream financial planning move. Tactics to keep elderly people’s assets and income within their family’s control while still qualifying them for Medicaid were common. Loopholes were exploited.

But legislative changes in the late 1980s and a major overhaul in 2003 have closed some loopholes, and the eligibility requirements for Medicaid have been eased; they will relax further on Jan. 1 under the Affordable Care Act of 2010, in an expansion that some but not all states have embraced. Such changes allow elderly people to keep more assets and income and still qualify for Medicaid.

Medicaid is intended to provide health care to people who are indigent, including people who are indigent and disabled or elderly. And paying for long-term care at home or in a nursing facility is an effective way to quickly run out of money. The national median rate for a year in a nursing home is $83,950. In New York State, it is $125,732.

The exact qualifications for Medicaid vary by state and will continue to do so. Most states now will cover nursing home expenses for someone whose income is $2,130 or less each month and who has $2,000 or less in assets, not including the primary residence. The threshold is substantially lower for at-home care. In New York the monthly income limit for receiving care at home is $800, or $1,175 for a couple. Any surplus that materializes must be spent on the patient’s care for that person to remain eligible.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Most people would prefer that their family inherit their life savings. But if in the five years before applying for Medicaid, an elderly person transfers any assets — for example, money or property to children or grandchildren — the giver would incur a penalty upon enrollment. Those five years are known as the look-back period.

There are a handful of exceptions. Federal law keeps some assets out of the equation altogether. A patient’s house is exempt, if the equity in it falls under a threshold that varies by state, from $500,000 to $802,000, and if the enrollee plans to remain there or to return after a stay elsewhere for medical care. Personal belongings are also exempt, like furniture or even a car. So are small life insurance policies and prepaid funerals.