Luci Gutiérrez

The team is busy in the town of Logiton this week, helping the police as well as civic planners.

Plead Insanity | Junior Varsity

Non Sequitur, the international ring of crime and illogic based in Logiton, has a special punishment for people who bungle crimes. The police chief has learned that they applied the punishment to Dana, who was very nearly caught for stealing the Trophy of Truth in Week Eight. (You may recall that Dana is one in a set of triplets and the police have only identified one of them, Elliot. They can’t tell the other two apart.) This punishment drives the recipient insane. In Logiton, everything that an insane person believes is false. But criminals in Logiton always lie, which means they will only say things that directly contradict their beliefs. So, for example, Dana might believe that 2+2=5 (because he is insane) and so say “2 plus 2 is not 5″ (because he is a liar). Armed with this knowledge, the police round up the two remaining unidentified triplets, Dana and Chris. They are seated in the interrogation room on the left and right sides of a table. The police record the following testimony:

Left: I am insane.

Right: No, my sibling is not.

Left: I don’t believe what my sibling is saying!

Some important things to know: Sane people in Logiton only believe true things, and Chris is either sane or may have gone insane since the last interrogation, in which Chris was proved to be a criminal (of a different crime). Finally, there’s no requirement that anyone in Logiton has to have a belief either way about everything. In other words, just because someone doesn’t believe a statement doesn’t mean that person believes the opposite of that statement. That person might simply not believe either the statement or its opposite.

Which of the two triplets is Dana, the purloiner of the Trophy of Truth?

Tree-angle | Junior Varsity

The Logiton Civic Planning Commission is going to wall off one corner of the village green to create a public park in the shape of an isosceles right triangle. The highlight of this park will be four newly-planted silverbell trees. In order to thrive to maturity, each tree needs a circle of radius six meters surrounding its trunk that does not extend outside the park and that does not overlap the similar circle surrounding any other tree.

What is the minimum length of one wall of the park?

See answers to last week’s puzzles below. Come back next week for answers and more puzzles. Note: Comments may include spoilers.

The National Museum of Mathematics (MoMath) is North America’s only museum devoted to mathematics. Learn more at momath.org.

SOLUTIONS

In the the relay that started on Jan. 9, in Staircase Surface, the line emerges from the paraboloid 9 units above the lowest point. The rows of Casey’s grid Word Block turn out to be words: CARET, CATER, CRATE, REACT and TRACE. The largest number of identical letters Casey can get on the diagonal is four, which implies a radius of 25/16 in Marble Jam.

That leaves only Cubic Conundrum, which turns out to have no solutions at all.

For extended solutions, go here.