In his first visit to Mississippi as a GOP presidential primary frontrunner, Donald Trump called the possibility of Syrian refugees entering the United States the "ultimate Trojan horse."

"We are funding all of these people they want to bring in from Syria..." said Trump to an enthusastic crowd on Saturday. "We have no idea who they are and where they came from. They're young and strong and a lot of them are men."



In a wandering hour-long speech at the Mississippi Coast Coliseum in Biloxi, Trump riffed on hot electoral topics including the media, the Iran nuclear deal, ISIS, and gun control. The billionaire real estate mogul had insults locked and loaded for President Barack Obama, Democratic presidential primary candidate Hillary Clinton, and even his fellow candidates in the GOP.

Thunderous rounds of applause greeted Trump's promises to gut the Common Core curriculum, roll back Obamacare, and build a giant wall across the border between Mexico and the United States. Signaling a shift in the campaign, Trump and his campaign volunteers also implored the crowd to get out and vote for him in an effort to convert his popularity into electoral success.



"If you're having problems, if you're not feeling well, if you're having all sorts of difficulty, if your wife says she's leaving you and she doesn't love you anymore, I don't care," Trump said. "Get out and vote."



At least 15,000 people, many fashioning their own Trump-style hats and t-shirts, attended the rally. Coliseum workers had to open up additional standing room to accommodate the overflow crowd. Even then, thousands of bystanders were left to watch the speech from a livestream playing in the adjacent Convention Center.



The campaign event marks Trump's first public appearance in the Magnolia State since he failed in the 1990s to build a $60 million 35,000-square foot casino next to the Marine Life Oceanarium, later destroyed by Hurricane Katrina. Subsequent plans by Trump to build casinos along the Gulf Coast also sputtered.



But any lingering ill will from the Gulf Coast was lost as the attendees roared when Trump took the stage a little after 7 p.m.



"There's love in these rooms," Trump said. "People are so tired of incompetence. They are tired of stupidity. They're so tired."



To cheers, Trump called for greater access to guns, saying that the shooting in California and the Paris terrorist attacks could have been prevented if the citizenry were armed.

"If they had a gun taped their ankle or put on their belt where we could do a little shooting in reverse, it wouldn't have been that bad," Trump said.



"You know what (the terrorists) did in Paris? 'Get over here.' Boom. 'Get over here.' Boom. They were total sitting ducks."

Using his characteristic brand of insults, Trump made fun the low poll numbers of GOP presidential primary candidate Jeb Bush.

"If I were him, I would not be talking about the polls," Trump said. "I would not be talking about how they exist."

With pressure building in the Coliseum, Trump asked one of the news cameramen to pan around the building to capture the huge size of the crowd. One refused and the crowd turned around and started to jeer at him. Not missing a beat, Trump said he would "fire his ass," drawing applause.

Trump is said to enjoy widespread political support in the South. According to the New York Times, some of his best states include Mississippi, Alabama, Louisiana, Tennessee, South Carolina, North Carolina, West Virginia and New York, where he lives. His best supporters are "self-identified Republicans who nonetheless are registered as Democrats," according to the report.

In August, Trump held a raucous campaign rally about 65 miles away at Ladd-Peebles Stadium in Mobile. Three months later, Trump held a rally in Birmingham, where a Black Lives Matter protestor was filmed being punched and kicked.

Prior to Trump's speech on Saturday, an announcer noted over the P.A. that it was a peaceful rally and urged the crowd to ignore any potential protestors. He noted that there was a designated area for protestors outside of the arena.



"If a protestor starts demonstrating in an area around you, please do not touch or harm the protester," the announcer said. "Please hold a rally sign over your head and start chanting 'Trump, Trump Trump.' Ask the people around you to do likewise until the officer removes the protestor."