More than 70 volunteers worked at the Riverview RV Park

The day after Thanksgiving and a couple weeks after U.S. 34 reopened, John and Susan Baptista drove from their Loveland home to Estes Park for the first time since September's historic flood.

The destruction to homes and properties along the Big Thompson River corridor was enough to almost make a person sick, Susan Baptista said. A need to do something — anything — led her to the Big Thompson River Restoration Coalition's first volunteer cleanup event Saturday, where she pulled logs, branches, pieces of plastic and more from tightly-woven mountains of debris.

"If you live here it's important; even if you don't, it's important," she said. "There are a lot of people who are suffering."

The Reach

For the kickoff for what's expected to be a series of Big Thompson River Restoration Coalition recovery volunteer events, more than 70 people met before 8 a.m. Saturday at the Riverview RV Park just west of Loveland. From there, the volunteers dispersed in groups along the area that's known as the "Big Valley reach."

The mile-long stretch of riverfront property is made up of several parcels, including the Riverview RV Park and part of Sylvan Dale Guest Ranch.

"We've all kind of banded together to work on this reach of the river," Riverview RV Park owner Roy Youree said.

The area been identified as a top priority for pre-spring runoff work in phase one of a master plan to identify immediate needs along the river.

"We're doing everything we can to have the biggest impact in the right locations," said John Giodanengo of Wildlands Restoration Volunteers, the nonprofit that's the lead entity of the Big Thompson River Restoration Coalition.

Giodanengo also chairs the coalition, which has grown to include hundreds of private property owners, state and federal agencies, nonprofits and local businesses all focused on restoring the river corridor.

The Project

Loveland resident Kirk Madden, left, and AmeriCorps NCCC members Anna DePace, Allison Hunter and Dwayne Walker work together clearing debris Saturday at Riverview RV Park. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

AmeriCorps members, who started river work a few weeks ago, led the volunteers in the two main jobs of the day: re-seeding and debris removal. When melting spring snowpack rushes into the riverway, the large debris left by the flood can pose a potential hazard downstream, said Lukas McNally, who is the watershed restoration coordinator for the Wildlands Restoration Volunteers.

"Anything that's directly in the river channel needs to come out and get staged for future restoration," he said.

The coalition has contractors with heavy machinery for some of that, but when it comes to the debris piles that have headlights, couches, toilet seats and more in the mix, McNally said there's really only one way to do that work.

"We could not pick out all the trash without volunteers," he said. "It has to be hand labor."

And while much of the flood debris will be hauled away, the coalition has found a use for the natural materials. Uprooted trees, logs and rocks are also being used by volunteers to shore up eroded banks, just as riprap is used in other river projects.

Lending a Hand

The Riverview RV Park reopened for business about 10 days after the flood, but because the river wiped out many of the camping spots, Youree said a park redesign is necessary.

The volunteer effort is a huge help, he said.

"We would have had to hire companies that have machinery and do it mostly by machine," Youree said. "When you have individuals to separate this stuff it's a cleaner way of doing it. It's obviously more work, but it's better."

Loveland resident Annie Gable can attest to the hard work aspect of the project, (the Baptista's marveled at her knack for conquering debris piles), but she's glad to do her part to help rebuild the canyon.

"If people just give a day, there's a lot that can be accomplished," she said.

The next post-flood cleanup and river stabilization project is planned for April 12, and Giodanengo said the need is for all kinds of volunteers, not just those who will be doing heavy lifting.

Registration is required to the volunteer projects. To sign up or view a schedule of projects, visit wlrv.org. For more information of the Big Thompson River Restoration Coalition, visit bigthompsonriver.org.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Maher at maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/JessicaMaherRH.