UnitedHealthcare wasn’t an anomaly in losing money on its Affordable Care Act exchange plans. About 70 percent of health plans sold on the exchanges lost a total of about $3 billion in 2014, and indications are that they lost even more in 2015.

That’s why many people are wondering if UnitedHealth, the nation’s largest insurer, was a shot over the bow when CEO Stephen Hemsley said April 19 that the company would drop out of most of the 34 states where it sold exchange plans.

Moreover, after 2016 health insurers will lose some $8 billion in annual funding to help cover losses from covering the sicker-than-average population that has so far been enrolling through the exchanges. Most analysts think that means insurers will try to get higher premium increases for 2017 than the 11-13 percent average increases they got for 2016, and Marilyn Tavenner, head of America’s Health Insurance Plans, has also sounded warnings to that effect.

The fact is United was never a major player in the ACA exchanges, so it’s exit won’t broadly affect consumer choices. But BlueCross BlueShield plans are big players, covering about 60 percent of exchange enrollees. “BlueCross BlueShield plans leaving will reduce choice to the consumer,” said Deep Banerjee, director of Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services. In 2016 about 12.7 million people enrolled in the ACA exchanges.

And BlueCross BlueShield plans had pretax operating losses of about $2.4 billion in 2015 and $1.7 billion in 2014 on their exchange plans, according to Goldman Sachs. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina, which lost more than $400 million on its exchange plans in 2014 and 2015, is contemplating whether it should pull back from some of the 100 North Carolina counties in which it sells exchange plans.

The best hope for exchange plans right now are plans that feature narrow networks of hospitals and doctors, as well as Medicaid managed care plans and some local health maintenance organizations run by provider groups. Those types of plans, along with health maintenance organization Kaiser Permanente, have done the best financially on the exchanges.

Stay on top of new developments in health law and regulation with a free trial of the Health Law Resource Center.

Learn more about Bloomberg Law and sign up for a free trial.