The recent front-page news of Governor Jerry Brown’s signing of the assisted death bill adds an element of choice for those who face the possibility of painful and prolonged death. In a personal statement attached to the bill, Governor Brown stated, “If I were dying in prolonged and excruciating pain ... it would be a comfort to be able to consider the options afforded by this bill.” Sometimes relief can come from knowing you have options.

More and more Americans — particularly older Americans — are becoming personally invested in finding out what their choices might be in terms of physical and emotional care for themselves, their families, and their caregivers, as they approach death. We cannot change the fact that we will all die, but many find dignity in having some say about the circumstances surrounding our departure.

For such a competitive first-world nation, the United States is sadly lacking in the quality of death we offer our citizens. Writing in the Oct. 7 Washington Post, Yanan Wang reports statistics from the Economist Intelligence Unit that show the U.S. ranked ninth — behind Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, Belgium, Taiwan, Germany, and the Netherlands — in its Quality of Death Index.

The five categories of indicators used were “palliative and health care environment, human resources, affordability of care, quality of care, and community engagement.” The main barrier in America is affordability. In spite of the positive impact of Medicare on the costs of medical care for elders, the private sector insurance companies are still profit-driven, and so the U.S. ranking in affordability comes in 18th.

I recently visited friends in Great Britain who are experiencing family deaths and serious disability. The level of care that I witnessed was a lesson for me in the value of paying higher taxes for the inestimable peace of mind that comes from cradle-to-grave medical support. This week I received an email from an Irish-American friend whose husband’s cancer was diagnosed while he was in Ireland for a family wedding. She reported that her son said it made him less resentful of the very high taxes he pays to see the support his dad is getting. It has reduced the financial and emotional stress the family is experiencing. By contrast when illness strikes in America, good medical care and a “good death” may be priced out of reach.

The choice to seek assisted death is not one that most of us will be called upon to make. Three palliative care physicians from Stanford University, Karl Lorenz, Stephanie Harman, and Steven Asch, ask in the Oct. 7 Sacramento Bee, “What about rest of us at life’s end?” They point out that of 200,000 of California’s annual deaths, only a few hundred to 1,000 cases a year might actually request death assistance. For most people the difficulties will arise because of gaps in the delivery of palliative care. They ask when the legislators will advocate for a “good and not just a shorter end.”

Advertisement

These physicians recognize that loneliness, spiritual crisis, and feelings of loss of control are frequent companions of the physical pain that people can experience at the end of their lives. Help will come with more palliative care training for nurses, social workers, and physicians. An electronic registry of patients’ advance care instructions will make their wishes available to doctors who are treating them.

A big step in doctor/patient communication is the recent announcement that Medicare will start paying doctors for time spent in end-of-life conversations with their patients. As Erin Mershon writing in Politico July 9 explains, this is the same conversation that Sarah Palin mislabeled “death panels,” setting off a wave of misunderstanding that nearly derailed the Affordable Care Act and delayed for six years doctors being compensated for helping their patients make advanced care plans for themselves. As Mershon points out, “Advance care planning doesn’t mean shunning aggressive care or choosing a Do Not Resuscitate Order; people can also specify in their care directives that they want ‘everything done’.”

Participation and choice are essential in these very personal and profound decisions. Conversations about all the end-of-life possibilities will help educate us about our choices. In Chico, a local group, the Alliance for Support and Education in Dying and Death, has been formed to bring together “individuals engaged in a range of holistic services to the dying, their care-givers and families, and committed to fostering community discourse on death.”

In 2013 AllSEDD was created by Rebecca Senoglu and Malama MacNeil, who wished to gather informally the people in the community who want to provide support services and education about end-of-life issues. The Alliance meets alternate months on the second Mondays, and they invite those who wish to “bring death into the light” to join their meetings. Some of the events they have organized to stimulate these conversations include Death over Dinner, Death Cafes, two Silent Walks for Reflection and Remembrance at the Chico Cemetery, “After Taxes, There’s Death, and a study group on the book “A Year to Live.”

AllSEDD will hold its fourth Befriending Death workshop 1:30-6 p.m. Nov. 1 at the Chico Women’s Club. Pre-registration is required for this participatory event that will include altar-making, collage, home funeral rehearsals, quick writing, Death Café conversations, music, spoken word, and ceremony to ”honor the dead, deepen the relationship with mortality, and celebrate the mystery of living and dying.” A resource table will offer end-of-life-planning guides and other pertinent materials. Contact AllSEDD at alliancesedd@gmail.com or go to Alliance for Support and Education in Dying and Death on Facebook to register and for further information.

Leslie Howard is a retired English teacher and certificated gerontologist. She welcomes comments and suggestions at leslie.t.howard@gmail.com.