Former Southern New England radio shock jock Carolyn Fox has dropped a bombshell.



She says she's been told she is under active consideration to take over the drive time shift on WPRO Talk Radio. The shift was headlined by former Providence Mayor Vincent "Buddy" Cianci Jr. before his death in January.

"I think I have a little bit of unfinished business back in Rhode Island," Fox told NBC 10 News during a recent interview in New York.

Fox was born and raised on the East Side of Providence. She graduated from Classical High School (where the then-Carolyn Berman was voted the girl "Most Likely to Succeed" in her senior class). She says her high school years remain one of the most enjoyable times in her life.

She began a career in radio with an internship at WGNG at the age of 15.

"They started paying me when I was 16," she said.

She worked weekend shifts and summer relief, but not in front of a microphone.

Fox attended Brown University, working at campus station WBRU and at WCOZ in Boston.

She graduated with a degree in history and semiotics, the study of signs and symbols as used in communication. But things changed after she walked through the Van Wickle gates that last time.

"I was graduated from Brown, and I thought getting a job would be so easy and of course when you need a job, there are none. And the only station that would hire me was WHJY, which was beautiful music before it turned rock 'n roll," Fox said.

Fox was one of the original shock jocks, coming up around the same time as Howard Stern, probably the most famous example of the radio genre. She says she didn't have to put on an act; she just had to be herself.

"I was having an awful lot of fun, telling dirty jokes, and playing pranks on people, and getting paid for it. And I always loved the music - the music saved my life," Fox said.

Her most notable -- or notorious -- prank happened 30 years ago, on April 1, 1986. On her morning drive show on WHJY, even during the news breaks, Fox and her colleagues announced the city of Providence was closed for the day. They cited the authority of the non-existent Providence Labor Action Relations Board Committee.

"I had to come up with something that meant absolutely nothing, but covered every category of government," Fox says now.

Fox says 50 percent of the available listening audience was tuned to her show at that time, so the prank "had quite an impact."

Phone lines at Providence City Hall and private employers were flooded with calls from people asking if they had to go to work. So were the phones at crosstown rival WPRO. Fox was giving out that radio station's phone number to people looking for more information.

At the time, Fox told NBC 10 reporter Dyana Koelsch: "I think they aren't taking it in the proper spirit it was meant to be taken. It's April Fool's Day."

Now, she recalls, "It got scary near the end, because I was being threatened to be put in jail As it turned out, it was a brilliant move."

She was named a Billboard Magazine Radio Personality of the Year in 1988 and 1989. Fox took some time away from the microphone to start a family in the early 1990s, but through most of that decade, she could be found somewhere on the radio dial in Providence or Boston.

When asked if she could have been as successful as Howard Stern, she said, "I think I could have been."



But the reality of family life led to a crossroads.

"I knew I wanted kids really badly. I just knew I was going to be a great mom, and I had to make a choice," Fox said.

"I think it's challenging being a mom and wanting kids and having kids that come out OK, which takes an awful lot of time and focus, and I don't know if doing shock radio would have been conducive to raising healthy kids," she said. "It's a combination of being a woman, making choices, not being able to doing everything at once and do it well, choosing your priorities. Overall for me, I know I made the right choice."

Fox left full-time radio when the landscape began to change.

"Radio was contracting so wildly I thought it was time. I didn't want to be the Willy Loman of radio," Fox said.

So, Fox went into business for herself. She worked as a financial adviser for a time. She launched a health insurance brokerage firm, connecting clients with health insurance policies. That business ended when President Obama's Affordable Care Act took effect, because her firm and the new government health exchanges were serving the same role.

Sirius XM became interested in having Fox develop a show to run on one of Howard Stern's channels on the satellite radio service. But the company pulled the plug on funding a year ago.

"It was a real drag, because I spent two years working on a show for them. And it was a great show," Fox said.

Needing a new direction after that, Fox joined Weichert Properties in New York City, as a real estate agent. The firm has offices above the iconic Radio City Music Hall.

New York wasn't much of a stretch for the Rhode Island native, whose mother was from Manhattan and who often visited her grandparents in the city.

Fox says her business savvy, her experience buying and selling several of her own homes, and her love of design brought her to real estate.

"I love being my own boss," Fox said. "I've always felt I was my own boss, even working for the radio station."

Out of the office, Fox keeps busy with her pets.

"I've always had a dog. I have two now. Because every sane woman moves to Manhattan to a tiny apartment with two large Labrador retrievers," she said.

She bicycles: "One of the most dangerous things I enjoy doing now as a grown up is riding my bike through New York City traffic and seeing if I live."

And she boxes: "I called Vinny (Paz) about a year ago to tell him I was boxing. I love boxing."

Her children are grown. One lives and works in New York, and the other recently moved to Los Angeles.

Fox was inducted into the Rhode Island Radio Hall of Fame as part of the class of 2009.

Even working in real estate, Fox says she keeps an eye out for a way back into media.

"I'm always thinking about where I'm going. Radio and TV are so ingrained in me and such a big part of my life that no matter what I do in business, I'm always going to find a way to create chaos somewhere. Good chaos," Fox said.

Fox says the recent death of Cianci was difficult for her.

"Like so many people have pointed out before, there was the nice Buddy, and the not so nice Buddy," she said. "I knew the nice Buddy."

The two were on the air at the same time, down the hall from each other at WHJY and WHJJ, and -- with a wink -- says that she taught Cianci everything he knew about radio.

"We were so close that when he was incarcerated, he would write me handwritten letters, and I would write him handwritten letters back," Fox said.

Fox says she would seriously consider an offer to return to Rhode Island radio.

"If Cumulus sees the benefit of my doing afternoon drive at WPRO, which by the way, I was doing until I was beckoned by a bigger paycheck. Which was awful," she said.

"It would be poetic if after Buddy's passing, that I take over for him, where I taught him how to do radio. I think it would be sweet," Fox said.

"Never say never."