Gail Wilensky is a senior fellow at Project HOPE. She directed the Medicare and Medicaid programs from 1990 to 1992 and was a senior health and welfare adviser to President George H.W. Bush.

Five years after its passage and 18 months after the implementation of most of the benefits, the Affordable Care Act has proven it can expand coverage -- especially for people who are heavily subsidized or who pay no premium at all.

Provide enough subsidies, fully fund Medicaid expansion, require people to buy insurance or pay fines and its not surprising more are covered.

Providing coverage to people who have been uninsured provides important medical and financial benefits to the people who become insured and to the communities where they live. If the Supreme Court decision eliminates subsidies in the federal exchanges, it will be important to find a way to maintain subsidies for an estimated 6 to 7 million people who would be affected.

But acknowledging the positive nature of its coverage expansion is different than "proving the A.C.A.'s worth." Spend enough money on subsidies, pay 100 percent of the Medicaid expansion, require people to purchase insurance or pay fines (even though the enforcement is by self-attestation and the number of excused categories is legendary), require employers to provide insurance or pay fines (even if its implementation is postponed) and it is hardly surprising that the number of people covered has increased.

Unfortunately we don't actually know how many people have become covered as a result of the A.C.A.. The government-sponsored surveys collected by the Census have not yet reported out data. The numbers that are typically cited are based on opinion surveys, range from 10 million to 17 million and at least one has a response rate of 7 percent.

What we do know is that the public remains deeply divided over the A.C.A. five years after its passage with about as many disapproving of the A.C.A. as support it. Not surprising, Democrats are more likely to support it and Republicans are more likely to oppose it. More surprising, slightly more say they have been harmed by the A.C.A. than say they have been helped although the majority say they have been unaffected.

And while the A.C.A. deserves credit for expanding coverage whether it should get credit for the slowdown in health care spending or stimulating the increase in financing or delivery system innovations is far more debatable and way too early to determine.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.