Medicare is penalizing 15 Colorado hospitals for improper care that led to hospital-acquired conditions, such as infections in catheters in veins and bladders, blood clots, bed sores and accidental falls.

By this measure, Colorado is among the 10 worst-performing states in the country, according to an analysis by Kaiser Health News.

Roughly a third of Colorado hospitals receiving Medicare payments, along with 721 nationally, will lose a portion of their fiscal year 2015 revenues.

Penalties can go as high as 1 percent of Medicare revenues under a provision in the Affordable Care Act.

The penalties are separate from those Medicare assesses on hospitals that have high readmissions rates. The Denver Post reported earlier this week that 27 Colorado hospitals will be penalized under that program.

In the hospital-acquired conditions program, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services calculate a score for hospitals from 1 to 10, with 10 indicating the greatest patient harm from infections and other conditions acquired during hospital stays in 2012 and 2013.

Prelimary or provisional scores were released in June, but finalized scores recently became available.

In Colorado, CMS assigned the five highest, or worst, scores to Vail Valley Medical Center, 9; Centura Health’s St. Anthony Hospital, 8.375; HealthOne’s Swedish Medical Center, 8.05; The Medical Center of Aurora, 8.025; and, Sterling Regional MedCenter, 8.

HealthOne officials told The Denver Post in June they take the matter seriously and have ongoing initiatives aimed at improving quality of care.

The government takes into account the size of the hospital, the location where the patient was treated and whether it is affiliated with a medical school when calculating infection rates. But the Association of American Medical Colleges and some experts question whether those measures are precise enough.

On the other, health reformers contend the release of the data could help reduce infections and other harm to patients by encouraging simple fixes, which would have the added benefit of reducing health care costs.

Electa Draper: 303-954-1276, edraper@denverpost.com or twitter.com/electadraper