Supporters of the ballot question creating a tax on businesses for education gather in front of the old Washoe County Courthouse. (Photo: RGJ file )

Businesses are always complaining about not having a skilled workforce, but they are opposed to the margins tax. Doesn't make any sense to me. I cannot help but wonder if the businesses affected by the margin tax would be opposed if the middle-class citizen had to pay the tax. I think not.

Many of these companies were given big tax incentives to locate here in the first place. Some that come to mind are Scheels, Cabela's, Amazon, Tesla and on and on. A lot of these same companies received big tax cuts from the Bush administration while the rest of us were lucky if we received a pittance. These same companies have employees that their children also benefit from the schools.

Many other states have a business tax that is much higher than what is being proposed for Nevada, and a lot of these ads opposing the margin tax are misleading at best.

While on the subject of taxes, the mining companies need to quit trying to influence our leaders and pay the same amount of taxes in Nevada that they pay in other states, no more, no less.

For all these reasons, I will vote yes on the margins tax.

Bill Miller

Spanish Springs

WE NEED TO START REINVESTING IN SCHOOLS

I am writing today to encourage your newspaper to endorse the Education Initiative on this November's ballot.

I am a public school teacher in Washoe County, as well as a product of our local school system. As an educator, I know how badly we need funding for our schools. Supporting Question 3 this November is a vote in favor of providing a quality education for the children of northern Nevada.

Some would have you believe that TEI will be bad for businesses, but that is a spurious claim. Nevada's corporate taxes are already the lowest in the nation, and only 87 percent of businesses in the state would be affected at all, and most of those only minimally.

At only 49th in the nation in per-pupil spending, our schools are vastly underfunded. In order to ensure that the state of Nevada, and its economy, continue to grow and prosper in the future, we must provide a competitive education that allows us to compete on a national level. To do that we need to reverse the trend of spending cuts in education — over $700 million since 2009 — and start re-investing in our schools and our children.

David Zepeda

Reno

WHAT'S THE ALTERNATIVE TO THIS PROPOSED TAX?

The Education Initiative. It's time for some frank talk.

I have read letters to the editor full of discrepancies. One letter questioned what the Department of Education wanted with this money. Truth: the Department of Education has nothing to do with the Education Initiative.

I have listened to costly TV ads. We hear people who cry "poor" when it comes to funding education, but they also seem to have very deep pockets when it comes to defeating TEI. None of these spokesmen ever dispute the fact that Nevada's schools are in dire need of funding. They just don't want to be the ones to pay for it. More important, they don't have an alternative. That seems to be something they don't want to talk about.

Finally, I've watched the Nevada Legislature year after year. I've watched them do nothing as far as truly funding our schools. I have no reason to believe they will act differently this session. So my question to you is, "If not this, what? If not now, when?"

We voters have an opportunity this election. We can tell our legislators, "If you won't do your job, we'll do it for you."

Vote yes on Question 3.

Fran McGregor

Sparks

Q3 EXPLANATION GOES ON FOR PAGES AND PAGES

Your section in this morning's paper gave the full text of the three ballot measures. Questions 1 and 2 took less than two pages, while the text of the margins tax went on for a full 10 pages, with 83 sections each with numerous subsections.

It reminds me of Rep. Nancy Pelosi's famous remark about Obamacare, "We have to pass it to know whats in it." Beware, Nevada.

Gary Lieberthal

Reno

DON'T LET PERFECT BE THE ENEMY OF GOOD

The margins tax proposal deserves support. It is not perfect, but should be supported.

Those supporting the massive campaign in opposition bring to mind the phrase, "Methinks thou doth protest too much." The new tax will generate badly needed funds for a desperately underfunded education system, and it has enough exemptions that few businesses will feel any major pain.

If our state's politicians would find the courage to revamp a revenue structure designed for the good old days when Nevada's gaming industry was the "only game in town," then we would not need such things as the margins tax proposal. But no one is betting that will ever happen.

So, until then, quoting Voltaire, "We should not let the perfect be the enemy of the good."

Jim Richardson

Reno

ERRONEOUS LANGUAGE SCARING BUSINESSES

There is a critical flaw in the sample ballot concerning Question 3, the Education Initiative. The opponents' argument against the Initiative includes a quote, "This 2% 'Margin Tax' would be on gross revenues…"

This is not true. Section 22.1 of the initiative refers to "2 percent of the taxable margin." No business would pay 2 percent of its gross revenue. The taxable margin is the amount remaining after subtracting generous exemptions and deductions from gross revenues.

The Education Initiative opponents' consultant, Applied Analysis, estimates that average tax liability would be 0.35 percent of gross revenue, considering exemptions, deductions and the Modified Business Tax credit. The opponents' language has overstated the impact of the tax by a factor of six (2/0.35).

The erroneous language has caused businesses and voters to unjustly fear the initiative. One relieved Nevada business owner says, "I now support Q3, knowing that the tax is 2 percent on taxable margin, and not on gross revenue."

The initiative's opponents have used this same erroneous language in their debates, on their website and in their literature. Voters should consider the correct amount of the tax and the lack of truthfulness in the opponents' campaign.

Megan Queral

Reno

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/1wd1xlS