After declaring in his campaign that he could not vote for John Boehner as Speaker of the House, Congressman-elect Gary Palmer (AL-06) joked, "I very likely will be the lowest ranking guy on the committee who will be responsible for making sure that we have clean bathrooms." Fortunately for both Palmer and Alabama, none of the committees to which he was assigned deal with legislative sanitation.

Yesterday, I spoke with Palmer who confirmed that he will serve on three committees in the U.S. House of Representatives: House Oversight & Government Reform, Budget, and the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. The combination creates a particularly interesting legislative mix for the newest member of Alabama's federal delegation.

Oversight & Government Reform is essentially a legislative watchdog of the executive branch. The committee will afford Palmer the opportunity to press federal agencies for information and transparency on issues ranging from the government's response to the Ebola outbreak to the Affordable Care Act and even the IRS targeting of conservative groups.

As a member of the House Committee on the Budget, Palmer will have input into setting the general spending and revenue priorities for the federal government. With Tom Price, a staunch conservative from Georgia, leading the committee, Palmer's perspectives on fiscal restraint will likely be welcome.

Perhaps Palmer's most interesting committee assignment is to the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. With Mo Brooks (AL-05) already on the committee, Alabama could have a formidable congressional duo impacting the state's growing science and aerospace industries.

How do you think Palmer will fare as a member of these three committee's? What issues would you like to see him prioritize for the Sixth Congressional District or for the State of Alabama?

(Cameron Smith writes a regular column for Alabama Media Group. He is the National Director of the Liberty Foundation of America and is a Senior Fellow with the R Street Institute in Washington, DC. He may be reached at cameron@smithstrategies.org or on Twitter @DCameronSmith.)