Teachers confronted by ­violent students are powerless to control them due to strict NSW Department of Education guidelines

TEACHERS confronted by ­violent students are banned from "shouting angrily" or pursuing children who try to run away unless they are in danger or likely to cause harm.

A lengthy list of classroom dos and don'ts also prevents teachers from taking students' personal items, including mobile phones, from them except where there are safety concerns.

The rules of "good or ­acceptable practice" in public school classrooms require teachers to ask students to hand over their phone if it is disrupting a lesson.

As more than a million students in NSW prepare for the new school year teachers are under orders from education chiefs to develop a "non-confrontational behaviour management style".

When faced with provocative behaviour, and even violence, they are directed to respond in a "calm manner to help defuse difficult situations".

More on discipline in schools

Mum's fears for son's future after he's suspended 10 times

Education begins by teaching the teacher

Sacked teacher Stephen Krix contacted by other fired teachers

Sacked Sydney teacher fights for job

In extreme situations teachers may seek support from colleagues or supervisors and the school principal can call police.

The strict guidelines are contained in a document produced by the NSW Department of Education and Communities headed Responding to Allegations against Employees in the area of Child Protection.

Australia's largest Muslim school, Malek Fahd at Greenacre in Sydney's southwest places similar restrictions on teachers who are also banned from shouting angrily, physically stopping children from leaving a classroom or taking a student's phone from them.

As in the state's 2240 government schools, Catholic schools in Sydney do not ­administer corporal punishment in any form and have a general "hands off kids" rule.

More than 18,000 long suspensions were handed out in public schools during 2012 - almost 40 per cent of them for physical violence - the latest data released by the department shows.

School serious incident ­reports show principals and teachers are abused, threatened or bashed daily in schools by violent students, angry parents or intruders with a grudge.

Some children become so out of control at school they throw furniture, smash windows and assault teachers by biting, kicking and hitting, forcing a number to seek an AVO for protection.

A survey of beginner teachers six years ago found bad ­behaviour by students was driving many out of the job.

A public debate has erupted over the issue of classroom discipline following revelations in The Sunday Telegraph that former high school teacher Stephen Krix was sacked after putting a misbehaving student in a headlock.

The case of Mr Krix, who lost an appeal in the NSW ­Industrial Relations Commission against his dismissal, has thrown the spotlight on the vexed issue of whether teachers are adequately equipped to control misbehaving students.

In a judgment in the Krix case Commissioner Peter Newall said the teacher was right to direct misbehaving boys to stay in his classroom but added he had not been entitled to "physically restrain" them.

A senior departmental officer with 38 years' experience in classrooms told the commission teachers who spent long enough in the job could expect to be abused and sworn at.

Blue Mountains solicitor Ian Collins, who specialises in litigation involving teachers, said the power balance in classrooms had shifted from teachers to students. He said it often took just one allegation for a teaching career to be over, even if proven false, and many were frightened to discipline students for fear of ramifications.

Teachers receive training in handling violent situations in the classroom, including how to repel physical attacks through defensive "block and move" manoeuvres using the arms to parry an attacker's blow and dodge out of harm's way.

New teachers have won extra time away from the classroom for professional development and improved mentoring support but the NSW Teachers' Federation says more is needed.

"Chucking people in (to a classroom) and saying they have a university degree and teaching is second nature is just stupid," federation officer Fionie Stavert said.