A majority of large employers have not made broad changes to their benefits as a result of the healthcare law, but those with 50 or fewer employees have made adjustments due to increasing costs.

More than half of employers believe that the Affordable Care Act has had a negative effect on their company, according to a new report from the International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans. Nearly 90 percent of employers expect the Affordable Care Act to increase their company’s healthcare costs in 2014, resulting in many employees seeing higher out-of-pocket costs and increased premiums and deductibles.

“We are seeing firsthand how the Affordable Care Act has had major implications on employers and their employees,” said Michael Wilson, CEO of the International Foundation. “Employers are taking a variety of actions to mitigate costs and in most cases are sharing the cost impact with their workforce.”

Key findings in the report include:

Nearly one-third of employers have increased out-of-pocket limits, increased participants’ share of premium costs and/or increased in-network deductibles.

More than one in five have increased copayments or coinsurance for primary care and/or increased employee proportions of dependent coverage costs.

More than two in five employers expect to see the greatest cost increases due to the Affordable Care Act in 2015.

The report finds that the majority of large employers have not made broad workforce adjustments due to the Affordable Care Act, but many smaller employers, those with 50 or fewer employees, have made changes to their workforce due to the increasing costs associated with the law.

Among smaller employers:

Nearly one in six has reduced their workforce.

More than one in 10 has reduced hours so fewer employees work full-time.

More than one in 10 have frozen or reduced pay raises and compensation.

One in 10 has cut back on hiring in order to stay under 50 employees.

Overall, nearly three-quarters of respondents will continue to provide healthcare coverage for all full-time employees in 2015, representing a steady increase in confidence in employer-sponsored coverage since 2012 when this figure was below half.