Khushbu Patel strode into SRA International’s Affordable Care Act enrollment center on Route 1 in Iselin earlier this week, eager to see if she qualified for health insurance, something she hasn’t had since coming to the United States as a permanent resident from India with her family a year ago.



About two hours later, Patel, of Iselin, had locked in a silver level plan from Health Republic of New Jersey with a $500 deductible, a maximum of $1,200 in annual out-of-pocket expenses and perhaps best of all, a monthly premium of $60 after subsidies were calculated.



At the end of it all, Patel was smiling.



“It’s a very long process,” the 26-year-old said, “but she was very helpful.” referring to Trupti Upadhyay, a certified application counselor at the enrollment center who helped Patel wade through the process.

As a green-card holder, Patel is entitled to apply for coverage through the Affordable Care Act and receive subsidies for which she qualifies, since she makes only part-time income as a laboratory processor.



Patel’s application is just one story in a very different tale of Obamacare.

In chapter one, at this time last year, the first open enrollment period was virtually moribund, shut down over an inadequate web site that crashed on its first day. It would take months to recover.



Chapter two is a different story. The web site is working – most of the time – more competition is keeping prices in check – in some, but not all cases – and consumers are making choices that they couldn’t make a year ago. Even with the qualifiers, federal officials said the first week of the new open enrollment period has been a much better beginning.



“We’re off to a solid start,” Sylvia Burwell, secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services told reporters. “But we’ve got a lot of work to do between now and Feb. 15,” when open enrollment closes.



Almost half of the 462,000 people across the country who signed up since Nov. 1 are, like Patel, uninsured, federal officials said. The enrollment totals are for the 36 states, including New Jersey, that use the federal government’s enrollment platform.



The total does not include people who signed up for just for dental coverage, Burwell said. HHS officials were embarrassed recently when it was revealed that that the dental enrollees were counted among those who bought full health plans, improperly inflating the numbers for 2014.



In all, more than a million people have submitted applications for coverage beginning Jan. 1, 2015, through the federal marketplace, she said. That number includes new applications as well as people re-applying.



The application process still has its glitches, but nothing like last year’s problems. CMS Principal Deputy Administrator Andy Slavitt acknowledged that the system has experienced “bumps,” but said there were no outages during the first week. The network processed 55,000 users concurrently at the highest point for the week, and that’s only about 20 percent of its peak capacity, he said.



Now that the open enrollment process has begun, the next order of business, Burwell said, is to make sure that people who purchased policies for 2014 go back to the marketplace to determine if the policy they chose is still the right one for them.



Those who keep making their payments will be automatically re-enrolled for 2015 if they don’t make changes before Dec. 15.



“For many, many people, it’s important to come back in,” she said.



It’s important because there may be a better deal on the marketplace for New Jersey consumers. The state has five companies offering plans, up from three in Obamacare’s first year.



The effect, in part, has been to keep price increases relatively flat in many cases, reports indicate.



Avalere Health, a Washington, D.C. health consulting firm, found that the average cost of the lowest-priced bronze plan for a 30-year-old non-smoker in New Jersey was $390 a month before subsidies ­-- $1 a month less than 2014 average rates, it said. For a 50-year-old non-smoker in New Jersey, the average cost, before subsidies, for the lowest-priced silver plan was $440, up $10 a month.



UnitedHealthcare, a new entry in the New Jersey marketplace, is offering six plans that include two options for health savings accounts. Those accounts allow consumers to assign a portion of their pay before taxes to be used for health expenses.



The other newcomer, called Oscar, focuses on lowering costs by using tele-health and limited provider networks.



Among the returning issuers, Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey is offering four new plans and is featuring a lower-cost option for consumers who opt for a “patient-centered” plan that provides a higher level of care coordination.



AmeriHealth New Jersey retired plans that served less than four percent of its individual customers, spokeswoman Jill Roman said, adding that the company has plans similar to the retired ones.



And Health Republic has three new plans, including one solely for Monmouth County residents that has a more consolidated network of providers in the county. In addition, Health Republic expanded co-pay options, reduced premiums and scrapped requiring referrals to network specialists, said spokeswoman Cynthia Jay.



Issuers and agencies promoting Obamacare enrollment are stepping up public programs to raise awareness, which is still an issue. A Kaiser Family Foundation poll last month showed that nine of 10 uninsured people were unaware that open enrollment would begin in November.



To spur interest, federal officials and enrollment specialists will be going to where the people are these days: shopping malls.



Federal marketplace CEO Kevin Counihan Wednesday announced a promotional partnership with Westfield, Inc., which operates 40 malls nationwide, including the Garden State Plaza in Paramus.



Horizon also has opened up mall kiosks in the Woodbridge Center Mall; The Outlet Collection/Jersey Gardens in Elizabeth; the Newport Center Mall in Jersey City and the Willowbrook Mall in Wayne.



In addition, HHS will work with the National Community Pharmacists Association, which represents 23,000 independent community pharmacies across the country, to enroll consumers.



Finally, XO Group, a media and technology company focusing on weddings, homes and pregnancies, also is joining the promotional effort, Counihan said.



Outreach would continue to focus on Spanish-speaking consumers, Burwell said, since they recorded relatively low enrollment rates for 2014 coverage. More effort is being put into mobile messaging, as surveys following the first open enrollment period showed that Latinos responded well to messages sent to mobile devices.



At SRA’s Iselin center, Spanish is not the only non-English language spoken. Consumers can get help in French Creole, Hindi, Farsi, Urdu, Pashto, Bengali, Arabic, Gujarati and more, said site Supervisor Omar Bonet.



When Feb. 15 comes, Burwell said HHS is sticking to its goal of 9.1 million people enrolled through Obamacare.



Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.