TALLAHASSEE — In Florida's budget battle, there's an 800-pound gorilla in the emergency room.

The House and Senate are divided on how to tackle two issues related to Medicaid, resulting in a $4.2 billion gap between the two chambers' budgets. Here is what this could mean for patients, hospitals and the state.

Q: Why are lawmakers at odds over Medicaid spending?

A: The Senate, led by President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, is backing a plan it calls a free-market alternative to Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. It would offer health-care coverage to more people but use a state-run exchange and require co-pays and premiums. Patients also would be required to be employed or looking for work and face increased fees for using emergency services for nonemergency care.

The House doesn't want Medicaid expansion in any form. House leaders call it a broken system providing subpar coverage that would rely on too much federal funding.

Q: So what's the other issue?

The Low Income Pool program, or LIP, is a Medicaid program that pays hospitals for care for low-income and uninsured patients. This often comes in the form of emergency care, since those without insurance don't usually seek or receive preventive care. That leads to more costly emergency treatment, leading hospitals to charge higher rates to paying patients.

The program would bring $2.2 billion to hospitals throughout the state, but it is scheduled to end June 30. The Senate offers an alternative plan in its budget, but the House doesn't, with leaders in that chamber saying Washington eventually will approve funds under an alternative program.

Q: Why is the federal government threatening to end LIP funding?

A: Washington extended LIP last year to allow Florida to continue its transition to its statewide managed-care program moving Medicaid patients into HMOs. House leaders and other observers have speculated the refusal to extend LIP is an attempt to force Florida to expand Medicaid under Obamacare.

But Sen. Rene Garcia, R-Miami, the Senate's top health-care-budget writer, suggested this week the federal government wants to see LIP funds more evenly distributed throughout hospitals in the state.

Q: How would local hospitals be affected if LIP ends without a replacement?

A: Central Florida hospitals would lose $142 million, according to the Safety Net Hospital Alliance of Florida, a group of 14 hospitals, including Orlando Health. Some hospitals would likely make drastic cuts, but it's too soon to say where they would be.

Q: How are the LIP and Medicaid expansion issues connected?

A: Senate leaders say their expansion plan could be used in lieu of LIP. House leaders say the two issues are separate and should be treated as such. Hospital executives say they need both the LIP program and Medicaid expansion.

Q: What has Gov. Rick Scott done about this?

A: Scott sent a letter to President Barack Obama last month detailing his concern for the end of LIP and the need for an extension. He has sent officials with the state Agency for Health Care Administration to Washington to negotiate.

AHCA Secretary Liz Dudek said Wednesday that the feds had broken off talks. But federal officials said Thursday that they were still in contact with state officials. The chances of a deal are less likely when the two sides can't agree on whether they're talking.

On Medicaid expansion, Scott said in 2013 he'd accept the first three years of federal money for it, but the House refused to go along. He has said next to nothing on the subject since.

Q: Who would be eligible under the Senate's Medicaid expansion plan?

A: About 800,000 people in Florida who make too much to qualify for Medicaid but also aren't eligible for subsidies on Obamacare exchanges would be able to get coverage. Those earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, or $32,900 for a family of four, would qualify.

Q: How much would the Senate's LIP and Medicaid expansion plans cost?

A: The federal government will pay for 100 percent of the expansion for the first three years before phasing down to 90 percent, with the state covering the rest. In the first 10 years, the amount from the federal government would be $52 billion. For the upcoming budget year, it would be $2.8 billion. The alternative LIP program would plug a potential $2.2 billion hole in the budget.

Q: What happens next?

A: That's anybody's guess. Because the Senate built the LIP and expansion plans into its budget, the two chambers are already at an impasse before negotiations even begin. Lawmakers could craft a budget without LIP, wait for Washington to approve an alternative and then approve backup LIP funds in a special session this summer.

But that would still require either the House or the Senate backing off its Medicaid-expansion position.

grohrer@orlandosentinel.com or 850-222-5564