James Michael McAdoo may or may not have his name called during tonight’s NBA draft. And if he does, it figures to be long after the first round – with its guaranteed contacts – has come and gone.

It’s a situation that had many questioning the junior forward’s decision to leave North Carolina with one year of eligibility still remaining.

Among the most surprised when McAdoo made the announcement back in April was his now-former Tar Heel teammate Brice Johnson.

“I thought he was going to return and I’d be able to play one more year with him,” Johnson said during a summer session with the media Wednesday afternoon. “He had to do what he had to do and I wish him the best.

“It was a little shocking because I thought he was going to be one of the ones to come back. But he didn’t.”

McAdoo was UNC’s second-leading scorer at 14.2 points per game while leading the team in rebounding at 6.8 per game.

As much as Johnson will miss playing along side his friend this season, the 6-foot-9 rising junior figures to benefit from McAdoo’s early departure because of the opportunity it will allow him to move over to his natural power forward position.

Johnson spent the better part of his first two college seasons playing as an undersized center.

“I’m sick of playing people that are 280 and 290 (pounds) all the time,” said Johnson, who is still slender at 217 pounds, even after an offseason program designed to help him gain more weight. “Somebody sent me an article about how me and Kennedy (Meeks) would be fighting for a position and I was like, um, I’m not a five. I’m a natural four.

“I had to go in there (as a center). I could hold my ground sometimes, but eventually when I get tired they’re going to bully me over. I’d rather play the four.”

Johnson averaged 10.3 points and 6.1 rebounds per game mostly off the bench as a sophomore in 2013-14. Although he made significant strides offensively as the season went on, he said he still has work to do with both his defense and consistency.

He also realizes that his newly expanded role will increase the amount pressure he’ll be under to perform.

“It means I have to be that person that steps up next year because I’m one of the best scorers in the post on this team,” he said. “I just have to step up and be ready to play.”