Going into the new year, Americans say terrorism is the greatest problem facing the country. Dissatisfaction with the government, a popular problem in 2015 and also the most popular problem in 2014, is second on the list, according to Gallup.

Lindsey Cook for USN&WR; Source: Gallup

The early December polling followed the terrorist attacks in both Paris and San Bernardino, California. The ratio of roughly 1 in 6 Americans citing terrorism as the country's most important problem is the highest in a decade, though significantly lower than the 46 percent measurement after 9/11.

Courtesy Gallup

Along with the economy and unemployment, guns/gun control, crime/violence, the Islamic State group/the situation in Iraq and national security also topped the December list from Gallup. And in another poll by the Pew Research Center asking about the government's efforts to reduce terrorism, more people rated its performance negatively than positively for the first time since 9/11.

National security and terror-related issues will likely remain atop Americans' list of concerns into 2016 and through the presidential election season, especially if there are other high-profile attacks.

Meanwhile, concerns about dissatisfaction with the government have decreased in recent months, per Gallup, while Congress has increased its productivity this year, according to Pew. Among its accomplishments this year, the Republican-controlled Congress passed a replacement for No Child Left Behind, a transportation funding bill and the USA Freedom Act, which curbed the NSA's surveillance capabilities.



Courtesy Pew Research Center

Since September, Americans' concern about the umbrella category of economic problems has decreased from 35 percent to 21 percent, though the economy in general is still the third-most popular problem cited by Gallup respondents.

According to Pew, more than half of Americans said they felt economic conditions a year from now will be about the same as they are now. And although the same is better than getting worse, it shows Americans aren't expecting many improvements.

All of this may mean good news for Republicans, as Pew found more Americans said Republicans are better equipped to deal with such threats. Additionally, the GOP led in terms of its members' ability to handle gun control – another top issue for Americans going into 2016. The party also had a slight edge on economic issues.



Pew Research Center

Among the Republican presidential contenders, voters on the right say Donald Trump and Sen. Ted Cruz are the best suited to handle the Islamic State group, with 47 percent favoring Trump and 21 percent favoring Cruz, according to a Dec. 17-21 poll from CNN.

On the economy, Trump is an even bigger favorite, with 57 percent saying he is best suited to handle it. Since the margin of error is 4.5 percentage points, the second-place contender is anyone's guess – voters showed 8 percent support for Cruz, 7 percent for Sen. Marco Rubio and 6 percent for Ben Carson.