Topics: Children, female friendship, Heavenly Creatures, Life stories, Slenderman, Teen girls, Violence, Life News

A week before my childhood best friend and I got busted by school authorities for stalking and threatening several students and a teacher. I wrote in my diary, “Soon, everything will be running on the right road.”

The prose would be absurd, if it weren’t for the context. I met Amy (not her real name) at summer camp when we were 8. She was fat and wore thick glasses, while I was sickly skinny with teeth so crooked you could still see them when I closed my mouth. We were instant friends, who communicated not on the actualities of our lives, but through story. We wrote them together, about everything, constantly. We were each other’s first audiences, not for the world as it was, but for the world as we wished we could summon it into being.

By high school, our tales had become less fanciful, and we were more interested in melodrama. Our characters were no longer fantastic and were, instead, fictionalized versions of our classmates and teachers. What if those two friends were really sleeping together? What if that teacher were Amy’s real father? And one day, What if we threatened to kill him? What would he do?

When we got caught slipping a note to that effect into a teacher’s school mailbox, Amy took the brunt of the blame, in part because I was the better liar and more timid child. We were forbidden from speaking to each other again, and she had to go to therapy three times a week. Meanwhile, I got off with a brutal lecture and years of suspicion.

While she had always been the dominant personality in our pairing and had started the darker escalation of our stories, the fact remains I had been her friend through months of this, engaged in these endless what-if scenarios, and suggested increasingly ghoulish ones to win her approval and keep her interested.

While I remember often being afraid that we would go too far, I don’t ever remember being clear on what too far was. I was never scared enough to tell her to stop, to walk away, or to tell an adult. The story, you see, was always the most important thing.

* * *

Many years later, I watched Peter Jackson’s “Heavenly Creatures” with a group of creative women like myself. The film tells the story of New Zealand’s infamous Parker-Hulme murder case in which two girls with an obsessive, story-based friendship ultimately kill one of the girls’ mothers. One of the pair, the former Juliet Hulme, is today the best-selling mystery novelist Anne Perry.

As the credits rolled, the women around me, to a one, said they felt like the story could have been – with less luck or divine intervention – their own. Each and every one of them had had an Amy. Some were still in touch with theirs. One pair were even still best friends, after, they insisted, a sojourn of separation during which they both got their heads on a little straighter.

In the 20 years since the release of “Heavenly Creatures,” I have had cause to think of it often. While I have seen Amy just a handful of times since leaving home for college, the creation of story has remained my primary relationship tool. When I meet you, I will tell you a story. And if you tell one back to me, frantic to find the connection between our two tales, we will become friends.