Area News Democratic Senate candidate brings message to Huron Modified: Monday, Apr 11th, 2016









HURON — Jay Williams says today’s Republican Party is not the Republican Party of his father or his two grandfathers.



As he travels the state as a Democratic U.S. Senate candidate running against Sen. John Thune, R-S.D., he is offering a contrasting message and sharing a philosophy shaped by wide-ranging life experiences.



During the Vietnam War, he and his Navy crewmates loaded bombs onto jets off the coast of North Vietnam.



“That experience gave me an insight of what war is, and a belief that we should only do that kind of thing, that kind of terrible power, in the very last resort,” Williams said at the District 22 Democratic Forum on Thursday.



After earning his wings, he flew search and rescue missions. Later, he and his wife served in the Peace Corps in South America.



Williams returned to college and received a master’s degree in computer science, later working as a software engineer in Texas and California.



In 1986, they moved to South Dakota — he’s a Gettysburg native and a grandson of that town’s first mayor — and opened a small business thanks to a Revolving Economic Development Initiative (REDI) fund loan. Williams has owned and operated his Yankton business for 30 years.



The 2013 government shutdown at a time when West River was experiencing an historic blizzard, and the Republican Party’s attempts to repeal the Affordable Care Act that has provided health insurance for 20 million Americans, are reasons he decided to challenge Thune.



Williams is also angry that Republican senators are refusing to hold hearings on President Obama’s choice of a moderate judge to serve on the Supreme Court.



“I’m not anti-Republican,” Williams said. “Both of my grandfathers and my dad were Republican. But the Republican Party of the 1950s is not the Republican Party of today.”



He points to President Eisenhower, a Republican who served two terms in the White House, who was responsible for one of the largest public works projects in American history – the interstate highway system.



But there’s also the Republican platform of 1956. Its planks included preservation of Social Security, asylum for refugees, extension of the minimum wage, expansion of the unemployment benefits system, a strengthening of labor laws and equal pay for equal work regardless of gender, he said.



“Those aren’t policies that anybody in the modern-day Republican Party would support,” Williams said.



“So I’m running because of that sort of uncompromising, really anti-American behavior of the Republicans in general,” he said.



Williams would bring a willingness to compromise to the Senate if elected.



But he also believes income inequality must be rectified, and that climate change should be taken far more seriously.



In 2015, he said 47 percent of households in the United States were unable to pay a $400 unexpected expense. Their options were to turn to friends or family, take out a payday loan or simply not pay the bill. “Meanwhile, the top 1 percent has 40 percent of the nation’s wealth,” Williams said. “With that kind of income disparity, it’s bad for our country.”



Despite the naysayers, the American economy is growing. The stock market is at a record high and unemployment stands at 5 percent, he said.



“In spite of what the Republicans tell you, the economy is actually doing well,” Williams said. “The problem is, it’s doing really well for the guys at the top and not so well for the ordinary working people.”



Since the beginning of the industrial revolution, about 1900, the climate has warmed a full one degree, he said. It doesn’t sound like a lot, but he said that by 2025 the polar ice cap will disappear during the summer.



If that happens, the whiteness of the ice and snow that reflects the sun will be gone, and the sun will be absorbed by the ocean.



“Investing in fossil fuels at a time when we need to get away from fossil fuels is a bad idea,” Williams said. “We need wind and solar, and we need to let the EPA do its job.”



For the complete article see the 04-09-2016 issue.



Click here to purchase an electronic version of the 04-09-2016 paper.



Share on Facebook HURON — Jay Williams says today’s Republican Party is not the Republican Party of his father or his two grandfathers.As he travels the state as a Democratic U.S. Senate candidate running against Sen. John Thune, R-S.D., he is offering a contrasting message and sharing a philosophy shaped by wide-ranging life experiences.During the Vietnam War, he and his Navy crewmates loaded bombs onto jets off the coast of North Vietnam.“That experience gave me an insight of what war is, and a belief that we should only do that kind of thing, that kind of terrible power, in the very last resort,” Williams said at the District 22 Democratic Forum on Thursday.After earning his wings, he flew search and rescue missions. Later, he and his wife served in the Peace Corps in South America.Williams returned to college and received a master’s degree in computer science, later working as a software engineer in Texas and California.In 1986, they moved to South Dakota — he’s a Gettysburg native and a grandson of that town’s first mayor — and opened a small business thanks to a Revolving Economic Development Initiative (REDI) fund loan. Williams has owned and operated his Yankton business for 30 years.The 2013 government shutdown at a time when West River was experiencing an historic blizzard, and the Republican Party’s attempts to repeal the Affordable Care Act that has provided health insurance for 20 million Americans, are reasons he decided to challenge Thune.Williams is also angry that Republican senators are refusing to hold hearings on President Obama’s choice of a moderate judge to serve on the Supreme Court.“I’m not anti-Republican,” Williams said. “Both of my grandfathers and my dad were Republican. But the Republican Party of the 1950s is not the Republican Party of today.”He points to President Eisenhower, a Republican who served two terms in the White House, who was responsible for one of the largest public works projects in American history – the interstate highway system.But there’s also the Republican platform of 1956. Its planks included preservation of Social Security, asylum for refugees, extension of the minimum wage, expansion of the unemployment benefits system, a strengthening of labor laws and equal pay for equal work regardless of gender, he said.“Those aren’t policies that anybody in the modern-day Republican Party would support,” Williams said.“So I’m running because of that sort of uncompromising, really anti-American behavior of the Republicans in general,” he said.Williams would bring a willingness to compromise to the Senate if elected.But he also believes income inequality must be rectified, and that climate change should be taken far more seriously.In 2015, he said 47 percent of households in the United States were unable to pay a $400 unexpected expense. Their options were to turn to friends or family, take out a payday loan or simply not pay the bill. “Meanwhile, the top 1 percent has 40 percent of the nation’s wealth,” Williams said. “With that kind of income disparity, it’s bad for our country.”Despite the naysayers, the American economy is growing. The stock market is at a record high and unemployment stands at 5 percent, he said.“In spite of what the Republicans tell you, the economy is actually doing well,” Williams said. “The problem is, it’s doing really well for the guys at the top and not so well for the ordinary working people.”Since the beginning of the industrial revolution, about 1900, the climate has warmed a full one degree, he said. It doesn’t sound like a lot, but he said that by 2025 the polar ice cap will disappear during the summer.If that happens, the whiteness of the ice and snow that reflects the sun will be gone, and the sun will be absorbed by the ocean.“Investing in fossil fuels at a time when we need to get away from fossil fuels is a bad idea,” Williams said. “We need wind and solar, and we need to let the EPA do its job.”



















Select Page: Area News Obituaries Sports Community Photos

Within: 1 Months 3 Months 6 Months 12 Months

Keyword: Advanced Search Select Page:Within:Keyword:

Enter your search terms Submit search form

Entertainment