Facebook image (Photo: USA Today )

At HTR Media, we want to not only provide you with news and information about our communities, but we also want to host and foster debates and discussions about the important issues our communities face.

We know that you have passionate, strongly held beliefs and opinions. We want to hear them, and we will not shy away from contentious issues because you speak frankly about these issues.

However, recently, the conversation has coarsened, especially on our Facebook page, the focal point of many of the debates we host.

When we post articles about crime, full blown battles have broken out. Some have engaged in a frankly sickening game of one-upmanship, trying to outdo each other in the graphic punishments they would mete out against the accused. It foments a lynch mob mentality. Suggesting that someone accused of a crime be hanged or shot, for example, does little to move the discussion forward..

Add to these disgusting comments the outraged response from friends and family members of the accused, and we suddenly find ourselves at HTR Media in the middle of profane, deeply personal arguments.

We understand that Facebook postings can often be written in the heat of a moment. Some crimes just get under our skin and, quite frankly, make us angry, but many of the comments we have been receiving on these stories offend us and, we believe, the vast majority of our readers.

It is not only with crime stories that we notice this shift in our Facebook fare. Personal attacks against the subjects of stories — or against those who write the stories — also are on the rise. Name calling and threats have no place in a civil discourse, yet we find them on the increase.

We work to provide our HTR Media print and online readers with the best possible experience. We value your communication with us and provide a number of avenues to accomplish that, including Facebook reaction to local stories.

However, many of these recent comments would never be printed in our newspaper. If they were broadcast on radio or TV without being “bleeped” out, the stations would face fines from the FCC. We will not have a different policy for our Facebook page than for our newspaper.

If you can’t make your point without swearing, then we’ll hide it or delete it. If you write about the violent punishment you would carry out against a person accused or convicted of a crime, we will hide or delete that comment.

Censorship? No, it’s our community policy. We’re not stopping you from venting like this. Share the story on your Facebook page and write whatever you want, but on our Facebook, we expect you to respect our rules. We’ll be publishing those guidelines soon so everyone knows our house rules.

We are evaluating the way readers interact with us on Facebook, and we will be making changes to what we post on our Facebook page and how we can foster positive, productive conversations and debates. In the meantime, we ask that readers remain — or become — respectful in what they post in reaction to our stories and photos. If necessary, take a few moments before writing that post to think about the impact it will have on those directly involved, and how it will be received by readers in general.

We value your comments, and we take them seriously and use them to help evaluate the effectiveness of what we do in seeking to provide what readers want.

As we look at how we use Facebook, try to keep things as civil and positive as possible. It will make a better experience for everyone involved.

Read or Share this story: http://htrne.ws/1p3imyO