Topics: Bob Dylan, Books, Dylan: disc by disc, Editor's Picks, jon bream, Music, rock music, Entertainment News

For much of the career of the man born Robert Zimmerman, there’s been a kind of critical consensus. He started as a folky, singing acoustic protest songs that spoke to a generation. Then one day — at Newport in 1965 — he plugged in, and musical history was electrified and his own career broadened. A few stunning years followed, including a motorcycle crash and a period of retreat, and then, a p0werful record about divorce called “Blood on the Tracks.” And then, what? A series of false starts, dead ends and attempted comebacks? A descent into Christian music? A loss of direction? Self-absorption?

It’s around this time that things get blurry and observers start to disagree. The release of a tribute record last year — “Dylan in the 80s” — and Elijah Wald’s recent book “Dylan Goes Electric!” try to reorient the way we think about specific periods. But the new “Dylan: Disc by Disc” reckons with the entire career. Jon Bream, music critic at the Minneapolis Star-Tribune, brings together dozens of writers to look at the output, from “Bob Dylan” to “Shadows in the Night.” They include rock critics Robert Christgau and Evelyn McDonnell, and musicians Joe Henry, Questlove, Suzanne Vega and Jason Isbell.

We spoke to Bream from Minneapolis; the interview has been edited slightly for clarity.

Dylan is probably the most written about musician in history, at least in the past 100 years or so, with the possible exception of the Beatles. Why did we need another Dylan book, and what were you filling in that wasn’t there yet?

Well, I was approached by a publisher about doing an illustrated discography, and they wanted me to do commentaries about every album. I said, “That’s not going to be very salable. How about if we get different people commenting about Dylan’s album and set it up as a pseudo-debate situation where two different commentators talk about each album.

Unlike the Beatles, Dylan is probably the most debated artist. There are probably more books about the Beatles, but people disagree about Dylan, on both sides of the issue. I thought it would be a fascinating way to do it. We had some professors who teach classes on Dylan. We have critics involved, and then we have some musicians as well.

I like your point: Give us a few examples of places where they disagree. I think there’s a moment of consensus, perhaps, but there are places where there really is an open debate on the value of certain periods and certain records. What are some of those?

It varies from commentator to commentator. A lot of people dislike his Christmas record, but I found two commentators who were willing to do it and they both loved it and rated it one of their favorite Christmas records of all time, along with Frank Sinatra’s record. Speaking of Sinatra, people are divided on Dylan’s Sinatra record. Is it really good singing? People say it’s good singing for Dylan at this point in his career, but a lot of people think he’s an acquired taste.

Some people dismiss him because his voice has become so croaky. They don’t call it singing, and they can’t take anything he does seriously, whereas other people maybe reserve judgment and say, “OK, this is Bob Dylan. This is what he’s evolved to, and let’s evaluate him on those terms.”

Right, and I think his Christian period in the ‘70s and early ‘80s was another that divided people. Many dismissed that period, but there are some who really love it as well. How did you find that period?

I think, in retrospect, some of the things we disliked about him sound better now. The Christian records don’t sound as bad now as we thought then, and the same can be said about “Self Portrait,” which was reviled at the time. Now that we’ve heard “Self Portrait” Part 2 and we’ve had a little time and heard a lot more from Dylan, we understand where it fits in in the overall arc of his career, in his sense of music, in his taste in music. Yes, it was the covers album, and no one wanted a covers album from the greatest lyricist of our time. But he was showing his taste in music and the kind of songs he grew up with and influenced him, and the songs he liked. It doesn’t sound as bad now as it did then. In fact, to some people it sounds good.

You mentioned the overall arc of his career. At this point, we’ve had more than 50 years of Dylan records. How do you see the overall arc or shape? Is there a single direction or a set of directions or a set of obsessions that he returns to from time to time?

Right now, he’s certainly on his exploration of American music. That’s what he’s always been on. We didn’t see it that way, but if you look carefully, that seems to be the thread that goes through his music, whether it’s the early blues and folk that he started out with, or the vaudeville and tin pan alley stuff that’s come out in the later years. He’s always been a student of American music. He’s had country music in there. Every style of music that he grew up and listened to, whether it was rock ‘n’ roll or folk or blues or even bluegrass, if you ever listened to his radio show, you got a very good idea for his range of interests. I think that would be the thread that runs through all the records, if you look at the overall arc.

That makes sense. There was a fairly brief period from “Bring It All Back Home,” “Highway 61,” “Blonde on Blonde” where he wasn’t just exploring American music, he seemed to be pushing the edges of it. He was experimenting and stretching. That period was tied up with the Newport ‘65 moment when he went electric — it’s the subject of a new book. How does that period now fit in when we look back over all these decades? Was it an anomaly?

No, people will argue that that was Dylan at his greatest. He had an incredible run at that time of creativity and originality, but you can also look back at it, Scott, as his version and his vision of American music. He was taking some of the things that he learned from other people, and he was bringing a different style of lyric writing to it, and he created his own style and his own vision. If you analyze it, you can see a lot of the antecedents: what informed that music and the things he listened to. Certainly, he created a style of his own because his singing voice was not typical. It was not pretty. It was unusual. His approach to lyric was unusual because it wasn’t tin pan alley anymore. He broke the form and created new forms. He took his style of poetry and adapted it to a rock format.