SOUTH BEND — A newly established health care services company plans to locate in downtown South Bend and create as many as 110 new high-paying jobs.

Advanced Centers for Cancer Care will move into space at One Michiana Square with help from the city in the form of $900,000 in new technology equipment.

The company plans to start with 35 employees and grow to 110 employees in five years, with an average wage of $25 per hour, according to a development agreement with the city.

“These are good-paying jobs, high-tech jobs” with benefits for the downtown economy, said Chris Fielding, assistance executive director of Community Investment for the city.

Under the terms of the agreement, the company will spend $7 million to equip and improve the space, which it will lease for an initial term of no less than five years.

The city, in turn, will spend $900,000 on technology equipment, which it will then lease back to the company.

As with similar agreements, Advanced Centers for Cancer Care will pay $1 per year for the equipment, with an option to buy it for $1 at the end of five years.

The company has pledged not to seek tax abatement for the project.

An offshoot of Mishawaka-based Michiana Hematology Oncology, Advanced Centers for Cancer Care provides management and advisory services to other health-care providers nationwide.

Specifically, the company assists providers in compliance with the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

“Our purpose is to improve the quality and lower the cost of cancer care through data and analytics,” said Colin Chambers, the company’s chief financial officer.

Chambers hinted the company likely will work with other analytics firms in the area, such as Data Realty or Aunalytics, graduates of Innovation Park at Notre Dame.

“When you’re based in a community, you do business with a lot of companies in the community,” he said.

The company’s move to One Michiana Square is expected to serve as a catalyst for future improvements to the 30-year-old building, which sits at the southeast corner of Michigan and Wayne streets.

The five-story glass and granite structure, which went through foreclosure in 2013, has suffered from low tenancy in recent years and currently is about 70 percent occupied.

“We’re delighted to have this growing firm add to South Bend’s tech sector,” Mayor Pete Buttigieg said in a statement. “Bringing new life to One Michiana Square will provide job opportunities for many people and is yet another shot in the arm for downtown.”

The Redevelopment Commission will consider the development agreement with the company on Thursday.

eblasko@sbtinfo.com

574-235-6187

@ErinBlasko