(Jonathan Newton / The Washington Post)

Waiting until the 11th hour to pass a bill that needs to be passed by midnight isn't anything new in Congress. But running up against the deadline on just about every major issue is.

And that's where Congress increasingly finds itself these days. Raising the debt ceiling? Passing a spending bill? Renewals of highway-funding bills and tax breaks? Congress waits until the last minute to get stuff done so often that it's basically the status quo now.

And that's a problem for anyone who wants a functioning government.

As any college student can tell you, waiting until the night before to study for a test or put together a project means it's more likely to be slapped together haphazardly. The 1,500-page spending deal Congress just reached (after extending its deadline four times three months) is one potential example: It's filled with goodies for just about every special interest that has a presence in Washington.

Deadline legislating "is this odd, sloppy, rocky political process, where everything gets fixed at the end of the day, but the path there is marred with nonsense and political rhetoric," said John Hudak with the governance studies program of Brookings Institution.

The budget experts of yore, like Rudolph Penner with the Urban Institute, who directed the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office in the 1980s, are dismayed to see Congress veering from deadline to deadline, never quite clear if lawmakers are going to get things done in time.

"It's really so incredibly inefficient to do business this way," he said.

So if last-minute deal making is so bad, why is Congress always doing it that way? There are a few reasons, so let's not waste any time (see what we did there?) breaking them down:

1. There are a lot of newbies on Capitol Hill



(BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI/AFP)

Which makes negotiating difficult, especially when it comes to complex policy proposals; i.e. the kinds of things that usually have these looming deadlines.

"We have really under-talented people in Congress," Hudak said. "The people who are talented -- the adults in the room -- know that this is a problem and they would prefer not to have it. But it is the non-adults in the chamber that tend to cause this."

The 2010 tea party wave in particular welcomed candidates who liked to tout their lack of a Washington record. This January, Congress welcomed 13 new senators and 58 new House lawmakers. As we noted after the 2014 election, basically half of Congress was elected in 2010 or later. Half.

(Though The Washington Post's Ed O'Keefe made the case that a lot of these new elected officials aren't totally naive in the ways of Washington. Many have backgrounds as congressional aides, political operatives or campaign donors.)

Which brings us to our next point...

2. There are few, if any, consequences for holding things up



Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) on his way to lead the fight against funding Obamacare in 2013. (J. Scott Applewhite/AP)

A big reason deals often take so long to get struck is because lawmakers are championing policy proposals that have little chance of becoming law. Take this fall's spending debate over cutting off public funds for the women's nonprofit Planned Parenthood that almost led to a government shutdown. Enough lawmakers wanted to cut off funds for Planned Parenthood -- even though Democrats opposed it and President Obama said he'd veto such a bill -- that they kept then-House Speaker John A. Boehner (R-Ohio) at the negotiating table longer than he would have liked to.

A similar scene played out during 2013's spending debate, when conservatives wanted to cut off funds for the president's 2010 health-care reform law, a.k.a. Obamacare, and Democrats steadfastly opposed it. That time, the government really did shut down.

And guess who the public blamed for it? In the 2013 case, it was the Republican Party. In this fall's spending debate, Boehner was the loser, resigning the speakership and seat in Congress. The individual lawmakers who arguably engineered the drama are not the ones losing their jobs, Hudak notes. In fact, Republicans won huge in the 2014 election and are now in a better position nationwide (i.e. everything except the presidency) than at any point since the Great Depression.

Those elected officials got to go back to their districts and brag about potentially shutting down the government over a law most of their constituents hated. One of those guys is even running for president on a platform of disrupting Washington.

Failure to pass laws in time might be damaging to the party establishment -- although the 2014 results call even that conclusion into doubt -- but it's often a win for individual lawmakers who are making a career of bucking the party establishment.

3. The folks back home are more polarized



(Scott Olson/Getty Images)

Those lawmakers would argue they're just doing their job: Representing their constituents.

For the most part, they're right. We increasingly live in two Americas. States, congressional districts and our communities are either getting redder and redder or bluer and bluer. It's easier for lawmakers to take a more polarized stand when the communities they represent in large part want the same thing.

And as many a former member of Congress can attest, to risk ignoring a large part of your constituency is to risk a primary challenger -- which is about the only way more members could conceivably lose reelection to their safely blue or safely red seats.

"The real challenge for congressional leadership," Hudak said, "isn't that members aren't being held responsible. It's that they are being held responsible."

4. It's human nature to procrastinate

We need to remember one important thing in all this, and it's that our lawmakers are human.

Penner of the Urban Institute takes us back to our metaphor about students waiting until the last minute to study for an exam. Lawmakers do that too, he said.

"It's just human nature to try to put things off, especially when those things involve difficult decisions," he said.

When some members of Congress were considering moving to a biennial (i.e. every two years) budget, Penner actually testified against it for that very reason. He thought moving the budget process from every year to every two years would just give lawmakers 365 more days to procrastinate.

Procrastination is the reality -- both in colleges everywhere and here in Washington. And for the reasons outlined above, it's not likely to change without major structural shifts in our politics.

That means making deals at the last minute is probably one of the few things you can count on Congress to do.