Cybersecurity experts warn that using Obamacare's website exposes Americans to computer hacking, privacy breaches

CEOs from computer security firms say it would take a year or more to plug healthcare.gov's security holes – if it can be done at all

Social Security numbers, dates of birth, home addresses and mortgage information make the Obamacare website's database a hacker's dream



Every witness in a November congressional hearing said consumers shouldn't be encouraged to use the website



The Obama administration says its healthcare.gov website is much improved and far less crash-prone, but cybersecurity experts warn that using it is an invitation to hackers and identity thieves.

David Kennedy, a former NSA analyst whose company TrustedSec is hired by big companies to test the security of their computer systems, told CNBC that the Obamacare website is a worst-case online scenario.

'It's really hard to go back and fix the security around it because security wasn't built into it,' Kennedy said. 'We're talking multiple months to over a year to at least address some of the critical-to-high exposures on the website itself.'



Morgan Wright, CEO of Crowd Sourced Investigations, went further, saying that the entire Affordable Care Act enrollment website should be scrapped and rebuilt from scratch with a proper security backbone in place.



'There's not a plan to fix this that meets the sniff test of being reasonable,' said Wright.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

TrustedSec CEO David Kennedy said it would take 'multiple months to over a year to at least address some of the critical-to-high exposures on the website itself'

Signing on to healthcare.gov is easier now, but signing up could expose taxpayers to hackers or identity thieves, experts say

He and Kennedy testified last month in a House Science Committee hearing that examined whether consumers' personal information would be safe on healthcare.gov's servers.

The consensus was overwhelming.

'Americans should be scared to death,' warned Utah GOP Rep. Chris Stewart.

Alabama Rep. Mo Brooks, another Republican, said providing the federal government's untested website with Social Security numbers, income levels, mortgage information, dates of birth and home addresses would create 'a mother lode for identity theft.'

'There's not a plan to fix this that meets the sniff test of being reasonable,' said cybersecurity CEO Morgan Wright

'It's not only Social Security numbers,' Kennedy agreed.



'It’s one of the largest collections of personal data, social security and everything else, that we’ve ever seen.'

Brooks asked the panel whether they think the public can use the Obamacare website safely.

'Given healthcare.gov’s security issues, and assuming for the moment that you would be personally responsible for all damages incurred from your advice,' he asked, 'would any of you advise an American citizen to use this website as the security issues now exist?'

'No,' replied all four, including Kennedy and Wright.

Three of the witnesses agreed that the site should be shut down and rebuilt.

Kennedy told CNBC that that 15 state-level health insurance exchange websites, including one run by the District of Columbia, are equally vulnerable and will be 'a large area for attack.'

He pointed to a problem on the Vermont website on Friday.



On Nov. 22, officials in charge of the Vermont Health Connect website admitted that one user was shown the personal information of another – including a Social Security number.

In another case, a government website delivered a South Carolina man's personal information to an unrelated person in North Carolina.





President Obama returned to campaign mode on Tuesday, trying to re-sell the Affordable Care Act to the American people amid concerns that its flagship website is unworkable and lacks security features