We hope to reach more of our nation’s current and future healthcare professionals and provide them with time-saving access to the leading research surrounding multiple chronic disease management, says Dr. Kim Kuebler, Director Multiple Chronic Conditions

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) identified Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center as a resource for health professionals who are diagnosing, treating and managing patients with multiple chronic conditions. Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center allows students, faculty and professional clinicians to easily obtain valuable training tools and current information regarding chronic disease management. The Center offers members exclusive access to evidence-based practices in chronic disease management, weekly updates on clinical practice resources, and policy updates. They offer webinars and live conferences covering relevant topics by speakers of varied disciplines such as medicine, nursing, social work, health policy and scientific drug development.

Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center is staffed with an expert faculty, including reputable providers across multiple medical specialties that each carry distinguished expertise in their field. They share a passion for helping health professionals achieve more successful outcomes in patients with MCC to include patient shared decision making and self-management.

The recent identification by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services allows the Center to support the latest HHS initiatives to launch new training materials to equip clinicians with the education necessary to improve the nationwide care of individuals with multiple chronic conditions.

According to the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, chronic diseases are responsible for 7 of 10 deaths among Americans each year, and they account for more than 80 percent of the $2.7 trillion our nation spends annually on medical care. Last year, The US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) declared $212 million in grant funding to prevent chronic disease. Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center intends to facilitate these efforts by providing quality, evidence-based resources and educational guidelines to health care professionals who are treating these patients.

“We are proud of the recent acknowledgement of our center by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. We hope to reach more of our nation’s current and future healthcare professionals and provide them with time-saving and convenient access to the leading research and guidelines surrounding multiple chronic disease management,” says Dr. Kim Kuebler, Director of the Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center.

Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center also displays a strong interest in helping medical professionals remain informed and prepared on how best to meet and address the changes of the Affordable Care Act. In addition, their website includes a free eBook that identifies and describes the current federal initiatives targeting multiple chronic conditions and self-management.

About Dr. Kim Kuebler and Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center

Dr. Kim Kuebler is the Director of the Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center and is an award-winning author on multiple textbooks covering chronic symptomatic disease and palliative care. She has made extensive contributions to and participates in editorial peer review for several medical and nursing journals. Dr. Kuebler is Assistant Program Director for South University’s online graduate nursing program. She is an Adult Nurse Practitioner and Clinical Specialist in Oncology from Emory University and received her Doctor of Nursing Practice degree from Vanderbilt University. Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center is a valuable resource for health care professionals to provide evidence-based care for patients living with multiple chronic conditions. If you would like to get more information about the educational services offered by Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center, please visit their website at multiplechronicconditions.org or email DrKimKuebler(at)MultipleChronicConditions(dot)org.