PHOENIX (AP) — One of Arizona’s largest health care insurers is leaving the state’s Affordable Care Act marketplace, a move that will reduce or eliminate options in rural counties.

UnitedHealthcare told state officials that it won’t sell individual plans to residents next year, the Arizona Republic reported.

Meanwhile, Blue Cross Blue Shield reported it lost $185 million on individual plans the last two years and said the losses are “not really something that are sustainable,” said Jeff Stelnik, senior vice president of strategy.

“We have to look county by county and make sure it makes sense to offer a product going forward,” he said.

The exit of both companies could leave residents in some rural counties without a way to get subsidized health insurance.

“The smaller overall market size and shorter-term, higher-risk profile within this market segment continue to suggest we cannot broadly serve it on an effective and sustained basis,” UnitedHealth Group CEO Stephen Hemsley said in an earnings conference call Tuesday. “Next year, we will remain in only a handful of states, and we will not carry financial exposure from exchanges into 2017.”

Blue Cross Blue Shield and UnitedHealthcare’s All Savers are the only marketplace options in eight Arizona counties where more than 30,000 people chose a plan, including Pinal.

The Arizona Department of Insurance says insurers must file proposals for their 2017 plans by May 11.

“My concern is that rural Arizona is left with too few choices,” said Kim VanPelt of Vitalyst Health Foundation.

Dr. Daniel Derksen, director of the Arizona Center for Rural Health, said he’s optimistic more insurers will enter the state’s marketplace before November because there is still a demand from uninsured residents. However, he added, it is “alarming” to see that the number of health plan options continue to shrink.

According to an ACRH report, the number of insurers on the federal marketplace decreased from seven to two or three in 13 of the state’s counties between 2014 and 2015. Pima and Maricopa counties also saw a dip in health insurers from 10 to eight during the same time span.

Whenever consumers have fewer options, Derksen said, it drives up premium prices and may deter them from enrolling in the ACA marketplace.

ACRH attempts to assist residents with navigating the federal marketplace by sending out staff members to rural communities during the enrollment period. Latinos and Native Americans are still highly uninsured in Arizona, Derksen said, and are priority populations for ACRH.

———

Dispatch Staff Writer Kevin Reagan contributed to this report.