POST PRESENTED BY: CommonSenseCare.com

So much has been said about the infamous Obamacare legislation currently being implemented across America. So many things, in fact, that we wanted to take a moment to celebrate the most absurd, astounding and incomprehensible statements made about this bill.

Here are a few of our favorites:

1. “You know, so much of what we see in the news is negative. But you know what? It’s not negative. This is the most positive thing that this country has done since the civil rights legislation that was passed back in the ’60s.”

- Ed Schultz on MSNBC’s The Ed Show, August 26, 2013.

While Ed may think this legislation is the best thing the United States has accomplished in more than five decades, many Americans would disagree. Higher premiums and less choice do not equate with greatness for the many in our nation struggling to pay bills and balance a household budget.

2. “If you get sick, America, the Republican health care plan is this: Die quickly.”

- Rep. Alan Grayson (D-Fla.)

Alan Grayson, best known for losing $18 million in an investment scheme and being generally reprehensible, uttered this nonsense while on the floor of the House in 2009. Some might argue minimum requirements for deductibles, co-pays, services and total out-of-pocket expenses are inefficient and violate our ability to purchase what we need in a free market economy.

Sponsor’s Note: There is hope for those looking to save money on their health care package. Wellspring has created a benefit package to help hardworking, middle-class Americans save on out-of-pocket health care costs. Discover how today.

3. “There are plenty of horror stories being told (about Obamacare) all of them are untrue.”

- Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.), February 25th, 2014

To the many Americans who feel helpless, confused and frustrated that something as basic as health care and health insurance has become one of the most, if not the most, expensive monthly cost – the stories are true. For the 300,000 people who had their policies terminated by Florida Blue, they’re true.

4. “If you like the plan you have, you can keep it. If you like the doctor you have, you can keep your doctor, too. The only changes you’ll see are falling costs as our reforms take hold.”

- President Barack Obama, June 6, 2009

This is perhaps the most famous quote about Obamacare, delivered a staggering 37 times by President Obama or a senior member of his administration. Most customers who were sent cancellation letters were given a deadline of Dec. 31 to switch or they’d be automatically enrolled in a recommended plan.

While President Barack Obama stated the Affordable Care Act would lower premiums for a family of four by $2,500, this hasn’t been the case. On the HealthCare.gov website, deductibles are averaging $5,081 per year for the minimal-coverage Bronze plans. For some households, deductibles may be as high as $12,700 annually, the Wall Street Journal reported.

The folks at CommonSenseCare.com genuinely care about saving Americans money on their health care costs. As James Jones of CommonSenseCare notes, “We’re seeing real people being impacted in a positive way. I want customers to feel empowered to take control of their health care costs that we all have as middle-class Americans.”