(KUTV) A new push is on its way to the Utah legislature for a death with dignity law. Monday the University of Utah College of Social Work hosted a discussion on the emotional issue ahead of the 2016 legislative session.

Representative Rebecca Chavez Houck, a Democrat, is sponsoring the bill and working to gain support from Republicans.

This will be her second try on the heels of a national debate sparked by California woman Brittany Maynard.





Maynard gained notoriety in the weeks leading up to her death in 2014 as she took her message to the world via blog and video. At the age of 29 she was diagnosed with a very aggressive form of brain cancer that could not be stopped or slowed with surgery.

The young woman and her husband moved to Oregon, leaving behind her home state of California where she was able to legally choose the day she died.

Maynard's life ended in November, 2014 with a single dose of phenobarbital. In a video interview posted online after her death, Maynard said "I chose it for myself."

California's legislature heard Maynard's story and pushed through a right-to-die law last year. Rep. Chavez-Houk tried pushing for the same in Utah without success.

She is back at it this year saying it can work because the drug would be "self-administered" and not a physician assisted suicide. A personal choice she says, where Utah doctors don't have to be involved if they don't want, and patients can make their own end of life choice.

"The thing that predominates with people who ask for the prescription, it is an issue of autonomy.It is beyond the issue of pain management."

Chavez-Houk says most people in Oregon who have chosen to end their own lives when faced with serious life ending illness have made the decision after caring for themselves their entire lives.

The University of Utah hosted a discussion for students and care givers who work in end-of-life care Monday afternoon.

"The goals of care conversations are incredibly important" said Troy Andersen with the college of social work.He believes opening the conversation is important no matter the end decision.

"It is a complex situation and that is why we are having ongoing debates, but I think it is very important that we expand the types of choices available."

Opponents worry about "playing God," and that patients in tough financial situations might be talked into options that would prematurely end their life. Andersen said there was concern of so called "death panels" after the passage of the Affordable Care Act. "Don't have this surgery. Don't have this procedure. The cost of this chemo is too expensive," were among concerns voiced.

Chavez-Houk proposes a system where at least two doctors sign off for a patient nearing the end of life, certifying their illness will end in death in the next six months. It also requires two requests for the medication must also be made by the patient in writing at least 15 days apart.

Chavez-Houk understands some will worry about second thoughts and patients who live longer than expected. She points to Oregon where over the last 17 years, there have been requests for the end-of-life medication 1,300 times. In one third of the cases, the fatal dose was never taken and the patient died by other means.