Several nonprofits distribute toys, gifts and food baskets to low-income families in Larimer County

Staff at House of Neighborly Service, from left, Alma Blanco, Chelsee Barragan, Sherrey Neckers and Becca Joy Magrum gather bags of pajamas, toys and stuffed animals on Thursday at the Life Center that were collected during a recent toy drive held by Layman Lewis Financial Group. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Even if clients of the House of Neighborly Service miss the Nov. 25 deadline for the adopt-a-family program, they still can get a holiday food basket with all the fixings for a Christmas meal.

The House of Neighborly Service, now housed in the HNS Life Center, 1511 E. 11th St., expects that 700 low-income families will sign up for food baskets by the deadline, an increase from last year's 663 baskets and from the 568 baskets provided in 2012.

"Every year it grows. The biggest increase last year from 2012 to 2013 is the number of seniors that are alone and want food for Christmas dinner," said Jenny Flanigan, family education manager for HNS. "There are more of them that are alone and don't have families to spend the holidays with."

Clients who sign up for the adopt-a-family program — a partnership among HNS, Loveland Catholic Charities Senior Outreach, the Early Childhood Council and Philo Club — are matched with donors who will put together holiday food baskets or provide a gift card for a food purchase and, if they choose, add in gifts. The donors, including individuals, businesses, churches and other families, will purchase the food items and deliver the baskets directly to the recipients.

If clients miss the deadline, they can apply for a holiday food basket directly from HNS starting on Monday, Dec. 1. Some of the food for the HNS baskets comes from the Food Bank, which also provides food for the Salvation Army, the Loveland Housing Authority and local churches and businesses wanting to give out baskets.

Advertisement

Clients also can shop for toys at HNS's Santa shop, which opens in one of the child care rooms a week before Christmas. Each year, approximately 50 parents visit the shop.

"Parents who don't go to other drives can come in here and get their toys for their children," said Glorie Magrum, executive director of HNS.

Community Toy Drives

Two nonprofits provide large, community-wide toy drives, Toys for Tots and Santa Cops, to collect and distribute gifts for low-income families living in Larimer County.

This year, Toys for Tots of Larimer County, a part of the Marine Toys for Tots Foundation, has more than 200 drop-off sites in Loveland, Fort Collins and Wellington to collect toys for children. Toys for Tots will pick up the toys donated to children from infants through age 17 by Saturday, Dec. 20, including from the main drop-off site at the kiosk in Old Town Square in Fort Collins at Linden and Walnut streets.

"We step in and fill the hole where Mom and Dad can't, hoping when kiddos grow up and see a need, they will step in as well," said Deborah Cross, co-coordinator of Toys for Tots.

Last year, the nonprofit distributed toys to more than 4,000 children and is expecting to deliver toys to 4,200 children, Cross said.

"People move in the community. There's been hardships, losses of jobs and transitions," she said.

The toys are delivered to three local charities and three churches, which then distribute the gifts to their registered families. The charities include the Salvation Army of Fort Collins, Catholic Charities Northern in Fort Collins and Touchstone Health Partners.

Santa Cops, a nonprofit consisting of local law enforcement, businesses and individuals, collects and delivers toys, aiming for three presents per child. The toys are collected at the Larimer County Sheriff's Office, the Loveland and Fort Collins police departments, the Colorado State University Police and the Colorado State Patrol and at toy drives.

Gift Programs

Several nonprofits have programs specific for their clients or members.

The Boys & Girls Clubs of Larimer County will provide toys to club members in two ways, at the annual holiday parties at each of the clubhouses in Loveland, Fort Collins and Wellington and through the Holiday Family adopt-a-family program.

Donors anonymously will give money or purchase gifts for families identified by the clubs as needing holiday assistance, and the Food Bank for Larimer County will provide a turkey and the fixings. So far, 10 families signed up for the program, compared with 18 families last year.

"We want to make it a nice holiday for our member kids, so we do what we can to help them out," said Tammy Chandler, finance director of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Larimer County.

Alternatives to Violence connects donors with families to anonymously give them gifts or gift cards through an adopt-a-family program. The gifts can be dropped off at the office, 313 E. Fourth St., and smaller is better because of limited storage.

"We want the holidays to be memorable, so we want to be able to facilitate that in any way," said Glenda Shayne, executive director of Alternatives to Violence. "It's nice for the kids to be able to take something home with them and have something that's just theirs, because so much has been taken away. They don't have to get rid of it or leave it behind."

Project Self-Sufficiency provides its clients with a family sponsorship program, where donors give gifts or gift cards, and a holiday party for clients and their families. The party, planned for mid-December this year, will feature a shopping area for children to select gifts for their parents and to receive games and books from Santa Claus or gift cards if they're older. The children can shop for their parents, in turn, through the under-the-tree program where they can choose gifts.

"There's the extra expense of providing a nice holiday for their families," said Mary Carraher, executive director of Project Self-Sufficiency. "By securing community support, the families can stay in their budgets and not use their credit cards and still have a nice holiday season for their children."

Giving Animals a Home

Needy animals also will be getting a gift — the gift of adoption — through nonprofits like the Larimer Humane Society. The animal shelter and rescue will host Whisker Wonderland 10 a.m.-5 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 13, with discounts on adoptions, determined by a spinning wheel game. Anyone who adopts an animal will receive a goody bag for dogs or cats with items for their new pets.

"Mainly we're focusing on adoptions this year and trying to get animals new homes for the holidays," said Derek Brown, marketing and community outreach program manager for the Larimer Humane Society. "We want people to come out and have fun and hopefully find a new family member they can take home to their forever home."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm