From: Connie DenzerThis is a copy of a letter that I have sent to the White House and all of our state representatives. I’d like to make people aware that there is a serious problem with our health care system. Obamacare and MNsure are not working.My husband and I were insured through MNsure last year and reapplied this year. No change in coverage or policy. It should have been a simple renewal. We applied the day after open enrollment began in November. After many calls and many wasted hours on the phone with MNsure and BCBS we still have not had our application processed. Every call results in a different run-around and MNsure points the finger at BCBS and BCBS points to MNsure as the problem and we are stuck in the middle. The staff freely admit they don’t know what they are doing and the system doesn’t work. It’s sad that our lives could be in danger if we have a medical emergency because of this bologna. We don’t go to the doctor when we should. I put off my eye exam for six years, because once our monthly premium is paid there is no money left for care. It also makes us sick when we think about the amount of money we have paid for insurance that covers nothing!!! We are not asking for a hand-out, just some respect and an affordable option. So we ask you how are we to comply and become insured? We are not able to afford regular insurance any longer. The minimum cost is around $20,000 a year for coverage that pretty much pays nothing. We pay out-of-pocket for doctor visits and medications. If we pay $20,000 a year for coverage there is nothing left to pay medical expenses and still live. We fear losing everything if one of us ever becomes seriously injured or ill. We both work full time. I am a dental assistant with no health coverage at work. My husband is self- employed as a tile layer. We have always paid for private coverage. This is no longer affordable and we can’t seem to get enrolled with MNsure (which is a joke of a program). We ask you, what are we to do to correct the issue? We carry private coverage on our children but cannot afford to pay for the entire family. We do very well budgeting our money so this is not the reason we can’t afford coverage. Health insurance is our biggest monthly expense. This system is encouraging people to not work and go on welfare. I see the abuse of the system every day at work. It makes me sick!! This is a whole other subject I would love to talk to you about. My husband and I are working our butts off and can’t get affordable health coverage and these losers get everything handed to them.Some of the things we have been told from MNsure are: We are not a citizen, that we now must prove this. This is crazy because we had the same coverage last year. We were told there was a problem with social society. We have no idea what this has to do with our insurance and they can’t explain it to us. That everything was processed (a flat out lie). We have been told this several times. That they can no longer talk to me, only my husband. THAT MY KIDS ARE COVERED, EVEN THOUGH THEY ARE NOT. Last year we were forced to sign them up for welfare. That was the only option given to us with MNsure. This was crazy because we did not want them in that system and we had been paying for their coverage their whole life, but this was the only choice given. We waited and waited and never received any confirmation of their coverage. We kept being told they are covered no matter what. We had to submit all our personal information to the county. Which they lost!!!! We now fear identity theft also. After months of run-around we discovered, what we felt to be true all along — they had no insurance. We then took out private insurance on them. This cost us $400 a month for coverage that pays pretty much nothing. They go to SEMCAC for their yearly visits and medication. So I’m paying for insurance and they still use a state-run program to be seen for care. This is crazy.

I also use the Sage program for my yearly visit and mammogram. I know the new law says that a yearly visit and mammogram are covered by insurance. Sadly, the person in charge of the Sage program at my clinic told me to continue the program because if they ever find something you will need the program because your insurance will cover NOTHING!!!!!



So what are we paying for? This year on ourselves we have had three different premium and tax credit amounts told to us (guess it depends on the day as to the amount you are quoted). We have received bills from BCBS for Jan., Feb., and March, with a monthly premium amount of $1,200 and a tax credit of $540 on what we have paid. Our April bill now says we owe $3,000. BCBS now says MNsure never processed our application. We can’t get an answer as to where the numbers for the charges came from for the first three months (guess they just fell out of the sky).



There is so much more we have been told and lied to about we can’t put it all in this letter. This is just crazy and scary. I cry because I feel helpless and no one is helping. I fear, what will happen if something happens and we need medical care? I’m not going to the doctor to have possible skin cancer checked because of this mess and not knowing if we are insured. I’m begging for you to help!!! Something needs to be done as soon as possible. We are sure we are not the only family going through this mess. We have run out of options other than taking our chances and going without insurance and paying the penalty at the end of the year. This sounds fair since we have tried to do everything we are told to do and can’t get results. It was great to see that while I was wasting my time on the phone trying to get this mess taken care of our wonderful president was on Jimmy Kimmel making jokes instead of taking care of serious issues in this world and his wife was dancing with Ellen DeGeneres. All this while we worry about our health care and losing all we have worked for our whole lives. How would you feel it this was happening to your family?