Dr. Zafar Quadir said parents should use the wellness visit to ask questions. (Source: KPHO/KTVK)

When 12-year-old Nathan Newcomb goes to the doctor for his annual wellness check, his mom, Michelle Toledo, saves money because he won't have to go in for a separate sports physical.

"I like to use the wellness visit for his sports checkup," Toledo said.

Dr. Zafar Quadir at Banner Health Center Chandler says he includes the sports physical with the free annual wellness visit mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

"I do promote parents, asking them if they can do a sports physical at the same time as the well-check exam because it saves them a visit," Quadir said. "It saves them money."

Quadir says insurance generally does not cover the sports physical. He also said parents should know those visits cover more than just basic checks of height, weight and blood pressure.

"Along with these physical exams we have mental health, just like kids are growing, and they are entering into the teenage years, they have worries just like adults," he said.

Under the Affordable Care Act, doctors should look for any signs of stress or depression.

Quadir also looks for vision and dental problems. While he does not treat them, he uses the exams to help parents navigate what further tests or visits may be necessary.

He said if children have ongoing issues, parents be able to use the wellness check to cover at least one of their monitoring visits.

"What I typically do is if they have things like ADHD, and if they are coming in a new calendar year, and say they have a co-pay of $20, $25, I would make that a well exam, as well as cover the ADHD at the same time," Quadir explained.

If you bring in a child who is ill, however, you will likely be billed for a sick visit.

"If the child is significantly sick and cannot be labeled as a well child, the we say we will make this as a sick visit, please come back as a well exam as a follow-up," he said.

Quadir said the best thing you as a parent can do is use the wellness visit to ask lots of questions and map out the best health plan to follow all year.

Toledo said that strategy it is helping her keep both her kids and her budget healthy.

"There is nothing extra out of pocket," she said.

For more information on what should be included in your wellness visit, you can check the Department of Health and Human Services website, www.HHS.gov.

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.