President covered wide range of issues related to civic engagement via technology, and there are many ways to revisit the milestone event.

AUSTIN, TX -- You're bummed because you missed President Barack Obama's historic keynote address at SXSW you say? Worry not, Patch has got you covered.

The event was historic in that Obama became the first sitting president ever to participate in the massive, 10-day technology, film and music festival that draws upwards of 80,000 visitors from all over the world.

Hosted by Texas Tribune editor Evan Smith, the conversation touched on a range of issues centered on using technology to increase the level of public engagement in civic affairs.

Issues discussed including using technology to connect rural schools to essential resources, the controversy over the government's attempts to get Apple to unlock an iPhone used in a terrorist action and even his embarrassment over the failed initial roll-out of the Affordable Care Act website.

The First SXSW Participant even localized his talk in suggesting ways of using technology to boost voter turnout. Despite record numbers of people voting in the recent Texas Primary, the Lone Star State's voter turnout ranked near the bottom when compared to other states holding primaries -- something the president attributed to GOP machinations he says have the net effect of limiting voter participation.

The 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals is poised to revisit one Texas law that some posit as voter-limiting, the state's controversial Voter ID law.

It was, appropriately, an engaging conversation; compelling, at turns entertaining and....okay we couldn't get in either. But the good folks at SXSW made sure to simulcast this milestone event, even for us hapless souls bereft of a coveted badge needed for entry.

But if you missed the talk, there are several ways to view it in replay or via text.

The good folks at SXSW have made the full conversation available online on the SXSW website (maybe giddy over their own 30th year milestone), although finding it on the site is as labyrinthine as the roads were on that day, given all the detours to clear the presidential motorcade.

But don't despair. There are other ways to find out what the prez had to say.

Local PBS station KLRU will broadcast much of the interview this weekend and then reprise the special programming later next week, Texas Tribune announced.

The local PBS production "Overheard" will air the most salient portions of the talk on Sunday, March 13 at 12:30 p.m., Texas Tribune announced. The show will be rebroadcast March 17 at 7 p.m.

The White House also has posted videos of some of the president's comments. Click here to view the snippets on the official White House site.

If you prefer the written word in lieu of watching the television, there are transcripts available of the entire conversation now. Here's one courtesy of the Boston Globe.

And since you are a reader -- and we really dig that about you -- please subscribe to receive the latest bulletins from Patch. Here you go, click right here for that. Bless you, readers, and God Bless America.