What would happen if the Supreme Court rules that ObamaCare doesn’t allow subsidies through the federal exchange? There’s plenty of speculation, ranging from no big deal to absolute, total catastrophe.

An article published on Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine tries to answer the question with a little bit more precision. It’s conclusion, however, is that disallowing those subsidies would be a devastating blow to ObamaCare.

The case — King v Burwell — centers on language in the statute which says that federal tax subsidies meant to offset the cost of ObamaCare insurance can only be provided through state-run exchanges. The plaintiffs in the case make a strong argument that the law is pretty clear on this.

At the very least, the fact that the court decided to take the case before there was a split ruling at the appellate level suggests that they aren’t nearly as dismissive of this challenge as those on the left were.

Authors Nicholas Bagley, David Jones and Timothy Jost — who are with the University of Michigan Law School, Boston University Public Health, and Washington and Lee University School of Law respectively — say that anyone who thinks the Obama administration can simply wave its executive order wand and make such a ruling go away is deluding themselves.

“ACA supporters,” the authors say, “have good reason to worry.”

The loss of tax subsidies in dozens of states that refused to set up their own ObamaCare exchanges would, the authors say, cause “immediate destabilization of its insurance market.”

And the ideas being floated to sidestep such a court ruling don’t stand up to much scrutiny. Besides, the authors say, “any attempt to work around King is sure to face legal challenges, which would introduce additional uncertainty and delay.”

As a result, the authors argue, the fate of “millions of people” and their ability to “continue to have access to affordable, comprehensive health insurance” stands in the balance.

But that last point presupposes that ObamaCare actually is providing access to affordable care. Catherine Keefe, writing in the Washington Post, would disagree. She says that, although she was a big Obama supporter, ObamaCare has “hurt my family.”

Their premiums went up — $121 a month for her, $82 for her husband — and the new plans exposed them to bigger out-of-pocket costs. They also couldn’t keep their doctors, and if they keep their current ObamaCare plans next year, their premiums will shoot up another $95 a month.

There are many other health reform ideas out there besides ObamaCare that don’t need a trillion dollars and actually would reduce health insurance costs. If the Supreme Court strikes down the federal exchange subsidies next summer and ObamaCare unravels, it might just provide the newly minted Republican majority in Congress the chance to get them enacted.

Follow John Merline on Twitter: @IBD_JMerline