“Kneeling beneath that cross on the South Side of Chicago, I felt God’s spirit beckoning me. I submitted myself to His will, and dedicated myself to discovering His truth.”

Obama has made several references to his diversified religious upbringing. He said in his book, “Audacity of Hope,” that his father, stepfather and grandfather were Muslims. He attended a Catholic school and then a Muslim school. As an adult he claims he was finally baptized at Chicago’s Trinity United Church of Christ, by Jeremiah A. Wright in his 20’s. After his baptism, he said,

“Whatever we once were, we are no longer a Christian nation; we are now also a Jewish nation, a Muslim nation, a Hindu nation and a nation of non believers.”

The United States remains a predominantly Christian nation, with over half of our population identifying with a Protestant religion and a quarter with Catholicism. Yet in several speeches, President Obama has maintained that,

Since 2008, we have been told that President Obama is Christian. However, are these assertions true? Gallup polls since 2008 have shown that fewer and fewer Americans believe he is actually Christian. As a matter of fact, President Obama’s approval ratings are and have remained the highest among Muslims than any other group in the United States.

Yet, when he was a senator, he made the following statements mocking Christianity and the Bible,

“Which passages of scripture should guide our public policy?, Leviticus which suggests slavery is ok or should we go with Deuteronomy which suggests stoning your child if he strays from the faith or should we just stick to the sermon on the mound, a passage which is so radical, that it doubtful that our own defense department would survive its application. Folks have not been reading the bible.”

Are these the words of a Christian? Would any true believer stand up and mock the Bible and those who believe? Has he read his Bible? “Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.”- Galatians 6:7

Does the faith of the President of the United States matter? We are a country based on religious freedom. Would it make a difference if he were, in fact, Muslim? I think the more important question would be, would you denounce your faith in order to achieve a political goal? If he is in fact a Muslim, has he not denounced that faith by claiming he is a Christian in order to get elected? If he is, in fact, a Christian, has he not denounced that faith by mocking the Bible and those who believe? Can you be a Christian and still say, with a perfect arabic accent, that “the call to Arabic prayer is one of the prettiest sounds on earth at sunset.” Can you really believe and support both? Believers of either faith would say, emphatically, NO!”

Then why, if the president is Christian, does he continue to support Muslims and Islam over the American people and Christianity? He has spoken on numerous occasion supporting and championing the Muslim people and the Islamic faith, yet while Christians are being persecuted and slaughtered in 151 nations across the world, President Obama remains silent.

In the last week, with the recent beheadings of two American journalists, James Foley and Stephen Sotloff, we have heard President Obama speak two times regarding their gruesome deaths,

“I don’t want to put the cart before the horse. We don’t have a strategy yet.” “They make the absurd claim that they kill in the name of religion. So ISIL speaks for no religion. Their victims are overwhelmingly Muslim, and no faith teaches people to massacre innocents.”

This month, Brother Rachid, a former Muslim, posted a video called, “A Message to President Obama from a Former Muslim.” In his video, he says,

“I can tell you with confidence that ISIL speaks for Islam. ISIL is a Muslim organization.” ISIL’s leader, Abu Bakr al Baghdadi, holds a PhD in Islamic studies and, therefore, knows more about Islam than Obama does. There are 10,000 members in ISIL who are all Muslims and come from different countries, with Islam being the common denominator.”

He further says of his own upbringing,

“We have been brainwashed to hate all of you in our sacred texts, in our prayers, in our Friday sermons, in our educational systems. We are ready to join any group that one day would fight you and destroy you and make Islam the religion of the whole world , as the Koran says.”

“Stop being politically correct, to call things by their names; ISIL, al Qaeda, Boko Haram, al-Shabaab in Somalia, the Taliban and their sister brand names are all made in Islam. Until you deal with the root of the problem, you will be just dealing with systems.”

It has become very obvious that ISIL has no respect for the United States. They have brutally beheaded two American citizens and threatened our nation. They have gone an a rampage intermittently killing men, women and children. They have slaughtered members of the Iraqi army and dumped them into mass graves. They have demanded Christians denounce their own religion and convert to Islam or be killed. Children have been beheaded and their parents forced to carry around their heads as an example to others. What do you call these types of people? Barbarians, thugs, brutes, Islamic terrorists? I think any of theses names would be an adequate description of who these radicals really are. But make no mistake, they practice the faith of Islam.

So, what about the innocent followers of Islam? In a recent panel at the Heritage Foundation, Brigitte Gabriel, the founder, president and CEO of ACT! for America, addressed a Muslim law student about the “innocents” in contrast to the “radicals” of the faith.

“There are 1.2 billion Muslims in the world today - of course not all of them are radicals. The majority of them are peaceful people. The radicals are estimated to be 15-25 percent…...you are looking at 180-300 million people dedicated to the destruction of western civilization…...It is the radicals that kill. It is the radicals that behead and massacre. Why should we worry about the radicals? When you look throughout history, most Germans were peaceful, yet the Nazis drove the agenda. As a result, 60 million people died, 6 million Jews. The peaceful majority was irrelevant. When you look at the Russians, most were peaceful, but the Russians were able to kill 20 million people, the peaceful majority was irrelevant. Most of the Chinese were peaceful, yet the Chinese were able to kill 70 million people. The peaceful majority was irrelevant. When you look at Japan prior to the war, most were peaceful, yet Japan was able to butcher its way across Southeast Asia, killing 12 million people, mostly killed with bayonets and shovels. The peaceful majority was irrelevant. On Sept. 11 in the United States, we had 2.3 million Arab Muslims living here…..it took 19 high jackers, 19 radicals to bring America down to its knees, destroy the World Trade Center, attack the Pentagon and kill almost 3000 Americans that day. The peaceful majority was irrelevant. So, for all our powers of reason and talking about moderate and peaceful Muslims, I’m glad you were here, but where are the others speaking out?.......... It is time we take political correctness and throw it in the garbage where it belongs…..

So, can we talk about ISIL without discussing the Islamic faith? Our President cannot continue protecting the innocent majority of Muslims and ignore the problem of radical Islam. We cannot expect to have a successful foreign policy while we continue to put political correctness over the safety of the United States.

When we speak of political correctness, why does it not apply when our President is speaking about American citizens; the very people he has been elected to protect? Why does he have no hesitation in expressing his obvious anger and disgust when calling Americans, “radicals,” “flat-earthers,” “extremists,” “selfish,” “warmongers,” ‘bomb-throwers,” “hostage takers,” and “frauds?” Yet, in his press conferences referencing the beheadings of Americans by ISIL, he remains composed and restrained in a situation that calls for anger and fortitude?

It is time for the United States President to stop attacking American citizens and declare ISIS the real enemy!