WASHINGTON -- If you've listened to Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, or watched some of the many anti-Mary Landrieu ads on TV, you probably are familiar with the number 97.

That's the percentage of votes in which Landrieu, the three term Democratic incumbent, has voted for the same position advocated by President Barack Obama in 2013, according to Congressional Quarterly (CQ).

"It shouldn't surprise us that Landrieu supports Obama 97 percent of the time," Cassidy said during last week's Senate debate. "She supports President Obama. I support you."

Landrieu said this during the debate: "While President Obama is not on the ballot, the future of Louisiana is, and electing a senator that can get the job done when it comes to energy, building a middle class in our country and in Louisiana. Using my influence and my clout, which is really the people's influence and the people's clout in Louisiana."

The issue of strong support for the president is the dominant issue Republican Senate candidates are raising against Democratic incumbents all over the country -- trying to tie them to a president whose approval ratings range from 39 percent to 46 percent nationally, depending on the poll.

In New Hampshire, where former Massachusetts GOP senator Scott Brown is running against incumbent Democrat Jeanne Shaheen, Brown says in a commercial: "He (Obama) is not up for re-election. I know you're shocked to hear that, but his number one foot soldier, Sen. Shaheen, is."

Cassidy took a particularly aggressive stance during last week's debate; calling Landrieu on her support for a president he said would "go down as one of the worst presidents." Asked to grade the president, he and Tea Party Republican Rob Maness gave Obama "zero." Landrieu gave Obama a grade of six or seven.

Republicans are confident that if they can tie Landrieu to Obama they'll win. But former New Orleans Mayor Marc Morial, now head of the National Urban League, said that strategy can backfire.

"I think the attacks are over the top," Morial said. "I was in New Orleans over the weekend and I heard a lot of the conversations about the race being a lot more about the president than what the candidates would do in the Senate. The problem of going so negative is that you might encourage people you don't want to vote to vote."

That reference is to African-American voters who supported Obama by large margins in 2008 and 2012 and could be motivated to vote in the Senate race by blistering attacks on a president they admire. It can also apply, Morial said, to independents, moderates and even some Republicans who may not agree with every position the president has taken, but don't view him through the extremely negative partisan lens painted by GOP Senate candidates.

The 97 percent support for the president comes from surveys done every year by the Capitol Hill news organization, CQ. According to CQ, Landrieu voted with the president 97 percent of the time in 2013, 90 percent in 2012, 95 percent in 2011, 98 percent in 2010 and 97 percent in 2009.

The five years reflect some 419 votes, with 226, more than half, confirmation votes on presidential nominations.

Notable votes in favor of the president's position included yes votes for the Affordable Care Act in 2010; extending lower interest rates for student loans; a farm bill that expanded crop insurance and made modest cuts in the food stamp program, expanding surveillance of people suspected of terrorist attacks and for legislation eliminating a loophole that allowed purchases of some guns at gun shows from private dealers without background checks.

Landrieu differed with the president's view on a 2012 vote to support the Keystone XL Pipeline; against EPA regulations to lower emissions from coal fired power plants; against reinstituting a ban on assault weapons and imposing limits on large capacity ammunition clips.

There would have been more instances when Landrieu voted against the president's wishes, but many contentious issues were kept from Senate floor votes by Majority Leader Harry Reid who didn't want to put members in the position of voting against their party's sitting president. The roll call tallies, Landrieu said, don't reflect her fight to end the moratorium on off-shore oil and gas development following the 2010 oil spill, all her efforts to move the Keystone XL pipeline and her opposition to EPA regulations on carbon and against previous administration proposals to roll back oil and gas tax subsidies.

Senate Democratic support for the president in 2013 ranged from 96 percent to 100 percent, with an average score of 90 percent, according to CQ.

As for Cassidy, his support for President Obama has dropped precipitously since Obama's first year as president in 2009, which also was his first year in the House. Cassidy voted in support of the president's position 8 percent of the time in 2013, 17 percent in 2012, 24 percent in 2011, 35 percent in 2010 and 37 percent in 2009, according to Congressional Quarterly.

Both Cassidy and Maness, the former Air Force colonel, who is running as the "true conservative" in the race, hit Landrieu primarily on her vote for the Affordable Care Act.

"We need a better economy than the Obama and the Obamacare economy. Sen. Landrieu, when she voted for Obamacare -- essential vote -- in a sense put a wet blanket over that economy," Cassidy said.

Maness said the health law encourages employers to reduce employee hours below 30 hours to avoid the mandate that businesses with over 50 full-time workers provide employee health coverage. "No one should have their job eliminated or reduced to part-time because of a mandate," Maness said.

Landrieu said the law isn't perfect and that she'd support changes, including lower cost options in the law's health care exchanges. But she said repeal, as advocated by Cassidy and Maness, would mean a return to a system in which people with pre-existing conditions couldn't get affordable coverage and when people were stuck in jobs because they were afraid of losing their health care, and before children up to age 26 could stay on their parents' health care plans.

A Rasmussen poll released last week showed 50 percent of Louisiana residents strongly disapprove of the president's performance, while six percent disapprove. That contrasts to 25 percent who strongly approve and 18 percent who approve - for an overall 56 percent disapproval and 43 percent approval rate in the state for Obama.

The president said in a radio interview with Al Sharpton Monday that he understands some Democratic candidates don't want him on the campaign trail with them. "This isn't about my feelings being hurt. These are folks who are strong allies and supporters of me, and I tell them, 'you know what, you do what you need to do to win. I will be responsible for making sure that our voters turn out,'" Obama said.

At a fundraiser Monday in Chicago, the president said Democrats share a common agenda.

"Democrats are for things that the majority of the American people are for,'' Obama said. "You don't see the Democratic Party captive to some wild ideological faction. We're pretty much offering raising the minimum wage, or fair pay legislation, or rebuilding roads and bridges -- stuff that used to be considered mainstream by both Democrats and Republicans."