Donald Trump is the top Republican presidential candidate. Trump leads in several polls and will take the stage Thursday in the first GOP debate. The event airs on Fox, and all eyes will be on Trump to see what the White House hopeful will say live and in prime time.

As GOP candidate, Trump's words have made for sensational headlines. In one televised event, the real estate magnate shared Lindsey Graham's phone number with the world. Other comments about immigration and Sen. John McCain's war record have also caused plenty of controversy. Trump has been in more than a few Twitter fights and his name never seems too far from the spotlight.

I look forward to the debate on Thursday night & it is certainly my intention to be very nice & highly respectful of the other candidates. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) July 30, 2015

Trump's had years of media exposure and plenty of famous feuds, which means plenty of opportunities for sound bites. Here are 50 of Trump's most famous quotes.

Continue Reading Below

"Show me someone without an ego, and I'll show you a loser -- having a healthy ego, or high opinion of yourself, is a real positive in life!" (Facebook, 2013)

"I try to learn from the past, but I plan for the future by focusing exclusively on the present. That's were the fun is." (New York Magazine, 1987)

"I know the Chinese. I've made a lot of money with the Chinese. I understand the Chinese mind." (Xinhua, 2011)

"In my life, there are two things I've found I'm very good at: overcoming obstacles and motivating good people to do their best work." (New York Magazine, 1987)

"I don't think Ivanka would do that, although she does have a very nice figure. I've said if Ivanka weren't my daughter, perhaps I'd be dating her," ("The View," 2006. Trump's representative makes it clear that he was clearly joking and the audience laughed at the comment.)

"I'd look her right in that fat, ugly face of hers and say, ‘Rosie, you’re fired.’ We’re all a little chubby, but Rosie’s just worse than most of us. But it’s not the chubbiness—Rosie is a very unattractive person, both inside and out." ("Entertainment Tonight," 2006)

"He's a war hero because he was captured. I like people who weren’t captured. Perhaps he's a war hero," (2015 Family Leadership Summit. Trump made the comments about McCain, saying he was not a war hero.)

"You know, it doesn't really matter what [the media] write as long as you've got a young and beautiful piece of [expletive]," (Esquire, 1991)

"Moron." (many, many times)

"Dummy." (See above.)

"Lightweight." (Ditto.)

"Just tried watching Modern Family -- written by a moron, really boring. Writer has the mind of a very dumb and backward child. Sorry, Danny!" (Twitter, 2013)

"What can be simpler or more accurately stated? The Mexican Government is forcing their most unwanted people into the United States. They are, in many cases, criminals, drug dealers, rapists, etc. (Press statement, 2015)

"I’ll win the Latino vote because I’ll create jobs. I’ll create jobs and the Latinos will have jobs they didn’t have." (NBC News, 2015)

"I would bomb the hell out of those oilfields. I wouldn't send many troops because you won't need 'em by the time I'm finished." (CNN, 2015)

"I promise you that I'm much smarter than Jonathan Leibowitz -- I mean Jon Stewart @TheDailyShow. Who, by the way, is totally overrated." (Twitter, 2013)

"He has done nothing for African-Americans. You look at what's gone on with their income levels. You look at what's gone on with their youth. I thought that he would be a great cheerleader for this country. I thought he'd do a fabulous job for the African-American citizens of this country. He has done nothing." (Trump on President Barack Obama. "This Week," 2015)

"Frankly, had he not met Monica, had he not met Paula, had he not met various and sundry semi-beautiful women, he would have had a much better deal going." (Trump said Bill Clinton was his favorite president of the last four in an interview with "Morning Joe.")

"If Hilary Clinton can't satisfy her husband, what makes her think she can satisfy America?" (deleted Twitter post, 2015.)

"As everybody knows, but the haters & losers refuse to acknowledge, I do not wear a “wig.” My hair may not be perfect, but it’s mine." (Twitter, 2013)

"She's been with so many guys she makes me look like a baby, OK, with the other side. And, I just don't even find her attractive. That has nothing to do with why I said it though." (Trump on Angelina Jolie during a "Larry King Live" interview in 2006.)

"One of the problems when you become successful is that jealousy and envy inevitably follow. There are people -- I categorize them as life’s losers -- who get their sense of accomplishment and achievement from trying to stop others. As far as I’m concerned, if they had any real ability, they wouldn’t be fighting me, they’d be doing something constructive themselves." ("Trump: The Art of the Deal," 1987)

"The final key to the way I promote is bravado. I play to people's fantasies. People may not always think big themselves, but they can still get very excited by those who do. That's why a little hyperbole never hurts." ("Trump: The Art of the Deal," 1987)

"Living your words, walking your talk, and talking your walk. ("Midas Touch: Why Some Entrepreneurs Get Rich and Why Most Don't," 2011)

"I don't have a racist bone in my body." (Entertainment Tonight, 2015)

"When Beyonce was thrusting her hips forward in a very suggestive manner, if someone else would have done that it would have been a national scandal," Trump, 66, said. "I thought it was ridiculous ... I thought it was not appropriate." (Trump discussing Beyonce's Super Bowl halftime show on "The Howard Stern Show" in 2013.)

"Do you mind if I sit back a little bit because your breath is very bad. It really is." (Trump to Larry King.)

"Love him or hate him, Donald Trump is a man who is certain about what he wants and sets out to get it, no holds barred. Women find his power almost as much of a turn-on as his money." (Trump on Trump.)

"You know the funny thing, I don't get along with rich people. I get along with the middle class and the poor people better than I get along with the rich people." ("Good Morning America," 2011)

"He grew up and nobody knew him. You know? When you interview people, if ever I got the nomination, if I ever decide to run, you may go back and interview people from my kindergarten. They'll remember me. Nobody ever comes forward. Nobody knows who he his until later in his life. It's very strange. The whole thing is very strange," (Trump on Obama's citizenship. "Good Morning America," 2011)

"I went to the opening of 'The Dark Knight Rises,' which is commonly known as 'the Batman movie.' And I'll tell you, it was really terrific." (Trump reviews movies, too.)

"Our president will start a war with Iran because he has absolutely no ability to negotiate. He's weak and ineffective, so the only way he figures to get reelected, and as sure as you're sitting there, is to start a war with Iran." (YouTube, 2011)

"One of the key problems today is that politics is such a disgrace. Good people don't go into government. I'd want to change that." (The Advocate, 2000)

"I think the institution of marriage should be between a man and a woman. I do favor a very strong domestic-partnership law that guarantees gay people the same legal protection and rights as married people. I think it's important for gay couples who are committed to each other to not be hassled when it comes to inheritance, insurance benefits and other simple everyday rights. (The Advocate, 2000)

"#JebBush has to like the Mexican Illegals because of his wife." (deleted Twitter post, 2015)

"China's Communist Party has now publicly praised Obama's reelection. They have never had it so good. Will own America soon." (Twitter, 2012)

"A nation WITHOUT BORDERS is not a nation at all. We must have a wall. The rule of law matters. Jeb just doesn’t get it." (Twitter, 2015)

"This very expensive GLOBAL WARMING bullshit has got to stop. Our planet is freezing, record low temps,and our GW scientists are stuck in ice." (Twitter, 2014)

"People are so shocked when they find ... out I am Protestant. I am Presbyterian. And I go to church and I love God and I love my church." (Trump on his religion. CNN, 2015)

"Isn't it funny that I am now #1 in the money losing @HuffingtonPost (poll), and by a big margin. Dummy @ariannahuff must be thrilled!" (Twitter, 2015)

"No more massive injections. Tiny children are not horses—one vaccine at a time, over time." (Twitter, 2014)

"Oftentimes when I was sleeping with one of the top women in the world, I would say to myself, thinking about me as a boy from Queens, "Can you believe what I am getting?" ("Think Big: Make it Happen in Business and Life," 2008)

"We have a disaster called the big lie: Obamacare ... And it's going to get worse, because remember, Obamacare really kicks in in '16, 2016. Obama is going to be out playing golf." (Campaign announcement, 2015)

"Rick Perry, I don’t think even understands what he is saying." (The Atlantic, 2015)

"There’s nothing I love more than women, but they’re really a lot different than portrayed,” he confides. “They are far worse than men, far more aggressive, and boy, can they be smart!" ("Surviving at the Top," 1990)

"Robert Pattinson should not take back Kristen Stewart. She cheated on him like a dog & will do it again -- just watch. He can do much better!" (Twitter, 2012)

"We have nobody in Washington that sits back and said, you're not going to raise that f---ing price." (2011)

"I've always had a great relationship with the blacks." (2011)

"All of the women on 'The Apprentice' flirted with me -- consciously or unconsciously. That's to be expected." ("How to Get Rich")

"You're fired." ("The Apprenticeship")

For even more quotes, check out Bustle, The Week, Esquire and Trump's Twitter.

Get Your Donald Trump Quotes Right Heredonald trump, donald trump quotes, donald trump sayings, donald trump for president, donald trump president 2016, donald trump president, donald trump twitter, president donald trump, donald trump speech, donald trump net worth, donald trump hairYesCR IBTimes