WIND CHILL ADVISORY in effect for the area tomorrow morning at 4am until 10am. For more click on the link the following link: http://www.erh.noaa.gov/er/ctp/

OVERALL: Bitter cold arctic air returns blanketing the area through the middle of the week before temperatures start to climb back to normal in the upper 30s over the weekend.

TONIGHT: Clouds will decrease through the evening and overnight. Temperatures will be the story as they are expected to drop to near zero but with winds remaining breezy, wind chill values will run -10 to -15 below zero. Wind Chill Advisory goes into effect at 4am until 10am tomorrow. Dangerously cold conditions expected with potential for frost bite and hypothermia to unprotected skin in a short period of time. Be sure to wear proper clothing, like layers, hat, gloves and scarves, if you have to work outside covering exposed skin as much as possible.

TOMORROW: Plenty of sunshine tomorrow until later in the afternoon when high clouds will drift in from the south as a storm passes through the Carolina’s dimming the sunshine a bit. A slight breeze will be enough for wind chill values to still run below zero and afternoon highs only making to the low teens.

WEDNESDAY AND THURSDAY: Plenty more sunshine as high pressure builds in but temperatures will be very cold with morning lows in the single digits and highs remaining in the teens.

END OF THE WEEK AND WEEKEND: We warm up to the 30s by Friday. A warm front pushes northward in the evening and may produce a few flurries but not much more. It will bring in milder air for the weekend with morning lows in the 20s and highs in the 30s. By Sunday, we could reach the low 40s. A wintry mix briefly in the morning is expected to change to rain showers on and off for the start of the weekend until the front pushes through late Saturday night. The precipitation should be out of here by Sunday morning leaving clouds and breezy conditions to start the day. With morning lows near 30° and sunshine breaking out, highs could warm to the low to mid 40s before colder air returns for Monday.

Ground Hog Day is Sunday. Will he see his shadow and keep winter around longer or will he not, bringing a sign that spring is just around the corner! Chances are pretty high he will see his shadow.

Also, Super Bowl Sunday looks to be dry and not too bad by kick off. Can you guess the kick off temperature? If so, you could win a hefty prize. Details to come out by tomorrow!

MaryEllen Pann, Chief Meteorologist

Like me on Facebook: maryellenpannfox43

Follow me on Twitter: @MaryEllenFox43