Education Secretary Arne Duncan recently offered a compelling speech pushing American students to learn about money and finance in school. “Young people, to be successful, to secure retirement, to take care of their families, and to not be in poverty, have to have a level of financial literacy that 30, 40, 50 years ago maybe wasn’t required,” Duncan said. “Today it’s an absolute necessity.”

This is important for several reasons.

First, when tested for financial literacy in 2012, American teens scored below average and far short of those in countries like China, Australia and New Zealand, according to the results of a recently published Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development survey.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on the Economy]

Second, today, more than one in three workers (36 percent) have less than $1,000 in savings and investments (excluding the value of a primary home or traditional defined benefit plans), according to a March report from the Washington, D.C. based Employee Benefit Research Institute. According to the same survey, six in 10 workers have less than $25,000 in savings and retirement plans, again excluding the traditional plans and the value of a home.

And what’s worse, WorldatWork, a Scottsdale, Ariz., based human resources professionals association found people are “leaving money on the table” when saving for retirement by not taking full advantage of benefits such as a matching employer contribution to their retirement account.

[READ: All the President's Bureaucrats]

These problems can be easily remedied by simply teaching students about financial literacy at an early age. Teaching financial literacy is also a great way to teach math (bringing to life the value of fractions and percentages) and to offer students the tools they need to navigate the complicated student lending process that many will enter when they go to college.

So far, according to Pew Trusts, only Missouri, Tennessee, Utah and Virginia require financial literacy education to graduate. However, many public charter schools have incorporated financial literacy in their core curriculum. After school and summer school programs have started to offer courses in financial literacy and students can now access financial literacy through many online programs.

But for the idea to take off, more states will need to require financial literacy as part of their core curriculum. Next to reading, nothing may prove to be more beneficial in preparing students for life.