BOSTON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--PARTNERS+simons, a subsidiary of Myelin Communications specializing in integrated marketing services for the financial services, healthcare and life sciences industries, announced today several investments in its long-term business vision.

Following substantial business growth in 2015, and in response to continued demand for deep industry expertise and digital strategy acumen in these highly regulated industries, PARTNERS+simons is taking steps to strengthen organizational leadership in these areas.

Jim Porter, a 10-year veteran of the agency, is now SVP, Managing Director, focused exclusively on the agency’s healthcare clients. With industry changes in the wake of the Affordable Care Act continuing to take hold, Jim’s experience, knowledge and insight will benefit health plans and hospital systems by providing proactive, strategic leadership to address today’s emerging challenges and opportunities.

The company has also hired Chris Paddock, Angela Streba and Madeleine Warren to round out its strategic offering and to help meet the growing demand for services from clients including AIG, Blue Cross Blue Shield, B.Braun, Roche Molecular and Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center.

“The complex role of today’s marketer requires a blend of brand development and demand generation efforts across a wide range of channels,” said Andrew Pelosi, EVP and General Manager of PARTNERS+simons. “We believe with Jim’s leadership and the additional talent we’ve added, that PARTNERS+simons is well positioned to partner with healthcare and financial services brands to create sustainable and engaging customer relationships, and measurably improve their marketing performance.”

More about Chris, Angela, and Madeleine:

Chris Paddock, Director Digital Strategy, has held Web strategy roles at Wheaton College, Sallie Mae, Virgin Health Miles and Bank of America, among others. He is adept at developing digital strategies that span inbound and outbound digital channels, including Web, mobile, social media and email marketing.

Angela Streba, Account Director, most recently led the global digital, advertising and marketing needs for the Noise Reduction Technology division of Bose Corporation. Prior to that, she orchestrated multi-level advertising and media campaigns for Perrigo Company, a leading global healthcare supplier. Streba adds experience and depth to the agency’s strategic planning and relationship management services.

Madeleine Warren, Account Supervisor, previously held account management and content marketing roles at DigitasLBi and Brafton, Inc., where she developed web strategies through content development, search engine optimization and analytics consulting.

About PARTNERS+simons

Founded in 1989, PARTNERS+simons is a brand communications and integrated marketing services firm with deep domain expertise in healthcare and financial services that creates communications to help people make the most important decisions in their lives. Fluent in digital and traditional communications – from online, mobile, and social media to direct mail, print, outdoor and broadcast advertising - the firm creates integrated marketing programs that connect with consumers and business-to-business buyers in meaningful, measureable ways. More information is available at http://www.partnersandsimons.com/.

About Myelin Communications

Just as myelin insulates and strengthens connections between the brain’s neurons, making them more powerful message conductors, Myelin Communications is a unique network of companies specializing in health and financial services. For a growing portfolio of payer, provider, medical, financial and wealth management organizations, Myelin creates connections that can make message platforms even more powerful. Our capabilities include brand development and activation, market research, channel planning and media solutions, integrated creative and marketing content, digital technology solutions, sales enablement, data analytics, mobile engagement, measurement strategies and more. More information is available at http://www.myelincommunications.com/