Clinton-Trump in Election 2016: Clash of the Unpopulars





If the two front-runners of both the Democratic and Republican parties win the nominations, America is on a collision course for one of the most polarizing presidential elections in this nation’s history.

Both Chairman and President of The Trump Organization Donald Trump, Republican and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Democrat have significant leads in overall delegate count in their respective parties. With each passing day, it becomes clearer that the names “Clinton” and “Trump” will likely appear on the general election ballot in November.

The uniqueness of this potential presidential contest comes from the unpopularity of the two candidates.

Trump’s wave of controversial rhetoric has sparked protest at many of his rallies and outside of his luxury estate in New York City. Trump has characterized Mexicans as “rapists,” proposed a temporary ban on Muslims entering the country and spoken lowly of respected people.

The billionaire is on record discrediting former Republican presidential nominee, John McCain. “He is not a war hero. He is a war hero because he was captured, I like people that weren’t captured,” said Trump. He has also called 2012 Republican presidential nominee, Mitt Romney, a”choke-artist” for losing the last election to current President Barack Obama.

Clinton has been the subject of skepticism for most of her time in the public spotlight. Hillary is the wife of former President Bill Clinton and the marriage has been one of controversy. Bill Clinton was impeached (he was acquitted and remained in office) after the Monica Lewinsky scandal. It was alleged by many that Hillary only remained with her husband for political power.

Distrust of Clinton also stems from her role in the Benghazi attacks of September 11th, 2012 that killed four Americans during her tenure as U.S. Secretary of State.

In March 2015, reports were released that revealed Clinton used her personal email address to handle official government business in her time as Secretary. Americans affiliated with both parties suggested that she put National Security at risk. She is on record admitting that she used her personal email address purely out of “convenience” and recognizes that “it was a mistake.”

Both Trump and Clinton have changed their positions on a multitude of topics. In a 1999 “Dateline” interview, Trump proclaimed himself a “liberal on health care,” saying “I like universal [health care].” Throughout his campaign, he has repeatedly stated that he will get rid of the Affordable Care Act ( legislation that expanded health coverage) and “replace it with something great.”

As a U.S Senator in 2004, Clinton described marriage as “a sacred bond between a man and a woman.” Now, she is in support of same-sex marriage and even included an image of two males holding hands in her presidential candidacy announcement video.

In a 1999 “Meet The Press” discussion, Trump identified himself as pro-choice and now he is openly pro-life. Hillary has a history of supporting trade agreements, including the North American Free Trade Agreement, which was signed into law by her husband on December 8th, 1993. Initially, Clinton showed support of the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement but has since come out against it in debates with Senator Bernie Sanders.

If these two candidates were too clash in the general election, each would have plenty of rhetoric to use against the other.

This potential match-up has another dynamic. Clinton and Trump know each other on a personal level. The former First Lady attended Trump’s last wedding and Trump has donated money to Clinton in the past.

A Clinton-Trump bout would be a movement versus a political dynasty. Trump’s rhetoric is perceived as heroic by his supporters. Trump critics describe him as having a bad temperament while his supporters see him as “telling it like it is.” The billionaire has unapologetically worn the mantle of the loudest and boldest candidate. He claims he is able to behave this way because his campaign is self-funded and therefore he does not have to compromise his beliefs. Trump recognizes that the Republican establishment is not fond of him, but claims he has the American people’s support and that is why he is winning.

Meanwhile, the Clinton organization is sophisticated and has allies among the Democratic establishment. Both Hillary and Bill Clinton have been involved in politics for decades. The perception is that Clinton knows the “ins and outs” of Washington politics.

Will our next president be the self-funded, resolute Donald Trump?

Or will America elect the first woman president in the nation’s history?

Two candidates with two public histories of success and controversy.