When Dustin Dinges gathered his team of Southeast Denver Baseball League 12-year-old all-stars for their first practices at the end of June, he had a feeling the group could do something special.

The team did him one better. They accomplished something historic.

Southeast Denver on Saturday will play its first game in the Cal Ripken World Series in Aberdeen, Md., becoming just the second team from Colorado to reach that pinnacle.

“It’s a big accomplishment,” Dinges said. “They are all friends who support each other. They have worked really hard and share a love of baseball. I think that’s what has gotten them to this point.”

Cal Ripken Baseball, a division of the Babe Ruth League, is similar to Little League with several key exceptions. In Little League, the pitching mound is 46 feet from the plate and bases are 60 feet apart. The Cal Ripken dimensions are 50 feet and 70 feet. Players can also lead off in Cal Ripken Baseball, unlike their Little League counterparts.

“It really prepares them for the game at the next level,” said Southeast Denver Baseball and Softball League president Gregg Palmer.

In order to reach the World Series, which will include nine other American teams and eight international squads, Southeast Denver had to win a district, state and regional tournament.

In the Midwest Plains regional tournament in Baxter, Minn., Southeast Denver went 4-0, beating teams from Minnesota, Missouri and Kansas.

“I was speechless,” said infielder Aidan Flores. “I knew there had only been one other team from Colorado to make it, so when we won, I couldn’t believe it.”

The reality is sinking in now. The team will leave for Maryland on Thursday and will play Saturday against a team from Homewood, Ill., the representative of the Ohio Valley region. The championship game on Aug. 16 will air on CBS Sports Network.

On Wednesday, the players received a warm send-off from Gov. John Hickenlooper at the state capitol.

“It’s really a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to be where we are,” said infielder Keegan Feeley. “We are trying to make the most of it and play to the best of our abilities.”