New lobbying business slows to a trickle - DC Policy Group inks two - Purple Strategies expands to the hub

With Andrea Drusch

NEW LOBBYING BUSINESS SLOWS TO A TRICKLE: Registrations for new business have slowed to a crawl in November and December — pointing to another bad year for K Street as a whole. According to a PI tally of new clients registered with the Senate, November was the worst month of 2013 for new client business. What’s more, December is on pace to be even weaker. According to the LDA database, 137 new clients were registered in November — the lowest total all year. And with December almost half over, only 46 new clients have filed new registrations. PI is not expecting a flurry of registrations around the holidays either. For comparison’s sake, the best month of 2013 for new business was April, when 581 new registrations were filed. When December 2013 is compared with December last year, the outlook improves a bit. Lobbying shops are working at adding new business at essentially the same clip. There were 48 registrations through Dec. 12 in 2012. November 2012 was even worse than November 2013 — with only 39 new clients total. Here is our quarterly compilation of new business with numbers as of Thursday: http://bit.ly/1e7WCgt

Story Continued Below

DC POLICY GROUP INKS TWO: The new firm started by Julie Bauer, formerly of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority and Chicago Board of Trade, has inked her former employers as clients. Bauer will lobby for FINRA on the regulation of broker-dealers, securities industry and markets. She’ll work on regulation of securities markets and taxation of securities products for the Chicago Board Options Exchange. Her firm, D.C. Policy Group, launched Nov. 1, and these are the first registrations to come across the Senate’s lobbying database.

GOOD THURSDAY AFTERNOON, the 50th anniversary of Kenya declaring independence from the UK. Send your lobbying news, gossip, tips and scoops to btau@politico.com. And keep up with PI on Twitter by following @ ByronTau or @ PoliticoPI.

PURPLE STRATEGIES EXPANDS TO THE HUB: Purple Strategies announced Thursday that it will open a New England office, led by consultants Patrick Griffin and J ames Demers. The office — to be based in the heart of Boston’s financial district — will focus on corporate issues, including strategic communications, reputation management and brand challenges. “After Purple’s successful growth in Chicago, we took a look at where we needed to grow to best serve our Fortune 500 client base,” said Alex Castellanos, chairman and founding partner of Purple Strategies. Griffin founded GY&K Marketing, one of the largest advertising, marketing innovation and digital communications firms in New England. Clients have included Coca-Cola, Cigna Health Care, Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield and Dunkin’ Donuts. He’s also done media consulting for Presidents George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush as well as Sen. Lamar Alexander and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney. Demers is a New England Democratic consultant, a former member of the New Hampshire House of Representatives and former congressional candidate. He currently serves on the board of directors of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation.

NADCO HIRES O’ROURKE: The National Association of Development Companies has brought Claire O’Rourke on board as director of government relations and grass-roots campaigns. She joins NADCO from the U.S. Senate Committee on Small Business & Entrepreneurship, where she advised chair Mary Landrieu (D-LA) on budget and appropriations issues. “Claire is a trusted member of the Senate Small Business and Entrepreneurship Committee staff who will add strength and visibility to our government relations efforts in Congress, in the administration and in the states,” said NADCO President & CEO Beth Solomon. “Working every day to advance small business lending and our industry of SBA Certified Development Companies, her efforts will help our industry fuel small businesses to create the jobs America needs.”

ASA HIRES STANTON: The American Statistical Association has selected Stanton Communications as its public relations agency of record, the association announced in a Wednesday release. “With the massive growth in the importance of data analysis, now is the time to advance ASA’s communications efforts and tell the story of statistic science in new ways through a partnership with an established and experienced public relations firm,” said Ronald Wasserstein, ASA executive director. “We will focus our campaign on communicating to young people the bountiful and rewarding opportunities available in statistical science. We are excited to work with Stanton Communications on this important initiative.”

**When you think retail, do you think innovation? Main Street retail is coming to life online. Here’s how one brand uses technology and social media to create a platform for artisanal merchants. Watch the video: http://bit.ly/15nhlC4 **

MICROSOFT DECKS THE HALLS: Spotted at Microsoft’s Wednesday holiday reception: Sens. John Hoeven and Jeff Flake, Rep. Tom Marino, Peter Cleveland with Intel, Laurent Crenshaw with Yelp, Jack Smedile with NAB, Steve Elmendorf from Elmendorf Ryan, Katharine Lister from Monument Policy Group, Ayesha Khanna with Sen. Harry Reid’s office, Jeff Farrah with Senate Commerce and Rob Porter from Sen. Rob Portman’s office.

WALL STREET’S POLITICAL WILDERNESS YEARS: Ben White and Maggie Haberman : “At both ends of the political spectrum, the titans of American finance today find themselves alienated from politics to a surprising degree. On the left, the rift has been precipitated by populist outrage and a damaged, difficult relationship with the White House. The discord and disappointment has simmered for years and is now boiling toward the surface on both sides, particularly for donors who felt burned and spurned by a White House they helped to elect. To understand just how far apart the president and the barons of Wall Street have drifted, consider that as a young senator in his first run for the presidency, Barack Obama took in $16 million from Wall Street donors while last year, as the incumbent president, he was able to muster only $6 million.”

SALAZAR, BILLIONAIRE FORM CONSERVATION PAC: Via POLITICO’s Morning Energy: Former Interior Secretary Ken Salazar and hedge fund billionaire Louis Bacon will launch a bipartisan PAC — America's Conservation PAC — which will push conservation and wildlife issues and make direct contributions to congressional candidates. The PAC will tap into those who feel Washington, and specifically Congress — which in its 112th iteration, from 2011 to 2012, didn’t conserve any new land via wilderness designation, national monuments or otherwise — haven’t done enough on conservation issues. Bacon has long worked to privately conserve land through easements — for example, earlier this year he put 21,000 acres of a ranch into an easement, and in 2012, Bacon gave 77,000 acres to the Fish and Wildlife Service for conservation. Salazar and Bacon will hold a conference call at 11 a.m.

ELSEWHERE IN THE INFLUENCE WORD:

WHAT DO PACS WANT? OpenSecrets.org finds that corporate and trade association PACs are some of the most cautious actors in all of politics — and that they sink money into candidates already likely to win, not into contested, competitive races. http://bit.ly/19EtVQz

CLICK THIS: It’s about how campaigns get you to open their emails and give them money. http://huff.to/1bytTcO

BONJEAN X-MAS PARTY TEASER: The Hill reports on the possible celebrity guest at the annual bash thrown by Ron and Sara Bonjean. http://bit.ly/18WYKFK

LIGHTER CLICK: Missouri teen channels Playbook (and PI!) http://politi.co/1jSHGmg

NEW POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE REGISTRATIONS:

Yellow Dog of New Orleans, La. — Treasurer Meghan Smith

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS: (Firm: Client)

Becker & Poliakoff: Signal Above

D.C. Policy Group: Chicago Board Options Exchange

D.C. Policy Group: Financial Industry Regulatory Authority

Dutko Worldwide: Hydrothermal Resources

MJ Capitol Consulting: Clean Energy Coalition

PricewaterhouseCoopers: Greater Houston Partnership

URAC: URAC

**From the National Retail Federation: "You’ve heard the mantra, “The customer is always right.” Shoppers want quicker access to product, smarter shopping through mobile, and better customer experience. And our members — retail businesses, large and small — are responding through innovative technology and smart business practices. The most innovative retail brands in the business will gather in New York City, January 12-15, for Retail’s BIG Show." See who’s attending and what they’re talking about.

Learn more about retail innovation at thisisretail.org/innovation. #thisisretail **

** A message from the National Retail Federation: Retail is more than great products, or the sound of a cash register. More than a storefront, or a website. It’s working together as a community, creating the things people want, today. It’s the smile at the end of every transaction and the effort and innovation that customers don’t see. Retail businesses – 98% of which are small businesses – are at the heart of many towns and neighborhoods nationwide. That’s why when retail thrives, communities thrive. Think you know retail? Think again: http://bit.ly/this_is_retail #thisisretail **