History was made in 1989 — that being the title of Taylor Swift’s fifth studio album.

Billboard announced that the 25-year-old’s pop effort, which was released on October 27, has charted above all other musicians for the past 10 weeks.

This makes the blonde hitmaker the first artist to sit atop the Billboard Artist 100 list for 10 weeks—longer than any other musician in the chart’s lifespan, reports NME.

Groundbreaking: Taylor Swift has been named the only artist to top Billboard Artist 100 for 10 weeks

Crossover success: The 25-year-old's pop album 1989 has been praised by critics and proven to be a hit with fans

The Artist 100 Chart tracks an artist's popularity across all various Billboard charts.

In claiming the honor, she has bested Sam Smith, who had a reign of three weeks as number one on the chart, and Ariana Grande and Maroon 5, who have previously spent two weeks in the top spot.

But Taylor's 10 weeks on top is a first for any musician in the magazine's ranking.

Taylor's crossover from country music to pop has proven to be a boost to her career. The lead single off her album Shake It Off was nominated for a Grammy for Song Of The Year.

Shake It Off: The lead single of her 1989 album was nominated for a Grammy for Song Of The Year

Her follow-up single Blank Space has spent eight weeks in the peak position on the Billboard Hot 100 chart—which tracks the success of songs weekly.

USA Today named 1989 Album Of The Year and Taylor as 2014's Musician Of The Year.

Taylor's album has sold 1.287 million copies in its first week of release and has earned her the title of the only artist to go platinum in 2014.

In fact, it is the biggest selling album in the U.S. since Eminem's 2002 release The Eminem Show.

Fine feline: The cat lover received two personalized carriers for her beloved pets

As if that's not enough of a holiday gift for the songbird, she recently gushed about a Christmas present she received from her mother.

'Not that giving Christmas presents is a competition, but this year, my mom won,' she wrote on Friday, sharing an image on Instagram of two cat carriers that had her pets' names inscribed: Doctor Meredith Grey and Detective Olivia Benson (the felines are named after characters in Grey's Anatomy and Law & Order: Special Victims Unit).