WASHINGTON -- Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker (R) said Sunday that he supports a constitutional amendment that would bar the Supreme Court from granting marriage equality rights nationwide.

The Supreme Court is expected to issue a decision this month that could grant, for once and for all, same-sex couples the right to wed across the country. But Walker said on ABC's "This Week" that he would support amending the constitution to protect states that still want to ban same-sex marriage.

"I personally believe that marriage is between one man and one woman," Walker, a prospective GOP presidential candidate, said. "If the court decides that, the only next approach is for those who are supporters of marriage being defined as between one man and one woman is ultimately to consider pursuing a constitutional amendment."

He added that "the decision on defining marriage should be left up to the states."

Same-sex marriage is legal in Wisconsin. Walker has said that he voted for the state's constitutional ban on marriage equality in 2006, which was overturned eight years later by the courts.

In April, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), who is also running for president, introduced legislation to establish a constitutional amendment protecting states that want to bar same-sex marriage.

Democratic National Committee Press Secretary Holly Shulman criticized Walker's comments Sunday, saying, "Walker showed us today the same divisive policies that he has supported throughout his career when it comes to the rights of LGBT Americans. We don’t expect more, but the American people should know what a Walker presidency would mean for the rights of their family and friends."

Walker refused to give an opinion on the transition of Caitlyn Jenner and her Vanity Fair cover when asked about the topic Sunday morning.

President Barack Obama tweeted last week that Jenner has shown "courage."

It takes courage to share your story. https://t.co/Q7wWjV9Rxx — Barack Obama (@BarackObama) June 1, 2015

"Well, I think it’s a personal decision," Walker said. "And to me, I don’t know that there’s anything more to comment on. It’s a personal decision."

This article has been updated to include comment from the DNC.

Want more updates from Amanda? Sign up for her newsletter, Piping Hot Truth.

Enter your email address:

Also on HuffPost: Scott Walker Pointing Fingers Scott Walker Pointing Fingers

1 of 10 Scott Walker FILE - In this Jan. 3, 2011, file photo Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker speaks at an inauguration ceremony at the state Capitol in Madison, Wis. More than a year after the standoff over union rights that rocked Wisconsin and the nation for weeks, the Republican Governor will face Milwaukee's Democratic Mayor Tom Barrett in Tuesday's recall election. (AP Photo/Morry Gash, File) Share this slide:

AP