70 percent of bites considered minor

Related Dogs on the Front Range

Pit bulls lead breeds of dogs euthanized along Front Range

Every day along the Front Range, at least eight people are bitten by dogs, according to a six-month investigation by Rocky Mountain PBS I-News and 9News.

Officials said the numbers may seem high, but the public should not be surprised.

"If a dog has teeth, it has the potential to bite," said Sgt. Stephen Romero, animal control investigator in Denver. "And if it's in the right conditions, circumstances, it can potentially bite."

I-News and 9News analyzed bite incidents from most major cities and counties along the Front Range from Colorado Springs to Boulder that took place between 2012 and early 2014. The investigation found that about 6,500 dog bites were reported to police or animal control officials. That's more than eight a day.

The breeds of the biting dogs were available for about two-thirds of the bites. It showed that Labrador and Lab mixes were most prone to biting, accounting for 416 of the bites. However, they were also the most popular pet breed, accounting for about one in every seven dogs registered along the Front Range, so there are many more of them.

"It's labs and lab mixes that bite more than any other animal," said Romero, who got an infection from a lab bite while on duty. "Labs are good dogs. It's just how you raise them."

Popular dogs and dog names Chances are if you walk into a dog park, you are likely to find a Labrador named Bella. That is the most popular dog breed and dog name along the Front Range. Rocky Mountain PBS I-News and 9News gathered data on more than 130,000 pet registrations from Colorado Springs to Boulder. It found: • Labradors were the most popular breed at 18,826 registrations, or one of every seven registered dogs. They were followed by Chihuahuas, 6,782, and German Shepherds, 6,811. • Bella, Buddy and Max were the most popular names at 1,481, 1,249 and 1,225, respectively • Sports figures tended to dominate pets named after celebrities. There were 52 Kobes (Bryant), 35 Melos or Carmelos (Anthony) and 32 Magics (Johnson). • Denver Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning beat out his boss, John Elway. There were 51 Peytons and only 19 Elways. • Elvis remained the King among celebrities with 90 pets named after him. - Hip Hop star Bow Wow only had one dog named after him. However, 19 lazy owners named their dogs simply "dog" or "doggie." Source: Rocky Mountain PBS/I-News

Labradors were followed by German shepherds, pit bulls, Chihuahuas and bulldogs.

Longmont police got 150 dog-bite reports in 2012, 125 reports last year and — as of Nov. 20 — 106 reports thus far in 2014, according to Robin Breffle, a community service officer with the Longmont police animal control unit.

The Boulder County Sheriff's Office got 64 reports of dog-bite incidents in the parts of the county under the sheriff's jurisdiction, and received 42 such reports from January through June of this year, according to Sheriff's Cmdr. Heidi Prentup.

Erie Police Cmdr. Lee Mathis said the town had 10 dog bite reports between Oct. 2013 and Oct. 2014.

Janeé Boswell, supervisor for Boulder Police Department Animal Control, said Boulder tends to see about 150 dog and cat bites per year. Boulder police reported getting 122 bite reports in 2013 and 137 reports between Jan. 1 and Nov. 20 of this year.

Lafayette Police Cmdr. Brian Rosipajla said that by October, Lafayette received 22 calls about dogs having bitten people in 2013 and 16 so far in 2014.

Bite-by-bite report breakdowns by dog breeds weren't immediately available from most Boulder County law enforcement agencies.

According to the Centers for Disease Control, about 4.5 million Americans are bitten by dogs each year, about half of those children.

Almost one in five of those bitten require medical attention, and in 2012 more than 27,000 people underwent reconstructive surgery.

Alice Nightengale, director of the Denver Animal Shelter, said humans can be as much to blame for dog bites as their pets.

"Just because a dog bites does not mean it's a bad dog," Nightengale said. "I think humans have a lot of responsibility for dog bites."

Said Longmont's Breffle: "Any dog can bite in many different situations, if stress is put on it."

A dog running loose, for example, might bite someone who tries to catch it, so authorities don't recommend approaching stray dogs, Breffle said. People should instead notify animal control or police officers.

"The best thing is to call us, if at all possible," Breffle said. "If a dog won't come to you, don't push it."

Breffle said Longmont authorities also get a lot of calls about accidental bites by a family dog or cat, either from the victims or other members of their families, or by physicians or hospitals, which are required to make reports when a bite victim comes in for treatment.

Several jurisdictions, including El Paso and Douglas County, which accounted for about 2,000 bites, included the severity and where people were bit. It showed only about 4 percent were deemed severe with 1-in-4 considered moderate and seven in 10 labeled minor.

The same data also included information on where humans were bit. Hands were the most common, accounting for about 34 percent of the 2,000 bites. That was followed by leg bites, 23 percent. Bites to the face including eyes, noses and ears accounted for 19.4 percent and bites to the arms comprised 15 percent.

The circumstances leading to dog bites varied.

Sometimes, they may be protecting their territory from intrusion and other times they feel threatened, said dog trainer Sean Miller. "Once a dog does bite someone, they immediately gain a sense of control because 100 percent of the time we flinch," Miller said.

Hillary Penner suffered serious bites to the hand while she was trying to help her female dog get away from another dog that had attacked her pet.

She said she has no regrets.

"Even though I have scars on my arms ... I am lucky I have her at the end of the day," Penner said.

Said Erie's Mathis: "When we receive these reports, we investigate the incident to include getting vaccination records for the animal as well as checking to make sure the animal is licensed with the town."

Mathis said the town also requires the owner to quarantine the dog for 10 days to monitor it for possible rabies or other issues, adding that the quarantine can be done at home depending on the circumstances.

"The quarantine is done regardless of the vaccination status of the animal," Mathis said. "We issue citations as appropriate and applicable for a vicious animal or any other offense that might apply such as failure to vaccinate or license the dog."

Longmont's Breffle said that "we're not out to punish people or the animal" by putting the dog into quarantine status.

"We want to make sure the dog is healthy," Breffle said.

Boulder Police's Boswell said a bite that results in broken skin requires a report be taken and the animal quarantined.

Boswell said that officers will respond immediately if there is a threat to public safety but that someone who was, for example, bitten by a pet can phone in the report. In that case, the animal can often be quarantined at home and later checked up on for signs of rabies.

Lafayette's Rosipajla said his police department responds to dog bites like any other call, making sure people receive medical care if needed. Officers check on the dog's history, looking for rabies vaccinations and licensing, and the dog is quarantined following American Humane Society protocols, he said.

"We've had many calls associated with people being bitten by their own dog or other family members being bitten," Rosipajla said. "We handle it like any other dog bite call."

Boulder County Sheriff's Cmdr. Prentup said that "dogs bite when they feel threatened, are in a fight with another dog and a person gets in the way, or they feel backed into a corner."

Prentup said dogs "typically display specific behaviors prior to biting, which may include an intense stare-eye contact by the person or other dog approaching them," which she said is "a sign of dominance in the animal world, and is perceived as a threat."

She said another sign of a pending biter would be when a dog tenses its body and tail, pulls back its ears, yawns, rolls its eyes back, growls, or has a furrowed brow.

Longmont Times-Call staff writers John Bear and John Fryar contributed to this report.