WASHINGTON -- By turning down federal funds under the Affordable Care Act to expand Medicaid, Louisiana will lose $1.65 billion in 2022, or more than twice as much as it is projected to receive in federal highway and transportation funds, according to a new study.

The report, released Thursday by the Commonwealth Fund, says the irony is that Louisiana residents, like those in the other states rejecting the expansion, will be paying for its implementation in other states.

"Those same states will be forgoing billions in federal funds while paying for other areas to provide expanded coverage," said Commonwealth Federal President David Blumenthal. Blumenthal, a physician who supports better access to quality health care, worked in the Obama administration, where he led efforts to speed the switch from paper to electronic medical records.

Blumenthal predicts that while 20 states, including Louisiana, have rejected the Medicaid expansion, he expects pressure to grow for those states to eventually join the expansion.

Gov. Bobby Jindal, in rejecting the expansion, has argued the expansion, though funded at no less than 90 percent of the cost by the federal government, would still be too expensive to the state and that expanding Medicaid is an inefficient way to improve access to health care.

By comparison to other state spending, it's a relative bargain, the authors of the Commonwealth Fund report say.

Under the program, the entire cost of the expansion is paid for by the federal government for the first three years of the expansion, beginning in January, 2014. After that, states are responsible for no more than 10 percent of the expansion costs.

In 2022, the report projects, Louisiana's cost of the expansion would be $280 million; compared to the $2.2 billion it is projected to spend on incentive payments to attract private business to the state.

"No state that declines to expand the program is going to be fiscally better off because of it," said Sherry Glied, one of the report's authors. "Their tax dollars will be used to support a program for which nobody in their state will benefit."

Under the Affordable Care Act, people with incomes at or below 138 percent of the federal poverty level ($15,856 for an individual and $32,499 for a family of four), would qualify for Medicaid. But the Supreme Court ruled last year that states could choose whether or not to participate in the expansion, and 20 states, all headed by Republican governors, rejected the expansion.

In a column for NOLA.com/Times-Picayune, Jindal defended his decision not to participate in the Medicaid expansion:

"Medicaid is an entitlement program, and therefore there is no fixed amount of federal Medicaid spending to be reallocated from state to state," Jindal wrote. "Unlike certain infrastructure grants, states that choose to participate do not have the opportunity to receive extra dollars when other states decline to participate. Every dollar we refuse to spend on Medicaid expansion is one dollar less that we have to borrow from China, not one dollar more that goes to another state."