(Editor’s note: Updated to include Valeant comments.)

The takeover battle between suitor Valeant Pharmaceuticals International Inc. and acquisition target Allergan Inc. has spilled over into the courts with Allergan filing a federal lawsuit Friday against Valeant, alleging insider trading and other offenses.

Allergan /quotes/zigman/217110/delayed /quotes/nls/agn AGN names activist investor William Ackman, whose Pershing Square Capital Management hedge fund owns nearly 10% of Allergan, in the lawsuit.

Allergan charges that Pershing Square bought $3.2 billion in Allergan shares between February and April of this year while fully aware of Valeant’s takeover intentions. Ackman’s actions deprived shareholders who sold stock to him of $1.2 billion in value gains, the lawsuit says.

Valeant made its initial bid for Allergan on April 22 for $48 billion. It has since upped that to $53 billion.

The complaint is asking the court to declare that Valeant and Ackman violated securities laws and that it order rescinding of Pershing’s purchase of the Allergan shares.

The lawsuit appears to be an attempt to thwart a coming shareholder vote on the merger by forcing Ackman to sell his stake in Allergan. Ackman’s shares, plus his influence among investors, is considered critical in bringing the matter to a vote.

Later on Friday, Valeant and Ackman countered that the Allergan lawsuit was “frivolous” and “baseless.”

“This is a shameless attempt by Allergan to delay the shareholders’ fundamental right to call a special meeting and vote their shares,” Ackman said in a prepared statement. “Allergan is threatened by our progress toward calling the special meeting. This scorched-earth approach is further evidence of the board’s and management’s entrenchment.”

Valeant Chairman and Chief Executive J. Michael Pearson added: “We are disappointed that Allergan continues to stand in the way of its shareholders’ right to voice their views on a transaction with Valeant. Despite Allergan’s attempted roadblocks, we remain committed to pursuing this compelling combination, which will create an unrivaled platform for growth and value creation.”

Allergan, meanwhile, says in its complaint that debt-laden Valeant — which it has accused of being a “serial acquirer” — did not have the cash to buy Allergan and so it sought the help of Ackman. Valeant also took several steps to make a tender offer for Allergan prior to reaching an agreement with Pershing Square, the suit alleges.

Shares of both Allergan and Valeant were off marginally in afternoon trades.

Follow @russbrittmktw

Follow @MWHealthBlog

More must-read health coverage from MarketWatch:

Obamacare rate hikes to average 4% in California in 2015

How health care has swallowed the U.S. economy, in one map

Khosla: Your cell phone may soon be your doctor