Aaron Day, the New Hampshire State Chairman of the Republican Liberty Caucus, has been fighting Obamacare’s medicaid expansion on the local level for years now.

Day spoke with Truth In Media’s Joshua Cook in 2013 after Day and statewide activists were able to successfully table a bill, but in 2015 Medicaid expansion is once again a fierce battle in the state.

In an exclusive interview with Truth In Media, Day told Joshua Cook that N.H. Republicans are not trying to stop Obamacare Medicaid expansion and are actually drafting the bill for the expansion.

Regarding a possible third-party run, Day declared that this is a serious consideration. “I’m not actually just throwing this out here, you know ‘maybe I’ll do it.’ I’ve already got a team together to get on the ballot. I need to get 3,000 signatures to get on the ballot as an independent. I already have a team in place, I’ve had a lawyer review the process.”

Following the interview, Day clarified to Truth in Media that “if the Republicans in New Hampshire expand Medicaid, I will launch a third party campaign. If the party rejects expansion, I will continue fighting in the trenches to elect conservative Republicans.”

Aaron Day said he asked Congressman Paul Ryan (R-WI), who is now the Speaker of the House, how he would advise and instruct the Republicans in the N.H. state senate regarding medicaid expansion.

“Tell them no, no, no on Medicaid expansion. The funding won’t be there,” said Ryan.

Day said that expanding Medicaid would ultimately bankrupt New Hampshire or trigger a massive tax hike. Currently, New Hampshire has no income or sales tax.

Day said that Sen. Kelly Ayotte (R-N.H.) is an influential force behind the movement to move Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion in the state.

Advertisement

Cook asked Day about his thoughts on splitting the vote and the result of Republicans losing a majority in the Senate if Sen. Ayotte loses.

“Not only might this cost her her seat, this might cost the Republicans control of the United States Senate,” said Day. “Which tells you just how serious I am about this issue, because it was thrown in our face. We wouldn’t be in this place if it weren’t for people who made a political calculation that said ‘in order for Kelly to win we are going to throw the state underwater so she has better election chances,’ I’m just changing the math.”

Day asked, “why bother even have two parties if Republicans are going to cave on an issue like this?”

“Because the number one problem our country faces in the next 12 to 18 months is a looming sovereign debt crisis. We have $18 trillion of debt and hundreds of trillions of unfunded liabilities and we are asleep at the switch and adding fuel to the fire by expanding Medicaid is only going to exacerbate the situation,” added Day.