When an 8-year-old girl blew out the candles on her birthday cake in January, she made three wishes instead of one.

“My three wishes were to go to Steak ’n Shake, have my brother back and to do this,” she said while standing outside Set Free Ministries on Dorsey Street in Gainesville.

“This” is bring dozens of bags of food and water to the men who live at Set Free, many of whom are homeless.

“At her birthday party, she said she wanted to learn how to share so other kids would learn, too,” said Denise Wilson, the girl’s guardian.

The girl’s aunt and grandmother, with whom she lives in Gainesville, were quick to encourage her philanthropic endeavor.

“She was abused, and we’re trying to build up her morale,” Wilson said.

Unfortunately, she is only one of hundreds of children who are abused or neglected in Hall County every year. She currently finds herself separated from her younger brother due to a custody dispute as a result of the abuse.

She may not be close to getting her brother back in her life, but as any expert will say, even the smallest effort to reach out and be a part of the world again may make a world of difference to a child who was abused or neglected.

Psychology of abuse

Dr. Guy W. Jordan is a psychologist based in Gainesville who has worked with abused or neglected children on and off throughout his decades-long career. In 2013, he published a book called “Simplify Your Emotions: Steps to Happiness” to help kids and adults simplify and manage their emotions in the wake of traumas such as loss or abuse.

The biggest problem with helping children who have been victims of abuse, according to Jordan, is that they have been conditioned not to address the real problem.

“The big problem with abuse is people tell kids ‘don’t tell or I’ll be in trouble; I’ll have to go to jail,’ so kids are coached to not talk about the abuse,” Jordan said. “I’ve worked with abused children for over 30 years, and the thing that I’ve learned with them is if I can tell them ‘Let’s talk about the abuse to understand what it was so you understand it wasn’t your fault,’ and ‘Let’s talk about ways it should’ve been different and how you’re going to be, act different from it.’ You can use it as a steppingstone to learn from, not as a damaged goods image for your life.”

Jordan recommends parents or guardians not keep bringing up the abuse, and especially not to talk about it in emotional tones.

“If the child brings it up, they need to deal with it in a neutral tone of voice rather than an emotionally intense voice,” Jordan said.

Jordan also recommends highly encouraging any attempts the child makes to have normal hobbies or social connections.

“Any positive activity or involvement the child can have with other kids or with an adult — that’s why mentors in school are great,” Jordan said. “That’s why sometimes having a relative do things with a child, have the child spend time with another child who has a healthy environment for them to interact and be part of is great.”

Adults should be careful not to overindulge children who have been abused, because it was a lack of boundaries that led to their abuse in the first place. But positive steps should be encouraged at all times.

“You have to be firm with your limits and set boundaries that are reasonable, but involve them in activities that are healthy, that make them feel good about themselves,” Jordan said.

By the numbers

In 2014, the Hall-Dawson Court Appointed Special Advocates program advocated for the welfare of 511 abused or neglected children in court.

Of those children, 240, almost half, were younger than 5.

Some 95 percent of the children were victims of neglect, whether it be educational, medical or the lack of basic needs and supervision.

Of the 511 children that received help from a CASA advocate in 2014, only 168 found a stable home through reunion with relatives or adoption that year.

Even if someone isn’t a social worker or therapist, there are still a variety of steps anyone can take to help combat child abuse in their area.

“There are children in Northeast Georgia that are being neglected and abused, and they need someone to speak up for them because they need a safe, loving home,” said Connie Stephens, executive director of Hall-Dawson CASA. “We have a serious need for volunteers and foster homes for these children.”

Potential CASA volunteers must be 21 years of age and consent to a criminal background check, as well as attend 40 hours of courtroom procedures and policies.

There is also a pressing need for more foster homes in Hall and Dawson counties.

Given the rate of re-victimization, children who suffer from abuse or neglect need as much help as they can get.

“When a child has been previously victimized, that child is three times more likely to be mistreated than other children,” Stephens said. “Shockingly, the group with the highest victimization rate — 16 victims per 1,000 children — is among children from birth to age 3.”