Pirates, politicians, gumshoes and gold miners are in store between now and Valentine’s Day. Also, lords and ladies upholding Victorian and Edwardian standards in a certain Yorkshire abbey.

“Community,” Jan. 2, NBC. The meta-humor is intact. Judging by the first three episodes of the 13 this season, the series under Dan Harmon is as quirky as ever. Great to see Jonathan Banks as criminology professor Buzz Hickey, a tough-guy of a different order than his “Breaking Bad” character.

“Downton Abbey,” Jan. 5, PBS. I’ve seen the first five episodes of season four, and it’s great to be back at the Abbey. The difficult end of season three (awkward due to an actor’s decision rather than good writing) sets the tone at first, but soon new characters, problems and even job possibilities arise.

“Justified,” Jan. 7 FX. Marshal Raylan Givens is back (in the form of Timothy Olyphant) in the series inspired by Elmore Leonard’s stories. Arriane Alexander joins the cast as a guard at the Harlan County jail.

“Chicago P.D.,” Jan. 8 NBC. Dick Wolf’s latest features the uniformed cops versus the undercover detectives. Jason Beghe, Jon Seda, Elias Koteas and more.

“Episodes,” Jan. 12, Showtime. The crazy-charming Matt Le-Blanc sitcom returns with transplanted British TV comedy writers Tamsin Grieg and Stephen Mangan finding ever more to mock — about Hollywood, TV networks and modern love. Big changes at the network will mean new challenges for Pucks!, the show they’re trying to write. This is my go-to personal relaxation, mood lift comedy.

“True Detective,” Jan. 12, HBO. Matthew McConaughey and Woody Harrelson in a creepy crime drama with psychological complications. The eight episodes skip back and forth in time among events in 1995, 2002 and 2012, all recounting a bizarre murder investigation and its effects on their lives. Judging by the compelling first two hours, sharp dialog and great acting will make this a DVR must.

“Looking,” Jan. 19, HBO. a modern gay San Francisco tale, sort of a West Coast mix of “Girls” and “Sex and the City,” with Jonathan Groff (“Glee”) and friends looking for love while approaching the end of youth. An update on “Queer as Folk” with a videogame programmer (Groff) adding a modern touch to the crises of love and sex. The first couple of episodes suggest it’s less fun than that forerunner.

“Sherlock,” PBS, Jan. 19. How will the cliffhanger resolve? Benedict Cumberbach and Martin Freeman return as Holmes and Watson in three new 90-minute episodes, “The Empty Hearse,” “The Sign of the Three” (Jan. 26) and “His Last Vow” (Feb. 2). The contemporary spin on the Sir Arthur Conan Doyle classic is created by Steven Moffat (“Doctor Who”) and Mark Gatiss.

“Klondike,” Jan. 20, Discovery. The network’s first scripted miniseries, a break from the reality TV fare of “Gold Rush,” yet still centered on the quest for Yukon gold. Period drama set in a small frontier town features Richard Madden, Abbie Cornish, Tim Roth and Sam Shepard. “You either leave with the gold or with your soul.”

“American Masters: Salinger,” PBS, Jan. 21. A documentary about the famously reclusive author J.D. Salinger. His childhood, his marriages, how he made his way to “Catcher in the Rye” and secrets he left behind.

“Black Sails,” Jan. 25, Starz. A pirate series from Michael Bay, with cable-ready sex, violence, crude language, wily wenches and intrigue. Intended as a prequel to Robert Louis Stevenson’s novel Treasure Island. Toby Stephens (“Die Another Day” and Maggie Smith’s son) is killer as evil Captain Flint. A second season has already been ordered.

“House of Cards,” Feb. 14, Netflix. Now things get nasty. The second season of the Emmy-winning, online-only political thriller starring Kevin Spacey and Robin Wright kicks off with all 13 episodes available at once. (It will also be in extra high-def, not that anybody owns a set equipped to watch that way.) “The butchery begins,” Frank Underwood (Spacey) intones at the end of the season 2 trailer.

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp