WASHINGTON — For many of the Republicans running for U.S. Senate, Tuesday’s caucus won’t mean much — maybe a chance to hobnob with party activists at schools and community centers across the state.

But for two candidates, El Paso County Commissioners Darryl Glenn and Peg Littleton, the March 1 event represents the first, best chance to ignite campaigns that have struggled to break free in a crowded GOP field.

The reason has to do with an event scheduled about five weeks from now: the state convention on April 9. At that gathering in Colorado Springs, about 3,000 select Republicans will vote on who should appear on the June 28 primary ballot. It’s not a winner-take-all thing; a candidate only has to break the 30 percent mark to qualify.

But with state Sen. Tim Neville, R-Littleton, expected to surpass that threshold easily, the challenge for Littleton and Glenn is to marshal enough support to crack 30 percent as well. Anything less for those two, and that’s it — campaign finito. So March 1 is critical to Littleton and Glenn because they must get their supporters on the path to be among the 3,000 select Republicans who vote April 9.

Those mini-elections — to pick the people who will pick the primary candidates — start Tuesday and continue through county assemblies later in March.

“For me, it’s the only route. It’s the route that I respect,” Glenn said of the caucus process.

It is not, however, the only way to get on the June 28 primary ballot and earn a chance to face incumbent Michael Bennet, a Democrat.

Colorado’s primary system allows candidates who don’t want to navigate the caucus system to “petition” their way on the ballot. That requires each candidate to gather 1,500 signatures from each of the state’s seven congressional districts — or 10,500 statewide.

Several major Senate candidates have chosen to take this route, notably former state Rep. Jon Keyser, businessman Robert Blaha, former Aurora City Councilman Ryan Frazier and former CSU athletic director Jack Graham.

The advantage to the petition path is that it’s less risky.

However, the petition route can get expensive. Frazier, who is pursuing petitions but said he hasn’t ruled out a convention bid either, estimated the low-end cost of a petition campaign is $130,000 to $180,000. The price tag can rise quickly, he added, the longer a candidate waits — although he added there were long-term advantages to the strategy.

“We want to build a grassroots army,” said Frazier of the petition drive. “This is a part of that.”

In deciding between the petition or convention route, there’s also a political calculus.

“The attendees of the caucus are generally your most active and engaged Republican” voter, said Dick Wadhams, the former state GOP chairman who now is running the Graham campaign. “They are naturally going to gravitate toward people who have been in elected office before.”

So for a political outsider such as Graham, he added, it makes more sense to qualify for the ballot by petition. Especially because Graham put $1 million of his own money into his campaign account.

That option, however, is less viable for candidates such as Littleton or Glenn.

So Littleton said she’s focusing on the March 1 caucus. She hired Elaine VanderJagt, a political consultant who in 2014 helped now state Attorney General Cynthia Coffman garner 69 percent of the GOP assembly vote.

And later Littleton plans to target an unusual bloc of voters: GOP convention-goers who support petition candidates such as Keyser or Blaha. Because these candidates won’t be on the ballot at the state convention, Littleton said she is courting these voters to help her crack 30 percent and give her campaign a jolt — and potentially add some intrigue to the June 28 primary.

“Going the caucus route and getting out of there with 30 percent lends an air of credibility to funders and financers,” Littleton said.

As a potential counter to this strategy, Neville may try to run up the score at the April 9 convention to keep Littleton and Glenn below the 30 percent mark.

In a recent fundraising email, Neville highlighted the importance of a “strong turnout” March 1 to his overall campaign, so much so that he is offering backers a chance to win an AR-15 rifle.

“I can’t think of a better way to get that word out before March 1st than by giving away a brand new AR-15,” he wrote. “Of course, I know the anti-gun media may hate it,” he noted. But “I am the pro-gun, pro-Constitution candidate in this race for U.S. Senate.”

Neville’s supporters include Dudley Brown, the executive director of Rocky Mountain Gun Owners and a force potent enough in the GOP caucus process that other candidates made note of that endorsement. It’s one reason why Neville is likely to emerge from the April 9 convention — although it’s uncertain by how much.

Neville did not respond to requests for comment.

If Neville can’t block Littleton or Glenn from the June 28 ballot, it could add a new layer of uncertainty to a primary slate that is likely to include several petition candidates such as Keyser, Blaha, Frazier and Graham.

Former state GOP Chairman Ryan Call said Neville would be hurt most if a candidate such as Littleton makes the primary.

Not only would it deny him the “talking point of unified party support” if he isn’t the only one to emerge from the convention, but a Littleton candidacy could “carve more into” Neville’s conservative lane, he said.

“The smart campaign … would be wise to throw their support behind an alternative to Neville” at the assembly, he added.

Mark K. Matthews: 202-662-8907, mmatthews@denverpost. com or @mkmatthews