Businessman Donald Trump is a danger to the conservative movement, "because he's trying to hijack it into something it's not," Club for Growth President David McIntosh tells"He says he'll replace Obamacare, but he'll replace it with Trumpcare where the government runs it under Donald Trump," McIntosh told "Hard Line" host Ed Berliner."He's not for property rights. I don't really believe he'll do a tax cut because he says he still supports the tax increases that he was for in the past."Trump says he wants to get rid of the Washington establishment, and the Club for Growth agrees that the problem is in the leadership in Washington, McIntosh said. But Trump is "just not the solution."$1.5 million worth of advertising aimed at South Carolina voters, saying that Trump is no conservative.As for Trump's claims the conservative group asked him for a million-dollar donation before trashing him, McIntosh said that was "classic Donald Trump where he doesn't like the truth so he makes up something else and starts attacking somebody who's questioning him."Watch Newsmax TV on. Geton your cable system –Trump invited the group to his office and asked what he could do to help, McIntosh said. "We said, 'Well, if you're a real conservative, you could contribute to the Club For Growth. We disagree with you about taxes and about trade, but that's how you could help us.'"Trump never sent the money, "then completely made up the story about that meeting," he said. "The truth is that Donald Trump has a terrible record on economic issues. He's been for tax increases in the past. Suddenly changed his mind when he started running for president."Trump also is for "eminent domain abuse where he wants the property to be taken by the government and given to developers like himself," McIntosh added. "He's declared bankruptcy through his companies four times, given to Hillary Clinton and a lot of the Democrats in his political giving. He's just not a conservative, and people are starting to see his true colors as the campaign goes on."