Avalanche rookie camp starts Monday. Terry Frei will be your man at Family Sports Center in Centennial while I’m playing in the fifth-annual Dawg Nation Hockey Foundation golf tournament in Morrison. I’ll be back working Tuesday while Terry digs in with Colorado State football.

I spoke with 20-year-old defenseman Chris Bigras on Friday and right winger Mikko Rantanen, 18, on Sunday. Both Avalanche youngsters could make the Oct. 8 opening-night roster, although injuries, trade(s) or biting the salary bullet would be required. Colorado has 12 forwards on one-way deals (plus Nathan MacKinnon) and seven defensemen on big-league contracts (plus Nikita Zadorov and Brandon Gormley). MacKinnon is obviously a lock and Zadorov is a good bet to make the team out of camp. I’m not sure about Gormley, who is not waiver exempt. The Avs could lose him if he’s demoted to the minors.

Avs coach Patrick Roy likes to carry 13 forwards and eight defensemen, so if everyone is healthy and present there is little wiggle room for young guys like Bigras and Rantanen, who could further develop in the minors.

It’s a similar scenario between the pipes. What to do with Reto Berra, who will make $1.45 million this season and next? I suspect Calvin Pickard, who is on a two-way deal, will force the Avs to trade, waive or buy-out Berra. The Semyon Varlamov/Pickard combination is obviously extremely attractive.

We’ll have a Rantanen story in Monday’s paper. On Sunday we posed eight questions about the Avalanche heading into training camp, which begins Thursday with physicals at the Pepsi Center. The two on-ice training camp sessions are Friday and Saturday.

Here’s experts of my conversation with Bigras, the 32nd pick in the 2013 draft:

I’m sure you feel good heading into your third training camp?

CB: “I know what it’s all about now, so I come in with a little more confidence in my game, and with the development I’ve made over last season I think I’m really ready to come into this camp and open some eyes.”

Based on contracts and the Zadorov addition there my not be room for you at the start of the year, if nothing happens with injuries or trades, so generally would you expect to start the year in San Antonio?

CB: “My expectations are to come in here and make the team. I want to set that bar for myself and go from there. I want to do all I can to make the team. If it doesn’t work out I’ll go to San Antonio and continue to take the advise that they give me and build off that.”

What’s your take on the addition of Zadorov?

CB: “I played with him a little bit in juniors when he was with the (London) Knights. Big body, likes to get physical. He’ll be a force on the defense as a shutdown.”

I imagine you guys are going to be Avalanche teammates for a long time, but right now it’s a healthy competition of who gets there first (Bigras and Zadorov are 2013 draft classmates).

CB: “Yeah, that competition is something that every hockey player loves, and what pushes us to take that next step.”

It seems like the up-and-coming D that this organization has is exciting. Would you agree?

CB: “I would, yeah, it’s a great organization and they’re taking a lot of steps to develop prospects and I think it will pay off huge. Like you said, all the D prospects are exciting.”