McConnell hints at fast-track procedure for Obamacare repeal

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Tuesday that the Senate will consider using a fast-track budget procedure to repeal some of Obamacare but declined to say when that may take place.

GOP leaders have not made a final decision on how exactly to use the powerful procedural tool, called reconciliation, which allows the Senate to avoid a filibuster and pass legislation with just a simple majority. Many Republicans, particularly the conservative wings in both chambers, would like to use the maneuver to attack Obamacare.

Story Continued Below

On Tuesday, McConnell signaled that Obamacare was a likely reconciliation option, but did not make a firm commitment.

“We’re certainly going to consider using budget reconciliation for repealing as much of Obamacare as is reconcilable,” McConnell told reporters Tuesday. “There’s certain rules that have to be applied to what is reconcilable and that’s in active consideration, as you can imagine.”

McConnell also did not lay out a time frame. The Senate committee chairmen with oversight of healthcare have said that they have no plans to report reconciliation legislation by the July 24 deadline set out in the budget. But Senate aides say that reconciliation legislation can be brought up at any time and that the deadline, if missed, won’t prevent action in the future.

Even if Republicans use reconciliation to send President Barack Obama a repeal of his signature healthcare law, he’s sure to veto it. And there are enough Democrats in Senate to uphold that veto.

Wyoming Sen. John Barrasso, the fourth-ranking Senate Republican who is the point person on health care, also declined to lay out a timeline for how GOP lawmakers will use reconciliation. But he stressed that the “focus” of reconciliation was to repeal the health care law.

“We have a lot to do between now and the end of the work period,” Barrasso said. “And those things are much more time-sensitive matters, especially transportation — the fund ends soon, the issue with Iran sanctions that the president reported today. We have 60 days to review that … so there is quite a lot to do.”