Topics: AFL-CIO, Al Sharpton, Chris Hayes, Ed Schultz, lawrence o'donnell, MSNBC, NBC, Rachel Maddow, Union, Media News, Business News, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

The AFL-CIO urged MSNBC hosts Wednesday to defy “fear and concern” and break their silence about NBC’s alleged anti-union “hypocrisy.” None of the five high-profile progressives they’ve targeted – Rachel Maddow, Al Sharpton, Lawrence O’Donnell, Chris Hayes and Ed Schultz – has so far directly and publicly addressed allegations that NBC-owned Peacock Productions exploited fear tactics and legal tricks to avert unionization. NBC and the five hosts did not immediately respond to Wednesday morning inquiries, or to prior requests for comment over the past week.

“These hosts have a particular responsibility,” AFL-CIO organizing director Elizabeth Bunn told Salon. “They have respect and they have clout that producers alone don’t have, and they’re part of the larger progressive movement.” She said the five anchors were “uniquely positioned to hear the stories of what their parent company is doing to workers, and broadcast that to the larger American public.” She urged them to follow the “inspirational example” of workers at Peacock Productions – a company that produces some MSNBC programming – who’ve chosen to take collective action.

“We’re speculating that there’s a level of fear and concern” among the five celebrity anchors, Bunn told Salon. “But what we’re hoping is if they meet individually or collectively with the workers,” and hear “how abhorrent this corporate behavior is,” that “as a group, they will speak out and exercise their collective voice just like workers at these production companies have exercised their voice in seeking to form a union.” Bunn blasted NBC as “guilty of hypocrisy and guilty of exploiting its workforce,” adding, “one would hope than an employer whose mission is to communicate accurately would behave more responsibly.”

As Salon first reported, Chris Hayes listened to Peacock Productions workers’ concerns at a private meeting held at the offices of the Writers Guild of America–East, according to several people present. Like his colleagues, he has not publicly addressed the workers’ allegations. WGA-E organizing director Justin Molito told Salon that Peacock Productions ran “a textbook anti-union campaign that you would see at companies like Wal-Mart” and alleged its exploitation of National Labor Relations Board delays amounted to “throwing in” with those behind the “right-wing extremist takeover” decried by MNSBC.

Following a Web petition hosted by MoveOn Civic Action, the AFL-CIO sought the five hosts’ support in a letter sent Wednesday. “What has occurred at Peacock is unconscionable,” AFL-CIO president Richard Trumka and the federation’s other two top officers told Sharpton, O’Donnell, Maddow, Schultz and Hayes in the morning missive, first reported by Politico’s Dylan Byers. They asked the hosts to “help these brave men and women appeal to Peacock and to NBC to cease their anti-union tactics. Meet with them, talk to them, call your viewers to action, and let’s make a difference together.”