On December 18, Congress gave employers and insurers an early Christmas present when, as part of an Omnibus Spending Bill, they amended the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act to include a two-year delay of the much-maligned excise tax, aka the “Cadillac tax.” As a result, employers don’t have to worry about the possibility of a 40 percent excise tax on high-premium health insurance plans until 2020. That’s great news and gives employers more time to work on their “glide paths” to reducing health premiums within their benefits programs. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

So, even if the Cadillac tax itself goes away, the ideas behind the Cadillac tax may live on in other forms of revenue generation and/or a cap on tax exclusions. What does this dynamic mean? Simply put, any preparation that companies have done to avoid the Cadillac tax will continue to help them through the coming period of legislative uncertainty and change. That’s good news!

Since 1999, health insurance premiums have risen, on average, by 203 percent, and workers’ share of premium costs have increased even more, at 221 percent. Over the same period, inflation has risen by just 42 percent and worker wages have increased by 56 percent. So while our actual earnings have gone up a modest 14 percent (less than 1 percent per year), an employee’s share of health insurance premiums has outstripped our income increases by 165 percent Furthermore, after modest increases of 2 percent to 3 percent for the past several years, the Kaiser Family Foundation reported that health premium costs rose at 5.3 percent in 2015.

Part 3: How to Look Ahead with Pragmatism One of the unexpected thrills of working in the benefits business is getting to solve big challenges and getting to do it for real people—your employees, to be exact. There is possibly no bigger challenge facing our industry than bending the benefits cost curve while maintaining or even increasing quality. It’s a huge issue—so much so that the Affordable Care Act has nearly 1,000 pages devoted to it.

Establishing the value of an HDHP with an HSA First, the bad news: the rise in HDHP adoption has also led to a great deal of anxiety around employees confronting unexpected costs and/or forgoing treatment because of an inability to pay first-dollar costs out of their own pockets. The good news is that a health savings account can help alleviate these concerns. When employers provide a sizable (and tax-deductible) contribution to an employee’s HSA, it can provide employees with first-dollar expense coverage and, over time, help them to build a healthcare nest egg so that they’re truly prepared for the unexpected if and when it occurs.