Gametracker: Arizona Wildcats vs. Colorado Buffaloes

TUCSON — Las Vegas oddsmakers have made No. 21 Arizona a 17-point favorite over Colorado in Saturday night’s Pac-12 matchup.

But you’d never know that by listening to Arizona coach Rich Rodriguez, although CU still seeks its first conference victory.

As coaches are apt to do, Rodriguez prefers to focus on the Buffaloes’ highlights: narrow defeats to Oregon State, California and UCLA. The latter two battles extended to double overtime.

“They’re close; they’re right there in every game,” Rodriguez told the Arizona Daily Star when asked about the Buffs (2-7, 0-6 Pac-12).

“Colorado is averaging 30 more yards per game than their opponents, which is a big stat when you look at it,” he added. “They play really, really hard. And they have some challenging schemes. They do a lot of stuff. For our defense, it’s a challenge to recognize formations and schemes and how to attack it.”

Arizona (6-2, 3-2) has much to play for in the game (6 p.m., Pac-12 Network). The Wildcats are still challenging for the Pac-12’s South Division title and hold the only victory over Oregon, a headline-grabbing 31-24 win over the then No. 2 Ducks in Eugene, Ore.

Arizona aims to make amends for last weekend’s 17-7 loss to UCLA, the only game this season in which the Wildcats failed to score at least 26 points. And much is being made here of Saturday marking Arizona’s 100th homecoming.

A matchup to watch is Colorado junior receiver Nelson Spruce against Arizona safety Will Parks, who likely will cover Spruce when the Buffs standout lines up in the slot.

“Those are the matchups you look for — to play against some of the best receivers out there,” Parks said to the Arizona Daily Star. “(Spruce is) definitely one of them. I’m looking forward to it.”

Colorado’s defense will be without starting sophomore free safety Chidobe Awuzie. CU announced prior to the game that Awuzie had lacerated a kidney during a practice this week and is done for the season.

Sophomore starting strong safety Tedric Thompson (concussion Oct. 25 against UCLA) also is out.

Another sophomore, linebacker Addison Gillam (viral infection), has returned.

Arizona star receiver Austin Hill (concussion) is expected to play.

Temperatures in Tucson are expected to reach the low-to-mid 80s by mid-afternoon but should cool to the 70s by kickoff.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler