In order to reduce breast cancer incidence and mortality rates, Obamacare plans on providing some people with drugs at no out-of-pocket costs. According to the Department of Health and Human Services, women who have an increased risk for the disease based on genetics and other factors might be eligible for free preventive medications.

Under the latest set of guidelines, certain drugs, such as tamoxifen and raloxifene, will be categorized as preventive medications under President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act. Women who have an elevated risk of breast cancer can get access to these drugs without paying co-pays or co-insurance.

"We are making significant advancements in combating this disease - and for women who are shown to be at a higher relative risk for breast cancer, today, access to early treatments can improve their health," said HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius reported by USA Today.

The decision to make these drugs accessible at no cost came after recommendations from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. The task force, which is composed of a panel of experts, wanted clinicians to provide these preventive drugs for women who have a higher risk of developing the disease. The experts reviewed research and concluded that these drugs have the potential to prevent breast cancer from developing in high-risk women. The task force and the government agency hope that these new guidelines will improve breast cancer mortality rates. Preventive measures can reduce the number of diagnoses and they can also catch cancers early on and improve survival rates.

"We've known that we can reduce the risk of breast cancer for women at high risk. But despite the knowledge and availability there is little traction in the clinical and patient community [for these drugs]," Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, the deputy chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society, stated reported by TIME. "For some women, the question may have been cost and affordability. For that segment of the population, this might make a difference."

The new guidelines apply for plans or policy years that start one year after the guidelines were issued. According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid services, "non-grandfathered group health plans and non-grandfathered health insurance coverage offered in the individual or group market will be required to cover such medications for applicable women without cost sharing subject to reasonable medical management."