Nicks and bruises are starting to build up, yet the Broncos are hanging in there with a week left before the bye. A lot of coaches say “next man up,” but Denver has had the depth to have little drop-off.

The big scare out of Sunday’s game was a back injury to DeMarcus Ware in the first half. After the game, Ware said “his back locked up” and he thought he would be OK.

Coach Gary Kubiak said all he knows at this point is that Ware’s back was bothering him. He will have a better idea on Ware’s status going forward after he talks to the trainers Monday afternoon.

Pick 6: The best place-kickers in NFL history

Ware was carted off after suffering a noncontact tweak of his back trying to make an adjustment on a Raiders’ screen play.

Reserve outside linebackers Shaquil Barrett and Shane Ray stepped up, both notching sacks to maintain the Broncos’ dominant pass-rush status.

Ware wasn’t the only one. Cornerback Aqib Talib (ankle), safety Omar Bolden (foot) and running back Juwan Thompson (hamstring) all left the game with injuries.

Kubiak said Talib was sore Monday and considered his status day-to-day. Talib was hobbled by his ankle throughout the game and was spelled by cornerback Kayvon Webster. Talib received in-game treatment and returned for about 15 plays. .

Webster came up big in his absence. He had a key pass deflection on a deep pass to Andre Holmes late in the fourth quarter when the Raiders were only down 9-7. If he doesn’t make that play, the game could have had a different outcome.

Kubiak said Bolden was battling his plantar fasciitis that has been ailing him since Week 1, but he thought he would be fine.

Thompson had a nice 16-yard reception and Kubiak said the plan was to get him the ball more, but he hurt his hamstring limiting that luxury.

Also of note, tackle Tyler Polumbus played more snaps than Ryan Harris at left tackle due to Harris’ lingering knee injury. Guard Max Garcia also played limited snaps as a reserve tackle.

Cameron Wolfe: 303-954-1891, cwolfe@denverpost.com or @CameronWolfe