GPB Capital Holdings, LLC (GPB Capital), a New York-based private equity firm, today announced that it has closed an investment in ITelagen, LLC (ITelagen), a healthcare IT company that provides electronic health records (EHR) solutions and support to physicians and medical practices.

The investment is the first of several planned in 2015 to support the growth and expansion of ITelagen's suite of software and hosting services enabling the medical community to implement and comply with new EHR requirements.

Headquartered in Jersey City, New Jersey, ITelagen helps small, medium and large physician groups and medical practices in the U.S. meet requirements mandated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. ITelagen provides medical practices and leading EHR platforms with certified technology support and hosting services that ensure both maximum system availability and security in a cost effective way.

“With increased regulatory pressure and a growing number of healthcare facilities implementing new EHR systems, our market is poised for tremendous growth, and we are particularly well-positioned to become the industry leader,” said John O’Keefe, CEO of ITelagen. "As we prepare for our next phase of growth, we couldn't be more enthusiastic to be partnering with GPB, a firm that shares our vision and commitment to customers. They are a trusted partner that provides our leadership team with exceptional financial and industry expertise.”

ITelagen's technology platform ensures that client applications are running at optimal levels and that data is secure through 24/7 support and system monitoring. Its cloud-based system manages patient’s EHRs, as well as assists with coding and billing records, medical and insurance claims, and categorizing insurance collections.

GPB's capital investment comes as healthcare providers face mandates via the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 to demonstrate the "meaningful use" of electronic health records practices in 2015 or face financial penalties.

"The healthcare industry is undergoing a significant transformation, and technology providers like ITelagen are playing a crucial role in making the industry more efficient,” said Mike Frost, director, Managed IT Services, at GPB Capital. “They provide a well-defined offering of value-added IT and EHR solutions that not only help demonstrate meaningful use, but also help to protect patient data by duplicating the rigorous security standards used in the financial services industry. This is the first of several investments we will make in the Managed IT Services space this year, and we see ITelagen's platform being the foundation upon which will build as the market demand for solutions grows.”

Dave Gentile, CEO of GPB Capital added: "The team at ITelagen has built an outstanding company with a well-deserved reputation for quality, innovation, and customer service. It has demonstrated a track record of robust growth, innovation and has consistently developed strong partnerships with its customers. This is precisely the type of company and management team we look to partner with at GPB, and we are pleased to have this opportunity to be a part of their next expansion phase.”

About GPB Capital Holdings, LLC

GPB Capital Holdings is a New York-based private equity firm with an exclusive focus on partnering with income-producing, middle-market, portfolio companies across three broad sectors: Automotive Retail, Managed IT Services and Life Sciences. GPB Capital’s principals are experienced financial, management and accounting professionals with over 70 years of collective experience working with privately-held companies and their management teams. GPB Capital does not rely on leverage to boost returns. They partner with successful businesses and provide their portfolio company management partners with the strategic planning, managerial insight, and capital needed to enable strong businesses to achieve a new level of growth and profitability. GPB Capital Holdings, LLC is a SEC Registered Investment Advisor

About ITelagen, LLC

ITelagen® redefines Healthcare IT for medical practices by providing electronic health records (EHR) as part of an entire back-office solution that includes unlimited onsite & remote technical support for all of your staff and secure hosting of your patient data. More than just desktop technicians, ITelagen provides clients a complete healthcare technology team made up of CIOs, engineers, and healthcare EHR experts. With ITelagen, customers have all the benefits of their very own fully staffed IT Department, without the expense of an in-house staff. By combining certified EHR experts with IT and hosting, ITelagen becomes the single point of contact and “One-Stop Shop for EHR®” for IT and EHR infrastructure, all for a flat monthly subscription fee.