ALBANY, N.Y.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Transparency Market Research announces the release of a report titled “Urgent Care Centers Market (Illness, Injury, Physical, Vaccination, Diagnostic and Screening) - Global Industry Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends and Forecast, 2014 - 2020”. The global urgent care centers market was valued at US$23.5 billion in 2013 and is expected grow at a 3.8% CAGR from 2014 to 2020 to reach US$30.5 billion in 2020.

Browse Report: http://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/urgent-care-centers-market.html

Primary Growth Drivers

Urgent care centers (UCCs) have underwent a remarkable growth over the last decade as they overcome the barrier of longer waiting times for healthcare delivery at emergency departments and primary care centers. UCCs also avoid the drawback of limited access to after-hours care at hospitals and other healthcare facilities. One of the important factors driving the UCCs market is the constant growth in the number of insured population. Growing health insurance coverage in the U.S. predicts an increase in demand for urgent care services. Patients insured under private policies are observed to more likely opt for treatment at urgent care centers than at emergency response or other hospital settings. The Affordable Care Act (2010) has introduced insurance cover for additional 32 million people in 2014. The changes introduced by the Act would be crucial to UCCs creating such facilities as a standard for affordable public health care.

Request Sample: http://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/sample/sample.php?flag=S&rep_id=2254

Segmentation

This UCCs market is segmented based on the major service types offered. The UCCs services include services for moderate illness, routine vaccination, injury and trauma, physical, diagnostic and screening and monitoring. Geographically, North America, Europe, Asia Pacific and Rest of the World together comprise the global urgent care centers market. Among these regional markets, in 2013, North America UCC market accounted for the largest share globally.

Press Release: http://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/pressrelease/urgent-care-centers-market.htm

Other Report:

U.S. Vaccine Market: http://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/us-vaccine-market.html

About Transparency Market Research

Transparency Market Research (TMR) is a U.S.-based market intelligence company driven by high-pedigree consultants and researchers. TMR leverages its Syndicated Research, Custom Research, and Market Consulting expertise to help businesses make accurate decisions. TMR’s exclusive blend of quantitative forecasting and trends analysis draws on proprietary data sources and techniques, while their data repository is continuously updated to reflect the latest trends.