Should it be a crime to deliberately lie during a political campaign? Tell us what you think in the comments below

WASHINGTON, D.C. - An Ohio case to be argued before the U.S. Supreme Court could help topple laws around the nation that make it a crime to deliberately lie about candidates during a political campaign.

The debate on whether Ohio’s election law violates free speech has made unlikely allies of the anti-abortion Susan B. Anthony List and the abortion-rights advocate American Civil Liberties Union, and will likely pit the state of Ohio against itself in arguing over the law’s constitutionality.

Earlier this month, the Supreme Court agreed to decide whether the Susan B. Anthony List can pursue its effort to overturn Ohio’s law even though a complaint against the group was withdrawn when the candidate it targeted during the 2010 election - single-term Cincinnati-area Democratic congressman Steve Driehaus - lost his reelection.

Ohio State University election law expert Daniel Tokaji says the litigation “could ultimately become a really important case on false campaign speech and whether it can be regulated” if the Supreme Court decides the Susan B. Anthony List has standing to challenge the law. The case will be scheduled for oral arguments this spring, with a decision expected in June.

The Susan B. Anthony List claimed the Affordable Care Act that Driehaus backed would permit taxpayer-funded abortions. Driehaus filed an Ohio Elections Commission complaint when the group tried to publicize that claim on a billboard as part of a nationwide campaign to attack Affordable Care Act backers on the issue.

Driehaus and other anti-abortion Democrats supported the bill only after President Barack Obama agreed to an executive order that specified insurance plans in the health care exchanges would not use tax dollars for abortion, except in cases of rape, incest or when the life of woman would be endangered.

Obama’s gesture did not mollify many anti-abortion groups. As the 2010 election approached, organizations like the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops insisted the health care law would still allow tax dollars to be used for abortion despite the executive order. Other anti-abortion religious groups, like the Catholic Health Association of the United States and the Leadership Conference of Women Religious said it would not, as did political fact-finding organizations like PolitiFact.

Driehaus filed his complaint when the Susan B. Anthony List attempted to buy a billboard that said: “Shame on Steve Driehaus! Driehaus voted FOR taxpayer-funded abortion.”

“Among my west side constituents and my lifelong neighbors, falsely accusing me of voting for a health care reform bill that included taxpayer funding of abortions was tantamount to falsely accusing me of a heinous crime or a grievous act of corruption, in that it portrayed me to the community where I have spent my life - inaccurately - as not the person or the public official I had claimed to be,” said an affidavit from Driehaus.

As it happened, the billboard never went up. The owner of the billboard decided not to accept the ad after Driehaus’ lawyer threatened legal action. Legal papers later filed by Driehaus say the Susan B. Anthony List continued making the disputed claims in political mailings and a radio ad that accused Driehaus of threatening the organization with “a criminal statute in a desperate attempt to silence us,” and claimed he didn’t want voters “to know the truth.”

The Susan B. Anthony List filed a federal lawsuit that challenged the Ohio election law on free speech grounds, which persisted after Driehaus withdrew his election commission complaint upon losing to Cincinnati-area Republican Steve Chabot.

The group claims Ohio’s criminalization of false political speech violates First Amendment rights in a similar fashion to the Stolen Valor Act, which the Supreme Court overturned in 2012. In United States v. Alvarez, it ruled the Stolen Valor Act, which criminalized lying about receiving military honors or decorations, violated constitutional free speech rights.

The Susan B. Anthony List’s appeal to to the Supreme Court says nearly a third of states have laws that prohibit “false” statements in political campaigns, and such laws insert “state bureaucrats and judges into political debates,” “charging them with separating truth from oft-alleged campaign ‘lies.’” It argued that laws barring “false” speech can be “politicized, manipulated and abused, thereby causing profound harm to truthful speakers - and the entire democratic process.”

“Such statutes are almost certainly unconstitutional, yet they play a troubling, harassing role in every political campaign in those states,” said a brief the group filed with the Supreme Court. “Speakers threatened by these laws do not and will not admit that their statements are false; their concern is that their political opponents will contend otherwise, imposing litigation costs and political burdens as a penalty for the speech.”

The group’s allies in the case include the American Civil Liberties Union - which typically opposes abortion restrictions. ACLU has filed legal documents that buttress the Susan B. Anthony List’s First Amendment arguments against Ohio’s law.

“Speech is rarely black and white - oftentimes whether a statement is true or false may be a matter of opinion,” ACLU of Ohio Legal Director James Hardiman said in a press release on the case. “If the government silences one side of the debate, the public is less informed and others may be fearful of criticizing elected officials. The answer to unpopular speech is not less, but more speech.”

Lower courts found the Susan B. Anthony List lacks legal standing to challenge the law because it wasn’t prosecuted for a violation. The state of Ohio urged the Supreme Court not to consider the case because the anti-abortion group couldn’t show its free speech rights were threatened, or that the commission would have prosecuted it for a violation. It also contends that because the law only bans lies, the group has no grounds to challenge the law since it insists its statements about Driehaus were truthful.

“This case’s unique context makes it a poor vehicle to review any broader justiciability principles,” it argued.

But even as Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine defends the state law before the Supreme Court, he plans to file a separate legal brief that will challenge the law’s constitutionality, as he did in a related challenge to Ohio’s elections law.

“An Attorney General has a special duty, as an officer of the Court and representative of the public, to acknowledge when the government’s side might be wrong, and especially when a statute might be unconstitutional,” said a 2012 brief he filed in U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio. The brief went onto say Ohio’s law “fails to provide adequate safeguards (including prompt judicial review) against the chilling of political speech.”

The DeWine brief was authored by former Federal Election Commission Chairman Bradley Alan Smith, now a law school professor at Capital University in Columbus. The case involved a conservative group’s claims that its social media postings about a Cincinnati ballot issue were improperly constrained by the law. The brief argued the election law harms those who want to speak out by requiring them to use time and resources responding to a complaint, and doesn’t provide a timely remedy for those whose speech might be improperly curtailed by a complaint that turns out to be unfounded.

“Ohio’s machinery for policing the substance of political speech will need to be recalibrated to remove the threat of inappropriate government burdens on Ohioans who desire to speak their minds at election time,” it concludes.

Ohio Democrats are critical of DeWine’s stance in the case. Ohio Democratic Party spokesman Brian Hester says DeWine has opposed the law on free speech grounds since the Ohio Elections Commission ruled that he made false claims about his opponent’s record during his successful campaign for Green County Prosecutor in the 1970s.

When DeWine disputed those findings and mounted a legal challenge to the law, courts upheld the law’s constitutionality, identifying the Commission's role in such proceedings as "somewhat similar to that of a grand jury," in that it refers its conclusions to local prosecutors for action if it finds a violation occurred.

“It is a very compelling state interest to promote honesty in the election of public officers,” said the 1978 Ohio Court of Appeals ruling in DeWine v. Ohio Elections Commission. “Freedom of speech does not include a right to purposely, with knowledge of its falsity, publish a false statement about a candidate for public office with the intent to promote the election or defeat of such candidate.”

DeWine’s Democratic opponent in this year’s contest for attorney general, former Hamilton County Commissioner and Cincinnati council member David Pepper, is also critical of DeWine’s viewpoint. Pepper spokesman Peter Koltak said Pepper “would absolutely defend the long-established law that requires politicians to tell Ohio voters the truth.”

Hester also noted that the views of Capital University’s Smith, who authored DeWine’s 2012 legal brief, are sufficiently controversial that they provoked an opposition campaign when Smith was a candidate to become dean of Case Western Reserve University’s law school in 2011.

Smith started a group called the Center for Competitive Politics to “build a case against the regulatory system that limits individual donations to candidates, reins in the role of outside groups, and bans union and corporate contributions to political parties,” in the words of a Politico article about its founding.

His biography on the group’s website cites a New York Times story that called him the “intellectual powerhouse” of the movement to roll back campaign finance restrictions.

In a column about the upcoming Supreme Court case on the Center for Competitive Politics website, Smith argues Ohio’s law “makes a sham out of the idea of due process,” and that complaints made under the law are usually dropped after the the election because they’ve already served their purpose of silencing critics.

“Ohio’s false statements law is much more pernicious than many realize,” he says. “Indeed, what’s fascinating is that there is no question that the SBA List ads that prompted this suit are true, yet SBA List was still forced to defend itself before the Ohio Election Commission and had to consider the possibility of criminal penalties before speaking.”

Driehaus continues to claim the ads were false in a defamation case he’s pursuing against the Susan B. Anthony List. The U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio dismissed his claim, but Driehaus has appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, arguing that the lower court’s rationale for dismissing the case - that “associating a political candidate with a mainstream political position, even if false, cannot constitute defamation” - has no basis in constitutional precedent.

“The challenged statements are capable of defamatory meaning,” says a brief from Driehaus. “They falsely made Driehaus out to be a hypocrite who abandoned his principles and his constituents by voting to spend tax dollars on abortions.”