Get Covered America tour stops at Tri-C West to promote the upcoming deadline to sign up for Obamacare

CLEVELAND, Ohio – As part of preparations for the second open enrollment period for health insurance on the federal exchange, Enroll America is recruiting and training new certified application counselors to help people through the sign-up process. The pro-Affordable Care Act organization hopes to recruit 2,000 counselors.

Enroll America is working with UHCAN (Universal Health Care Action Network) to recruit and train volunteer counselors in Cleveland. An informational event will be held from 9 to 10:30 a.m. Friday at the Get Covered America's northeast Ohio office, 13437 Cedar Rd., Cleveland Heights. Preregistration is suggested at Get Covered America's web site, getcoveredamerica.org/events but people can also show up. For information, call Chris at (614) 636-0385.

Those who are unable to attend Friday's session can log into a make-up webinar at 6:30 p.m. Wednesday, Oct. 29. Go to Get Covered America's web site for information.

The schedule for group training sessions and individual online training will be provided at a later date.

According to data from Enroll America, people who received in-person assistance were more than twice as likely to successfully complete enrollment as those who attempted to enroll online without help.

Ohio has received less money per uninsured resident than most states to help with the sign-up efforts. Because of that, more volunteer certified application counselors are being recruited to add to the ranks of navigators (whose salaries are covered by federal grants) and other counselors. Certified application counselors are affiliated with hospitals, community health centers, social service agencies and other non-profit, non-governmental organizations.

Other recruitment events in Ohio included a session in Columbus on Wednesday and a session in Cincinnati on Thursday.

Enroll America also is joining with the Ohio Association of Foodbanks to implement an online scheduling tool that will allow people to schedule appointments with in-person assisters in their area.