Broncos right offensive tackle Michael Schofield has had trouble giving up sacks left and right. After Schofield allowed pressure that led to quarterback Brock Osweiler’s second interception, Tyler Polumbus came in for Schofield for the rest of the game.

“We play this game because we want to play football, and I haven’t been playing football for a while,” Polumbus said. “It was fun. I was fired up. I don’t think it’s necessarily a knock on Mike. I certainly enjoyed the opportunity.”

DeMarcus Ware injured.

Broncos outside linebacker DeMarcus Ware had his first sack since Nov. 8 but couldn’t finish the game. He left with a left knee injury. Ware missed five games this season with a structural issue in his back. Teammates believe Ware should be in position to play in the postseason, benefiting, like safety Darian Stewart (hamstring), from the bye week.

Darian Stewart aggravates hamstring injury.

Safety Darian Stewart reinjured his hamstring breaking up a pass intended for San Diego Chargers tight end Antonio Gates in the first quarter. Stewart was visibly upset, throwing his helmet off in frustration before walking to the bench. He was listed as “questionable” to return but never did after being downgraded to “out” early in the third quarter.

After the game Stewart, said he thought he was 100 percent leading up to the game, but hamstrings are notoriously tricky injuries to recover from.

“I was scared for a minute,” Stewart said. “I have two weeks to recover, so I’ll be back then. I have strength in it. It’s just something I have to keep an eye on.”

Stewart practiced in full the week leading up to Sunday’s game after missing the Broncos’ Dec. 20 loss at Pittsburgh because of the injury.

Limited linebacker.

Brandon Marshall started Sunday after suffering a sprained right ankle against Cincinnati, but he didn’t stay in the game long. Marshall saw a few snaps in the first quarter but did not get any game action after that.

“It just wasn’t right. I knew if I continued to play, I would hurt the team,” Marshall said.

Todd Davis got the bulk of snaps in Marshall’s place. Marshall said he plans to be ready to play after the bye week.

Gary Kubiak’s historic W.

The Broncos’ victory gave coach Gary Kubiak a spot in the team’s history books.

The Broncos’ 12 victories this season tied him with Red Miller (1977) for the most by a Broncos coach in his first year with the team. And it made Kubiak one of only three coaches, joining Miller (1977) and John Fox (2011), to win a divisional title in his first season.

The Broncos clinched their fifth consecutive AFC West title and their 15th all time.

Danny Trevathan: teeth of D.

Linebacker Danny Trevathan couldn’t forget his last meeting with the Chargers, on Dec. 6. He intercepted Philip Rivers, racing for a touchdown, leaving the Broncos 5-0 when the defense scores. Trevathan also suffered a concussion on a hit that cost him two upper back teeth on the right side of his mouth. he swallowed one and spit out the other.

“It’s just teeth, man,” Trevathan said. “I didn’t even know it was a big deal until DeMarcus (Ware) told me I was bleeding. It’s fine now. They put some bone in there.”

With Marshall (ankle) limited, Trevathan finished with 10 tackles.

Footnotes.

The Broncos’ split personality didn’t divide by halves, but by quarters Sunday. After compiling 237 yards and six first-quarter first downs, the Broncos gained 42 yards in the second quarter. . Tight end Owen Daniels (offense), defensive end Vance Walker (defense) and cornerback Kayvon Webster (special teams) were selected as game-day captains for the Broncos.