Georgia Insurance Commissioner Ralph Hudgens has garnered national attention for his comparison of pre-existing medical conditions to a car wreck that is "your fault," but his spokesman revealed today that Hudgens himself is among the millions of Americans with a pre-existing condition.

Hudgens is a prostate cancer survivor. He had surgery to remove the cancer 11 years ago when he was 60 and still gets checked regularly.

“He fully understands why it’s not somebody’s fault (he or she) has a pre-existing condition because he has one,” said Hudgens spokesman Glenn Allen.

The revelation comes amid a walk-back by the commissioner of the statement last month at a GOP luncheon. He told us Wednesday that he used a “really poor analogy” and “nothing could be further from the truth. ... It’s not the person’s fault they have a pre-existing condition.”

Under the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies must not discriminate against customers -- via higher premiums or cancellations -- based on pre-existing conditions. Hudgens was lamenting the fact that insurance companies say this will double the cost of insurance.

But even in a non-Obamacare world, Hudgens would not be at risk. He was under the state employees' plan, as a state senator, when he had the surgery and he remains so today. If he were to switch coverage after leaving public life, he would be eligible for Medicare.

On a conference all organized by the liberal Washington-based group Americans United for Change to take umbrage with Hudgens' comments, state Rep. Karen Bennett, D-Stone Mountain, said Hudgens' cancer surgery revelation "supports the need for insurance under the Affordable Care Act" for people in similar situations to his.



Among those on the press call was Keisha Kuma, a Georgian who has multiple sclerosis and has struggled to get coverage since her husband changed jobs in 2010 and the family had to change plans.

Hudgens' comments have been picked up by left-leaning national media outlets, including Mother Jones, Salon, Esquire and the Huffington Post. The outcry has fired up Democrats to challenge Hudgens for re-election in 2014, said state Sen. Nan Orrock, D-Atlanta, on the press conference call: