Buy Photo Dr. Mark Apfelbaum, Director of the Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory at NewYork-Presbyterian/Lawrence Hospital, stands in the new catheterization room at Lawrence Hospital Center May 27, 2015. (Photo: Joe Larese/The Journal News)Buy Photo

Two Lower Hudson Valley hospitals spent $14.5 million to open new cardiac departments this year despite declines in patients requiring treatment, state data show.

Lawrence Hospital Center in Bronxville opened an $8.6 million cardiac catheterization laboratory last month; 10 miles away, White Plains Hospital spent $5.9 million to construct its second cardiac catheterization lab.

Read more : Westchester's cardiac abuse clean-up

Search data : Average cardiac surgery Medicare costs

The projects underscore the increasing competition for cardiac patients in Westchester County at a time when state and federal regulators are focused on reducing overuse of some cardiac surgeries and exams.

A critical factor is the push north by New York City health systems, said Dr. Robert Amler, vice president for government affairs at New York Medical College in Valhalla. In the past three years, they have merged or partnered with more than a dozen hospitals in Westchester and Rockland counties.

"They're trying to get capital, and trying to get large enough so they can weather the current market conditions," Amler said.

As for the argument that increased hospital competition will reduce medical bills and save taxpayers health-care costs, Amler said those results have yet to materialize.

"There's the potential for cost savings as we get more efficient in providing care, but I'm sorry to say this is as yet an untested model," he said. "We are all living in the midst of a very large experiment."

Lawrence Hospital is now part of NewYork-Presbyterian Healthcare System, and White Plains Hospital has partnered with Montefiore Health System.

State Health Department officials approved the two cardiac projects as some related treatments, including angioplasties to open narrowed arteries, often combined with stent placement — or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) — dropped about 20 percent, from 1,700 to 1,400, between 2008 and 2012, the most recent data show. (See chart)

The reduction is also a result of changes in technology and medical treatments, said Dr. Richard Kay, a cardiologist who lives in Briarcliff.

"Once we've got data that says where it's useful, we've stopped using it for the indications that are no longer applicable," he said.

Kay belongs to the ColumbiaDoctors Medical Group, formerly Cardiology Consultants of Westchester. He has been with the cardiology practice for 30 years, and declined to discuss its prior relationship with Westchester Medical Center, the subject of a Medicare fraud probe that ended this month with the hospital paying $18.8 million to settle a civil complaint.

Lawrence and White Plains hospitals also sought to fill an expected void as Westchester Medical Center started in 2008 to shift more resources toward more advanced heart procedures, such as open-heart surgery, state Health Department data show. The Valhalla-based hospital had been the angioplasty leader in the Lower Hudson Valley. Then, from 2008 to 2012, the number of annual procedures dropped from 1,277 to 488.

See : Cost of Medicare and Medicaid fraud, waste and abuse cases

Reducing travel times for heart-attack patients was another reason for the project at Lawrence Hospital, said Dr. Mark Apfelbaum, director of the cardiac lab there.

"It is those sickest patients that are getting the biggest benefit here," he said. "There is a significant population that we're able to address where we're making a clear-cut difference in their prognosis and outcomes by having this lab available."

In 2012, about 700 patients from Westchester traveled to NewYork-Presbyterian's Columbia University Medical Center for PCI treatments, which Apfelbaum said added more than an hour to some cases. Lawrence Hospital plans to treat that population in its new lab, state records show.

As New York City hospitals pushed north, Westchester Medical has also expanded into Rockland and Dutchess counties. This month, it finalized a joint venture with Bon Secours Charity Health System, which runs Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern.

Charity Health also runs Bon Secours Community Hospital in Port Jervis, N.Y., and St. Anthony Community Hospital in Warwick, N.Y., along with several other related health-care providers.

Westchester Medical now has a 60 percent economic interest in Charity Health, a subsidiary of Bon Secours Health System, a nonprofit organization based in Maryland.

In 2014, Westchester Medical purchased the bankrupt St. Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie. That site now operates as MidHudson Regional Hospital of Westchester Medical Center.

The Affordable Care Act, in 2010, along with new regulations that seek to reduce health-care spending, is also using incentives and penalties to shift less-serious treatments away from hospitals into outpatient settings. (Think urgent-care centers and health clinics popping up in shopping plazas and grocery stores.)

For example, Medicare and Medicaid are reducing reimbursement rates for treatments at emergency rooms, which have long been a primary source of revenue for hospitals, to drive patients to urgent-care clinics. To counter that loss, many hospitals have invested in sophisticated and costly treatments, such as cardiology and oncology.

Amler, who is also a public health professor and dean at New York Medical College in Valhalla, noted the number of hospitals performing PCI also grows as the cost of technology and expertise involved becomes less prohibitive.

"It is a natural and welcome transition when technology gradually diffuses to a broader array of providers," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1HPO8so