VAIL — They rode for Amy. Margaret. Bob. Greg. Olivia. Mary. Mom. Dad. Nana.

And the more than 2,900 skiers and snowboarders who blanketed Vail’s slopes in a sea of pink tutus and tights on Saturday raised almost $700,000 for the Shaw Regional Cancer Center.

In five years, the festooned fundraisers, who every spring paint Vail pink on a sunny Saturday, have raised $2.4 million for the cancer center’s Spirit of Survival program, which delivers free fitness classes, nutrition courses, acupuncture, family counseling, emotional support programs and regular outings and events for those who have lived in cancer’s shadow.

“All the things we need that insurance doesn’t cover,” said Robin Specthrie, who personally raised $19,106 in her fifth year of fundraising for Pink Vail, helping her 80-plus teammates on team “Double Stuffed” top $40,000 to lead this year’s 224 Pink Vail teams. (Runner up team “Saving Second Base” harvested more than $38,000.)

Specthrie, dazzling in head-to-boot pink frill, feathers and fur, was the top fundraiser of this year’s Pink Vail party, which draws thousands to Colorado’s largest ski area for what is billed as the “biggest ski day to conquer cancer.”

“This money takes care of the people who need it,” said Specthrie, who was diagnosed with breast cancer almost 15 years ago.

Across Vail Mountain, the pink party raged. It was the biggest Pink Vail ever, with the number of participants, donations, volunteers and dollars raised reaching all-time highs. Like spawning salmon, the pink-hued masses skied across the hill’s vast network of decks and restaurants, where bands kept everyone dancing. A country hoedown raged at the Two Elk eatery atop China Bowl. A circus theme took over the 11,000-foot Wildwood Smokehouse. Mid-Vail hosted a colorful luau. At the end of the day, the party peaked at the mountaintop Eagle’s Nest complex. Thousands of festive revelers skied down at the same time to end the day, wearing bibs custom-painted with the names of survivors and loved ones.

The costumes were crazy. Pink wedding dresses were popular, especially with the fellas. Ben Kullman wore pink tights and skied in vintage rear-entry boots and long, skinny skis, all painted neon pink He won third place in the costume contest.

“Dressing up, having fun, raising money. What a great event,” said Kullman, his pink mohawk almost standing as tall as his old-school skis. “It’s a good cause, too. Everything stays here in the valley.”

Tom Kleinhardt dyed his beard pink and wore an oversized T-shirt that read “I’m Skiing For My Wife.” His wife Janet spent a lot of time at the Shaw Regional Cancer Center a few years ago. A cancer survivor, she still goes to Pilates there every Monday.

“Nowhere else in the world can you see something like this,” said Kleinhardt, sipping a beer amid a sea of pink atop the mountain. “This event is not duplicated anywhere. People in this valley are dedicated and committed to sharing. This is the Vail Valley at its best right here.”

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or @jasonblevins

Pink Vail 2016 by the numbers:

Participants: 2,926

Volunteers: 344

Donations: 5,291

Teams: 224

Age range: infant to 88

Cancer survivors: 211

States participating: 46

Dollars raised: $698,117

Five-year total dollars raised: $2,398,117