Justice Jane Marum Roush was a judge on the Fairfax County Circuit Court before she was appointed to the state Supreme Court . (Matt McClain/The Washington Post)

Most of the legislators ordered back to the Capitol to revamp Virginia’s congressional map will arrive Monday bent on remaking the state’s highest court instead.

A federal court ordered the General Assembly to draw a new map by Sept. 1 to replace one deemed to have been illegally gerrymandered along racial lines. But virtually no one expects the special session to produce one.

Any plan agreeable to the ­Republican-led House and Senate is widely expected to be vetoed by Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D), which would prompt a panel of judges to take over the job.

“I have not talked to anybody in either party that doesn’t think this thing is going to wind up with a three-judge panel drawing the district,” Senate Minority Leader Richard L. Saslaw (D-Fairfax) said. “I don’t even know why we’re even going to Richmond.”

Republicans did not see a reason for the session, either — until McAuliffe inadvertently gave them one that they found far more appealing than mapmaking. By appointing Fairfax Circuit Court Judge Jane Marum Roush to the state Supreme Court two weeks after he called the special session, McAuliffe handed Republicans a chance to unseat her and one-up him.

Republicans appear to have the muscle to remove Roush, even if, with the potential defection of one or two moderate Senate Republicans, they fall short of their goal of installing Virginia Court of Appeals Judge Rossie D. Alston Jr. in her place.

[GOP legislator hints he will not go along with party’s plan to replace Roush]

The removal of a sitting Supreme Court justice would be unprecedented in modern Virginia history and represent a new low in relations between McAuliffe and Republican leaders.

The General Assembly usually elects judges, but governors may fill vacancies when the legislature is not in session, as McAuliffe did in Roush’s case July 27. Those recess appointments expire 30 days after the legislature comes back into session unless members affirm the choice by permanently electing the judges to their posts.

Had McAuliffe not called the special session, that clock would not have started ticking until the legislature convened for its regular session in January. Republicans still could have moved to oust Roush then, but it would have been tougher at that point because she would have been on the bench for months.

Realizing that McAuliffe had endangered his court pick by calling legislators back to Richmond, his top staff searched for ways to cancel the session after he had formally ordered it in July, according to four people with direct knowledge of the matter. That, too, would have been a first in Virginia, although governors of other states have called off special sessions.

McAuliffe ultimately decided against canceling, according to the four, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss private deliberations.

Christina Nuckols, a spokeswoman for McAuliffe, did not dispute that people suggested canceling the session, but she said that McAuliffe never pursued that option. “The governor received advice from a variety of individuals and certainly appreciates and listens to all of that advice, but he never even made the slightest gesture in that direction,” she said.

“It’s extraordinarily regrettable that Republicans would attempt to fire a highly qualified justice with overwhelming support in the legal community and across the commonwealth,” she added. “The governor continues to call for full and fair consideration of this fine justice.”

McAuliffe and Republican leaders have fought before, most bitterly over the governor’s thwarted effort to expand Medi­caid under the Affordable Care Act. But there were differences in policy and ideology behind that battle.

When it comes to the Supreme Court, Republicans have no beef with McAuliffe’s pick. They express a preference for Alston, whose résumé includes a stint with a right-to-work group. But their chief issue is one of protocol: McAuliffe did not consult with House Speaker William J. Howell (R-Stafford) or Senate Majority Leader Thomas K. Norment Jr. (R-James City) ahead of time, nor even give them a courtesy call once he had made his choice.

The perceived misstep drew a public rebuke from former governor L. Douglas Wilder (D) and private criticism from several fellow Democrats. McAuliffe has dismissed the GOP’s complaints as a “political temper tantrum.”

[Doug Wilder blasts McAuliffe’s handling of Supreme Court pick]

The administration acknowledges that it did not contact GOP leaders but has said that it was no secret Roush’s appointment was in the works and that Republicans voiced no objections.

Nuckols said that Roush called Howell and Norment while she was still one of several candidates in the mix. Howell spoke with Roush in May and said that he had heard good things about her, that Del. David B. Albo (R-Fairfax) would submit a letter on her behalf and that the appointment was the governor’s prerogative, Nuckols said.

Howell does not recall the phone call, said his spokesman, Matthew Moran. Even if it happened, Moran said, the point is that the administration never discussed the appointment with Howell.

As for Norment, Nuckols said that Roush phoned the majority leader while she was being considered for the job and again on the day of her appointment but that he did not return either call.

Norment’s spokesman, Jeff Ryer, said that Norment does not remember receiving the first call and admits to ignoring the second.

“The calls customarily come beforehand, and they customarily come from the governor,” Ryer said.

[Why Republicans want to oust McAuliffe’s Supreme Court pick]

The administration did give a heads-up to Albo and another Republican legislator who had advocated for Roush’s appointment, inviting them to be present when McAuliffe announced Roush as his choice. Albo, chairman of the House Courts of Justice Committee, attended. The other was Del. Gregory D. Habeeb (R-Salem), a lawyer who has long been impressed with Roush and encouraged her to seek a spot on the state Supreme Court.

A few days before the announcement, McAuliffe’s chief of staff, Paul Reagan, called Habeeb to offer the invitation. Just returning from a vacation, Habeeb was unable to attend but told Reagan that the governor had made a great choice. Habeeb said he also cautioned Reagan to get Republican leaders on board.

“I said, ‘I hope you’ve gotten buy-in,’ and the answer was, ‘We’re good,’ ” Habeeb said.

Reagan said he recalled only that Habeeb “expressed very positive feelings about Justice Roush. I thought that was very good.”

Jenna Portnoy contributed to this report.