Along the Front Range, there were 61 child victims of sex trafficking identified last year, and at least an equal number thought to be misidentified as drug, domestic violence or runaway cases. On June 23, the latest major FBI sting occurred, rescuing 18 children and arresting 11 traffickers. This followed a similar sting less than a year before.

But what happens to the children after they are removed from sex trafficking? Though treatment of these cases is slowly improving, typically the children are handled no differently than any other juvenile criminal. First, they’re placed into a juvenile detention facility for evaluation and detoxification. This stage can last from days to months, depending on availability of beds at other “suitable” sites.

At the worst, such sites include coed group homes where girls freshly removed from sex trafficking are housed with male sex offenders. A step above is typical foster care (up to four children with no therapy), then group therapy homes. The highest current level is therapeutic foster care homes, with one or two children who are provided therapy, support, training and oversight.

However, the best outcomes result from the specialized therapeutic foster care model which incorporates foster parents, volunteers and professionals specifically trained in dealing with trauma resulting from sex trafficking. This model places each child into a stable, long-term home environment, supplies intensive therapy and a variety of other support services.

Sarah’s Home in Colorado Springs is the first and only such facility in the state. Unfortunately, their four beds are already full, but there are plans for four more. Maple Star Colorado is the child placement agency for Sarah’s Home, and is leading the development of a scalable, specialized therapeutic foster care model.

The status quo is not even close to satisfactory. Because of the lack of quality care, you and I are paying for these children to be bounced around the juvenile justice/foster care systems, usually ending up right back in “the life” when they turn 18. The growth in proper housing and services capacity is only a tiny fraction of what it needs to be if we want to solve this problem.

The best way to provide enough suitable care and improve individual outcomes is by affecting change from within the foster care system. We must: 1) increase the capacity of specialized therapeutic foster care through recruitment; 2) improve the quality of foster care by adding specialized training, support services, mentorship and oversight; 3) offer continuing assistance to survivors after they leave foster care in both personal and professional development.

A new organization is working with Maple Star’s model to pursue these goals. Blossom Care Network is building a specialized therapeutic foster care network for all children rescued from sex trafficking in Colorado. Their biggest need is qualified foster parents who are willing to complete the specialized training and make at least a one-year fostering commitment. There is a ton of information about the child sex trafficking issue on the BlossomCareNetwork.org website, including compelling first-hand video documentaries, links to related sites and different ways to get involved.

We have a moral obligation to help these mostly American children that have been enslaved against their volition. If we don’t, there is a heavy societal and economic cost. Most will return to the sex and/or drug trade after they become adults, end up incarcerated, or at best living in poverty, perpetuating this generational cycle. It is a virus that’s slowly eating away at our communities, but if we do something now, it is not too late to eradicate it.

Matt Sharratt is executive director of the Blossom Care Network.