TruPlan, the multiple-employer health plan launched in 2013 and sponsored by Meadowlands Hospital Medical Center in Secaucus, will wind down operations by year's end after failing to attract enough members beyond its core group of hospital employees to put it on a financially sustainable footing.

However, Meadowlands spokesman Al Gaburo said plans are to shift TruPlan to “dormant” status and possibly re-launch the multiple employer welfare association, or MEWA, in six months to a year, once the Affordable Care Act is fully implemented and more employers are looking for options to provide health coverage to their workers.



Gaburo said in January that Meadowlands will move its employees into a self-insured health plan backed by the hospital.



“The employees won’t really see any diminution of services and won’t experience any kind of hiccup in service going forward,” he said.



Jeanne Otersen, policy director for the Health Professionals and Allied Employees union, which represents about 300 nurses and other health care workers at Meadowlands, said the union was not notified that TruPlan is winding down or that health coverage will change in January.



“This appears to be another example of Meadowlands failing to consider the needs and concerns of its employees or to bargain with us, as they are required by law to do,” Otersen said.



She said Meadowlands has about 400 employees, and about 300 of them members of HPAE.



She said she will reach out to management of the for-profit Meadowlands and “we will make a demand for information and a demand to bargain so that we can be sure the workers will have comparable benefits if and when TruPlan shut down.”



Otersen said the union’s job is to “make sure the changeover is seamless and that people have comparable coverage and benefits without any loss in the meantime.” She added that the union will reach out to the state Department of Banking and Insurance and the state Department of Health “to find out how they will monitor the situation to assure that workers are held harmless.”



Gaburo said the goal is for TruPlan “to be placed in a dormant status at least for the time being. One of the real issues and one of the problems has been the delay in implementation of Obamacare.”



The Affordable Care Act employer mandate requiring employers with more than 50 workers to provide health insurance was supposed to take effect in 2015, but is being delayed by the Obama administration.

RELATED: Revisions to MEWA shelved until the fall as lawmakers spar over mandates



Small businesses with 50 to 99 full-time equivalent employees have to start insuring workers, or pay penalties, by 2016. Those with 100 or more will need to start providing health benefits to at least 70 percent of their full-time employees by 2015 and 95 percent by 2016



Gaburo said the Obamacare delay caused the market for health coverage to change dramatically and “at least from the standpoint of the owners of the hospital, the MEWA does not make a lot of sense right now. The idea is in the best case to make it (TruPlan) dormant and then reassess it in six months or a year and see if it makes sense” to relaunch the MEWA.



John Marshall, an actuary and TruPlan’s administrator, said the MEWA has fewer than 400 members, mostly employees of the hospital, which along with its affiliated physicians is the primary provider of health care to the members.



TruPlan got approval to begin operating from the state Department of Banking and Insurance in January 2013.



“The problem is the lack of membership,” Marshall said. “This is a self-funded organization and you need a certain critical mass to handle large claims. It became apparent we were not getting the membership that we were expecting.”



He said outside of Meadowlands, TruPlan’s membership includes about 30 employers.

“They are mostly small businesses in the Secaucus area, and most of them have just a handful of employees,” Marshall said.



The employers who belong to TruPlan were sent notices in mid-October to inform them of the wind-down and that they will need to find alternative coverage starting in January, Marshall said.



TruPlan continues to pay claims and does not expect to end the year in a deficit, Marshall said.

Click here to subscribe to the NJBIZ morning, daily and industry email news blasts



He explained that Meadowlands Hospital does not file claims with the MEWA, but instead has been receiving a capitated portion of the premiums paid by members to TruPlan in exchange for providing medical care to the members. Claims are filed by non-Meadowlands providers who deliver care that Meadowlands does not provide, including “invasive cardiac surgery, transplants and out-of-area emergencies.”



He said all other care has been provided by the hospital, which has taken on financial risk in exchange for capitated payments to cover the medical care needed by TruPlan members.



Marshall said Meadowlands was using an innovative and promising care delivery model.



“The whole concept is very good: health care groups are going to take on more risk and I think we will see a lot of that with health care reform,” Marshall said. In the case of TruPlan, “It did not work because basically we could not attract (sufficient) membership.”



In contrast to the problems at TruPlan, New Jersey’s two other well-established MEWAs (multiple employer welfare arrangements) have succeeded in attracting employer groups and growing their membership base



The Association Master Trust, founded in 1945, has about 18,000 members. The employers who join AMT belong to 16 New Jersey trade associations, including those representing fuel merchants, electricians, plumbers and veterinarians.



The Affiliated Physicians and Employers Health Plan, which is administered by QualCare, began in 2004 and provides health coverage to more than 20,000 members. In 2011 it partnered with the Employers Association of New Jersey, many of whose member employers have joined the MEWA.



Dawn Wright, vice president of QualCare, said “MEWAs are a great alternative when run appropriately and when offered through an association or sponsor that is fully committed to the program. Our MEWA, Affiliated Physicians and Employers Health Plan, has seen great success and has experienced over 80 percent growth in 2014 because we have always listened to our members and continuously offered new benefits, networks and coverages to meet their needs.



“It’s also important to have a qualified and experienced plan manager to oversee the operations of a MEWA and assist members in the management of their risk.”

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Booker defeats Bell and other Election Day results

N.J. real estate leaders react to news that Hersh will step down

Private-sector cleanup experts playing key role at Roche site