A school policy without principal

Manhattan: What if I told you your boss wanted to promote you, but if you took the position you’d lose $50,000? That’s what the city plans to tell teachers who became assistant principals in recent years or want to become assistant principals in the next few years. The city’s labor and education departments have decided that teachers who become assistant principals have not worked “continuously” and therefore are not eligible for the lump-sum payments earned during their many years without a contract, payments now agreed upon through the new contract with the UFT. Putting aside the illogical construct that working for the same city, for the same department and, very often, in the same school is not “continuous employment,” what kind of philosophy is this? We’ve all heard Mayor de Blasio and Schools Chancellor Carmen Fariña on the subject: They believe that school leaders should come from the ranks of experienced NYC teachers. Most public school educators in the city were delighted when de Blasio and Fariña expressed their beliefs, because they were so obvious and important to anyone who’s ever worked in a school. Why are we punishing the teachers who wish to stay in the city’s schools but move into a new and more challenging role?

Ernest Logan, president, Council of School Supervisors and Administrators

Give ’em hell, Harry!

Glendale: Where, oh, where is Harry Truman when you need him? That man would have sent those drones in a minute after that poor reporter had his throat cut, and Harry would have blasted ISIS off the face of the earth. I’m so disappointed in our President. Gloria Brendle

State secret

Bronx: Since his ISIS strategy has finally been revealed, I’m sure our President had stored this sensitive information in a safe place, possibly his iCloud account, for instance. Sandy Harris

Liars and liars

Brooklyn: To Voicer Larry Hoffman: Be reminded that if you accuse former President George W. Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Don Rumsfeld of lying in order to go to war, you must include our congressional leaders (Ted Kennedy and John Kerry included) and leaders of the international community as well. When you consider Obamacare, Fast and Furious, IRS, NSA and the Benghazi debacle, Bush et al. are J.V. compared to our current liar in chief. Is that simple enough? Jerry Chiappetta

Been there

Fairfield, Conn.: Let me try to understand this. We are going to train and arm the same Iraqis we trained and armed before. These are the same guys who, when they fought us, surrendered in the tens of thousands. These are the same guys who, when ISIS came in, dropped their weapons and ran like all hell, giving ISIS the arms they needed to kill and grow. So we are now going to do the same thing by training and arming these same guys. Didn’t someone once say, “Insanity is doing the same thing over and over and expecting a different result”? Sal Busciolano

Names and names

Northville, Mich.: I think it is admirable that the Daily News will no longer print the nickname of the NFL team that plays out of Washington. What about the Chiefs? Hopefully they’re next on your delete list. I also hope you stop using names like Lions, Dolphins, Jaguars, Colts and Broncos. These animals have feelings, and I think it is degrading to name teams after them. I believe team nicknames should only be inanimate objects, like Jets, Steelers, Browns. Oops, is “Browns” politically incorrect? Dave Westhoff

Honor and respect

Bayside: Names are given to streets, roads, bridges, buildings, schools and children as a means of honoring the person they are named after. Names are chosen for teams the same way — to honor and esteem. Why would you think that anyone would choose a name that would denigrate what they hope to be a winning team? Names given are a sign of honor and respect. To think differently is abhorrent. Phyllis Ecker

The sizzle and the smell

Bronx: Tad’s Steak House holds a special place in my heart because back in the 1950s, my grandfather was a barber in the Taft Hotel and, on the special days that he took me into work, we lunched at Tad’s. The garlic bread and sizzling steak from the open grill made my day even more memorable. Thanks for reminding me! Chris Arnone

Dust off Dusty

Brooklyn: Wonderful article about “Musical styles” in Sunday’s paper, but you omitted one very special lady: Dusty Springfield — with those panda eyes, beehive hairdo, and those classy elegant gowns that she wore. Did I forget to mention that she was one of the greatest vocalists of all time? James D’Alessandro

Girardi’s smarts

Nashua, N.H.: Talk about a players’ manager (Joe Torre). Joe Girardi had the audacity not to drop Derek Jeter in the line-up. Girardi had many valid points in his reasoning in keeping the captain batting second. Mr. Hall of Fame Bill Madden suggested this brilliant move. Last time I looked, Girardi is the manager and former player, Madden the baseball writer. I am going to keep a list of all of Bill’s failed ideas and send them in. I respect Girardi for his baseball smarts and I am sure the players do for his loyalty. David Dion

Playing it safe

Forest Hills: To Voicer Lucia Lopez: You are right to be concerned about the possibility of not feeling or being safe in college. While there is no way to guarantee that nothing bad will happen, there are things you can do to make it less likely. Personal responsibility on your part to make sure you are in control of yourself by not drinking too much or taking drugs is one of them. Knowing the boys you hang out with is another. Being mindful of your surroundings at all times is also important. Please don’t interpret this as blaming the victim — it’s merely a reminder that, to a great extent, we are responsible for ourselves and should not depend on others to do the right thing if we are “under the influence.” Linda Sperling

A week on the wild side

Brooklyn: Who doesn’t love to watch models show off clothes that would not usually be worn by the general public? I mean if I were to wear some of these designs, strolling down the street, I would look nuts! New York Fashion Week never fails to present collections of insane yet unique pieces of clothing that reflect creativity and new trends. Can’t wait to see what bizarre fashion statements are made on the city streets this year. Ingrid Libman

Cabulous idea

Brooklyn: There are about 170 women driving cabs out of 46,000 in New York. We should support a women-only cab service. Ensuring the customers’ safety is key and there are numerous complaints against male drivers. As long as people have a choice in what they want to do, I don’t see how it’s discriminatory. I wake up early to take the bus to school, I would rather wake up later and take a cab there. However, religious parents, such as many Muslims, don’t allow their girls to take a cab to school. If the girls and their parents prefer a female driver, then they should be able to get one with this app. Marwa Ahmed, age 17

A good fit

Bayside: To Voicer Don Belcher, who justifies Eric Garner’s unconscionable murder with words like “He would have found another way to make money” and “criminals will be criminals”: Your name is perfect. Belcher. David Lang

Help wanted

Brooklyn: Well, I lost my job. I receive unemployment insurance, but now an additional 28 weeks are not coming. Can we get the Senate to pass this bill? It’s hard living on Social Security. Rita Leslie

Separated by birth

Bayside: It occurs to me that Denis Hamill very much resembles actor Mark Hamill. I’d have to therefore assume they are brothers. Both, may I add, do very well in their fields of endeavor. I’ve always wanted to write this letter. Where else but to Voice of the People? Sarah Alboher

Six-two and even, over and out

Brooklyn: Does the Apple Watch remind you of the wrist TV/radio Diet Smith gave to Dick Tracy in the 1960s? Dan Donovan