We got to tax day, that glorious annual tribute to the federal government, yesterday with one Democrat running for president – Hillary Rodham Clinton, in case you hadn’t noticed – and three Republicans: Sens. Ted Cruz of Texas, Rand Paul of Kentucky and Marco Rubio of Florida. The three Republicans are all first-term senators, as the Republican Party’s takeaway from the Obama presidency appears to be that first-term senators are the best at being president. But they have very different political identities and sensitivities. What do those mean for their plans regarding tax day 2017, 2021 or even 2047?

Cruz loves stirring speeches that rile up the base. A cry to “abolish the IRS” is a recurring feature of those speeches, and this call for action appears to be driven to a large extent by the IRS’ targeting of conservative organizations in the run-up to the 2012 election, when the tax authority asked grassroots activists to fess up about the content of their prayers, and things along those lines.

What a world without the IRS would look like is unclear, as a need for at least some revenue would continue to exist even under a Cruz administration. What Cruz presumably has in mind is a smaller, less intrusive organization that administers a simpler tax code, much like prominent anti-tax advocate Grover Norquist suggests in his new book "End the IRS Before It Ends Us."



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

What that tax code would look like is also unclear. Cruz has supported a nationwide 23 percent sales tax to replace the income tax in the past, but more recently he has also expressed support for a flat income tax that would presumably feature a similar rate (at 25 percent, it would be close to revenue-neutral). Of course, the administrative burden of filing your taxes is not mostly that of multiplying different rates by different dollar amounts, and the IRS does not spend most of its time correcting people’s arithmetic. You’d presumably still want to make sure people don’t lie about the money that’s coming in, but you could reduce the burden on taxpayers and the need for compliance by getting rid of lots of deductions and credits and exemptions that people like – although Cruz has already indicated that at least a couple of those would continue to exist.

Anyway, we’ll see how this materializes as platforms solidify, but one thing is for sure: Any tax reform along these lines would be a massive tax cut for the very rich, and a big tax hike for the poor (certainly in terms of rates!) and/or the middle class.

Paul, who’s still a libertarian, has been a bit more specific on the tax policy front. Yes, he also wants to abolish the IRS, and the entire tax code while he’s at it, but he’s also announced what he wants instead: A flat tax, with a 17 percent rate for both individuals and firms, and no death or capital taxation. This would also be a massive tax cut for the very rich, and a big tax hike for the poor and/or the middle class. According to Paul, this would add $7 trillion to the debt in the next 10 years if spending programs currently in place continued, raising the amount of debt held by the public to over 100 percent of GDP. Presumably, the Paul administration would be able to find a lot of stuff to cut, but it’s not clear how fast he would be able to privatize Medicare and sell off a few aircraft carriers.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Republican Party]

The most specific by far of the three senators has been Rubio, who has been trying to adopt the role of the policy wonk in this field of presidential contenders. His plan is similar in some ways to Paul’s (it ends capital taxation at the individual level, eliminates most deductions and credits, for example, and reduces the corporate tax rate), but it is much more detailed and doesn’t lose nearly as much revenue. It lowers rates less drastically and even increases rates on income from work between $75,000 and $410,000 for single filers, and between $150,000 and $410,000 for and married couples. As a consequence, it “only” adds $4 trillion to the debt over the next decade. (That's still two to three times the budgetary impact of the Affordable Care Act!)

That does come at a steep political cost. Not only does the plan imply a massive tax cut for the rich (Mitt Romney, for example, whose income derives mostly from capital, would face an effective tax rate close to 0 percent, just like he would under the Cruz and Paul plans), it also, due to its rate increases, raises taxes on millions of people in the middle class. (That is the middle class as defined by that same governor, those making less than $250,000 a year.) It’s a bold choice, especially coming after the discussions of income inequality and the 1 percent these past few years, particularly around the last presidential election.