Biggest health stories to watch this year

With help from Paul Demko

THIS YEAR'S MUST-WATCH HEALTH STORIES — Buckle up, people. The 2016 election year is going to be a big, busy one for health policy. Pro’s Jen Haberkorn has a handy list of some big stories coming down the pipe, including a landmark Supreme Court case that will determine how far states can go to limit abortion. SCOTUS will hear the case, Whole Woman’s Health v. Cole, in March and the ruling, which could be the most significant abortion decision in a generation, is likely in June. ”It will have implications far beyond Texas, defining how states can limit abortion access and regulate doctors and clinics," Jen writes. "And the timing guarantees that it will play into how the 2016 presidential candidates talk about abortion, and potentially energize voters on both sides of the divide.” We’ll also be watching the House Republicans' legal challenge to Obamacare’s cost-sharing subsidies. And speaking of Obamacare, we’ll be keeping our eyes on the health care law before it gets handed to the next administration. Jen writes, “Beyond that, 2016 is the last opportunity the administration has to directly influence the president's signature domestic policy legacy, especially if a Republican president is elected.”

Story Continued Below

— Then there are the mega insurer mergers. Congress, the states and the Justice Department are watching the Aetna deal to buy Humana and the Anthem deal to buy Cigna. A Senate subcommittee has already grilled Aetna and Anthem on consolidation plans and more investigation is expected in 2016. The deals, if successful, aren’t expected before the summer.

— We'll also be tracking whether political pressure on drugmakers will grow. Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders have both been critical of drug companies — Clinton has made it a focal point of her campaign. But will the pressure continue? We’ll be watching. The story for Pro’s here: http://politico.pro/1JSH9vE

OBAMA’S LAST YEAR HEALTH PRIORITIES: OPIOID EPIDEMIC, E-CIG REGS, DRUG PRICES — The Obama administration will focus, as always, on fending off attacks on the president’s signature health care law, but Pro's Brett Norman and Paul Demko report that “the final year will also be marked by efforts to curtail a deadly opioid epidemic, fight soaring prescription drug prices and deliver a long-awaited rule on expanded tobacco oversight.” More from Brett and Paul: http://politico.pro/1NU41fY

GOOD MONDAY MORNING and welcome to the first Pulse of 2016, where we're excited to be back from a wonderful holiday break with family, friends and food, so much food. We've told you some of what we expect for health policy in the new year — but we'll of course be on the lookout for more so send us your tips, predictions and scoops over to behley@politico.com and emershon@politico.com.

Rock your body right

PULSE is back, alright

FRIENDLY REMINDER — State Week and Prescription Pulse will be back Tuesday.

CREDIT RISKS FOR INSURANCE MEGADEALS — Insurance mega mergers could pose credit risks for the companies involved, according to a new report by Standard & Poor’s. Specifically, Anthem and Cigna could see their credit ratings downgraded by up to two notches, while Aetna could face a one-notch downgrade. That’s because the companies are taking on significant debt to finance the blockbuster deals, more than $40 billion in the case of Anthem’s takeover of Cigna. But the biggest risk for the companies involved is that the deals could be thwarted by state and federal regulators. “These deals are unprecedented in their size, complexity, and simultaneous nature,” S&P notes. “Therefore, we expect the review process to be lengthy as it will involve both the DOJ and multiple state regulators, each with their own local interests.” The report for Pro subscribers: http://politico.pro/1PFc5E2

** A message from the United Health Foundation: How does your state rank on leading health indicators? The United Health Foundation just released America’s Health Rankings 26th Annual Report that provides analysis of national health on a state-by-state basis by evaluating a historical and comprehensive set of health, environmental and socioeconomic data. Visit www.americashealthrankings.org to find out more. **

HOUSE READIES OBAMACARE REPEAL VOTE — Yes, again. But this time it's going to the president's desk (for a certain veto.) The House Rules Committee is expected to meet Tuesday to take up the Obamacare repeal vote which was approved by the Senate through reconciliation. The full House is expected to vote on the measure this week.

MENTAL HEALTH WATCH ON THE HILL — We’re expecting two big mark ups and one hearing on comprehensive mental health reform this month. On the House side, the Energy and Commerce Committee is planning to hold a full committee markup on Rep. Tim Murphy’s bill, which still faces steep opposition from Democrats in the E&C subcommittee, but has dozens of Democratic supporters in the full House. House Speaker Paul Ryan has also touted it as the chamber’s response to recent mass shootings.

— On the Senate side, the HELP Committee is expected to take up Sens. Chris Murphy and Bill Cassidy’s reform bill. The Senate Judiciary Committee is also expected to hold a hearing on Sen. John Cornyn’s mental health and criminal justice reform bill, which faces opposition from Democrats because it includes NRA-backed gun language.

EMPLOYER MANDATE IN FULL SWING — It’s finally fully in effect, now that it’s 2016. But we can’t rule out that Congress would revisit it — or the 30 hour workweek for insurance coverage purposes — one way or another this year.

REPORT: PATIENTS STILL GIVEN OPIOIDS AFTER OVERDOSING — A report from researchers at Boston University and Harvard University found that more than 9 in 10 chronic-pain patients who survived an opioid overdose continued getting the drugs prescribed and were at high risk of overdosing again. The study found that 70 percent of the overdose patients got those opioid prescriptions from the same doctor who prescribed the drugs before the overdose. More from Pro’s Brett Norman: http://politico.pro/1QRu7q4

FASTER WAY TO TRACK FLU EPIDEMICS? LOOK TO THE CLOUD — If research pans out, Cloud-based health records could track flu epidemics faster than the CDC and more accurately than GOOGLE, Pro eHealth’s Arthur Allen reports. Last year, researchers at Harvard used data from CDC, Google and social media along with reports from EHR vendor athenahealth’s database to provide real-time flu trends and accurate predictions for up to two weeks. More here: http://politico.pro/1mtdrs6

CHECKING IN WITH TAVENNER AT AHIP — After leaving CMS, Tavenner has been focusing on the accessibility and cost side of health care. Pro’s Jen Haberkorn has the details: As AHIP CEO, Tavenner said her priorities will be addressing medical costs, working with the pharmaceutical industry to address drug costs and preserving a relationship with the government on issues such as Medicare Advantage. For years, AHIP has led the pushback against proposed cuts by the Obama administration to the private insurance alternative to traditional Medicare. More from Jen here: http://politico.pro/22yDiza

CMS’S MANDY COHEN TALKS COVERAGE ISSUES AND PAYMENT REFORM — CMS’s chief of staff and chief operating officer joined a POLITICO Emerging Health Care Leaders event before the holiday break and discussed her focus for 2016 — private insurance marketplaces and health care delivery reform. Pro’s Rachana Pradhan has the details for Pros: http://politico.pro/1JJ5Ieg

ICYMI: Q&A WITH CMS QUALITY CHIEF — Pro's Erin Mershon sat down with CMS' quality chief Kate Goodrich. The interview here: http://politico.pro/1Pul5gX

HOW SEN. HELLER WORKED THE CADDY TAX REPEAL — Pro's Nancy Cook has the tic toc on how Sen. Dean Heller became the unlikely hero for the labor lobby's big end of the year victory in the form of the Cadillac tax delay. More from Nancy: http://politico.pro/1OWmus1

CONSUMER GROUPS AND INSURERS FIGHT OVER 2017 OBAMACARE RULES — Insurers and state regulators are at odds with consumer groups over the 2017 Obamacare rules, Pro's Paul Demko reports. More here: http://politico.pro/1YBzsAv

HHS’S MEAGHAM SMITH TO SKDKNICKERBOCKER — Meaghan Rose Smith, HHS senior adviser to the secretary, is leaving the department to join SKDKnickerbocker in February.

WHAT WE'RE READING —

The New York Times reports that more people see IRS penalties imposed under the ACA individual mandate as more affordable than coverage: http://nyti.ms/1YYQMF2

The Palm Beach Post reports that people are lying about their Florida residency to obtain insurance from the state's insurance exchange: http://bit.ly/1Pad7oH

The White House releases its report from the 2015 White House Conference on Aging http://bit.ly/1It9JEr

The Wall Street Journal reports on the potential health side effects of virtual reality technology: http://on.wsj.com/1Z0cA3l

Sources say Rep. Jim McDermott is expected to announce his retirement today, Western Washington's K5 reports: http://kng5.tv/1YZO9xx

** A message from the United Health Foundation: What makes Hawaii the healthiest state? How did North Carolina improve its health to make the biggest gains in 2015? What are you doing today to help your community improve its health in 2016? The answers, and much more, are all in the America’s Health Rankings 26th Annual Report. The Annual Report provides an analysis of national health on a state-by-state basis by evaluating a historical and comprehensive set of health, environmental and socioeconomic data. The Annual Report also provides tools that everyone from individuals to communities to Capitol Hill can use to make America healthier. What’s more, in 2016, America’s Health Rankings will release 8 reports, each focused on a different topic or population, with the goal of providing insight into how to truly transform the health of all Americans. To view the report and learn how to turn data into actionable results, visit www.americashealthrankings.org. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **