Rep. Sean Duffy speaks Wednesday on the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives. (Photo: Screenshot courtesy of CSPAN)

Editor's note: On Wednesday, Rep. Sean Duffy gave a passionate speech on the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives in favor of a bill that would ban abortion after 20 weeks of pregnancy. (The bill went on to pass 242-184 in the House; it has not been scheduled for a vote in the U.S. Senate.)

During the speech, Duffy showed a photograph of his daughter, MariaVictoria, nicknamed "Mighty V."

This is a transcript of Duffy's speech in its entirety:

Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a bill that is protecting babies that can survive outside the womb. This is babies who can feel pain. That this institution wouldn't stand up for those vulnerable children in our society is a sad day for this institution.

I have seven children. This is my sixth. This is Mighty V. This picture was taken with the two of us the day she was born. She's now 5 years old. She's gregarious, awesome, fun — the most beautiful joy in our family. The way the law stands today is that, the day before this picture was taken, it would have been legal to abort Mighty V.

Want to talk about women's rights? This is a little girl, this is a little baby girl who will one day grow up to be a woman. Let's stand up and protect this little girl — not the day that she was born, only, but also the day that she's in the womb.

Let's protect her from the pain of abortion. The silent screams of those babies who were aborted in the womb, that aren't heard, because they don't have voices in this institution defending them.

Madame Speaker, I listen to the floor debate day after day, whether in this chamber or on CSPAN, and I hear the other side talk about how they fight for the forgotten. They fight for the defenseless. They fight for the voiceless. And they pound their chests and they stomp their feet.

You don't have anyone in our society who's more defenseless than these little babies. And we're not talking — listen, I believe in life at conception. I know my colleagues are not going to agree with me on that. But can't we come together as an institution and say, we're going to stand with little babies that feel pain? We're going to stand with little babies that can survive outside the womb? Ones that don't have lobbyist that have money, that can't rally, that can't offer contributions to your campaign? Don't we stand with those little babies?

If you stand with the defenseless, with the voiceless, you have to stand with little babies. Don't talk to me about cruelty in our bill when you look at little babies being dismembered, feeling excruciating pain. If we can't stand to defend these children, what do we stand for in this institution? What do we stand for in America if we can't stand up for the most defenseless and voiceless among us?

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1HlhMWr