(Editor's note: This a one in a series of reports on a quality of life report by the Centers for Disease Control.)

STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- When it comes to health insurance, Staten Island is covered.

A Health Care Access and Quality report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC) Community Health Status Indicators (CHSI) shows that only 9.7 percent of Staten Islanders under the age of 65 are uninsured; Eerie, N.Y., is tied with Richmond County at 9.7 percent, placing the two counties in first place among similar peer counties.

The national average 17.7 percent.

The latest National Health Interview Survey released by the CDC shows that the rate of uninsured Americans has reached an all-time low of 9.1 percent in 2015.

In years prior, at least 1 in 10 Americans did not have health insurance.

Citing the Affordable Care Act, the CDC says that: "Today in America, there's a father who can no longer be denied coverage because of a pre-existing condition; a mother who can no longer be charged more because she's a women; and a child who can stay on their parent's plan up to age 26. Those rules benefit millions of people, and thankfully, they're now part of the fabric of America."

ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE

Staten Islanders also have abundant access to health care providers -- there are 150.5 primary care providers general practice, internal medicine, obstetrics and gynecology, and pediatrics per 100,000 borough residents.

The national average is 48 providers per 100,000 county residents.

People who have access to primary care providers are more likely to seek care for an ailment, as well as receive long-term care from a provider for more serious conditions, the CDC says.

COST BARRIER TO CARE

Cost of health care is not an issue for most Staten Island residents -- only 10.5 percent of residents 18 and older didn't seek care from a doctor because of cost, according to the study.

The national average is 15.6 percent of residents.





Access to comprehensive, quality health care service is important for the achievement of health equity, and for increasing the chances for a healthy life. Barriers to health care service diminishes quality of care and can lead to delays in receiving appropriate care, the inability to get preventative services and hospitalizations that could have been prevented, according to the CDC.

'SIMILAR COUNTIES' GUIDELINES

The "similar counties" category was based on the following county-level equivalent variables for all 3,143 counties studied: Population size, growth, density and mobility; percent of children and elderly, sex ratio, percent foreign born, percentage of high school graduates, the number of single-parent households, median home value, housing stress, percentage of owner-occupied housing units, median household income, receipt of government income, household income, overall poverty, elderly poverty and unemployment.