Ty Gadis, 5, left, helps break ground with the student council Friday for the Twin Peaks Charter Academy athletic complex. ( David R. Jennings / Broomfield Enterprise )

Twin Peaks Charter Academy in Longmont is close to completing the high school renovations of its new campus, with athletic fields and new classrooms going in this fall in a $5 million construction project.

"This is a big deal for us," said Kathy DeMatteo, Twin Peaks' board president. "We're fulfilling our mission to support the whole child."

Twin Peaks bought the building, at 340 S. Sunset St., and converted it from a warehouse to a school four years ago. The new building also allowed the K-8 school to add a high school, with the first senior class graduating in May. The high school this year has about 130 kids, with a goal of 350 to 450 high school students and 1,450 students altogether at build out.

"Strong academics and activities will draw and attract parents and students," said Principal B.J. Buchmann.

The school already has a 10,000-square-foot high school gym that meets Colorado High School Activities Association standards, with a 20-foot-high ceiling built specifically to accommodate volleyball games.

The school also has a playground and a small field in front.

Once the new athletic fields are complete, school officials said, Twin Peaks can start hosting track and field meets and soccer games.

The fields are being built on 9 acres next to the school, with an option to buy another 4 acres if needed to expand the sports program.

Along with new fields, the school is completing its high school renovations.

Advertisement

Although the high school and the elementary school share a building and an administration, older students — grades seven to 12 — are separated from younger ones, with different entrances, lunchrooms, gymnasiums and libraries.

Construction this fall includes finishing the second story of the high school side, adding 11 classrooms, which will include two science labs. The school also is adding lockers and finishing the library for the older students, with plans for a technology-based study and research center rather than a traditional library.

Dallin Witt, a high school physics and math teacher, started at the school this fall and is in one of three finished classrooms on the second floor. Though he's not looking forward to construction noise, he said, any distractions will be worth it.

"It's exciting to see the building turn into a high school," he said.

Added math teacher and advanced placement coordinator Stephanie Sickau, "We're excited about what it's going to do for the image of the school."

Senior Chris Fitzgerald, who enrolled at Twin Peaks his freshman year, said he was willing to try a new, small school because he wanted a college prep education that "really pushes you to the edge of what you're able to do."

"It's nice to see the school growing and becoming more of a legitimate high school," he said. "This really adds to the school."