Syracuse, N.Y. -- I'm still answering readers' questions about Obamacare and the New York health insurance exchange.

Here's another one:

My husband has been unemployed for 16 months. He has been trying to launch a business. I work part time. Our total income for 2013 was $28,000. I applied for Medicaid through the state health insurance exchange website and am waiting for a Medicaid representative to contact me. The Medicaid website application did not request asset information. We have about $60,000 in savings from an inheritance, which we are spending down at $7,000 a month. We only have about eight months before we are completely out of money. We also have about $250,000 in a 401K. We own one car and have no college savings for our 16- and 14-year-old children. Are we likely to qualify for Medicaid? Right now, we are paying $1758 a month for private health insurance.

-- Carolyn

You should be eligible for Medicaid, even though you have some savings, according to Sara Wall Bollinger of HealtheConnections. Her Syracuse agency employs navigators who help people enroll in health plans through the state exchange.

Medicaid is the government health insurance program for people with low income and the disabled. There used to be a limit on how much you could have in assets and still qualify for Medicaid. But that limit on assets was eliminated this year for most people when New York expanded Medicaid as part of the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

You can qualify for Medicaid in New York if you earn up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level. That's about $15,800 for a single person or $32,500 for a family of four.

To determine Medicaid eligibility, the government looks at an applicant's modified adjusted gross income -- MAGI for short. MAGI is essentially the amount of income a household reports on its annual federal tax form with a few exclusions that do not affect the majority of households.

Medicaid does not look at an applicant's savings and other financial resources unless the person is 65 or older or disabled.

Send your questions about Obamacare and the New York health insurance exchange to James T. Mulder at jmulder@syracuse.com. Follow him on Twitter @JamesTMulder.