Bond International Software, the global staffing and recruiting software specialists, and a Pinnacle Sponsor (booth #48) of the 2015 Staffing Industry Analysts’ Executive Forum at the Loews Royal Pacific Resort in Orlando FL, today announced that it will showcase a special demonstration of its AdaptSuite staffing software with unified Affordable Care Act (ACA) compliance management at the event.

AdaptSuite, Bond’s cloud-based staffing and recruiting software, has reaped significant attention for its productivity-enhancing capabilities enabling both staffing sales reps and recruiters to manage 80 percent of their daily tasks from one screen.

The Forum kicks off with an opening night welcome reception hosted by Bond on Monday, March 16th from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Featured highlights for Bond at the SIA Executive Forum include:



Unified ACA Compliance Management for Staffing. March 18th, 1:15 PM – 2:15 PM, Java Sea 2. Learn how Bond AdaptSuite staffing and recruiting software can help you take control and manage your ACA compliance with the least effort and the highest accuracy.

Private AdaptSuite Demos. Schedule a private demonstration of AdaptSuite in the Admiralty Boardroom by contacting sales(at)bond-us(dot)com or at the Bond booth (#48).

iPad Giveaway. Bond will giveaway four Apple iPads during the event. Register for the drawing at the Bond booth #48 or online at http://web.bond-us.com/cn/uscom/Entry_Form.

Customer Appreciation Happy Hour. Bond is hosting a St. Patrick’s Day reception for its customers Tuesday, March 17th, 7:00 PM – 8:30 PM on the Promenade Deck outside the Pacifica Ballroom.

Throughout the event, Bond representatives will be available at booth #48 to discuss how Bond’s AdaptSuite software can assist staffing and recruiting agencies enhance their growth through innovative technology that unifies and simplifies complex workflows and tasks.

###

About the Staffing Industry Executive Forum

The SIA Executive Forum is the most prominent annual meeting for CEOs, owners, and senior level executives from all sectors and segments of the staffing industry. This event provides access to the top industry thinkers, leaders, and innovators, a focus on the staffing industry's strategic issues, developing trends, future opportunities, current challenges, and an unparalleled opportunity for informal, peer networking as well as more formal deal-making.

About Bond International Software PLC (UK, AIM: BDI)

London stock-market listed Bond International Software has been a global provider of Recruitment, HR and Payroll software & services for 40 years.

Bond is one of the largest, and most established, global specialists in staffing software for recruitment agencies worldwide and is a rapidly growing provider of web-based e-recruitment and talent acquisition software to the corporate market. Bond also provides established HR and payroll outsourcing services and software directly to both the public and private sectors. For more information please visit http://www.bondinternationalsoftware.com.

Bond International Software, Inc. is the U.S. operating company for Bond, with headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia. Bond U.S., with more than 100 employees, supports nearly 600 customers and 20,000 users. For more information please visit http://www.bond-us.com.