Reuters Shanghai stocks climb on Wednesday.

The bulls are back in China with the stock market rallying for a sixth straight day Wednesday to the highest level since the global financial crisis in 2008, on hopes of further stimulus measures from Beijing to rejuvenate the sluggish economy.

The Shanghai Composite Index SHCOMP, +0.26% finished up 2.1% at 3,577.30 Wednesday, taking gains this year to 10.6% and adding to its 53% surge last year when it ranked as one of the world’s top performers.

China’s stock market has been a wild ride in recent months with the rally late last year fueled by a November interest-rate cut — the first in two years — before a correction in January when investors locked in profits and worries grew over a clampdown by Beijing on investors using borrowed money to buy stocks.

But buying has picked up in recent weeks, with enthusiasm in recent days coming after Chinese Premier Li Keqiang said Sunday the government has room, as well as the tools, to step in should growth falter and affect employment. That is fueling expectations for further monetary easing, in the form of cuts in interest rates or banks’ reserve-requirement ratios.

“After an over 50% gain last year, the market looked overbought” but investors are returning once again, said Shane Oliver, head of investment strategy at AMP Capital. “Growth is soft but there’s further stimulus on the way,” encouraging buying, he added.

Adding to the positive sentiment, China’s state-owned People’s Daily said in an article Wednesday that the recent rally was due to prospects of further economic reforms and the government’s pro-growth stance. The report cited statistics from the China Securities Depository and Clearing Corporation Ltd. showing new trading accounts on the mainland climbing to 720,800 last week, higher than the historical weekly average of 240,000.

Still, most of the turnover is coming from local mom and pop investors, while foreign investors have been more bearish.

The Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect, a trading link giving foreigners easier access to Shanghai stocks, has seen a lackluster month for purchases of Chinese shares. Inflows netted 13.3 billion yuan ($2.1 billion) in the past month, representing 4.4% of the program’s total 300 billion-yuan quota.

Volatility is also putting off investors in the short term. The Shanghai Composite was down as much as 5% in early February. It remains at roughly 60% of its record value in October 2007.

Meanwhile, stocks in Shenzhen, the smaller of the mainland’s two markets, have surged 29% this year, raising concerns of a bubble in smaller stocks. BNP Paribas estimates that stocks in Shanghai have traded at 13 times price-to-earnings this year, compared with 25 times in Shenzhen. The index was up 2% to a record high of 3,577.30 Wednesday.

Daily turnover in Shanghai has been climbing since February and at 603 billion yuan Tuesday, it was at its highest since late December. At the peak, turnover reached 795 billion yuan on Dec. 9, 2014, according to data provider CEIC.

On Wednesday, the Shanghai Composite marked six straight days of gains, its longest streak since early February when the market rose seven straight days. The benchmark began trading at its highest level since May 2008 by yesterday’s close.

Meanwhile, China’s yuan hit a two-month high against the U.S. dollar after weeks of severe depreciation pressure as bets that authorities would continue guiding the currency weaker mounted. Investors now say the central bank’s actions signal a preference for a stable currency. The yuan hit 6.2284 against the dollar, appreciating as much as 0.4% since its previous close.

Elsewhere in Asia, some markets struggled to shake off concerns ahead of an announcement by the U.S. Federal Reserve Wednesday on its interest-rate outlook. Stocks Singapore, Korea and the Philippines were slightly off.

“Investors will be holding their collective breath for the Fed’s announcement, as it will give the clearest, most data-driven account yet of where the central bank stands on the interest rate hike scenario,” says Yutaka Miura, senior technical analyst at Mizuho Securities. The Nikkei Stock Average NIK, +0.09% was up 0.6% at 19,544.48, gaining ground for the fifth time in the past six sessions.

In Australia, shares of Fortescue Metals Group Ltd. FMG, +2.07% in Australia plunged 5.3%, after the world’s fourth largest iron ore exporter scrapped a planned $2.5 billion bond sale, surprising investors.

More from MarketWatch