Candidates for insurance commissioner: a clash of styles





Photo: Pete Kiehart, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Buy photo California Insurance Commissioner Dave Jones talks to a reporter during a meeting at the offices of The Chronicle on August 21, 2014 in San Francisco, Calif. California Insurance Commissioner Dave Jones talks to a reporter during a meeting at the offices of The Chronicle on August 21, 2014 in San Francisco, Calif. Photo: Pete Kiehart, The Chronicle Buy this photo Image 2 of 2 State Sen. Ted Gaines, R-Rocklin, a Republican, believes there are too many regulations on the insurance industry. State Sen. Ted Gaines, R-Rocklin, a Republican, believes there are too many regulations on the insurance industry. Photo: Rich Pedroncelli, STF / AP Candidates for insurance commissioner: a clash of styles 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

The race for California’s insurance commissioner features candidates with very different views of how the office should operate.

For Democrat Dave Jones, who is seeking a second term, his job is making sure insurance companies play fair with their California customers by tightly regulating the rates they charge and the job they do.

“I want to make sure we have a level playing field, a strong insurance market and good consumer protection,” said Jones, a 52-year-old Sacramento resident. “Without regulations, insurance companies would take advantage of businesses and consumers.”

Too many regulations

Republican state Sen. Ted Gaines, who has run his family insurance business for 30 years, believes Jones has put too many regulations on the industry, keeping companies from operating in California.

“We have to make the insurance market more competitive,” said the 56-year-old Roseville resident. The insurance commissioner “has to be a neutral party, someone who has a stick, but who also has the carrot. (Jones) has been all stick.”

Gaines was more blunt in a written interview with the Western Insurance Agents Association earlier this year.

Jones’ “power-grabbing support for rate control over health insurance would choke off the supply of medical care,” Gaines told the group.

Opposes health law

Gaines is a critic of the Affordable Care Act and has sued Covered California, the state’s new health insurance exchange, for its efforts to implement President Obama’s signature legislationand what he says are excessive costs and a lack of transparency.

“I don’t think (insurance) should be a mandate,” Gaines said. “People should be allowed to decide on their own” how much health insurance they need and what it should cover.

Gaines also opposes apair of November ballot measures, Proposition 45, which would allow the insurance commissioner to regulate health insurance rates, and Proposition 46, which would raise the cap for noneconomic damages in malpractice suits and force some doctors to submit to random drug testing.

Prop. 45 backer

Jones has endorsed both measures and is one of the main backers of Prop. 45.

That measure “puts the regulation of the health insurance industry in the hands of one person,” Gaines said. “It grants too much power to a politician.”

Jones, a former assemblyman who began his career as a legal aid attorney, said Gaines’ objections show the candidates’ contrasting approaches to the insurance commissioner’s job.

“I come from consumer advocacy and he comes from the insurance industry,” Jones said. “He believes most if not all regulations should be done away with.”

Prop. 45 is needed to stem the surge of double-digit rate increases California consumers have suffered over the past decade, Jones said. It would simply give the commissioner the same rate regulation power over health insurance that he already has over auto, property and casualty insurance, he added.

“Why is car insurance and home insurance more important than health insurance?” Jones asked.

Check the ads

Jones also dismissed Gaines’ charge that insurance companies are shying away from California.

“If you watch late-night TV, you’ll see the lizard, the lady in white, the guy at the insurance college and lots of smaller companies,” he said.

While Jones insists he doesn’t have an adversarial relationship with the insurance industry, he said health insurers have been charging excessive rates and that some have recently reduced premiumsfor purely political reasons.

“There’s no doubt in my mind that (the insurance companies) pushed prices back to prevent an outcry at the polls in November,” he said.

The battle over the two insurance-related initiatives could be Gaines’ best hope for a November upset. He finished second to Jones in the June primary, 53 percent to 41 percent, and as of June 30, the cutoff date for the most recent state campaign finance reports, he had about $50,000 in his campaign account, compared with Jones’ almost $2 million.

Huge war chest

But the insurance industry, doctors, hospitals and others have raised nearly $100 million to defeat the two insurance-related initiatives, and a Field Poll this month showed voter sentiment turning against the measures.

“It’s clearly an uphill struggle,” Gaines said. “But this is a year when you will see a lot of money spent on insurance issues and ... there will be a lot of people in opposition to Jones’ position.”

The two candidates don’t disagree on everything. Both want to battle insurance fraud, agree that the insurance industry affects every person and business in California and that keeping that industry healthy is important for the state’s future.

2 approaches

How to get there, though, is the question.

Gaines sees his intimate knowledge of the insurance industry as a potential game-changer.

“It’s helpful to have someone with experience in the industry in the office,” he said. “I consider myself the ultimate consumer advocate because I’ve had to address the needs of my clients.”

For Jones, his lack of ties to the insurance industry is a plus for California.

“We need someone who’s independent,” he said, “who’s not a captive of the industry.”

John Wildermuth is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. E-mail: jwildermuth@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @jfwildermuth