Luverne, MN

If you're caught bullying in a Minnesota school, there will be immediate consequences. That's the message Governor Mark Dayton is sending by signing a tough anti-bullying bill into law.

"Well, from when I was even young, people would bully. So, it's always been a problem as far as I can remember," Brook Birdsey said.

The new bill would require Minnesota school districts to track and investigate cases of bullying and train staff members on how to prevent it.

"I know there's been, in Minnesota, several suicides and things they attribute to bullying," Lucas Peters said.

In 2011, two teenage girls from Island Lake committed suicide after being harassed in school. In 2012, two separate suicides in Southeastern Minnesota were linked to bullying as well. Government action against bullying comes as no shock to parents in Luverne.

"Sometimes the government, I don't know. I guess it's a good thing, it's a good thing. Somebody needs to step in there and take care of it," Birdsey said.

"Well, bullying will always be a part of growing up, I think, but if it can help limit some of the severe cases and at least put some punishments on the books for stuff that goes over the top, I think that'll be a good thing," Peters said.

Birdsey says to go along with legislation against bullying, she's been impressed with her child's school and their approach to the issue.

"They've had multiple classes about it and they've been taught several different things in the school about it, yeah," Birdsey said.

The bill signed by Governor Dayton comes on the heels of extreme bullying circumstances, and parents in Luverne say that it's a good step to keep bullying out of their schools.

Parents hope it will at least stop a bigger problem from taking place.

"Hopefully we can recognize it and see it, something we may have overlooked in the past hopefully will get noticed and stop something before something really bad happens," Peters said.

The law will go into effect for the 2014-2015 school year.