Topics: AIPAC, Benjamin Netanyahu, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Henry Kissinger, Hillary Clinton, Israel, Libya, Middle East, Terrorism, War on Terror, Technology News, News, Politics News

Hillary Clinton just gave one of her clearest statements of her foreign policy agenda in the Middle East, and by extrapolation around the globe, and it isn’t a pretty picture—not for Jews or anyone else.

She vowed a stronger relationship between the U.S. and Israel, saying she’d invite Netanyahu to the White House. She stated that “[a]s president, I will make a firm commitment to ensure Israel maintains its qualitative military edge. . . The United States should provide Israel with the most sophisticated defense technology so it can deter and stop any threats. That includes bolstering Israeli missile defenses with new systems like the Arrow Three and David’s Sling. And we should work together to develop better tunnel detection, technology to prevent armed smuggling, kidnapping and terrorist attacks.”

Let’s be clear about one thing: ensuring that Israel can continue its unlawful and immoral expansion of West Bank settlements, destruction of Palestinian homes and land, and the like is no way to support Jews. That is like giving an addict their drug of choice as a way to help them, when in fact it is only pushing them further into their unhealthy behavior, almost ensuring no way out. Providing Israel with even greater means by which to enact their horrific policies and violence against Palestinians will only ensure the spread of anti-semitism around the world and make Jews less safe, not more. Too many people already believe that Jews control the sources of power in our country (you only have to read tweets in support of Donald Trump to see this).

And Hillary’s promise to keep Israel safe is indicative of her hawkish style more broadly around the globe. Her support of the coup in Honduras, the overthrow of Gaddafi in Libya and her uncritical support of Saudi Arabia are just a few examples of what we can expect from Clinton’s foreign policy. When you rely on Henry Kissinger, a war criminal, to back you, you should know you are on the wrong side of history.