Getty Images

Quick, what is the stock market’s biggest driver today?

Corporate earnings? Interest rates? The Federal Reserve? Some say the correct answer is something people rarely discuss: companies buying back their own stock.

Companies purchasing their own shares represent the single biggest category of stock buyers today, according to a study this month by Jeffrey Kleintop, chief market strategist at brokerage firm LPL Financial.

Only one other major group, individuals, is a net stock buyer now and individuals are buying less than corporations, Mr. Kleintop found. Of six major groups he identified, hedge funds, foreigners, insiders and investment institutions such as pension funds and insurance companies all are net sellers, he found. He used data from the Fed, the U.S. Treasury, FactSet, the Investment Company Institute and other sources.

The pullback by traditional investors helps explain why stocks have had trouble making progress at various points this year, money managers say. And the increasing prominence of corporate buybacks has drawn criticism from some in the investment world.

“Most of the buying is coming from the companies themselves. It doesn’t sound healthy but that is certainly where it is coming from,” Mr. Kleintop said.

He points out that stock buyers tend to wax and wane over time. In the future, corporations may find more productive investments and buy less stock, and traditional investors may become more active again.

Companies spent $598.1 billion on stock buybacks last year, according to Birinyi Associates in Westport, Conn. That was the second highest annual total in history, behind only 2007, Birinyi calculated. The pace picked up in the first quarter of 2014, when companies spent $188 billion, the highest quarterly amount since 2007.

“They have obviously been a driving force,” said Robert Leiphart, a Birinyi analyst who tracks buybacks. “They really benefit everybody.”

Despite several benefits, buybacks also are a source of controversy. Some money managers and analysts say they permit companies to provide artificial support for stock prices.

The most direct impact of stock purchases is to increase demand for the shares, which supports their prices. But buybacks also have a more subtle impact: If a company reduces its number of shares, simple math dictates that earnings per share will rise even if total earnings go nowhere. Analysts and money managers look mainly at earnings per share, so buybacks can improve a company’s apparent earnings performance even if overall earnings aren’t rising at all.

Some critics go so far as to say executives use buybacks to manipulate share prices, which helps them hit earnings targets, please investors, receive bonuses and avoid scrutiny from shareholders and boards.

Mr. Kleintop of LPL Financial and Scott Clemons, chief investment strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman Private Banking, both calculate that half of the first quarter’s S&P 500 per-share earnings gains came from declining share count, not from increases in actual earnings.

“If a company is buying shares to hit earnings-per-share targets, that is not good capital allocation and there is a lot of that going on. For the market as a whole, there is too much of it,” Mr. Clemons said. “There are an awful lot of buybacks taking place that aren’t adding value to shareholders.”

That doesn’t mean all buybacks are misguided, he added. In some cases he likes buybacks better than dividends as a way to return money to shareholders, because investors pay taxes on dividends and don’t on buybacks unless they sell shares.

Mr. Clemons generally agrees with an argument Warren Buffett has made: Companies should consider buying back shares only if the shares are undervalued based on the company’s earnings, sales, book value or other valuation benchmarks. But Mr. Clemons also worries that the ease of buybacks, compared with the difficulty of business investment, can lead a company to avoid seeking opportunities and taking risks in uncertain times. That can hold down profits and overall economic growth, he said.

“I think there is a lot of corporate cash on the sidelines not being put to work because of the uncertainty, not because of the lack of investible opportunities,” he said.

Last year, owning the stock of companies with significant share-buyback programs was one of the most successful investment strategies tracked by Goldman Sachs, according to its research reports. As of June 20, buyback-related stocks had risen more than 115% since the end of 2012, Goldman found.

But almost all those gains came last year and buyback stocks have done no better than the S&P 500 this year.

Several companies have gotten attention for their heavy buybacks, including International Business Machines. Under pressure to meet earnings targets in the face of steadily declining sales, IBM spent $8.3 billion in the first quarter purchasing its own shares. Some analysts criticized that and noted that IBM’s debt level rose, suggesting it was in effect using borrowed money.

A person familiar with IBM said the big first-quarter purchases weren’t a typical pattern for IBM and that IBM has said it doesn’t intend to continue spending at that clip. He called it irresponsible and unfair to say IBM was supporting its per-share earnings numbers through buybacks.

Some analysts project that 2014 could be the third-biggest buyback year ever. But there also are signs the buying could begin to wane, said research analyst Michael Amenta of FactSet Research Systems in a June report. Most of the 10 biggest big corporate buyers of their own shares slowed their buying pace in the first quarter and many indicated that they expect to further reduce spending as the year goes on, he said.