WASHINGTON -- Should Medicare start paying for health economists' PhDs if they result in a better healthcare system?

Maybe not, but that's an extreme example of the direction that Medicare could be heading if it adopted one of the proposals in the Institute of Medicine's (IOM) recent report on the future of graduate medical education (GME), according to Bruce Vladeck, PhD, former administrator of what is now the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).

"I think some would make the argument -- not me -- that you could improve Medicare policy by training more PhDs in health economics," Vladeck, now a senior adviser at Nexera, a consulting firm in New York City, said tongue-in-cheek Wednesday at a briefing sponsored by Health Affairs. "Therefore, Medicare ought to subsidize their education."

Vladeck was referring to a proposal in the IOM report suggesting that GME funding include a "Transformation Fund" that would, among other things, award money for new training positions in areas of geographic or clinical need. This could include financing training slots for, as an example, pediatric residents who would not be treating Medicare patients.

"Medicare is an entitlement for the beneficiaries," he said. "It creates an entitlement to a specified set of healthcare services, not an entitlement to policymakers or particular institutions that are receiving the money."

The issue arises because the money goes toward providing clinical care and education at the same time, so it's not always easy to separate the two, Vladeck explained. "That's one of reasons the [National Labor Relations Board] and the [Internal Revenue Service] have had such a hard time over the years figuring out whether residents are employees or trainees; they are both simultaneously."

Some people might argue, he continued, that "We have this money in GME ... We need $2 or $3 billion a year to fund innovation -- a proposition with which I don't disagree -- and therefore we can break a 50-year precedent and take some money that has been originally designed to pay for clinical services for Medicare beneficiaries, and take it out of that pot and put it in a pot to pay that for educational services for professionals who may never see a Medicare beneficiary either in their training or in the lifetime of their clinical practice.

"I want to suggest ... that this is really a very slippery slope and one that I'd be extremely nervous about entering into."

Gail Wilensky, PhD, another former CMS administrator and co-chair of the IOM panel that wrote the report, explained the purpose of the Transformation Fund in remarks made prior to Vladeck's.

"The Transformation Fund ... will be used to finance innovations both in terms of how the money is distributed but also in terms of developing some of the various metrics and research that need to occur," said Wilensky, who is now a senior fellow at Project Hope. "Pilot studies are extremely important," especially for helping to develop performance measures which will help Medicare move to a performance-based payment system.

Wilensky also explained why the panel decided to recommend continuing to use federal money to fund GME even though there is a "lack of a comparable role in undergraduate medical education or in other healthcare professions, or in other professions which are in short supply.

"We felt that a changing delivery system which the country is now undergoing could be so much helped by continuing federal support training the physicians that are coming forward now... that that was a sufficient justification to recommend continued Medicare funding ... for at least the next decade, after which we recommended that this be reconsidered as to whether there was a continuing role for the federal government going forward and, if so, what that role might be."

The committee recommended maintaining the current amount of GME funding, indexed for inflation, and no longer dividing the funding into direct and indirect funding but instead moving to a single funding stream divided into a Transformation Fund and an Operational Fund.

The report also recommended establishing a policy council for GME, representing "a mix of experts" in different policy areas, and putting the council in the office of the secretary of Health and Human Services, to make recommendations about various studies needed in GME. Another recommendation was to establish a GME Center within CMS to distribute the funds accordingly.

Christopher Dawe, a former adviser to President Obama, gave the recommendations a mixed review, praising them for their strong focus on accountability and transparency but also noting that there was no suggestion for budgetary savings.

"The idea of big savings in the short term could have political currency, although recent trends in health spending could take a little bit of pressure off," Dawe said.

The recommendations also leave open the potential for geographic warfare as different regions compete for funding, "which on multiple occasions came extremely close to bringing the Affordable Care Act down," he added.

All the panelists agreed on one thing: that predicting whether there will be a physician shortage in the future -- and how much of a shortage -- is extremely difficult. Edward Salsberg, MPA, of George Washington University in Washington, noted that a 2010 report from the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) projected a shortage of 45,000 primary care physicians in 2020, while a report from the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) issued 3 years later using updated data predicted a shortage of 6,400 primary care physicians in 2020.

"The world changed from when we did the AAMC projections and when we did the HRSA projections to where we are today," he added. "We are facing serious maldistribution problems in terms of specialty and geography, but it's not a general shortage for the nation as a whole."