Buy Photo Bill Schuette, left, and Mark Totten (Photo: Detroit Free Press file photos)Buy Photo

The race for attorney general has been shaped into two central messages by the respective campaigns:

Mark Totten is inflating his résumé, incumbent Republican Attorney General Bill Schuette's camp says.

Bill Schuette has taken on one right-wing crusade after another, at the expense of Michigan families, comes the charge from the Democratic challenger.

However, as with most campaigns, the truth is far more complicated — and interesting. And the same could be said about the race and candidates themselves: What started out as a fairly low-key race where Schuette appeared to be a shoo-in, has turned into a more competitive contest than many thought — particularly as the candidates have begun airing ads defining themselves to voters in recent weeks.

Schuette leads Totten 38%-32%, according to the most recent Free Press poll. But with a 4 percentage point margin of error, the numbers could be much closer. And that gives hope to the Totten campaign, especially considering of the 600 people surveyed statewide 70% said they didn't know who he was.

Totten, 40, was raised by a single mother/teacher in Kalamazoo in a very religious home. He gave his first sermon at his hometown Baptist church when he was 16.

Early on, he figured out that if he wanted to go to college, he was going to have to pay for it himself. So he mowed lawns, delivered newspapers, and worked at the public library and the overnight shift at a Meijer store stocking shelves.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Mark Totten, democratic candidate for attorney general talks about the race against incumbent Attorney General Bill Schuette, a Midland Republican. Kathleen Gray Detroit Free Press

"From a very, very early age, Mark has been a very determined, hardworking, goal-oriented person," said his mother, Delynn Totten. "I raised him to be honest and to make sure to complete the tasks you put your mind to."

By the time he graduated from high school, he had $15,000 saved. Coupled with scholarships, he attended Cedarville College, a small Baptist college in Ohio, and thought he might end up as a preacher.

"I felt a calling to move in a different direction, the direction of law," he said. "It's an incredible tool to serve other people."

He got his law degree from Yale, as well as a PhD in ethics. He also studied religion for a year through a fellowship at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland.

He has only limited political experience, having served on the Kalamazoo Board of Education for three years, until he resigned earlier this year to pursue the attorney general's job.

Schuette, 61, lost his father, Dow Chemical executive William Schuette, when he was 6. So he also was raised by a single mother — Esther Schuette — although in more comfortable means.

While he was at Georgetown University getting a bachelor's degree, his mother married Carl Gerstacker, the chairman of Dow Chemical. He then went on to the University of San Francisco for his law degree.

Schuette grew up around a politically active crowd, and counts former Republican National Committeewoman Ranny Riecker as one of his primary mentors. He has also remained active in Midland's bustling philanthropic community and sits on the boards of the Rollin Gertstacker and Elsa Pardee foundations.

His political career started 30 years ago with a congressional run and a challenge: No one knew how to pronounce his name. Was it "Shoe-ette," "Shoot" or some other variation? People would ask. His answer came from his mom.

He got one of his old, black wing-tip shoes and taped a big white "T" on the front of the shoe, carrying it with him to campaign events in that first run for Congress. Get it? "Shoe-T." He won that first race and still keeps the battered old shoe on a shelf in his office as a reminder of his mom and how far he's come.

"He's very compassionate and very caring," said Alan Ott, the retired chairman of Chemical Bank in Midland, who has known Schuette since 1962. "He started Harvest Gathering with Cynthia and when he starts something he never walks away from it."

The annual food drive began in 1991 and has raised more than 9 million pounds of food and $8.9 million toward feeding hungry people.

Careers

Totten worked as an attorney with U.S. Department of Justice, and as a law clerk for U.S. District Judge Thomas Griffith in the Washington, D.C., district — one of the three most-sought-after law clerk jobs in the nation, along with U.S. District courts in New York and San Francisco.

His stint there came during times of crisis in the U.S. and the court dealt with cases involving Guantánamo Bay where terror suspects were held, and the aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist attacks in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania.

"He has the strength of character to go with the intellectual horsepower to do the job," said James P. Sullivan, who also clerked with Griffith and now works for King and Spalding in Austin, Texas. "He has fantastic judgment, and an excellent temperament and demeanor. He's very fair-minded."

After marriage to fellow attorney Kristin, and the birth of their first child, Totten decided to return home. He's teaching criminal law at Michigan State University and worked for 18 months as a volunteer, part-time special assistant prosecutor in the U.S. Attorney's Office in Western Michigan. He worked primarily on appeals and post-conviction criminal cases.

That's the biggest point of contention for Schuette, whose campaign and surrogates have criticized Totten's claims to be a federal prosecutor because it was a part-time, pro-bono job for less than two years.

"I resent somebody who comes along, a pretender who calls himself a hard-nosed prosecutor," said Oakland County Executive L. Brooks Patterson, who was the county prosecutor for 16 years. "He was a volunteer one day a week in the U.S. Attorney's Office."

But Totten doesn't back down from his experience.

"Some of the most fulfilling work I've done is helping put away bad guys," he said, noting he's worked on cases involving child predators, domestic abusers and predatory lenders. "I have more than enough courtroom experience."

Schuette has been in public office for the vast majority of his adult life, starting out with working on the campaigns of Presidents Gerald Ford and George Bush. He graduated to Congress in 1984, but left Washington after losing badly to U.S. Sen Carl Levin in 1990.

While the loss was painful, it also ended up being one of the happier moments in his life because he said he reconnected with his high school sweetheart, Cynthia Grebe, and the couple got married and have two children.

Schuette came back to Michigan and has worked as state agriculture director under former Gov. John Engler; state senator; and a state Court of Appeals judge before running for attorney general, a seat he won in 2010 over Flint Prosecutor David Leyton.

"I've worked with Bill Schuette on a number of things that have been beneficial for the community," Leyton said, declining to say if he was supporting Schuette or Totten in the upcoming race.

The record

Schuette does have a record to dissect from his nearly four years as AG. He touts several initiatives, including contributing $4 million from lawsuit settlement proceeds to test 11,300 long-forgotten rape kits found in a Detroit police storage facility in 2009; helping establish the Okay2Say hotline to anonymously report instances of bullying; intervening in the Detroit bankruptcy case to try and protect the pensions of Detroit retirees; going after pharmaceutical compounding companies that contributed to an outbreak of deadly meningitis in the state; and spearheading the creation of a Human Trafficking Commission.

"For me, it's about listening hard. And if I'm on receive instead of broadcast, there are so many things I can do to help people across the state," he said.

He also has a controversial record of taking up issues popular with his Republican base, including fighting to uphold the state's constitutional ban on same-sex marriage, despite legal rulings around the country that have been overturning those bans; writing briefs in support of the Hobby Lobby case, upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court, which allows small family-owned companies to refuse to offer certain types of contraceptives in insurance packages because of religiously held beliefs; and filing a brief in support of a federal lawsuit challenging federal tax credits given through the Affordable Care Act for people to buy health insurance.

About 250,000 people in Michigan received those tax credits.

Totten said Schuette, by taking on these cases, is leaving foster children orphans because they can't be adopted by both gay parents; is jeopardizing health insurance for thousands of people who have never been able to afford it; and is limiting access to essential health care for an untold number of women.

"There have been a lot of examples of my opponent taking on one extreme crusade after another." Totten said. "There are a lot of people who want to see this office go in a different direction, who remember someone like Frank Kelley."

Schuette said his role in those controversial cases represents the main reason he became the state attorney ceneral, to uphold the state's laws and constitution.

"I took an oath to observe and protect and defend the constitution and that's not a discretionary exercise," he said.

"If the citizens of this state decide to change a provision in the constitution, or the Supreme Court rules on this, I'll respect and defend that."

Meet the candidates

Mark Totten

Hometown: Kalamazoo

Age: 40

Political: Kalamazoo Board of Education,

Professional: associate law professor, Michigan State University; part-time, pro-bono federal prosecutor U.S. Attorney in western Michigan; U.S. Justice Department, Washington, D.C.; clerked for U.S. Court of Appeals Judge Thomas Griffith in Washington, D.C.

Education: bachelor's degree Cedarville College, Ohio; law degree and PhD in ethics, Yale University.

Personal: married, two children. He's a twin; brother Christopher lives in Australia.

Fun fact: He took four years of Latin at Kalamazoo Central High School with classmate Derek Jeter, recently retired New York Yankee baseball superstar. Jeter's Latin name was "Brutus." Totten's was "Perceus."

Bill Schuette

Hometown: Midland

Age: 60

Political: state attorney general, 2011-present; state Court of Appeals, 2002-08; state Senate, 1995-02; director, state Department of Agriculture: 1991-94; U.S. House of Representatives, 1985-1990; ran for U.S. Senate against Sen. Carl Levin, 1990.

Professional: lawyer, Warner Norcross, 2009-10.

Education: Bachelor's degree, Georgetown University; law degree, University of San Francisco.

Personal: Married, two children

Fun fact: At one of Schuette's first campaign events in Owosso in 1984, the wait staff was overwhelmed, so Schuette grabbed a coffee pot and started refilling cups. It unnerved his opponent, former U.S. Rep. Don Albosta, who was at the same event; and got some attention from a crowd who had no idea who he was. It's a practice he continues to this day.

Also running

Libertarian: Justin Altman of Ypsilanti

U.S. Taxpayer Party: Gerald VanSickle of Wellston

Green Party: John Anthony LaPietra of Marshall

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1xEZ3wG