Annual breast cancer screenings matter

Photo: Karen Warren, Staff Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Walkers cheer as they approach a rest stop in the River Oaks area Saturday during the AVON 39 Walk to End Breast Cancer, formerly known as the Avon Walk for Breast Cancer. ( Karen Warren / Houston Chronicle ) Walkers cheer as they approach a rest stop in the River Oaks area Saturday during the AVON 39 Walk to End Breast Cancer, formerly known as the Avon Walk for Breast Cancer. ( Karen Warren / Houston Chronicle ) Photo: Karen Warren, Staff Annual breast cancer screenings matter 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Two weeks ago, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force released its recommendations for breast cancer screening and is on the brink of once again imperiling the health of women throughout the nation.

The task force, an independent panel of health experts whose recommendations influence the decisions of health-care providers, insurance companies and policy makers, is proposing to give the routine screening of women ages 40-49 a grade of "C" and is offering a "B" grade to biennial screening for women 50-74. In other words, the panel once again is recommending less-frequent screenings for breast cancer. What this likely means is that women ages 40-49 who choose routine screening and those 50-74 who want to be screened annually would not be guaranteed health insurance coverage for mammograms.

Currently, the Affordable Care Act requires private insurers to cover exams or procedures that the task force has graded "B" or higher.

As the National Institutes of Health reported last year, the rates of women seeking mammography screening initially dropped among women ages 40-49 after the task force's 2009 recommendation calling for less-frequent breast-cancer screening. The NIH cited unfavorable public reaction and conflicting official statements as a reason for the drop. Now, here we are again, having to convince women in their 40s of the importance of having a mammogram - an impossible task if it isn't covered by insurance.

Adoption of the task force's recommended grades would result in thousands of additional and unnecessary breast cancer deaths each year. Additionally, millions of women's private insurance may no longer cover their mammograms.

This recommendation cannot stand. Public outcry is the way to stop it from becoming official. Time is short: The deadline for public comment is May 18.

At The Rose, a local nonprofit breast cancer organization, nearly one half of the 350 women we diagnose each year are under age 50. (Our youngest was 19.) To tell women between the ages of 40-49 that a mammogram isn't needed or should only be used based on their physician's understanding (of the patient's personal health and the physician's knowledge of the benefits of mammography) puts thousands of women at risk.

After the fiasco with this task force's 2009 recommendation, the number of women having annual screenings nationwide has continued to remain at an all-time low. I remain convinced that the 2009 recommendation is a key reason why women in their 40s are delaying having a mammogram and subsequently dealing with later stage cancers.

The irony is that mammography works! There has been a 30 percent decline in the mortality rate - 30 percent fewer women are dying from the disease - since 1990, when mammography became available to most women and was also covered by insurance and Medicare as an annual screening procedure.

The task force's recommendations do not reflect the current state of screening or its advancements and the suggested delay in screenings will cause serious harm. In the public health arena, recommendations such as this one send a false and confusing message and do a disservice to women in general.

Not all women have access to health care or to a personal physician to guide decisions about when and how often to be screened for breast cancer.

If you or someone you love was diagnosed with breast cancer before age 50, if you care about women's health and if you recognize the impact of early detection, please make your comments known to the task force before May 18. Here is hoping our voices will lead to changes.

Gibbons is CEO and co-founder of The Rose.