Video of a Russian doctor pummeling two men – KO’ing one of the patients who later died – is going viral. The outrageous video of the doctor duking it out, which occurred in the southern city of Belgorod, approximately 25 miles north of the Ukrainian border, was aired repeatedly on state television, earning the burly aggressor the nickname “Doctor Boxer.”

Video of Russian doctor punching patient / Video screen shot

Reports the AFP on Jan. 9, via Yahoo News: “The incident raised questions over a cover-up culture in state medicine, with investigators only announcing the probe several days later, after security camera footage was released online and shown on television.”

The video, taken December 29, shows a bare-chested man being examined on the table by a nurse. Another employee leads the doctor into the room and points out the fellow. The doctor then grabs him under the arm and shoves him through a doorway into another room. When the other man comes to assist, the doctor, identified as surgeon Ilya Zelendinov, drops him with a series of punches, then turns his attention back to the patient, whom he lays out with a single wallop.

Zelendinov then goes back and begins to ragdoll the second man, dragging him around as stunned nurses leave the room. As the video is sped up, we see the doctor return, and while the second man holds a bloody cloth to his face, Zelendinov and the staff perform CPR on the patient for approximately two minutes before dragging him into the other room.

The patient, identified by Russia media as 56-year-old Yevgeny Bakhtin, reportedly was being physically abusive to the nurse who checked him in. The doctor can be heard yelling in translated Russian, “Why did you touch the nurse?”

According to Belgorod's Investigative Committee, the patient “kicked a nurse during a procedure,” the investigators said. “The cause of death of the victim was trauma to the skull and brain from hitting the back of the head on the hard surface of the floor.”

Zelendinov was arrested on charges of “death through negligence,” and faces up to two years only in jail. He was fired from the hospital but remains free until his trial. Only a minor charge was brought against the doctor even though video clearly shows what happened in the one-sided assault.

Per BBC News: “Yelena Kozyreva from the local investigations committee said they believed there was no malicious intent in the doctor's actions.”

According to investigators, there was “no grounds to say that the doctor wanted to murder the patient… If the victim had stayed on his feet or hit his head on a less hard surface, the consequences would not have been so critical.”

The video has caused sharp rebuke of the Russian doctor and criticism of the relatively minor charge.

Adds the Agence France-Presse: “Health Minister Veronika Skvortsova has ordered the state health watchdog to carry out a check into the incident, state television reported Saturday. Russian medics have long operated in a culture of secrecy, with patients having little recourse to compensation for medical errors.”