As I searched for my precinct caucus on a cold February evening in 2008, the Columbine High School auditorium was so crowded with hundreds of Jefferson County Republicans it was hard to discern one caucus meeting from another. Across the state, an unprecedented 70,000 Republicans were similarly gathering in thousands of caucuses to help decide who the 2008 Republican presidential nominee would be.

But this was no ordinary caucus night. Traditionally, only 10,000 Republicans or so bothered to attend their precinct caucus. But 2008 was different because the first ever Colorado Republican presidential preference poll was being conducted, where attendees could register their support of a candidate in a tangible way and results could be quantified. Colorado Republicans finally mattered in a fight for the nomination.

Precinct caucuses are essentially neighborhood meetings that are the first step in the process to elect Colorado’s delegations to the Republican and Democratic national conventions. Caucuses elect delegates to county conventions in all 64 counties that in turn elect delegates to the state convention and to seven congressional district conventions. The state and congressional conventions ultimately elect national convention delegates.

Before 2008, Colorado Republicans had never conducted an official preference poll to quantify support for presidential candidates. The caucuses were merely the first step in the national convention delegate selection process.

As the newly elected Colorado Republican state chairman in 2007, I was determined that Colorado Republicans would play as influential of a role as possible in our 2008 presidential nomination process. Both parties had open, competitive presidential contests and the legislature had allowed the two parties to move the caucuses to an earlier date.

Colorado Democrats had conducted caucus preference polls for decades and as a result received a great deal of media attention. Republicans were relegated to bystander status because there was nothing to quantify our caucus results.

The Colorado Republican Committee voted overwhelmingly to implement the first ever presidential preference poll as part of our 2008 precinct caucuses resulting in more than 70,000 attending and voting. And as a result, media attention focused on both parties, not just the Democrats, on that exciting evening.

The Colorado Republican State Executive Committee recently voted to eliminate the presidential poll in 2016. This decision appears to be driven by a new requirement by the Republican National Committee that such preference polls must now be binding on a state’s national convention delegation. Indeed, the earlier polls were non-binding on the state’s delegation and I appreciate the fact this is a major change in the rules.

Additionally, the executive committee has expressed a desire that Colorado’s delegates be totally unbound should the nomination be in doubt going into the Republican National Convention in Cleveland in July 2016.

The last time a Republican presidential nomination was still in doubt going into the national convention was in 1976, during the epic battle between President Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan. Republicans are blessed with a field of many outstanding candidates and it is plausible that a contested convention might occur, but it remains very improbable.

But Colorado Republicans do not have to sacrifice the ability to play a major role in a contested convention even if a binding presidential preference poll is held. As candidates inevitably drop out of the race as the process moves forward after Colorado’s caucuses, any delegates won by those unsuccessful candidates would be released to vote for whomever they want at the national convention. And for those candidates who are still alive and competing, the delegates they won should be required to vote for those active candidates as a show of good faith with the grassroots support they won at the caucuses.

Colorado Republican State Chairman Steve House is a good man who is doing an outstanding job. The Colorado Republican State Executive Committee is comprised of outstanding men and women who have devoted a great deal of time, energy and passion as Republican leaders.

I hope these leaders allow the full Colorado Republican State Committee, made up of around 400 county leaders and elected officials from across the state, to debate this decision when it meets on Sept. 26 in Pueblo and, hopefully, restore the caucus vote.

Our precinct caucuses are open to any Republican to attend and participate. Let’s keep the Colorado Republican presidential preference poll as a way to empower those attendees and quantify their support for a presidential candidate. And, most important, to allow Colorado Republicans to have a strong influence on who we nominate to be the next president of the United States.

Dick Wadhams served as Colorado Republican state chairman from 2007 to 2011.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.