Oh wait, they're already here ...

Oh wait, they're already here ...



@DRUDGE Speaker Pelosi Part 2: Opening Jan 5. 2015

Rush Limbaugh:

Rush Limbaugh on Wednesday blasted the Republican Party as “irrelevant” and responsible for “creating one of the greatest political disasters” he’s ever seen. “I was trying to think earlier today, if ever in my life I could remember any major political party being so irrelevant,” the conservative radio host said on his show, according to a transcript. “I have never seen it. I have never seen a major political party simply occupy placeholders, as the Republican Party is doing.” Rush says the party still refuses to offer "serious opposition" to Obama, again claiming that this is because Obama is black.

Rush says the party still refuses to offer "serious opposition" to Obama, again claiming that this is because Obama is black. Hardliner and actual CNN contributor Erick Erickson, or maybe he's not there anymore because who the hell watches CNN these days:

I am tired of funding Republicans who campaign against Obamacare then refuse to fight. It’s time to find a new batch of Republicans to actually practice what the current crop preaches.

The Tea Party Nation is very, very sad:

Barack Obama demanded unconditional surrender from the Republican Party. He pretty much got it. […] In short, the GOP got nothing from their fight. But then again, McConnell, Boehner and the GOP establishment never tried.

As are a great many of the arsonists themselves, lighters still in hand:



@CongHuelskamp Must be kidding. After 15 days and no proposal by Obama or Reid, GOP leadership may pass Democratic deal for them? http://t.co/...

FreedomWorks and Club For Growth are frothing and foaming.



@philipaklein FreedomWorks: "The line separating the Democrats and the Republican establishment is fading- it might have disappeared today."

But House conservatives like Raul Labrador know what the real problem with their plan was. It's the fault of that damn meddling media for saying House Republicans wanted to repeal Obamacare instead of calmly explaining that the Republicans merely wanted to reasonably exchange defunding or delaying the law in exchange for allowing the federal government to continue to function. Stop painting us as unreasonable!

"We never asked for a full repeal of Obamacare because we can't get that," he said. "We have voted on a full repeal of Obamacare that the Senate has rejected every single time. But what we were asking for, our position from the beginning, was exchanging a one-year CR for a one-year delay of Obamacare. That was something we thought both sides were giving on something."

John Boehner may have decided that he'd rather not plunge the United States into default quite just yet, but the true believers? They're mad. Really, really mad. A roundup of arsonist reactions:

Much more, below the fold.