A Community Open House & Expo, which will be held from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. April 19, on the Edison campus of Middlesex County College at 2600 Woodbridge Ave.

Middlesex County College’s Edison campus will open its doors to the community to celebrate its 50th anniversary. (Photo: Courtesy of Nicole Kazar) Story Highlights Middlesex County College will host a daylong event that will features activities for all ages.

The MCC Theater Camp will conduct a drama workshop.

The Middlesex Academy for Science, Math and Engineering is organizing Bubble Soccer.

The event will include exhibitions and workshops highlighting college programs.

Residents are invited to celebrate Middlesex County College's 50th anniversary celebration on April 19.

The college will open its doors to the community for its Community Open House & Expo, which will run from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., on the local campus, 2600 Woodbridge Ave. The event will offer activities for all ages.

"It's a celebration of MCC and will be a lot of fun," Lisa Gregory, associate director of admissions and co-chair of the organizing committee, said. "So whether you are considering enrolling at Middlesex or you would just like to see the campus and have a great time, this event is for you."

RELATED: Five decades and counting

Children will have the opportunity to decorate and eat their own cupcakes. There will also be pony rides and a petting zoo. The MCC Theater Camp will conduct a drama workshop. The Middlesex Academy for Science, Math and Engineering is organizing Bubble Soccer. Parents and children can tour the college's Child Care Center. In addition, the pool will be open for recreational swim.

The British Invasion Tribute Band, featuring Robert Murdock, class of '79, will entertain. The Edison Light Cruisers will conduct a car show from noon to 4 p.m., which will feature at least 100 classic, modern muscle cars, exotic and specialty cars.

The event also will include a performance of "Fiddler on the Roof," which made its debut in 1964. Tickets for the show may be ordered in advance from the website.

Alumni artists have created paintings, sculptures and mixed media pieces that will be displayed. At least one work from each artist will be auctioned off with the proceeds going to the Alumni Scholarship Fund. The program will be curated by Dorothy Bitetto '69, Alumni Association president, and Francine Neidle-Krimsky '86, who retired last spring after 28 years as professor of graphic arts.

Visual-art students will have an exhibition of their work on display and credit and non-credit programs will offer workshops and information sessions in their areas.

MCC student groups also will be involved in the day's activities. The award-winning step dance team, "Exitium," will perform and clubs will provide information on their mission and programs.

The Blue Colt Bookstore will be open all day and will have sales of items, including candy popular from the 1960s, as well as the story time for children. Democracy House, the college's service learning program, will organize a blood drive for the community. The MCC Foundation will sponsor miniature golf. The baseball and softball teams have home doubleheaders scheduled at noon.

Debórah Dwork, a Holocaust scholar, will speak on "Refugees 1933-1945 and 1990-2015" in a program at 2:30 p.m. that is co-sponsored by MCC's Center for the Study of Genocide, Prejudice and the Holocaust.

The foundation will conduct a Community Forum.

A display of photos and memorabilia from the college's history, as well as the book, "Endless Possiblities Middlesex County College 1964 to 2014," will be on display.

MyCentralJersey.com and other organizations also will be at the event.

All activities are free except for the performance of "Fiddler on the Roof." For a complete list and to register, visit www.MCCOpenHouse.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1FO0v4l