Former New Hampshire Congressman Charlie Bass once derided his neighbor to the west as a “Sandernista,” linking the name of Vermonter Bernie Sanders with that of the ruling democratic socialist Sandinista party in Nicaragua. But earlier this month it was Sanders who had the last laugh, notching an impressive Granite State victory against Hillary Clinton. Sanders’ showing in New Hampshire—after a close second-place finish in the Iowa Caucus ensures that the Democratic party will have a competitive race for at least the next several weeks.

Sanders’ proposals read like a progressive’s wish list. However, Sanders’ suggestion of a political revolution lacks enough reverence for what has been accomplished under President Obama, most notably during 2009-2010 with the 111th Congress. This was the most productive progressive legislative session in a generation, and Democrats would be well-advised to defend these accomplishments with Democratic establishment candidate Hillary Clinton, rather than chancing that the House of Representatives—where Republicans will likely have an iron grip until at least 2023—will want to work with a democratic socialist to implement a 52 percent top tax bracket to pay for single-payer healthcare and free college tuition.

Advertisement

Consider some of the hard-won achievements that badly need defending. The 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA, or Obamacare) brought affordable health insurance options to all Americans. The ACA protects Americans from being denied coverage if they get sick, lower income people have access to free or subsidized insurance, and everyone can buy insurance that has a minimum set of benefits. This had been a goal of progressives for nearly a century.

There’s no reason not to believe Republican presidential candidates when they say they will repeal the ACA if elected. Meanwhile, a Republican Congress can easily ignore a proposal to enact single-payer healthcare from a President Sanders.

Another important accomplishment is the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Dodd-Frank requires large banks to keep enough cash to protect against a wave of defaults. The Act better regulates the credit rating agencies and launched the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. Again, no reason to think a Republican in the White House wouldn’t gut the law, nor that a President Sanders could pass his proposed legislation to break up big banks further.

That’s not all. The Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 dramatically changed the statute of limitations for filing an equal-pay lawsuit under the Civil Rights Act, which means the worker can actively confront discriminatory pay practices in the present, not just near the start of employment. 2010 brought us the end of the military’s Don’t’ Ask, Don’t Tell policy, which prohibited LGBT service members from serving openly in the military.

To find a progressive legislative term more historic than the 111th, you have to go back 44 years to the 89th Congress of 1965-1966. The 89th enacted the landmark Voting Rights Act and created Medicare and Medicaid. Would it have been better at the time to extend Medicare coverage to all Americans, and to more aggressively combat discrimination? Of course. But the 89th Congress had to find bills that could pass both houses. And in doing so, they changed the direction of the country for the better. History will look back on the 111th Congress of 2009-2010 with similar gravity.

Advertisement

Frustrated progressives will point out that President Obama leaves behind problems that a courageously progressive president could tackle head-on — the price of college, healthcare, tax reform. But it’s unlikely any Democratic president will be able to negotiate with a Republican Congress to address any of these issues in a revolutionary way. Conservatives hold too much power in Washington to allow more than incremental tweaks to major progressive programs, but those are badly needed too.

Bernie Sanders has an important voice in the Senate and in our national dialogue. But the best choice for progressive voters this year is to dig in deep and defend the victories of the 111th Congress by supporting Hillary Clinton: an established Democratic candidate who appreciates the achievements we must cement even as she strives and maneuvers for still better.