When Pam Bondi became Florida's first female attorney general in January 2011, some who had known her as a prosecutor in Tampa had hopes she would be a real problem-solver, not a partisan ideologue. Those hopes faded quickly.

Just two months later, as a member of the Parole Board, Bondi enthusiastically voted to make Florida the hardest state for ex-felons to regain their civil rights. She ignored former Gov. Jeb Bush's Ex-Offender Task Force, which concluded that easier rights restoration would help Florida by motivating more ex-felons to stay straight.

Most recently, Bondi has continued her defense of Florida's same-sex marriage ban, despite five court rulings against it. A self-described conservative would seemingly oppose laws that deny rights, but Bondi clings to an amendment that strips gay people of rights related to everything from taxes to end-of-life decisions.

Same-sex marriage, however, is just one of many issues where Bondi has acted against the interests of the state and its people. In February, she joined a lawsuit opposing cleanup of the Chesapeake Bay, which is hundreds of miles from Florida. Despite the urgency here of restoring the Everglades after decades of abuse from agricultural runoff, Bondi sided in that case with the American Farm Bureau and the Fertilizer Institute.

Compared with other attorneys general, Bondi also was passive in the multi-state lawsuit against financial companies. She has never intervened on behalf of consumers in a utility rate case, unlike her three predecessors, from both parties. She sued BP very late after the oil explosion in the Gulf of Mexico. She has no major consumer protection victories. Last year, she talked about joining a lawsuit against Donald Trump's online university. Shortly afterward, the Trump Foundation donated $25,000 to a committee supporting Bondi. She has not joined the lawsuit.

Bondi waited eight months before visiting the Miami office that is the center of the fight against Medicaid fraud. And two years after she took office, the fraud unit had 23 vacancies. Yet Bondi has found time to argue against the Affordable Care Act before the U.S. Supreme Court. She lost, as she lost her defense of Gov. Rick Scott's efforts to drug-test welfare recipients and the Legislature's stealth attempt to privatize prisons through budget language, rather than legislation.

Bondi demonstrated similar poor judgment last September when, to accommodate her campaign kick-off event, she asked the governor to postpone the execution of double-murderer Marshall Lee Gore, delaying justice. And she made another error in judgment by refusing to return a dog she rescued after Hurricane Katrina, forcing the dog's devastated family to sue her for its return.

Challenging Bondi in her re-election campaign are Democrat George Sheldon and Libertarian Bill Wohlsifer.

The far better alternative is Sheldon. He doesn't have Bondi's money — $3 million directly to her, much of it from corporate interests. And as a speaker, Sheldon can put even supporters to sleep.

But lack of charisma is not lack of resolve or record. As deputy attorney general from 1999 to 2003, Sheldon helped in the successful lawsuit against the Adam's Mark hotel chain for racial discrimination. During his four years, the office successfully sued Eckerd Drugs — which CVS bought — over deceptive drug marketing. After Sheldon served as deputy secretary of the Department of Children and Families under Charlie Crist, Scott's transition team called DCF the state's best-run agency.

To contrast himself with Bondi, Sheldon says he would investigate a device that lawsuits claim has harmed women being treated for female incontinence. And if his lawsuit alleging Scott has not followed campaign disclosure rules was political, it went where Bondi never would, but should. While Sheldon correctly acknowledges Bondi's important work on pill mills and human trafficking, he also is correct that local law enforcement did more, and sooner.

"There are very few offices," Sheldon told the Sun Sentinel Editorial Board, "that have the ability of an attorney general to look at issues affecting the public."

Bondi has ignored the public good. As Sheldon says, "On almost every issue, she's wrong."

The attorney general, he says, "must be the people's lawyer, not the governor's lawyer."

The Sun Sentinel strongly recommends George Sheldon.