WASHINGTON, D. C. - Champaign County GOP Rep. Jim Jordan isn't sure whether he'll end up leading a newly established conservative group called the "House Freedom Caucus" whose goal in Congress is to strive for "an agenda of limited constitutional government."

Jordan expects the group's roughly 40 members will formalize its structure, rules and leadership at a meeting early next week. He said in an interview this week that he's not seeking to lead the organization but would be willing to do so if others ask him.

"If the group wants me to serve in some role, I am open to that," said Jordan, the only Ohioan so far to join the new group. "I would maybe be more open to someone else serving in that role."

Jordan is admired enough by his House conservative colleagues that one compared him to George Washington in an interview this week. During the past two congressional sessions, colleagues who were disenchanted with John Boehner's leadership cast votes for Jordan to be House Speaker, even though he wasn't seeking the post.

"I have no interest in being Speaker," said Jordan, who formerly chaired a more established group for House conservatives, the House Republican Study Committee. "John Boehner has a tough job. I respect the fact that he has a tough job."

Jordan says the new group's immediate priority is to prompt Senate passage of a House-passed bill that defunds President Obama's November actions to give work permits to millions of immigrants who are in the United States illegally and temporarily halt some deportations.

Senate Democrats have blocked consideration of the bill, and President Obama has said he'll veto it. If the House and Senate can't agree on a bill with Obama, funding for the Department of Homeland Security - which oversees immigration - will expire on Feb. 27.

Jordan said his group plans to pressure Democratic senators to allow consideration of the bill, particularly those who questioned whether Obama's actions were constitutional.

"We have to run a 21-day campaign," said Jordan. "Our folks have been active. I did a TV hit. We're blogging, we're tweeting. All that stuff."

Jordan said the group will also work on coming up with alternative legislation to replace Obamacare, which conservatives hope will be gutted by an upcoming Supreme Court case.

"We will have an Obamacare alternative," said Jordan, who anticipates it will focus on health savings accounts, patient empowerment, and allowing people to keep their own doctors. "That will be the longer-term project."

He said the new group will be a "smaller, more cohesive, more agile and more active" conservative group than the Republican Study Committee.

"We think there are significant numbers of middle-class families who think this town has forgotten them," said Jordan. "We see our vision as standing up and fighting for those families who feel like no one is really fighting for them and doing it in a way that's consistent with the Constitution and conservative principles and principles we think are good for the country."