Torrance Memorial Medical Center. File photo. (Thomas R. Cordova / Staff Photographer)

When Jessica Reed’s elderly father began experiencing severe eye pain this week, she took him to the emergency room at Providence Little Company of Mary Medical Center in Torrance and was quickly stunned at the crowded conditions they encountered.

“They were taking patients’ vitals and giving them blood tests, pills or even IVs in the lobby,” said the Redondo Beach resident. “I was very shocked to see that.”

Reed soon learned what was occurring on that Monday, the first workday of the new year, when Dr. William Conrad, chairman of the Emergency Department, publicly asked the tired, frustrated and ailing patients for their patience.

Conrad, who himself had been called into work because of the massive influx of outpatients, announced to the crowd at about 8 p.m. Monday that the hospital was experiencing the greatest number of emergency room visits in its 55-year history.

At that moment, 109 patients were seeking treatment — the highest number ever at one time, a hospital spokeswoman said.

“I remember the days in 1999 when we would occasionally have a patient-free environment,” said Conrad, an ER doctor at the Torrance hospital for 16 years.

“We would see about 60 patients a day,” he recalled. “What’s happened over the following 16 years is we’ve reached an incredible volume. In a single day (Monday), we saw 283 patients in a 29-bed emergency room. It’s a staggering number.”

Across town, Torrance Memorial Medical Center was experiencing a similar surge Monday with an “unprecedented” 285 patients admitted to the hospital, said Dr. Eric Nakkim, who co-manages the Emergency Department with registered nurse Shahin Thomas.

Patients waited up to three hours to be seen that day, far longer than the usual time of about 40 minutes, Nakkim said.

“It was very busy, very crazy, very stressful,” Thomas said. “It put a stress on everyone.

“The majority of the patients we see are gastrointestinal, cold, sore throat, earache,” she added. “Those types of things could be seen in urgent care or could be seen by their primary physician.”

A combination of factors contributed to the outpatient overload this week:

• Winter is prime season for coughs and colds, so hospital ERs traditionally are busier during those months anyway.

• Monday was the first workday of 2016 and many family doctors had shut their doors for the holidays, so there was pent-up demand for treatment.

Advertisement

• Many primary care physicians are also so busy their patients may not be able to get a quick appointment to treat an illness and, rather than wait days or weeks for one, choose to go to an ER.

• Those who had struggled with an illness over the holiday weekend suddenly realized Monday they weren’t ready to go to work and headed to an ER for treatment.

• Some hospitals have closed their doors over the past few years, which can contribute to a patient overload for others at peak times.

• Perhaps most significantly, the Affordable Care Act kicked in a year or so ago, significantly increasing the number of insured. But many of those who signed up may not have their own family doctor or are otherwise unaware of the complex health delivery system, including the network of urgent care centers that are available.

Patient volume in the emergency room at Torrance Memorial has increased about 25 percent since what many call Obamacare took effect, Thomas said.

“Those patients who were medically disenfranchised now have health care coverage, which is good,” Conrad said. “But there is an imbalance between the outpatient resources for those patients and the number that are now insured.”

That hospital ERs can get clogged with patients who clearly do not have emergency medical issues has potentially troubling implications for seriously ill patients and those who care for them.

Emergency rooms that are always staffed around the clock offer perhaps the most expensive medical care that exists.

What’s more, ERs are, after all, for people with genuine medical emergencies. And their care can be compromised when doctors and nurses are instead dealing with relatively minor medical conditions.

For instance, when emergency rooms are overloaded, ambulances can be put on what’s called diversion.

In those situations, a hospital with a crowded emergency room can decide not to accept patients arriving by ambulance for one-hour increments. The problem, of course, is that patients arriving by ambulance often are in need of more immediate medical care than those who walk in.

But hospitals by law can’t stop treating folks who just walk in. So they divert ambulances to other hospitals.

While diversion is “uncommon” at Torrance Memorial, on Monday it occurred for six hours in a 24-hour period.

Likewise, Little Company of Mary was forced to impose diversion for 25 hours from Jan. 4-6.

And therein lies the problem.

“When things are so bad that we’re on diversion, it’s highly likely that at that same moment in time all of our neighbors are on diversion as well,” Nakkim said. “And when everyone is on diversion, then functionally it’s just like everyone’s open. A patient has got to go someplace.”

So the ERs accept the patients anyway.

“It puts a tremendous strain on the system,” he added. “It’s much simpler to give care when you’re not dealing with these huge volumes.”

Indeed, things could be much worse at Torrance Memorial during peak periods had the hospital not changed the way it treated patients in the ER in an effort to reduce long waits to see a physician.

In the fall of 2013, the hospital began redeploying staff in its 200-foot-long, 40-bed emergency room into five “pods” of doctors, nurses and technicians that are responsible for eight to 10 beds each.

At least one team is responsible for seeing nonemergency cases, Nakkim said.

The result is that doctors spend less time walking the length of the ER, communication and accountability between the small teams improves and patient wait times are cut almost in half.

Meanwhile, doctors find themselves counseling patients who may not have a family doctor to get one before they fall ill again or suggesting other resources such as urgent care clinics for some minor medical issues.

Preventive medicine means fewer health problems and can help reduce unnecessary ER visits.

“I don’t particularly blame these people at all for coming in for care,” Nakkim said. “I do try to educate them after the fact on where to go. When they first come in, I don’t lecture them — ‘Why didn’t you go to your doctor?’ — That’s not really my place, that’s not what we’re about. We’re about treating people right.”

Which is why Conrad made his emergency room announcement Monday.

“It’s a beautiful thing when it changes the perception: it’s no longer one of ‘these people are uncaring and they’re not working hard,’ ” he said. “It’s important that leadership be available.”

And it was appreciated by the likes of Reed, especially considering she and her father spent about 10 hours in the emergency room, during which he was administered a painkiller in the lobby.

“He is awesome,” Reed said of Conrad. “Once he came out and told us that, I think everybody in the room was more at ease, including myself.”