U.S. Rep. Annie Kuster co-sponsored new legislation this week designed to amend a flaw in the Affordable Care Act that indirectly incentivizes doctors to prescribe excessive opioids for pain relief.

Kuster, D-N.H., said the bill strikes a harmful provision in the federal law to encourage doctors prescribing medication in an effort to prevent patients from becoming dependent on the opioid, thus increasing the likelihood of becoming addiction. ...

Please sign up for as low as 36 cents per day to continue viewing our website.

U.S. Rep. Annie Kuster co-sponsored new legislation this week designed to amend a flaw in the Affordable Care Act that indirectly incentivizes doctors to prescribe excessive opioids for pain relief.

Kuster, D-N.H., said the bill strikes a harmful provision in the federal law to encourage doctors prescribing medication in an effort to prevent patients from becoming dependent on the opioid, thus increasing the likelihood of becoming addiction.

Kuster co-sponsored the Promoting Responsible Opioid Prescribing Act with U.S. Rep. Alex Mooney, a West Virginia Republican, who introduced the bill to fix what he called a technical modification to the ACA - known as Obamacare - to eliminate a possible penalty on physicians who refuse to overprescribe opioid drugs. There is a provision that links Medicare reimbursement rates for doctors to patients' self-assessed pain levels, which has at times led to overprescribing opioids.

The measure would remove the link between the self-assessed pain level and reimbursement rates, relieving doctors and medical centers of undue pressure when prescribing narcotic pain medicine.

"We must put an end to this epidemic once and for all - I urge my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to come together and pass this important legislation without delay," Kuster, co-founder of the Bipartisan Task Force to End the Heroin Epidemic, said in a statement. "Around the country, families are losing loved ones to the devastating opioid epidemic that is sweeping across the nation. Far too many of those individuals struggling with opioid and heroin addiction first started after developing a dependence on prescription drugs."

Both New Hampshire and West Virginia, as well as most states across the Northeast, have seen a dramatic rise in heroin and opioid addiction. In many cases, those individuals struggling with addiction became dependent on prescription drugs.

State officials here have called the heroin/opioid crisis the most pressing public health and public safety issue after more than 400 overdose-related deaths in New Hampshire last year.

In her State of the State address, Gov. Maggie Hassan said drug overdoses are now the second-most common cause of death, topping diabetes, breast cancer and motor vehicle accidents. New Hampshire Republican Rep. Frank Gunita also signed on as a co-sponsor to the measure, along with lawmakers from Massachusetts and the Midwest.

"Prescription drug abuse is wreaking havoc on families and communities in West Virginia and across our country. We have to fight back against this drug epidemic before it tears more lives apart," Mooney said in a statement. "The Promoting Responsible Opioid Prescribing Act changes current law to help end the unnecessary overuse of prescription painkillers. In doing so, this bill empowers doctors, not the federal government, to choose what is right for patients."

Chris Garofolo can be reached at 594-6465, cgarofolo@nashua

telegraph.com or @Telegraph_Chris.