Topics: News, Politics News

Venezuela’s opposition won control of the legislature in the election Sunday, for the first time in almost two decades.

The president of the country’s National Electoral Council told the Associated Press that the Democratic Unity Roundtable (MUD) — a right-leaning coalition of right-wing, centrist, and center-left opposition parties led by conservative politician Henrique Capriles, head of the right-wing Justice First party — won at least 99 seats in the 167-seat National Assembly, while the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV) won 46.

For 17 years, the PSUV has enjoyed enormous popularity in Venezuela. Its economic and social programs drastically reduced poverty, created universal healthcare, and promoted widespread literacy and education. Compared to its Latin American neighbors, Venezuela has consistently led the region in reducing poverty.

In recent years, the Venezuelan economy has faced turbulence and rising inflation. Venezuela has the world’s largest oil reserves, and the rapid drop in the price of oil has hit it particularly hard.

The opposition, which blames the government’s left-wing policies for the instability, has capitalized on the turmoil. Supporters of the government, on the other hand, say powerful business oligarchs, corporations, and foreign governments — especially the U.S. — have pursued policies of economic sabotage in Venezuela. This view is supported by the information revealed in U.S. government documents released by WikiLeaks.

After the election, President Nicolás Maduro — who was elected after the death of Hugo Chávez in 2013 — lamented in a televised address, “I can say today that the economic war has triumphed.”

The electoral victory marks the first time a right-wing government will rule Venezuela in this century.

Although Venezuela’s democratically elected socialist government has been widely characterized by the right wing as a “dictatorship,” in 2012, former President Jimmy Carter — who won a Nobel prize for his international election-monitoring work through the Carter Center — remarked, “As a matter of fact, of the 92 elections that we’ve monitored, I would say that the election process in Venezuela is the best in the world.”

Under the PSUV, Venezuela has been known for its harsh criticism of U.S. foreign policy. In 2006, President Chávez called George W. Bush a “devil” in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly, in comments met with applause from the audience. Chávez also referred to President Bush as a “donkey.”