Topics: From the Wires, News

VALENCIA, Spain (AP) — At the height of Spain’s crushing economic crisis, the Villareal soccer club sported an eye-catching logo across its jerseys: Aeroport Castello. The local government paid the club 20 million euros ($27 million) to promote what was to become Spain’s most notorious “ghost airport” — one that hasn’t seen a single flight since it opened in 2011.

The deal illustrates one of the peculiarities of Spain’s meltdown: As austerity measures sap the life from health, education and welfare programs, Spain’s soccer teams have been receiving hundreds of millions of dollars in government aid. The government says soccer subsidies are simply part of a policy of supporting sports around the country.

An Associated Press review of official documents shows that Spain’s highly autonomous regions are helping to keep some soccer teams alive through massive direct cash injections. The financing has some politicians and ordinary Spaniards questioning the support.

The 20 clubs in Spain’s top soccer league received at least 332 million euros in direct public aid between 2008 — the beginning of Spain’s financial meltdown — and 2012, according to the AP review. The funds were allocated through public agencies and companies run by the country’s 17 regional governments. In the same time period, the clubs have also benefited from an additional 476 million euros in indirect aid, such as allowing clubs to run up tax and social security debts.

That makes the total 810 million euros in the years reviewed — $1.1 billion.

The AP tally is based on club accounts, the budgets of local and regional authorities, and documents submitted to regional audit courts that oversee public expenditure.

“Soccer puts the fear of God into politicians,” said Sandalio Gomez, a sports management expert at the IESE Business School in Madrid. “They find ways of getting money to the clubs without which (the clubs) would not survive.”

The European Union is investigating whether government loan guarantees for seven Spanish clubs violate EU competition law, designed in part to prevent businesses from enjoying unfair advantage through state intervention. The probe is examining tax breaks granted to the Real Madrid, Barcelona, Athletic Bilbao and Osasuna soccer clubs.

Ten of the 23 members of Spain’s national team — the reigning champion playing its opening World Cup match on Friday — belong to those clubs. So do many of the World Cup’s other biggest stars: Brazil’s Neymar, Portugal’s Cristiano Ronaldo and Argentina’s Leonel Messi all draw their salaries from clubs being investigated, though the great bulk of their income comes from sponsorship deals rather than government subsidies.

But that’s just a part of government assistance to Spain’s soccer league, according to the AP review.

The largest case of government subsidies can be found in the city of Valencia, on Spain’s eastern seaboard. The AP found that over the 2008-12 period, the Valencia region pumped 169 million euros into its four top-flight soccer clubs: Valencia, Elche, Levante and Villareal.