"He's yet to mention a stand on any issue. It's just sound bites."



I watched the Freedom Summit in Iowa Saturday on my computer at home. As our governor spoke, I was exchanging texts with a state legislator who will remain nameless.

I bet the legislator a six-pack of beer that Chris Christie will enter the 2016 presidential race.

“He’s yet to mention a stance on an issue,” he wrote me. “It’s just sound bites.”

“Exactly,” I wrote back. “Now gimme my beer.”

In his speech, Christie took exactly the position you’d expect a candidate for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination to take: Say nothing; but sound determined when you say it.

After all, that worked for Mitt Romney last time around. Remember how he used to pound the dais and proclaim that his first act in office would be to repeal Obamacare?

In fact, Romney invented the Obamacare approach when he was Massachusetts governor. (See video below) Republicans remain in denial about this, and I’d never heard one mention it until Donald Trump did Saturday. The Donald argued that Romneycare alone should keep Republicans from nominating Romney for the 2016 nomination.

It should indeed. But then it should have kept them from nominating him in 2012. They did it anyway. And then they professed shock when voters chose the real Obama over the imitation.



Among those who misread that race was Kellyanne Conway, a Fox News personality and pollster who spoke at the summit. The host introduced Conway with gushing praise for her polling skills, but I have a different recollection from my one encounter with her.

That came just 10 days before the 2012 election, when I was on a three-person panel with her before a Republican group in Morristown. When the moderator pressed us for our predictions, Conway said that “I do believe Romney will win, and we will all go to bed early,” according to a report of the event from the Morristown Green site. So did the other panelist.

That left it to me to inform the audience of the grim reality: “Mulshine predicted a very close vote but bet a six-pack it would be Obama,” the article states.

I didn’t have any takers on that bet. Pat Murray certainly wouldn’t have taken it. He’s the head of the Monmouth University Poll with whom I’d been consulting prior to that race.

Like most professional pollsters, Murray noted that Obama was leading in the dozen or so swing states and therefore would cruise to a comfortable win. That’s exactly what happened, yet on Election Day top Republican insiders were still predicting a Romney landslide.

I saw little evidence from the speakers Saturday that things will be different next year. The contenders offered a variation on what Romney offered: We promise to drastically cut the federal budget – with the exception of course of Medicare, Social Security and defense.

Of course, most of the budget goes to those three programs, so where would the candidates cut? Like Christie, they’re not saying. To do so might cost support in crucial swing states like Ohio, Florida, Pennsylvania, Virginia and Colorado.

But bashing big government is not a strategy that will work with swing voters, Murray said when I called him after the event.

“Look at these states. Their big concern is not big government,” he said. “Big government is okay if it’s helping me out.”

That’s reflected in the records of two of the last three Republican nominees for president. George W. Bush gave us the biggest Medicare expansion ever. Romney gave us the individual mandate to buy health insurance.

As for the third, John McCain wants a government big enough to run the entire world. On a talk show Sunday he called for more “boots on the ground” in places like Yemen. Insane as that is, it’s more accepted by the mainstream GOP than the so-called “neo-isolationism” of Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, who did not attend the Saturday event and clearly would have been unwelcome.

It’s up to Christie to sort this all out. I can’t wait to hear how he plans to do it.

We certainly got no hint of that over the weekend. But we did get news Monday that Christie's crew is planning to set up an exploratory committee.

And I’m planning on enjoying that India Pale Ale.

(Below: I don't know if the Donald was trying to help Christie with these remarks, but the way he demolished Mitt Romney and Jeb Bush leaves Christie as the most prominent mainstream hopeful standing - although Alan Steinberg makes a good case Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker could knock him from that perch. This is the reasoning behind Christie's run.)

By the way, the real name for the river in Des Moines is - ready for this? - the Des Moines River.