Generic Doctors Visit Photo (Photo: WWL)

NEW ORLEANS (WWL-TV) -- Both United Healthcare and Ochsner Health System have been inundated with calls Monday as patients learned that soon they may have to change doctors. However, the changes only apply to some policies, not everyone who has United coverage.

"Who could afford that? That's a house note for most people," Lori Demonsabert, 56, said of her previous health care policy.

Demonsabert, who works as a hairdresser, went off of her Union Health Care policy and logged on to Healthcare.gov in 2016 to save money. She bought from Compass, the Obamacare or PPACA division of United Healthcare. It took her a month to finally get an appointment at Ochsner for hip bone problems.

However, with no warning or letter from United, Demonsabert found out Ochsner and United/Compass are ending the in-network contract starting May 15.

"I can't go to Ochsner at all, so I have to cancel that appointment,” Semonsabert said. “Then they (Ochsner) try to tell me I didn't give them 24-hours to cancel it, and they were going to charge me."

United will quit selling on the Health Insurance Marketplace (PPACA) policies at the end of this year. The 29,000 people in Louisiana who have that policy can continue going to their doctors through December, but for 2017 many will be moved to the Medicaid expansion.

Others can sign up for Obamacare through Vantage, BCBS or Humana, but for the 3,000 who are using Ochsner, that in-network policy will end May 15.

Those policy-holders will need to call United and find a new primary care doctor for the rest of 2016 at one of 24 other hospitals in the area, such as East Jefferson General Hospital or West Jefferson Medical Center.

Gabe Janusa, an insurance broker with Demand Insurance and Benefits said that change could be difficult for people.

"What was happening is that people are making health care decisions based off of what doctors and providers are in the network," Janusa said.

"There's 3,000 people right now, as of today, looking for another primary care physician," Demonsabert said. "I am one of them."

Medical Watch called the consumer line, and after 10 minutes on hold, a recording explained that due to the high volume of callers, the hold time could go longer than an additional 20 minutes.

This change does not affect those with private United Healthcare policies, like through an employer. For United-Compass patients who are Ochsner transplant patients, and others with more serious long-term treatments will be able to keep their Ochsner doctor.

United policy-holders can call the number located on the back of the insurance card to learn more.

Update: A United spokeswoman asked Medical Watch for the name of the patient in our story and said she should have been notified of the changes and that the company would get in touch with her.

(© 2016 WWL)