The federal government sent out incorrect information on about 800,000 1095-A forms, a new form being sent to consumers covered under the Affordable Care Act.

Buy Photo The federal government sent out incorrect information on about 800,000 1095-A forms, a new form being sent to consumers covered under the Affordable Care Act. The form is needed to file 2014 tax returns. (Photo: Detroit Free Press file)Buy Photo

Those who had been expecting trouble this tax season with the latest paperwork involving the Affordable Care Act found it Friday.

Thousands of people in Michigan and elsewhere now will have to delay filing their federal and state income tax returns until at least March, as a result of a glitch involving health-care related tax forms.

The federal government sent out incorrect information on about 800,000 1095-A forms, a new form being sent to consumers covered under the Affordable Care Act. The form is needed to file 2014 tax returns.

It's a glitch that means many people who file earlier to get refunds will now have to wait longer for their money from the federal government and in some cases from state credits.

The HealthCare.gov blog lead with a question today: "Is your Form 1095-A Correct?"

Why wouldn't it be?

The web site said that most people have received a correct Form 1095-A.

But hundreds of thousands of consumers nationwide could be contacted by the federal government very soon because of incorrect information on some forms.

The forms used numbers for 2015 healthcare premiums, not 2014 costs, as would be needed for 2014 tax returns. It's as bad as an employer sending out wrong W-2 forms.

"Some forms included the monthly premium amount of the second lowest cost Silver plan for 2015, instead of 2014, which needs to be corrected."

Terry Stanton, director of communications for the Michigan Department of Treasury, said incorrect 1095-A forms may impact the calculation of total household resources for individuals filing a Michigan Homestead Property Tax Credit and the Michigan Home Heating Credit.

Stanton said it is not known now how many Michigan filers would be impacted.

Mark Ciaramitro, vice president of Health care services at H&R Block, said the announcement of the incorrect tax information will be an inconvenience for those who have already filed their tax returns, too.

Tax filers who already submitted 2014 tax returns but then received a corrected 1095-A will have to amend their tax return, Ciaramitro said.

Some tax filers who expect generous refunds and now need to amend those returns could discover they possibly need to repay portions of the Advance Premium Tax Credit, which also is part of the Affordable Care Act.

"We already know that more than half of those who received an Advance Premium Tax Credit must pay a portion of that back," Ciaramitro said.

"Now, this delay only compounds that dilemma."

The Affordable Care Act made healthcare a component for completing your taxes beginning on 2014 returns.

"We're working quickly to resolve this and any other issues with the 1095-A forms," according to HealthCare.gov.

Consumers who face problems will get a call and email in the next few days and there would be a message in the consumer's Marketplace account at HealthCare.gov.

All corrected forms should be available by early March, according to HealthCare.gov.

Taxpayers, of course, would not want to file their tax returns now if they have an indication that they've got the wrong numbers on their 1095-A forms.

HealthCare.gov said consumers who cannot wait could call the Marketplace Call Center at 800-318-2596. Or there is a tax tool on HealthCare.gov.

The 1095-A form includes information about health care premiums paid and is issued to calculate a consumer's premium health care credit.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1Ey81Pg