Volunteers will work through April to aid seniors, lower-income adults

Harry Love, left, looks over a tax return prepared by Cindy Nelson, center, as Michelle Firestone of Loveland, right, provides them with the information they need for her income tax forms on Tuesday at the First United Methodist Church. Love and Nelson are volunteers who help residents with their taxes through the Volunteer Income Tax Program. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Free tax preparation services through the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance, VITA, and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly, TCE, programs. When: 10 a.m.- 2 p.m. Monday to Thursday through mid-April. Where: First United Methodist Church, 533 N. Grant Ave., in the basement; a second site at the HNS Life Center, 1511 E. 11th St., starting in mid-February. More info: Visit www.makechangenoco.org or call 599-1794 (Loveland) or 599-1765 (Fort Collins). To donate: Send donations directly to Realities Focus, Inc., 2601 S. Lemay Ave., Ste. 7-187, Fort Collins, CO 80525 or online at www.makechangenoco.org or www.coloradogives.org.

Just as tax season got underway, volunteer tax preparer Cindy Nelson expected there to be the usual line Monday at a Loveland church.

That's because in past years, volunteers with the Larimer County Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program had to ask dozens of filers stopping in during the four-hour preparation period to come back later.

Advertisement

On Monday, the first day Realities Focus Inc. workers began preparing state and federal income tax forms for low- and middle-income and senior tax filers, the volunteers completed 24 forms. The volunteers at First United Methodist Church typically can handle 35 to 40 forms each day of the free service Monday to Thursday for 10 weeks through mid-April.

"It was slower than we anticipated. Typically, we had lines," said Nelson, a VITA volunteer for 12 years. New documents required as part of the Affordable Care Act, which will be sent in mid-February, could be part of the reason, he said.

Certified Volunteers

Internal Revenue Service-certified volunteers help Larimer County residents with their tax filing questions through VITA, which serves taxpayers ages 59 and younger with gross incomes as much as $57,000, and Tax Counseling for the Elderly, TCE, for filers ages 60 and older at sites in Loveland, Fort Collins and Windsor.

MakeChange NoCo is the registered trade name for Realities Focus, the nonprofit that provides VITA and TCE programs in Larimer County. The two programs were established through the Tax Reform Act of 1969.

This year, 25 volunteers are working in Loveland, 75 in Fort Collins and a small number in Windsor. They are required to undergo 20 hours of training and certification for each filing season.

"The bulk of our clients are so grateful to us. They're intimidated by taxes," Nelson said on Tuesday, the second day of the free service. "The taxes are so complicated. There are so many quirks and exceptions."

The volunteers spend an average of one hour per set of forms, Nelson said.

"A lot of the seniors we see — and low-income people we see — their returns are really simple, and they really don't justify going to a paid preparer to do a return," said Harry Love, Loveland area coordinator of the program and a board member of Realities Focus. "If they go to a paid preparer, they could be charged $275 or more. ... It's a way for them to be self-sufficient. We help our community members keep their income in the community."

Several of the filers qualify for a variety of credits, including child tax, education and retirement, Love said.

"We try to help seniors who are in a situation who can't afford to pay, or they're having difficulty getting their tax forms done," Love said. "It's no secret the tax code is complicated. The government prefers electronic filing, and some seniors don't know how to do it."

Last Year's Numbers

In 2014, Realities Focus helped nearly 4,000 taxpayers prepare their 2013 tax returns, saving them more than $600,000 in tax return preparation fees. The volunteers filed 1,272 returns in Loveland and a total of 3,264 in Larimer County.

Loveland resident Michelle Firestone stopped in a second time this year to get help with her taxes, after seeking help last year when she had three jobs.

"I didn't have money to pay someone else to do it," Firestone said on Tuesday. "I just feel more comfortable that I won't get anything back saying I did this wrong. They're very friendly and efficient."

Berthoud couple Bill and Judy Booren also used the service on Tuesday after getting help last year with their taxes when they had questions about their home purchase.

"We felt more secure having them do it than us doing it ourselves, because the law changes so much. You have to keep up with it all the time," Judy said.

The VITA volunteers work as greeters, preparers, quality reviewers and site coordinators — in Loveland, there typically is one greeter, seven preparers and two quality reviewers and two site coordinators.

The greeters sign in the clients and give them paperwork to fill out with their basic information and a checklist of what they may need to include in their tax returns. The preparer fills in the forms, which the reviewer checks for accuracy. The site coordinator, in charge of coordinating and overseeing the all of the activities, electronically files the completed forms.

VITA volunteer Kathy Weisshaar of Loveland is a retired tax preparer who's been volunteering with the program for nine years.

"This is more fun. For one, we're not selling them anything," Weisshaar said. "And we're still providing the same amount of service without having to charge people who can't afford that kind of fee."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm