ASSOCIATED PRESS

So that happened. On this week's podcast we hear from Rep. Hank Johnson (D-Ga.) about his bill to pursue police demilitarization, discuss the Confederate flag and the aftermath of the Emanuel AME church shooting in Charleston, debrief on the Supreme Court Obamacare ruling and find out why the state of Florida actually banished one of its residents.

Listen to this week's "So, That Happened" podcast below:

* * *

Some highlights from this week:

“What did Scalia want? Does he not realize that if they had upheld this decision, it would have brought every legal troll in the world out with their magnifying glasses looking for tiny little grammatical mistakes in laws to get them overturned.” — Jason Linkins, on Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia’s dissatisfaction with the Obamacare ruling

"If Senate Democrats had wanted to kill it, they could have. Instead, they decided to let it go through without getting anything in return.” — Zach Carter, on the Senate’s approval of Obama’s controversial trade agenda

“I believe it’s a culture that enables or says it's okay for law enforcement officers to shoot to kill blacks, be they male or female, Hispanics … to use excessive force. Yes, I do think it’s a cultural issue within certain departments. Certain departments have a documented history of using excessive force.” — Rep. Hank Johnson, on the perceived culture in some police departments

“Yes, I do think Confederate flags should come down off of statehouses, but ultimately, I personally wouldn’t care that much if they stayed if I saw some type of political shift away from racism.” — Julia Craven, on the implications of Confederate flags being taken down in Southern states

* * *

This podcast was produced and edited by Ibrahim Balkhy and engineered by Brad Shannon, with assistance from Christine Conetta and Adriana Usero.

To listen to this podcast later, download our show on iTunes. While you're there, please subscribe, rate and review our show. You can check out other HuffPost Podcasts here.

Have a story you'd like to hear discussed on "So, That Happened"? Email us at your convenience!

Shootings In America Shootings In America

1 of 13 Swat team members secure the scene near Sparks Middle School in Sparks, Nev., after a shooting there on Monday, Oct. 21, 2013. Authorities are reporting that two people were killed and two wounded at the Nevada middle school. (AP Photo/Kevin Clifford) Share this slide:

AP