Sisseton, SD

The Sisseton Redman Mascot has caused a stir in the community. For a collection of high school girls, they are trying to raise awareness about what they say is a civil rights issue.

For many it's a shirt, but for these high school students, it means much more.

"The message we want to send out is that it's not appropriate to make people an image and portray us as an image so that would give them the right to look down at us, and we're not an image, we're people too," student Fidelity Eastman said.

The shirt has a bandana over the face of the Sisseton Redman logo. The girls say it symbolizes the hidden faces of the country, American Indians. Many of the students went to the school in Sisseton before transferring to the Tribal School Tiospa Zina.

The girls say their problems aren't just with the mascot, but also the schools homecoming coronation. Every year people will wear traditional Native American headdress, even if they aren't Native American.

"That's not really suppose to be public and like it's kind of a sacred to us and it seems like to them their just making it a mockery and while they'll doing it there whooping and I don't know, I find that disrespectful," student Hailey Shepherd said.

Many of the girls play on the high school basketball team. Fiedelity Eastman says having teammates stand together is making this whole process easier.

"Having support from family, friends and everything, it just keeps it positive, and that's what we want. We just want positive vibes and positive change," Eastman said.

A classmate of the girls, Bruce Gunderson, also went to school in Sisseton before transferring to play basketball with Tiospa Zina this year.

"I went to school there pretty much my whole live and never got treated any different than any other kids and that's why I'm pretty much neutral and stuff," Gunderson said.

They girls say their message goes way beyond Sisseton. It's for anybody needing a voice.

"It's not just a racial issue. It's civil rights and we're not pinpointing out anybody. We're just standing up for what we believe in and what we believe is right," student Bethany Robertson said.

Whether it's huddling together on the basketball court, or praying together off of it, these high school students will continue to stand together and spread their message.

Around 300 shirts have been printed and handed out. The girls are not selling the t-shirts, just giving them out to raise awareness.

Education

Elementary

High School

Middle School {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.