TRENTON — Same-day surgery centers contributed $3.75 billion to New Jersey's economy last year, employing 9,100 people and generating $73 million in tax dollars, according to the industry's latest annual report that was released on Tuesday.

The second annual report by the New Jersey Association of Ambulatory Surgery Centers coincides with the introduction earlier this month of controversial legislation aimed at curbing the astronomical billing practices of some out-of-network physicians and hospitals. The association opposes the bill, which would limit what out-of-network medical professionals could charge for services.

"We always talk to legislators, and there are things on the horizon," said Larry Trenk, the association's president, explaining what impact he hoped the report would have in Trenton. The goal of the report is to "solidify our place" in the market "and make them appreciate our role."

"The report paints an impressive picture of how we impact the state economically. We're not a mom and pop (type of) industry," he added.

New Jersey's 72 hospitals contributed $21 billion to the state's economy in 2013, according to a report by the New Jersey Hospital Association in December.

There are 364 same-day surgery centers in New Jersey, each running, on average, a $4.3 million operation, according to the report. After dramatic growth in the industry in the 1990s, the state imposed a moratorium on the creation of new centers in 2009. But growth is expected, with the Affordable Care Act and Medicare both discouraging costlier in-patient hospital care whenever possible, Trenk said. More hospitals are forming partnerships with surgeons and surgery centers, he added.

"The industry has grown, there are more people employed, and the centers are busier. You are seeing more cases shift out of hospitals" such as spinal surgeries and hip and knee joint replacements, Trenk said.

Surgery centers are not legally mandated to accept uninsured "charity care" patients, which have made them the target of criticism by hospitals which must accept patients in need of emergency care regardless of their ability to pay. Trenk said the criticism overlooks the fact that each surgery center has paid a state tax based on profits. The tax was a maximum of $150,000 a year when it was instituted in 2004. This year, the most lucrative centers pay $350,000, he said.

The surgery center association's attorney, Mark Manigan of Roseland, issued a statement last week urging lawmakers who sponsored the so-called "out-of-network" bill to eliminate the requirement that centers monitor the billing practices of their physicians, and disclose the cost of each procedure, among other concerns. Lawmakers who sponsored the bill met with the association last week as well as dozens of out insurance and health care representatives to craft a compromise.

Information about how to obtain licensing, accreditation and inspection reports for specific same-day surgery centers, may be found here. The health department began posting inspection reports in 2012 at the urging of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, a consumer advocacy organization and think tank, which had obtained the records and shared them with The Star-Ledger.

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.