When they refer to Master Jack Harpole these days, they aren’t simply addressing a 12-year-old kid from Littleton anymore. Albeit to date unofficial, Jack Harpole clearly qualifies as a Colorado Master Angler following a weekend fishing trip with his father, John.

A bit foggier is the question of whether Master Jack may have become the state- record holder in not only Colorado but Utah as well when he landed a pair of monster mountain whitefish on both sides of the state line on consecutive days. During a whirlwind September weekend, the father-son team traveled to the “A” section of the Green River below Flaming Gorge in Utah, then returned to fish the Roaring Fork River just below Carbondale.

Between landing impressive brown trout, Jack caught the pair of mighty whities. Both were estimated in the vicinity of 5 pounds, roughly the over-under line for a state record in Utah and Colorado.

“I only later found out that the record in Utah for a mountain whitefish is 4 pounds, 12 ounces, set by Roy Montoya in 1997,” John Harpole said. “The whitefish Jack caught on the Roaring Fork the very next morning may not have broken the Colorado record of 5 pounds, 2 ounces, set back in 1982 by Richard Sals, but it must have been darn close.”

The fish easily met the 15-inch length requirement to earn Colorado Master Angler status for fish caught and released, as photos attest.

“I was showing the pictures to a fishing buddy of mine whose jaw dropped while he simultaneously stated, ‘Dude, you threw back two potential state records,’ ” John Harpole said. “I felt like an idiot.”

If there is blame to be cast, however, it likely falls on the shoulders of their fishing guides. Not only did they fail to recognize the potential records, but, as is so often the case, more or less dismissed the feisty whitefish as a worthwhile pursuit altogether. Never mind that they are native to the region — unlike rainbow and brown trout in the river — and are members of the trout family.

“Jack said the whitefish definitely put up a better fight than any of the others pound for pound,” John Harpole added.

Although many anglers tend to focus their attention on brown trout ahead of the autumn spawn, fall is a terrific time to target whitefish in Colorado. Now through mid-November, whitefish tend to congregate in densely populated schools that lend themselves to multiple hookups in a single session.

Like brown trout, whitefish spawn in autumn. But they use a different technique. Rather than digging individual spawning beds, or redds, in shallow water, whitefish huddle in deeper water for a mass spawning mission.

The bonus is that brown and rainbow trout often congregate below the spawning whitefish to feast upon the eggs. So even those who turn their noses up to these bottom dwellers reap the benefits of their presence.

Some argue whitefish are a detriment to trout populations because they too eat eggs. But the argument doesn’t hold water, considering trout are far better suited to eat whitefish minnows (up to 7 inches or so) as well as their eggs. The small, downturned mouth of a whitefish makes it virtually impossible for them to consume other fish, and the tackle of choice is typically a small, shiny fly such as a bead head prince, pheasant tail or copper John heavily weighted to bounce off the riverbed. Egg patterns will work too.

The beauty of the whitefish arrives in steady action, making them an especially good introduction for kids learning to fly-fish in a river. They will get plenty of practice fighting fish, and maybe even land the big one — or two.

“When I told Jack about the possibility of his whitefish anonymity, he just said, ‘No big deal, Dad,’ ” Harpole said. “I hope he feels that way 50 years from now.”

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby@denverpost.com or twitter.com/swilloughby