Dr. Ben Carson is a brain surgeon who has written eight books including a few New York Times best sellers about his work in medicine. He also happens to be running for president and is adamantly pro-life. Today at the National Right to Life (NRLC) Convention he shared about his work and how it’s affected his pro-life beliefs.

He said, “There are few things I like to talk about more than life. My whole career has been about that. There is nothing that you have that is more valuable than your life.”

He explained that this is exactly why he’s against Obamacare because it gives bureaucrats the power to do they want with health care.

Dr. Carson said, “America was designed around the people, with the government to facilitate life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. With the Affordable Care Act, the government comes along and says ‘We don’t care what you the people think.’ It turns the whole concept of America on it’s head and if we continue to accept it, where else will it go? It’s up to us the people to stand up for what we believe in.”

Additionally, Dr. Carson explained that he performed the first ever successful intrauterine surgery on a unborn baby who had Hydrocephalus, which causes a baby to accumulate fluid around the brain. He was amazed when he inserted a shunt and saw the baby’s head shrink on the ultrasound. Remarkably, the baby survived and later he mentioned that many pro-abortion physicians would have advised the mother to abort that child rather than save its life through surgery.

Dr. Carson stressed that technology and education can change the face of the pro-life movement. He said, “It’s hard to keep people in the dark with the technology that exists today and we have to continue to make that available to everybody because it’s education that’s going to save us. Our founders said that our society and liberties are based on well informed and an educated populous. Why? Because they realized that people who are uneducated are easy to manipulate.”

Dr. Carson is correct; medical technology is one of the reasons the pro-life movement is thriving today. For example, countless babies are saved every year thanks to ultrasounds, which can show the baby in utero in incredible detail. In fact, statistics show that 78% of pregnant women who see an ultrasound of their baby reject abortion.

Keep up with the latest pro-life news and information on Twitter. Follow @LifeNewsHQ

At the NRLC convention, Dr. Carson concluded by saying that millions of Christians didn’t vote in the last election and it’s critically important that those people go to the polls in 2016 and vote pro-life. He said, “We have a government that believes we aren’t a Judeo-Christian nation. But they don’t get to decide that, we get to decide that.”

As LifeNews previously reported, in 2013, Dr. Carson shared what he believes about the supposed “war on women” at the Voters Value Summit. He said, “You know, there are those of us in this society who have told women that there’s a war on them because that cute little baby inside of them, they may want to get rid of it and there are people that are keeping you from doing that,”

Carson continued. “And women say, ‘No, no, they’re not doing that to me! No!’ And they get all riled up.” He continued, “There is no war on them, the war is on their babies, Babies that cannot defend themselves. Over the past few decades, we have destroyed 55 million of them. And we have the nerve to call other societies of the past heathen. What we need to do is re-educate the women to understand that they are the defenders of these babies.”