Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina extracted a little revenge Friday on The View after her looks were criticized following the last GOP debate.

On October 29, the hosts on The View said that Fiorina looked “demented” and that her face was like a “Halloween mask.”

Those comments not only enraged conservatives, but also CNN’s Brooke Baldwin, who chastised The View for focusing on Fiorina’s looks. Baldwin wondered about whether or not they had a double standard since Behar had disapprovingly asked Donald Trump why he talked about Fiorina’s face instead of her brains, in reference to comments he made about her for Rolling Stone when he appeared on the show.

After some initial discussion about the campaign and what Fiorina is focusing on, Goldberg turned to the issue of humor and the comments that were made on the October 29 show.

“There are going to be lots of comics saying lots of different things and I wondered, because we saw that you were a little upset about us, about a comic comment that was made,” said Goldberg, “and so how will you steel your skin … Do you know what I mean? How will you get a thicker skin to accept some of the humorous things that will be said about you?”

“If you meant your comment about my face being demented and a Halloween mask as humorous, so be it,” Fiorina said. “I guess you misinterpreted Donald Trump’s comments about my face and thought those were not humorous, you sort of took him to task. But the point is, I have a real thick skin.”

Fiorina’s response didn’t sit well with Behar who jumped in and tried to defend herself by saying that she has made plenty of jokes about Hillary Clinton’s pantsuits and Bill Clinton’s sex life, and therefore didn’t understand “why any politician should be exempt from my comedic jokes.”

Making fun of Hillary’s pantsuits isn’t exactly the same as cracking jokes about Fiorina’s face, so I fail to see the logic there.

Fiorina got the last laugh, though, when Paula Faris said that she was making money off of her feud with The View, calling it “making lemonade out of lemons.”

“Oh, so you guys are telling me that you guys are lemons?” Fiorina said, earning applause from the hosts for her witty response.

The attacks on Fiorina’s looks weren’t comedy, but rather an attempt by Behar and company to take her down just in case she does win the Republican nomination, because they know that she would indeed be Hillary’s worst nightmare.