A local brick mason, left, views a completed cookstove with a small firebox to conserve wood fuel, a piece of metal with three openings for pots of different sizes, and a concrete pipe to take the smoke out of the home. ( Spense Havlick / Daily Camera )

Spense Havlick (Spense Havlick / Daily Camera)

Have you ever wondered why people from Guatemala and other Central American countries try to find a better life in the United States? Recently I found part of the answer and it is heart-breaking.

About a dozen service workers from Boulder (sponsored by Kansas City-based Transformational Journeys) were tasked with building fuel-efficient stoves for poverty-stricken Mayan families that pick coffee as their main livelihood. The stoves are made from concrete blocks, scored and chiseled with machetes. A concrete pipe takes the smoke from a small, efficient firebox through the roof out of the home.

Typical rural dwellings in the Guatemalan highlands consist of one room with a three-stone fire on a dirt floor. A sheet of metal is placed on the stones to heat water and cook tortillas. The smoke fills the room and coats the walls and ceiling with black creosote. Damage to eyes and lungs from the constant smoke has serious health impacts.

In the last two years a fungus or botanical rust has destroyed up to forty percent of the coffee harvest in this region that has coffee as a singular crop. This has an economic impact on families who are no longer able to afford sending their children to school. Chronic poverty due to crop failure, lack of education and inadequate housing help to motivate people from Guatemala and other Central American countries to try to enter the United States.

Advertisement

The plight of Mayan peoples goes back hundreds of years to the Spanish conquests of Central America. The greatest and bloodiest episode in the "cycles of conquest" that have befallen the Maya since the arrival of the Spaniards began May 29, 1978, in the Kechi-speaking town of Panzos, Guatemala. There a unit of the Guatemalan army opened fire on a group of Mayans peacefully protesting the government's refusal to award them land titles. More than 100 women, men and children were killed.

Past government death squads and security forces unleashed a reign of terror against the Mayans. Anthropologists from Queens University in Kingston, Ontario estimate that over one million Maya were displaced. Our National Academy of Science reports that 150,000 people were killed and an additional 40,000 "disappeared."

Last week, in a small village where the cook stoves were being built, two Mayan husbands left their wives and families and headed north to Mexico hoping to cross the U.S. border. One father was apprehended, imprisoned and then returned after spending years of savings on the escape.The other husband is unaccounted for.

Have you ever thought about the probability of rolling dice when it comes to where each of us is born? How is it that our sisters and brothers in Guatemala live in what we would consider utmost squalor with four large families sharing a single hole latrine with no potable water? And all of this is life under the shadow of military oppression.

Nevertheless, clothes are hand-scrubbed to pure white, tortillas are the constant meal, and laughter and family cohesiveness is abundant. Others who have done service projects in Third World countries have encountered similar situations where there was no electricity, sewerage, or drinkable water and perhaps only one or two meals a day.

Sending boots on the ground to try to provide a better life for a village in Afghanistan, or Yemen, or in Latin America, is what the United States has been doing for decades. Recently, a friend told me he believes there will always be wars to fight, boots and drones to be dispatched, and that we in America better adjust for the never-ending struggles of strife, injustice and poverty.

I am naïve enough to believe otherwise. Yet I am humbled with my luck to have been born in this country and to live in this town, especially at this time of year.

Spense Havlick is a member of the Daily Camera Editorial Advisory Board, professor emeritus at CU and president of the Boulder Cuba Sister City Organization. Email havlick@colorado.edu