The Holiday Inn Milwaukee Riverfront’s lobby has been greatly expanded. The new lobby includes a bar area called River’s Edge Lounge and has views of the river. Credit: Calvin Mattheis for the Journal Sentinel

By of the

For Glendale's Milwaukee River Hilton, the river was in the hotel's name — but not its heart.

"When you walked into the hotel, there was no sense that the river was there," said Nagib Lakhani, one of the hotel's new owners.

But this month, the 160-room hotel at 4700 N. Port Washington Road changed its name and franchise to the Holiday Inn Milwaukee Riverfront. It is banking on a new lobby, banquet room, restaurant, patio and boardroom — all focused on the river — to help boost revenue.

"Really, the fundamental change was to take advantage of that," Lakhani said, gesturing toward the Milwaukee River.

The renovations will total about $8 million, he said.

The Holiday Inn's greatly expanded lobby now has views of the river, which didn't exist during the property's nearly 40 years as a Hilton.

The new lobby includes a bar area called River's Edge Lounge that offers a light menu, said Bridget Hawks, hotel general manager.

Meanwhile, an outdoor patio is being built, with a fireplace and canopy, to host weddings and other riverfront events.

The hotel's Anchorage Restaurant, a North Shore mainstay, is closed for renovations but is scheduled to reopen in March.

It will have improved river views, new décor, new kitchen equipment and a menu that still focuses on seafood, along with more contemporary items, said Lakhani, who operates RevMAX Hospitality Consulting Services Inc. in Issaquah, Wash.

The renovated banquet room will be tied to the Anchorage. An upstairs boardroom for smaller group meetings was created within a former guest room overlooking the river.

The project includes completely remodeled guest rooms, with new décor, furniture, bathroom fixtures and other features, Hawks said.

The rooms on the five-story hotel's top two floors have been remodeled, with the remaining rooms to be finished by March. A new fitness center also is being built.

The remodeled banquet room, restaurant, lobby bar and patio will help the Holiday Inn attract weddings and other social events, supplementing the property's traditional strength at drawing corporate functions, Lakhani and Hawks said.

The Hilton saw demand for weddings but often didn't have the facilities to accommodate them, Lakhani said.

The Holiday Inn also hopes to draw more leisure travelers by positioning itself as a less-expensive alternative to downtown hotels while being a short drive from Maier Festival Park and other downtown attractions. The hotel's features include a free shuttle service to downtown and Glendale's Bayshore Town Center.

Meanwhile, the remodeled lobby, where guests can socialize as well as work on their laptops and other electronic devices, will help draw business travelers, Lakhani said.

CMH Milwaukee River Inn LLC, an investors group whose members own hotels in West Virginia and Canada, bought the hotel for $6.7 million from Houston-based MRI Partners, according to state real estate records posted in June.

The Hilton franchise was dropped that month and the remodeling started. The property operated as an independent hotel before the Holiday Inn franchise was adopted Dec. 9.

The renovations took place on a fast track, with large blocks of rooms closed over the summer and fall as the work progressed.

"It was a significant undertaking," Lakhani said.

The hotel is operated by Chesapeake Hospitality Management of Greenbelt, Md.

The Holiday Inn's opening comes just over a year after the Glendale Common Council rejected a proposal to convert the Hilton and its restaurant to the Wisconsin International Center, a housing and a dining hall for over 300 Chinese students attending Milwaukee-area private high schools.

Opponents included North Shore residents and business operators, who cited the Anchorage's role as a community gathering place, and the hotel and restaurant as a destination. Council members also said they were concerned about losing hotel room tax revenue.

Meanwhile, the for-profit Wisconsin International Academy bought the 127-room Days Inn hotel, at 11811 W. Blue Mound Road, Wauwatosa, and converted its restaurant and banquet center into student housing.

Facebook: facebook.com/JSBusiness

Twitter: twitter.com/TomDaykin