Duck Commander Family Foods and Chinook USA

A Kentucky company that’s brewing iced tea inspired by “Duck Dynasty’s” Uncle Si on the hit A&E reality TV show has filed for bankruptcy, accusing the show’s stars of breaking their promises to promote the beverage.

The beverage maker’s federal lawsuit against Duck Commander Inc.—the Robertson clan’s duck-call business in Louisiana—portrays the “Duck Dynasty” brand as growing too big, too soon.

In the glow of the spotlight, Duck Commander has made dozens of licensing agreements to grow its brand. That includes a deal with Chinook USA LLC to make and distribute a beverage named for Uncle Si, who drinks from a bottomless cup of iced tea on the show.

At least one branding expert said the Duck Commander family has too many products and trinkets, telling officials at the beverage maker that it’s “sad to walk through their retail store in Monroe and see all the junk they’ve licensed,” according to the suit.

The over-scheduled Duck Commander family allegedly broke its contract to promote Uncle Si’s Iced Tea in media interviews and special appearances, according to the lawsuit. Si Robertson also failed to promote the tea on nationally televised morning shows, the lawsuit said.

As a result, sales haven’t been great for the beverage, which was unveiled in spring at a Nascar race near Dallas.

Duck Commander and its licensing companies haven’t responded to the lawsuit yet. The family’s publicist did not respond to emailed requests for comment on Monday and Tuesday.

Chinook is now running low on money after spending more than $4.5 million on the project. Several million bottles are out for sale in at least 10 states, according to the company’s website. It comes in four flavors: sweet, unsweet, peach, and half tea/half lemonade. Mr. Robertson, who served in the Vietnam War, drinks his tea unsweetened—a nod to wartime sugar rationing.

Chinook filed for bankruptcy last week and laid off its roughly one-dozen employees while leaders figure out what to do. The firm’s employees have worked on more than a dozen beverage brands, offering advice on sourcing raw materials, find production facilities or send drinks to its distribution network, according to its website. The employees also have worked with celebs like Kid Rock, Jimmy Fallon and the Black Eyed Peas and once put a spotlight on Hpnotiq liqueur—a mix of vodka, cognac and fruit juice that’s been promoted by Khloe Kardashian.

“Now, hopefully, we have the attention of the Robertsons,” said Chinook lawyer J. Bruce Miller in an interview with Bankruptcy Beat. “They have a billion-dollar business, and they need to get it under control.”

The lawsuit also said that Duck Commander shouldn’t have made deals with two other companies that planned to make Duck Dynasty-branded vitamin water and energy shots. The contract gave Chinook the right to sell both the iced tea and any other “ready to drink” beverage for at least five years, according to the lawsuit.

Since 2012, Duck Dynasty has chronicled the camouflaged, bushy-bearded Robertson family in the Louisiana bayou, documenting what it’s like to get rich off of selling duck-hunting calls. The fourth season of the A&E network show in mid-2013 drew an audience of 11.8 million viewers, breaking the cable television industry’s record for most-watched nonfiction telecast.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follower her on Twitter at @KatyStech