ST. LOUIS — Yohan Flande is certainly not the savior for the Rockies’ fragile rotation, but he’s made a strong case as a reasonable short-term solution.

The left-hander started twice on the Rockies’ road trip through Chicago and St. Louis, acquitting himself well. He was particularly effective Sunday, despite the Rockies’ 3-2, walk-off loss to the Cardinals at Busch Stadium.

“He’s a strike thrower,” manager Walt Weiss said. “That’s what he does, and he sinks the ball. He has a good changeup, and that’s what he did again today.”

Flande, 29, pitched five solid innings Sunday, allowing two runs and four hits. He struck out three and didn’t walk a batter. His one mistake was a big one. In the fifth inning he left a changeup hanging over the plate and Jayson Heyward feasted, sending the pitch over the center-field fence for a 2-0 St. Louis lead.

Tuesday in Chicago, Flande earned the first win of his major-league career, allowing one run and four hits in five innings of Colorado’s 7-2 victory.

“I want to take advantage of the opportunity,” he said. “I want to be a starter, but as long as I have an opportunity to be in the big leagues, I won’t say anything bad if I go back to the bullpen. But now, with everybody hurt, there is an open door for me.”

Flande is taking his cues from left-hander Jorge De La Rosa, the Rockies’ best pitcher. He beat the Cardinals on Saturday.

“It helps when I watch De La Rosa pitch,” Flande said. “He obviously threw a tremendous game yesterday and I am following a really good pitcher. I was pretty much trying to follow what he did yesterday.”

Kendrick update. Right-hander Kyle Kendrick, the veteran whom the Rockies signed to a one-year, $5.5 million contract, is scheduled to have an MRI on his inflamed right shoulder Monday. He said the big fear is that he has a torn rotator cuff, which would almost certainly end his brief career with the Rockies.

Kendrick, 4-12 with a 6.43 ERA in 21 starts, has struggled most of the season. But he was particularly bad Friday against the Cardinals when he pitched just one inning before being lifted because of shoulder pain.

Weiss, however, said Kendrick had not been pitching through pain in starts leading up to Friday’s game.

“He’s been fine,” Weiss said. “He had some shoulder fatigue before the (all-star) break, but he was never in pain; he’s never had any pain.

“There was no reason to take him out of the rotation, physically. Everything was the same. It’s a little bit more sore this time, and we saw the drop in velocity (down to an 83 mph fastball). So that was a red flag in his last start.”

Footnotes. Weiss said he expects to announce Monday the starter who will replace Kendrick for Wednesday’s home game against the Mariners. … Leadoff hitter Charlie Blackmon swiped two bases Sunday to give him 29 this year, setting a career high.

Looking ahead

Mariners’ Felix Hernandez (12-6, 3.02 ERA) at Rockies’ Eddie Butler (3-7, 4.82), 6:40 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

Hernandez has been dominant in 18 of his 21 starts, posting a 1.72 ERA. But he’s had some bad outings, giving up seven or more runs three times. The Diamondbacks blasted him for seven runs and a season-high 12 hits in 6 innings last week. Butler will be making his first start against an American League club. The rookie right-hander remains a work in progress, pitching well one batter, losing command the next. Butler is 2-4 with a 5.84 ERA in seven outings at Coors Field.

Tuesday: Mariners’ Vidal Nuño (0-1, 2.02 ERA) at Rockies’ Chris Rusin (3-4, 4.61), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Mariners’ Taijuan Walker (8-7, 4.73) at Rockies’ TBA, 1:10 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Off

Friday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (7-4, 4.87) at Nationals’ Jordan Zimmermann (8-6, 3.36), 5:05 p.m., ROOT

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post