If you ran a multibillion-dollar enterprise that generated more money than any other business, would you turn over the reins to someone who had never worked in business a day in his life?

This is what a vast majority of Republican voters and politicians want to do — turn over the country to a man who never worked in government.

Donald Trump says that under his leadership, he would make the country great again. Great compared to what? The United States has the largest economy in the world and we have fared better than any other nation after the worldwide economic meltdown of a few years ago.

Trump says he is a businessman and a great negotiator and knows the art of the deal. Yet, he has not explained what he will do if other nations don't dance to his tune. For example, what if Mexico refuses to pay for the wall that he plans on building on the border? Is he going to invade Mexico? Seize the funds that Mexican nationals send back to their country?

As a man who constantly exhibits boorish behavior and has shown repeatedly he doesn't have the temperament nor skills to be on the world stage, where would he lead the nation, except into a ditch?

Contrary to what his supporters may say, being a “businessman” does not qualify one for the presidency. George W. Bush was a businessman. Herbert Hoover was a businessman. What were their legacies besides two of the greatest economic downturn in our history? Kenneth Lay and Jeffrey Skilling of Enron were businessmen who ran a massive fraud. How many business owners have placed profit above the public good?

What will Trump's supporters do once they realize that he doesn't have the power nor the constitutional authority to accomplish his presidential wish list? Riot in the streets? Finish destroying the country like the Republicans in Congress? Just like the leaders of their party made promises that they knew they could not keep (e.g. get rid of Obamacare), so has Trump made promises that will be impossible for him to keep.

For example, Mr. Trump said that under his presidency, everybody would say “Merry Christmas” instead of “Happy Holidays.” What was left unsaid was what he would do for those who refuse to follow his edict on the proper holiday greeting. Is he going to put them in jail? Levy fines against them? Seize their property?

The American people have the right to vote for whatever candidate pleases them. Our democratic process has been messy and ineffective at times, yet never has a reality television star, an egotistical individual who believes he knows everything, and is a threat to our traditions and the freedoms we love have been so close to the Oval Office.

Critics on the right claim President Obama is a dictator. What dictator allows his critics access to the radio, television and the Internet so they can constantly slam him? Who has the president jailed for being a political opponent? However, if a President Trump becomes a reality, the nation will get the chance to see firsthand what it is like to have a real dictator in the White House.

If he gets elected, we should say, “God help America” instead of “God bless America.”

Alan Hawkins is an information technology professional and is working on his MBA. He lives in Silver Springs Shores.