Clean water continues to be an issue for flooded Front Range and northeast Colorado communities.

Residents in Ward, Allenspark and Manitou Springs are still being asked to boil drinking water for at least three minutes, while residents in parts of Loveland and anyone remaining in or visiting Lyons are still asked to drink bottled water, according to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.

Wastewater-treatment issues, primarily broken pipes, are lingering problems in parts of the region.

Treatment plants in Boulder, Longmont, Loveland, the St. Vrain Sanitation District, Sterling and the Denver Metro Reclamation District were operating Saturday, but repairs to broken pipelines are ongoing, according to the utilities.

“Crews and contractors are working day and night to repair blocked or damaged sanitary sewer lines that were compromised during the flood and then filled with debris,” the city of Boulder states on its website. “Given the magnitude of the impacts our system sustained from the flood, this work is time-consuming and we ask for your patience.”

On Saturday, after eight days, the city of Evans in Weld County lifted the “no flush” rule on toilets in some areas, although they continued some restrictions while crews work to fully repair the local wastewater-treatment plant.

The city is using temporary power and pumps, so residents are still being urged to conserve water — including no laundry, no car washing, and no lawn or other outdoor water use — until facilities are fully restored.

“Residents are asked to be responsible and caring community members so they don’t overload the system, which can result in sewage backing up in basements,” the city said in a statement Saturday.

In Estes Park, Boy Scouts are going door to door to hand out information about issues facing the Upper Thompson Sanitation District. The utility is still enforcing “Do not flush” zones for neighborhoods from U.S. 36 south to Kiowa Trail and Little Valley on the southeast side of town, as well as some areas along Fall River.

The city of Estes Park said Saturday there is no timeline yet for the repairs to be completed and restrictions to be lifted.

The Left Hand Water District, which serves customers in rural Boulder and Weld counties, lifted its boil-water advisory Thursday for all but a few homes.

Mandatory water limits, however, continue. Residents cannot run sprinklers or wash vehicles or driveways, and they cannot refill ponds or swimming pools.

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch