Surrounded by a roomful of enthusiastic supporters at the City of Richardson’s Richardson Center and introduced by Texas conservative stalwart and President and CEO of the Liberty Institute, Kelly Shackelford who has personally endorsed her, Adryana Boyne announced the kick-off of her campaign for the Texas House of Representatives.

Boyne is seeking the Republican nomination for the District 102 seat currently held by State Representative Stefani Carter who is not seeking reelection, but who is instead running for Texas Railroad Commission. Boyne is the only candidate in the District 102 Republican race who has a proven track record of supporting conservative causes in the Texas Legislature for each ofthe last three legislative sessions.

“Stefani Carter has represented us well in Austin and I wish her well in her new campaign,” said Boyne. “Now it is time for the voters of District 102 to elect as her replacement a strong, dynamic and proven conservative leader who will go to Austin and defend our values and who will work to build and strengthen our state and our Republican Party. I believe I am that leader.”

Adryana immigrated to the United States from Mexico as a young adult and graduated from Criswell College with a degree in Biblical Studies. She continued her education at Blinn College, studying government and history, and at Spaeth Communications and The Leadership Institute, where she learned how to implement effective public policy. Over 20 years ago, she proudly became an American citizen.

Adryana’s voting record as a citizen reflects her conservative Republican views, and she has been actively involved in both Texas and national politics, expressing her conservative values in English and Spanish on national TV and radio, as well as in-person at events across the country.

She has successfully debated liberal Texas Democrats such as Representatives Rafael Anchia, Jessica Farrar, Roberto Alonzo and Domingo Garcia, and many others. During the recently concluded 83rd Texas Legislature, as well as in previous sessions, she traveled to Austin to fight on behalf of the voter ID bill, the sonogram bill, and the recently passed bill which bans abortions in Texas after 20 weeks and requires safer conditions at abortion clinics.

Adryana is the National Director of VOCES Action, a 501(c)(4) non-profit which informs, educates and empowers Latinos with conservative values and helps non-Latinos engage with Latinos. She is the former Director of Development for VOTO Honesto, the Hispanic initiative of True the Vote, a citizen led effort to keep our elections free and fair. She teaches ‘Issues that Unite Latinos’ and ‘Conservatism’ at The Leadership Institute‘s Leadership Training School and at their nationwide workshops.

On the national level, she has debated liberal Hispanic congressmen Luis Gutierrez, Joe Garcia and others. She continues to fight vocally against the misnamed Affordable Care Act, and stands steadfast against both big government and high taxes. She is not afraid to fight for her state; for example, she confronted Attorney General Eric Holder when he came to Texas to tell us how to run our Texas elections.

Adryana believes in a strong economy that lets small business work and grow without unnecessary and burdensome government regulations. Those, as well as bad fiscal policies and wasteful spending, have created many of our current problems as a nation. Texas stands as a prime example of how a friendly business climate can allow a state to thrive, and she pledges to fight for a continuation of those business-friendly policies in our state.

“I will work hard in the Texas Legislature to help Texas maintain its conservative values, to defend our personal freedoms, and to fight the further incursion of the federal government into the daily lives of Texans,” said Boyne. “I am a conservative Republican Latina, but most of all I’m a proud American, and I look forward to having the opportunity to serve in Austin and to help bring new and energized voters into our Republican party so that it remains the majority party in our state for many, many years to come,” Boyne concluded.

Adryana has been married to Dr. Daryl Boyne for 26 years, and they are proud parents of two sons. She and her husband have served as Christian missionaries in Mexico and Costa Rica as well as here in the United States, and they attend Watermark Church in Dallas.

Texas House District 102 is located in Dallas County and includes parts of the cities of Addison, Dallas, Richardson, and Garland