Some of Denver’s outstanding architectural heritage showcased during the annual Doors Open Denver weekend in April included structures over a century old. At the Brown Palace and Oxford hotels and elsewhere, they continue to radiate the classic details of an age of optimism, when young Denver strove to become a city to be taken seriously.

Today, it seems strange to me that most local architects, who have lent their names to highly commendable projects, don’t seem to be taken seriously, or get the recognition they deserve.

With Curt Fentress’ design of Denver International Airport’s main terminal that opened in 1995 a notable exception, Denver has for decades seldom been self-assured enough to trust its own architects with the major and high-visibility commissions that help define a city.

Instead, “starchitects” with international reputations were almost always imported. Their projects include the 1971 Denver Art Museum (Gio Ponti from Milan); Coors Field in 1995 (HOK Architects of Kansas City); the 1995 Denver Public Library addition (Michael Graves from Princeton, N.J.); and the 2006 Denver Art Museum’s Hamilton Wing (Daniel Libeskind, from New York). The 2007 Museum of Contemporary Art was by London-based David Adaye.

Spanish starchitect Santiago Calatrava was originally chosen for an addition to Fentress’ Jeppesen terminal at Denver International Airport, but withdrew when Denver couldn’t meet the estimated $650 million cost. The project is now directed by the San Francisco-headquartered Gensler Architects, with a 500-room hotel and RTD rail terminal scheduled to open in 2015.

Critics have pointed out that the still-rising hotel at DIA is already obscuring Fentress’ mountain-peaks roof that has become a Denver signature.

The outsiders-only model for major Denver projects has become less rigid in recent years. The $136 million Lindsey-Flanigan judicial center that opened downtown on West Colfax in 2010 was designed by the Denver firm of klipp Architecture (now klipp/GKKwork). The adjacent Van Cise-Simonet detention center was done by Denver-based OZ Architecture. Both projects went to local talent after international starchitect Steven Holl was fired over vaguely defined design issues.

The $258 million Ralph Carr judicial center opened in 2013 just south of Civic Center and was designed by the Fentress firm. Nearby, the $111 million History Colorado Center, opened in 2012, was by Denver-based Tryba Architects, who had earlier done the 2002 Wellington Webb Denver Municipal building with RNL Architecture.

Despite this progress, local architects remain little-known.

In business stories, priorities are clear. First mentioned are the corporate firm’s principals, along with the project’s cost. Next come the developers and money men, followed by a cast of lesser luminaries. If the project’s architect is mentioned at all, he or she comes in near the end.

“Architects don’t get respect because we don’t do a very good job of promoting ourselves,” said architect Dennis Humphries, principal of Humphries Poli. “But that’s part of what Doors Open Denver is about: to create an awareness that architects are important,” he added.

“Denver architects seem to do much better abroad than at home,” said architect Hans Morgenthaler, who teaches architecture at the University of Colorado’s Denver campus.

Brit Probst, principal with the Davis Partnership firm, said “Denver isn’t among American ‘first-tier’ cities like New York, Los Angeles, Chicago or even Houston and there’s less building of major projects here. So when a client plans a 50-story skyscraper, how many Denver architects have experience with that?”

“Denver architects still get no respect,” said Alan Gass, who has worked on downtown Denver projects since the 1950s and is a fellow of the American Institute of Architects. “The general public doesn’t know what we do and, often, neither do clients. Aside from Fentress, local architects don’t get the recognition they deserve.”

He added: “Trends taking place in other American cities are ignored here. While other cities are eliminating urban freeways by placing them below ground, Denver plans to expand and widen Interstate 70 through the city.”

It shouldn’t be that way. Certainly, Denver is today far more sophisticated — architecturally and otherwise — than when Denver Mayor Robert Speer suggest a Greek theater a century ago for a planned Civic Center and a city councilman supposedly asked, “What for? Denver doesn’t even have that many Greeks.”

J. Sebastian Sinisi is a former Denver Post reporter.