Kentucky Gov. Matt Bevin has notified the Obama Administration that he will begin shutting down his state's healthcare exchange. | AP Photo Kentucky begins dismantling Obamacare exchange

Kentucky’s new Republican governor is plowing ahead with plans to close down the state-run Obamacare insurance marketplace, shuttering an exchange that the White House had hailed as a model for the law's success.

Gov. Matt Bevin recently notified the Obama administration that he will dismantle Kentucky’s enrollment website, which worked nearly glitch-free when the Obama administration and other states bungled Obamacare’s launch in 2013.

Story Continued Below

The decision marks the first time a state will scrap a functional state-run marketplace to join the federal enrollment site, HealthCare.gov, which has been working much more smoothly since its initial rollout.

Bevin campaigned on repealing the state-based exchange, known as Kynect and built with nearly $300 million in federal grants, calling the marketplace redundant when the federal government oversees Obamacare enrollment for 38 states. The Republican governor, however, has retreated from his earlier calls for repealing the state's Medicaid expansion and now says he wants to overhaul the program that has covered roughly 400,000 low-income adults.

Bevin's health care decisions come as a disappointment to supporters who viewed the state as the Obamacare jewel of the South, where most states remain ardently opposed to the health care law. Former Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear's decision to expand coverage through executive orders helped Kentucky record one of the largest statewide drops in the uninsured rate in the past two years.

Obamacare's drafters originally envisioned each state would create their own enrollment website, with HealthCare.gov serving as a fallback. Instead, most Republican-dominated states shunned building their own marketplaces.

Kentuckians can continue to enroll in 2016 health plans through the state-run exchange until the sign-up period ends Jan. 31. Bevin likely wants the transition to HealthCare.gov to be completed in time for enrollment in 2017 health plans this fall, but he hasn't publicly committed to that time frame. The Department of Health and Human Services said it will work with the state on a smooth transition.

But health care advocates say ditching Kynect means the state will lose out on the local connection that made enrollment so successful in Kentucky. And it likely means the state will have less money for enrollment education and outreach, potentially hindering future enrollment growth.

“HealthCare.gov is a ‘one-size-fits-all’ program that will result in fewer Kentuckians getting the help they need to enroll in coverage. It is government farther from the people,” Kentucky Voices for Health, a consumer advocacy group, said in a statement. “The governor should keep Kynect because it was built to meet the needs of Kentuckians.”

Scrapping Kentucky’s state-based exchange is also likely to create confusion for enrollees who are accustomed to using the state’s website. Even more than two years after the launch of HealthCare.gov, health policy experts say the Kentucky platform has worked vastly better at enrolling people into private plans as well as Medicaid.

“It’ll be like driving a Honda versus driving a Ford or a Toyota. You still have a vehicle to get you there, but it’s a totally different experience,” said Dan Schuyler, a senior director of exchange technology at Leavitt Partners, a consulting firm headed by former George W. Bush health secretary Mike Leavitt. “There will be some disruption, there will be confusion. There will be some attrition.”

The previous Democratic administration in Kentucky estimated that switching to HealthCare.gov would cost the state $23 million. A Bevin spokeswoman declined to comment on whether the new administration had developed its own cost estimate.

Fees on Kentucky health insurance companies will also rise, and the increase could be passed onto consumers in the form of higher premiums. The state-run exchange charged insurers a fee equal to 1 percent of premiums to fund operations, but HHS charges insurers a 3.5 percent fee to sell plans on HealthCare.gov.

“This may give some carriers pause to think about participating on the [federal exchange] if the fee is going to go up 2.5 percent,” Schuyler said.

Bevin also hopes within a few months to outline changes to the state's Medicaid expansion. He's taking a path that mirrors efforts in other states where newly elected Republican governors have inherited Medicaid expansion: They don't eliminate coverage, but try to add conservative elements to the program, such as requiring enrollees to pay more for their health care.