SAN DIEGO — It was a Sunday afternoon of wasted opportunities for the sliding Rockies.

They battered Padres ace James Shields for five runs on nine hits, including three home runs, two by Nolan Arenado. They jammed the basepaths with traffic, making them look like a Southern California freeway.

Charlie Blackmon also launched two homers, including a solo shot off closer Craig Kimbrel in the ninth.

And yet, the Rockies dropped their fifth straight game, losing 8-6 at Petco Park as the Padres completed a three-game sweep.

“That team is better than us right now,” Arenado said. “We need to hit better and pitch better. All around, we just aren’t very good right now. Losing gets contagious … so we have to turn this around.”

At the root of the Rockies’ blown chance was another bad performance by starting pitcher Kyle Kendrick, who was charged with six runs on six hits in five innings. He gave up two, two-run homers — one to Justin Upton, the other to Derek Norris.

Kendrick, the free agent from Philadelphia who signed a one-year deal for $5.5 million, fell to 1-4 and his ERA rose to 8.73. His 10 home runs are the most allowed by any major-league pitcher this season.

“They put some balls in play and hits some good pitches, but the results aren’t there,” Kendrick said.

But, Kendrick insisted, he has not lost confidence in himself.

“If you don’t think you can get guys out, then you shouldn’t be out there,” he said. “But these things are going to happen. Guys hit the balls to where our guys were not today.”

Kendrick’s outing marked the seventh consecutive game that a Colorado starter has worked less than six innings. In 16 of Colorado’s 24 games, the starter has worked 5.2 innings or less.

With Shields looking vulnerable in the first inning, the Rockies desperately needed Kendrick to deliver a shut-down inning, but he was unable to do so. Kendrick’s club gave him a lead twice, and tied the game once, but he let the Padres back into the game every time.

Blackmon led off the game with a solo homer to right off Shields, but in the bottom of the first, Kendrick hit Matt Kemp with two outs and then Upton swatted a two-run homer to right-center, giving San Diego a 2-1 lead.

A leadoff homer by Arenado and a run-scoring single by Michael McKenry put the Rockies back in front, 3-2, in the fourth. So what happened? Kendrick hit Kemp again, gave up a single to Upton, a run-scoring groundout to Yangervis Solarte and a two-run homer to Norris. The Padres were back in the lead, 5-3.

Arenado’s second homer of the game — a two-run shot in the fifth — tied up the game again, 5-5. But Kendrick couldn’t hold it, again, as Upton delivered an RBI double to score Cory Spangenberg.

“You want to have shut-down innings after you score,” manager Walt Weiss said. “We have a good lineup and it’s tough to keep down. But (the Padres) didn’t miss some of the mistakes they saw today.”

The Rockies had an opportunity to break the game open in the sixth, loading the bases with one out. The chance passed by without a run being scored. Troy Tulowitzki, pinch-hitting for Kendrick, popped out to short and Blackmon grounded out to first.

The Padres iced the game in the sixth on a two-run homer by pinch-hitter Jedd Gyrko off right-handed reliever Brooks Brown. Gyrko came to the plate hitting 2-for-39 against righties this season, but he drove the ball 438 feet to right, putting the Padres ahead 8-5.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp