Don’t expect another bruising fight this year in the Legislature over expanding Medicaid in Florida. But there are still issues to resolve as lawmakers decide how much more the state will have to contribute to the massive federal-state health care program for the poor that already consumes nearly a third of the state’s $79.3 billion budget.

Last year’s session shut down abruptly after lawmakers failed to agree on a proposal to expand Medicaid under President Barack Obama’s health care law, the Affordable Care Act. Republicans have fought expanding the program to cover more Floridians, arguing Medicaid already is an expensive part of the state budget and it’s not clear how much the federal government will help cover the cost of future enrollees.

Florida lawmakers will spend this year’s session discussing ways to keep Medicaid costs under control. They also must determine how much more state money is needed to cover the loss of federal cash for a small Medicaid program that helps cover the cost of uncompensated care provided to the poor through hospitals and other providers. Federal officials told the state last year that they would only provide $1 billion in the current budget year and a little more than $600 million next year for the low-income pool program that in past years has received more than $2 billion in state and federal money.

❖ ❖ ❖

The high-stakes arguments over Medicaid matter because the program is such a large part of the state’s budget. At $24.6 billion, Medicaid makes up just over 30 percent of all state spending, the largest single program expense in the Florida budget — more than elementary and secondary education or corrections or transportation or public assistance programs. Any change could save or cost taxpayers many millions of dollars, a point that has been central as Republicans have argued against wholesale expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare. While expansion would attract more federal money, it would also require the state to come up with millions more to cover its share of the cost of new enrollees.

By 2020, the federal government will reduce its share of covering new enrollees under Obamacare to 90 percent, leaving states to pick up at least 10 percent of the expansion cost. States already cover about 40 percent of the cost of Medicaid for the vast majority of existing enrollees, an expense that continues to grow in state budgets every year even without expansion.

Expanding Medicaid to more Floridians under Obamacare would cost the state an estimated $176 million to cover the 800,000 new enrollees who are expected to sign up, assuming the federal government would cover 97 percent of the cost of new enrollees. That cost to the state would jump to $330 million — above what the state already pays into Medicaid’s existing program — by fiscal year 2021 when the federal share falls to 90 percent, based on an analysis by the state Office of Economic and Demographic Research.

And even without expansion, Medicaid spending grows each year. The total for Medicaid in fiscal 2005 was $14.3 billion, and that has since jumped to the current $24.6 billion, with an increase every year in the state budget.

❖ ❖ ❖

House Health Care Appropriations Subcommittee Chair Matt Hudson said lawmakers this year would try to reduce Medicaid costs by making medical help easier to access. It’s cheaper to treat people when an illness is in the early stages, Hudson said.

“A key thing here is to improve access,” said Hudson, a Naples Republican. “If you can close the amount of time it takes someone to receive care and receive a solution that’s easier than waiting until it gets really bad, costs will go down.”

Hudson pointed to a plan up for discussion in this year’s session that would allow physician assistants and advanced registered nurses to prescribe more types of medication, including controlled substances. SB 152 sponsor Denise Grimsley said her bill would likely entice people in rural areas such as her district, which covers stretches of St. Lucie, Martin, Okeechobee and Highlands counties, to get help before a medical problem gets worse and thus, more costly.

“In my district, you may have to wait until the doctor comes back to town, which could take weeks, or you could drive to the next town,” said Grimsley, a Sebring Republican. “There’s an access issue there that has plenty of people concerned.”

Grimsley and Hudson also said another proposal, HB 1061, would make Florida part of an interstate nursing compact, which could bring more nurses to the state. The bill, by Rep. Cary Pigman, an Avon Park Republican, would also increase access to health care, which would encourage Medicaid members to seek medical attention earlier.

Because Florida uses a managed-care model in its Medicaid program, the belief is the state can save money by encouraging access to health care early, through clinics and private doctors who accept Medicaid, instead of more costly hospitals.

“The problem is that just because we have the managed-care plan, it does not make a person healthy,” Hudson said. “Again, access is key here.”

❖ ❖ ❖

Florida Hospital Association President Bruce Rueben said the state’s managed-care plan promotes a better health care routine for Medicaid recipients and provides some control over cost. However, he supports expanding health coverage to more Floridians. A report produced by the state Office of Insurance Regulation in 2013 shows Florida has the fifth highest amount of uninsured people.

“The managed-care program will get better over time, but there’s no replacement for helping the people who don’t have health insurance,” Rueben said. “It’s more cost-effective to keep them healthy than wait for them to get really sick.”

Gov. Rick Scott included in his proposed state budget $17 million to streamline the system the state uses to handle billions of dollars in Medicaid transactions every year, and $500,000 to develop a better payment system for nursing homes that receive Medicaid money for elderly enrollees. Hudson said his committee would discuss ways to make Medicaid payments to nursing homes more nimble to the patients they support.

Medicaid continues to expand in Florida, with more people being served and now 79 percent of those eligible actually enrolled in the program, according to state Senate data. The number of enrollees has grown from 2.2 million people in June 2005 to 4 million people as of July 2014.

Chief legislative economist Amy Baker told the Senate Appropriations Committee in October the flood of new Medicaid members should recede in the coming years but the projected costs that came with the new enrollees cannot be ignored.

“There are very limited things you can change other than recognize it’s coming,” she said. “You’ll have to prepare yourselves for the reality that you’ll need to pay for it.”

arek.sarkissian@naplesnews.com

(850) 559-7620