Iowa's CoOportunity Health, the second largest CO-OP in the nation, was shut down by the state's insurance commissioner in January 2015 after losing $45.7 million in the previous 10 months.

(CNSNews.com) – Despite guidance from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) last year that allowed Obamacare Consumer Operated and Oriented Plans (CO-OPs) to use “creative” accounting and record “loans as assets in their financial filings,” “CO-OPs are failing left and right,” Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-UT) said during a hearing Thursday.

Last year, more than half of the 23 non-profit CO-OPs set up under the Affordable Care Act as an alternative to for-profit insurers were closed by state regulators after they failed to take in enough premiums to cover their costs.

“Of the 11 CO-OPs still in operation, there is reason to call their long-term financial viability into question. All but two of them are losing money,” Hatch pointed out during the hearing. “Not a single one of them had an underwriting gain through the third quarter of 2015.

“And as CO-OPs generally continue moving into weaker financial conditions, several show signs of running out of money this year," Hatch said.

“CMS has actually encouraged the CO-OPs to cook their books with some creative accounting. Last year, the agency issued guidance allowing CO-OPs to apply surplus notes to program start-up loans, which essentially allowed the CO-OPs to record loans as assets in their financial filings,” he continued.

“Taxpayers have been forced to foot the bill for the CO-OP experiment, to the tune of $2.4 billion in federal loans for 23 CO-OPs around the country. And, to date, more than half of the CO-OPs have failed, while the vast majority of the others are in poor financial shape.

“As a result, hundreds of thousands of Americans have lost or will lose their health insurance and taxpayers are still on the hook,” Hatch added.

But acting CMS Administrator Andy Slavitt assured the committee that the remaining CO-OPs “have every opportunity to be successful long-term market participants.”

“For the CO-OPs that are closing, we are working closely with the CO-OP and state regulators to facilitate a smooth transition for consumers to retain access to coverage and ensure providers are reimbursed for covered services rendered to CO-OP enrollees. Affected CO-OP enrollees have access to a special enrollment period, and are able to shop for 2016 coverage on the Marketplace until February 28, 2016,” Slavitt told committee members.

A July 2015 report by the inspector general of the U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services stated that “member enrollment for 13 of the 23 CO-OPs that provided health insurance in 2014 was considerably lower than the CO-OPs’ initial projections and 21 of the 23 CO-OPs had incurred net losses as of December 31, 2014.”

Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-IA) noted that CoOportunity Health, the first CO-OP to go out of business - leaving 120,000 people “scrambling for health insurance” - was in his home state of Iowa. If the second largest CO-OP in the country failed, Grassley asked Slavitt, how could CMS be sure that smaller CO-OPs would not face a similar fate?

“One of the things we learned there was how quickly things can happen, and how quickly things can deteriorate,” Slavitt replied, noting that the regulatory agency has learned valuable lessons from the failed CO-OPs.

“The reason that there were so many CO-OPs that closed last year was that we worked very aggressively with the departments of insurance to make a full-on, 12-month assessment, and even those that seemed like they were in pretty good shape at the time didn’t have the wherewithal to last through the end of the year,” he said.