A rapid recovery in the building industry is fueling Orange County’s economy, along with healthy growth in nearly all other employment sectors.

Local construction companies added 2,700 jobs last month, contributing to a year-over-year jump of 9.8 percent, according to data released by state officials on Friday.

Overall, payrolls in Orange County are rising more rapidly than in California or the United States, expanding by 3.4 percent in April, as compared with a year earlier.

California jobs grew by 2.9 percent in a year. Payrolls nationwide rose by 2.2 percent.

“During the recession, we lost more jobs percentage-wise than California or the U.S. because we relied so much on construction and sub-prime mortgage companies,” said Chapman University economist Esmael Adibi. “Now we are in catch-up mode.”

Orange County’s jobless rate, which is not adjusted for seasonal changes, dropped to 4.1 in April, the lowest it has been since June 2007. Last month, it stood at 4.4 percent and a year earlier at 5.1 percent.

California and U.S. rates, which are seasonally adjusted, were 6.3 percent and 5.4 percent respectively.

Significantly, unemployment rates did not just drop over the year because people decided to stop looking for work, as happened throughout the recession. The labor force, which includes both workers and job-seekers, expanded by 1.7 percent in Orange County, faster than local population growth.

Jobs in Orange County rose over the year across almost all sectors, including manufacturing, where employment grew at a rate of 2.6 percent. In all, the county added 50,500 jobs.

The recent building boom is particularly good news because construction jobs tend to have a domino effect. With the purchase of new homes, people buy more furniture, appliances and services such as landscaping.

“Prices are up and inventory for resale homes is extremely tight,” Adibi said. “So builders are responding to the high demand, particularly for multi-family housing. Also, some people have recaptured equity in their homes, and so they are remodeling. “

Other sectors that expanded in the twelve months through April include:

• Professional and Business Services, which added 10,300 jobs, with 60 percent of the growth in professional, scientific and technical services. Law is the only profession to have lost jobs, reflecting a national trend.

• Educational and health services, which added 9,900 jobs, with 66 percent of the increase in social assistance and health care. Expanded health insurance under Obamacare has fueled the growth.

• Leisure and hospitality, including restaurants, hotels and theme parks, which grew by 4,100, at a 2.1 percent rate.

• Government, a category that fell dramatically during the recession, but which has bounced back, adding 3,308 jobs, including 1,800 in local public schools.

• Financial activities, including those at banks and other lenders, which grew by 3,400, at a 3 percent rate, thanks in part to a pick-up in home purchasing and refinancing.

Statewide, the 6.3 percent unemployment rate is the lowest since February 2008, and the gap between California’s rate and the nationwide rate has narrowed to where it was before the recession.

“The wage and salary job gains we’ve been seeing for many months have been impressive,” said Robert Kleinhenz, an economist with the Los Angeles County Economic Development Corporation.

“California’s economy is pulled forward by tech and tourism,” he added, noting that with the slowdown in the Texas energy industry, the Golden State has pushed past the Lone Star State in job creation.

The competition between the two states with the biggest job markets has been fierce in recent years, with Texas officials seeking to lure California companies. However, Texas payrolls increased by just 1,200 jobs in April, while California added 29,500 new positions.

With the state’s payroll growth of 457,000 year over year, “California has accounted for roughly one of every six jobs added in the country this past year,” noted Mark Vitner, a Wells Fargo economist.

Contact the writer: mroosevelt@ocregister.com; on Twitter @MargotRoosevelt