Buy Photo Heath care news. (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

In “Lethal Errors,” the Register recommends legislation requiring health-care providers to disclose medical errors, as well as for greater government oversight of hospitals. Thnis stops short of insisting on those legislative changes that as a malpractice attorney I believe are necessary to meaningfully enhance quality health care in Iowa.

In all other areas of our market economy, those allegedly responsible for the harm they cause to others are required to submit to an open and transparent assessment of their conduct and, if found negligent, pay their victim full compensation. Apart from any altruistic considerations, the economic consequences of this framework has encouraged our citizenry to act responsibly toward one another for the past 130 years.

However, some 35 years ago, based upon the fiction that transparency in the system and the payment of full compensation to the victims of medical errors would bankrupt Iowa’s health-care system, our legislature carved out a statutory scheme of immunities and other protections for health-care providers and their insurance carriers that have allowed them to maximize profits by restricting patient rights, without requiring in return an increase in the quality of health care. Existing “peer review” laws permit a health-care provider to hide their medical errors. That serves as a disincentive to quality health care because it effectively allows the provider to police itself. History has shown, as pointed out by the Register editorial, that it is incapable of doing so.

In other words, merely requiring disclosure of a medical error in itself is insufficient; to ensure the integrity of the decision, there must be transparency of the decision-making process.

Adding to this are unreasonably restrictive time limitations placed on naive patients and their families, whose right to sue may have expired before even realizing a medical error — which the health-care provider has no duty to disclose in the first place — has been committed!

Further, existing state laws that permit negligent health-care providers to avoid payment of an injured patient’s medical expenses and lost income by shifting such costs to the backs of the patient and their health insurance carrier is an abomination. Such reallocation of costs unnecessarily results in higher health and disability insurance premiums for the injured patient and their employers.

No other profession or business enjoys such protection from our legislature. So, while requiring the disclosure of medical errors may be a laudable first step, it likely will have only a marginal effect on the quality of health care in Iowa, unless the legislature acts systematically to change other laws that restrict the rights of injured patients and serve as disincentives to providing quality health care.

Thomas P. Slater is a West Des Moines attorney whose firm practices in the area of healthcare law. Contact: tomslater@snglaw.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Tvyp7f