An attempt to fix Denver’s affordable-housing ordinance faces an uncertain future after a City Council committee rejected it Tuesday.

Sponsor Robin Kniech, an at-large member who led the effort to rewrite the law, vowed to submit the proposal for a full council vote despite the committee roadblock. Council rules allow that rarely used option.

The Safety & Well-being Committee voted against her proposal 4-3.

Committee members cited differing reasons for voting it down, from a lack of support from some developers and business interests — including the Downtown Denver Partnership — to doubt about the law’s purpose. A couple of developers testified in favor.

Taking it to the full council would allow up to six more members to weigh in.

“I think it is important that this council hear from the full breadth of the community on this topic before each member votes,” Kniech said after Tuesday’s meeting.

She hopes to introduce the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance rewrite as planned Aug. 18, with a one-hour courtesy public hearing. Whether to allow the public to testify will be up to President Chris Herndon, who voted against the measure in the committee.

Kniech has held public forums and twice briefed the committee. Its membership changed last month, resulting in some members who may have been less familiar with her plans.

The ordinance, controversial since it was adopted in 2002, requires developers of condo projects to provide some affordable, for-sale units. It doesn’t apply to rental developments.

The old rules require new projects with 30 or more units to mark down 10 percent of them to affordable prices for qualified buyers. But only 20 affordable units have been produced under the requirement in the past five years, prompting calls for a rewrite.

Developers often have opted out of the set-aside rules by paying fees that amount to half the adjusted unit price. That money has helped subsidize affordable projects elsewhere.

Kniech proposes changes that include making the flat $5,500 city incentive per affordable unit a dynamic amount. It would range from $2,500 to $25,000, depending on where in the city the project is located and how difficult it is to find affordable housing nearby.

In more expensive neighborhoods, she wants to increase sharply the opt-out fees from 50 percent of the marked-down unit price to 70 percent. It would be much less in other areas.

Kniech also wants to give developers a chance to offer alternative plans that still would comply with the goal of providing affordable housing, even if off-site.

Besides Herndon, the committee’s other no votes came from Jeanne Faatz, Peggy Lehmann and Mary Beth Susman. Joining Kniech in support were Chairman Paul Lopez and Albus Brooks.

Jon Murray: 303-954-1405, jmurray@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JonMurray