The play-making combination of No.10 Toomua and inside centre Lealiifano has been a crucial cog in the Brumbies' success over the past two seasons.

ACT Brumbies three-try hero Matt Toomua says their emphatic victory over the Western Force wasn't a warning shot to the rest of the Super Rugby competition, but rather a statement to themselves they can make a dent in the finals.

Toomua was brilliant in the 47-25 win, which also saw the return to form of super boot Christian Lealiifano – something Brumbies skipper Ben Mowen said he knew wasn't far away.

The play-making combination of No.10 Toomua and inside centre Lealiifano has been a crucial cog in the Brumbies' success over the past two seasons.

Toomua said it hurt missing the NSW Waratahs game due to an adductor injury he picked up on Wallabies duty and he clearly turned up to play at Canberra Stadium on Friday night.

Advertisement

He scored the first two tries of the game, set up the next two and then crossed for his first hat-trick "since training a few years ago".

It was part of a dominant Brumbies display that came at exactly the right time – the eve of the Super Rugby finals.

The Brumbies will take a massive amount of confidence and self-belief into the play-offs, but Toomua didn't think it sent a warning shot to the other remaining teams.

"I don't think we're in a position to do that, it's kind of a reminder to ourselves that we're still a good team," Toomua said.

"We were probably down on confidence after the last few losses.

"I think it was saying to ourselves, 'Look guys we've had a lot of distractions, but at the end of the day we're still a strong team and we can make a dent in this competition'.

"I think it was something that was more internal to remind ourselves that we're here to play."

With five players coming back into the Brumbies' line-up from injury, there was always the risk they could come back in a little rusty.

But everything clicked – the lineout dominating and the backs running rampant almost every time they got the ball.

Toomua was one of the returning players and felt he had a point to prove.

"I wanted to [play well], I really did, I hate missing games and a big one against the Tahs," he said.

"Since the [Wallabies] series it hurt not playing for the Brumbies and I wanted come back and contribute to the team the best I could.

"I kind of had a point to prove and I thought I did all right."

After off-season ankle surgery, Lealiifano has taken some time to find his kicking radar.

He started out shakily against the Force, but then nailed a tough shot from almost right on the sideline in the second half and it looked like the old belief had started to return.

Like the form of the team, it couldn't have happened at a better time.

Mowen knows how important Lealiifano's lethal right boot can be when it's on song – like it was last season for both the Brumbies and the Wallabies.

"A guy of Christian's calibre, who's been such a world-class kicker for the last couple of years – he's maybe not got the percentage that he would like this year – you know it's not too far away," Mowen said.

"We spoke at half-time, I said, 'How you hitting them?', he said, 'Good', I said, 'You miss any more and you owe me a schooner a kick'.

"I think he owes me about three schooners for the second half, but you just keep handing him the ball because you trust [him].

"He's won so many games off his boot, his best kicking is just about to come.

"If he missed every kick all year and starts getting them now, that's perfect."