Buy Photo Susan Fender, a registered nurse and case manager at The Greenville Free Medical Clinic, meets with Charles Monnett. (Photo: HEIDI HEILBRUNN/Staff)Buy Photo

When a heart attack cost Charles Monnett his job, he lost his health insurance too.

Without medical care or medicine, his blood sugar spiked to dangerous levels, and he wound up in the hospital delirious from an infection.

“If I had insurance, I would have been able to see a doctor ... and I would have been able to take care of myself and had what I needed,” Monnett, 50, told The Greenville News. “But I started getting sicker and sicker.”

Monnett is like countless other people in Greenville County and elsewhere around the country who put off getting care because they have no insurance and wind up in worse shape, said Ron Pollack, executive director of Families USA, a nonprofit that advocates affordable health care for all Americans.

A Commonwealth Fund survey of uninsured young adults between 19 and 31 in 2013 revealed that about half hadn’t gone to the doctor when they were sick, filled a prescription, gotten a recommended test or follow-up visit or seen a specialist because of cost. And a third said their condition deteriorated as a result.

Pollack said it’s common for people without insurance and living on a limited income to defer care when a health problem arises in the hopes that it will go away because they don’t have the resources to pay for that care.

“Too often, it doesn’t go away,” he added. “And for too many people, the delay in care can have the most severe consequences. A problem that could have been dealt with successfully at an early stage gets more severe and more complex ... and becomes something that ultimately can’t be treated.”

Postponing care also can spark a downward spiral that leads to absenteeism from work and then job loss, bankruptcy and homelessness, which can be hard to emerge from, Pollack said.

“If you’re having a health problem that can be remedied, but not getting care for it ... and you’re fired,” he said, “your economic situation gets worse ... and at some point, it may be very difficult to get that remedied.”

Losing it all

More than 16 percent of South Carolinians were uninsured in 2014, according to the U.S. Census. Greenville County’s uninsured rate was 16.5 percent while Pickens County’s was 13.6 percent.

Monnett was one of them.

For most of his life, he’d been doing tree trimming and landscaping work. But that was too physically demanding after he was diagnosed with diabetes.

“It just took a toll on me,” he said. “My body started slowing down and getting weaker.”

So he found a job at a big box store in floor maintenance, where he worked until his heart attack in 2010.

“After that, I lost everything. And when Obamacare came out, I didn’t even qualify for that,” he said. “I thought, ‘Where do I go from here?’ ”

Americans are eligible for Obamacare if they earn between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level. A Medicaid expansion was designed for those with incomes less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level. But South Carolina was among the states that did not expand its Medicaid program. So Monnett fell into what's called the Medicaid Gap.

Though he was supposed to be taking insulin for his diabetes, he couldn’t afford it or the associated medical equipment, let alone doctor visits.

“I have no way to afford the several hundreds of dollars that it literally takes, when you figure the insulin, the syringes,” he said. “That adds up. And I don’t have it.”

Then in August as he was being released from the hospital, Monnett was linked up with Susan Fender.

She is a registered nurse and case manager for the Bon Secours St. Francis Healthy Outcomes Program, which seeks to find medical homes for chronically ill uninsured people in poverty.

Finding help

Fender got Monnett established with a primary care provider — the Greenville Free Medical Clinic — and the medications he needs to stay healthy.

“They knew I didn’t have no insurance and no way to take care of myself,” he said. “They provided a way. This clinic has been a blessing to me.”

Fender is managing 400 patients like Monnett.

“A lot of referrals that come to me are people who are in the hospital,” she said. “And of the people I see, at least 80 to 90 percent are not eligible for (Obamacare) subsidies and we did not expand Medicaid in this state.”

Many are working, but often only part time and in low-paying jobs without benefits, she said, and the few who do have insurance find it almost impossible to pay the high deductibles and co-pays.

Others are disabled and awaiting Medicare coverage, she added, while still others are homeless.

In addition to linking them with a primary care provider, she arranges transportation to the doctor if they need it and connects them with other safety net providers in the community, such as mental health services, shelters and more permanent housing, food banks and other social services to try to help them get back on their feet.

Since St. Francis started Healthy Outcomes just over a year ago, there has been a marked decline in hospitalization among the patients in the program, and about $1 million in savings, she said.

Breaking the cycle

When Monnett was admitted to the hospital, his blood sugar levels were between 600 and 700, Fender said. Normal is 100-120. And that uncontrolled blood sugar contributed to his developing potentially life-threatening sepsis, she said.

Things are different now.

“It’s only been a matter of weeks,” she said, “and he looks tremendously better.”

While the program was designed to keep chronically ill people out of hospital ERs for non-emergent conditions and save money, it’s benefiting the patients by keeping them healthier by providing them access to care.

Monnett was not only able to see a doctor and get the medicine he needed, he was taught how to eat to keep his blood sugar more regulated.

“I was totally ignorant about some of the stuff I needed to know about diabetes,” he said. “Before, I didn’t take it serious enough at all. But I am learning. Now I’m measuring out my food by grams and carbohydrates (and) ... my sugars are from 99 to 140 and that is a whole new switch for me.”

Monnett said he feels so much better and is so encouraged now that he has care that he hopes to get back on his feet.

“This program will help me do that,” he said. “Without a sense of self-worth, without independence and motivation, you ain’t going anywhere and you can’t get that if you’re always down in the dumps and in poor health. You can’t break that cycle.”

To learn more about the Healthy Outcomes program, contact Natalie Dougherty at Bon Secours St. Francis Health System at 864-675-4302 or at Natalie_Dougherty@bshsi.org.

#UNSEENGREENVILLE

This story is part of ongoing coverage by The Greenville News focusing on neighborhoods in the shadows of our community and the people who live there. Largely bypassed by economic progress that is transforming Greenville and facing challenges of transportation, economic opportunity, education, health care and gentrification, they are the Unseen Greenville. Learn more at UnseenGreenville.com.

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/1RWtmsR