HOLYOKE -- The Republican and MassLive.com asked the candidates for mayor in the Sept. 22 preliminary election to discuss their positions on issues of importance to voters.

Their responses will be featured daily on MassLive.com beginning Sept. 6.

In this installment, Mayor Alex B. Morse, who is seeking a third term, Fran O'Connell, who founded the business O'Connell Care at Home here in 1987, and Anthony Soto, who is in his second term as Ward 2 representative on the City Council, discuss the Community Preservation Act.

The top two finishers in the preliminary election will move onto compete on Election Day Nov. 3 while the candidate placing third will be eliminated.

Mayor Alex B. Morse, 26:

I support the Community Preservation Act.

The Community Preservation Act helps communities preserve and rehabilitate historic buildings, recreational spaces, and affordable housing. It is important that people understand what alternatives we face: without the revenue to rehabilitate and restore old buildings, we are often faced with a situation of having to demolish buildings that have deteriorated; the city is then left with an empty lot instead of what could have been a source of revenue.

The CPA, while it places a surcharge on property taxes, ensures that that money stays in our community, and serves a useful function for the betterment of our community. Further, the state matches a percentage of every dollar, to be used specifically for the types of projects I've described. The CPA provides communities with much needed funding to restore important spaces. Investment in our public spaces makes the city safer for everyone, and encourages the private investment we need for the whole city to prosper.



Fran O'Connell, 56:

The Community Preservation Act represents an interesting mechanism for increasing revenues for the City to spend in the areas of historic preservation, recreation, open space and affordable housing initiatives. Unfortunately, the matching state funds that had been available in the past have all but dried up. Ultimately, it is up to the voters to decide whether they want to increase their property taxes to fund the CPA. Personally, I will be voting for its passage, but am not optimistic that it will pass the voters at large.

Anthony Soto, 41:

This is not the time to add another increase in property taxes and many families already are at their limit and taxpayers are not getting a clear answer from the administration on how dollars are being spent. I would focus on increasing fiscal transparency and restoring more stability in the city first.