Things get steamy between Paul Kroeger and soprano Sara Lin Yoder in the Eklund Opera Program's production of "Coronation of Poppea." ( Glenn J. Asakawa / University of Colorado )

If you go What: The University of Colorado's Eklund Opera Program presents Monteverdi's "Coronation of Poppea" ("L'incoronazione di Poppea") When: 7:30 p.m. Thursday, April 23-Saturday, April 25; 2 p.m. April 26. Where: Music Theater, Imig Music Building, 18th Street and Euclid Avenue, CU campus, Boulder Tickets: $16-$26 (discounts for youths and seniors) Info: 303-492-8008 or cupresents.org

The University of Colorado's annual April chamber opera is often a contemporary masterpiece such as Mark Adamo's "Little Women" or Ned Rorem's "Our Town."

It might be a Broadway musical revue, as it was last season. In the past, works from the early classical and even the late baroque eras (by Gluck and Handel, respectively) have been staged, as have Benjamin Britten's 20th century examples. Rossini's work has made an appearance.

But never has the CU Opera program (now known as the Eklund Opera Program) reached nearly as far back as it will next weekend at the Imig Music Theater.

That would be the earliest days of opera at the beginning of the 17th century, when the Renaissance was transitioning to the Baroque and the operatic genre still was being codified, largely by one man, Claudio Monteverdi. His last work, "The Coronation of Poppea" ("L'incoronazione di Poppea"), written in 1643, reaches back another 1500 years to the Roman Empire of the 1st century, when the infamous Nero sat on the throne.

While the musical style is archaic, the plot is worthy of the 21st century — it's a celebration of amorality, sex, and cutthroat political intrigue, where the villains not only get a happy ending but a gorgeously romantic duet.

With that in mind, director Leigh Holman has set the piece in a stylized version of our time, in a futuristic version of Washington, D.C. where European and American governments are combined. And the overall look of the piece is based on the popular Netflix original series "House of Cards," which, like the opera, is based on an insatiable hunger for power.

What Holman and music director Nicholas Carthy are not aiming for is a historically accurate performance.

"We don't want an emulation of early baroque vocal style to get in the way of our performers singing with their own voices," Carthy said. "Sure, we'll put in some typical ornamentation, but not too much of it."

One problem is the work's fragmentary transmission.

"If you're going to do it," Carthy said, "you have two choices, to do somebody else's reconstructed version, none of which are really practical, or you have to create your own."

Monteverdi really only left a bass line, the vocal lines and some instrumental interludes, or "ritornelli." Any orchestration has to be reconstructed, and Carthy has meticulously done that.

The accompaniment will be played by an onstage string quintet and harpsichord at the back of the action. Carthy and student Joshua Horsch will alternate conducting and harpsichord duties over the four performances. The double duty is necessary, Carthy said, because "it's hard to take care of singers performing in an unfamiliar style when you are at the harpsichord."

Carthy said he made several cuts, transposed some vocal lines, swapped scenes around and essentially adapted the piece for the forces available.

He said that this was a common practice with Monteverdi himself, and the early baroque was known for this. A piece from another composer's work might even be inserted.

"We've got it down to a manageable 2 ½ hours," he said, noting that if all the material were included, the opera would run more than four hours. "It's my own performing edition, and I've written it out completely using Monteverdi's melodies and bass line. I wrote it as a labor of love for our students and our people."

Holman said that although the plot is convoluted on paper and there are a lot of characters, audiences will have no trouble following it:

"The story will be relatable in our time and easy to understand."

Every character in the opera is flawed, she said, not just Poppea and Nero (Nerone in the sung Italian). Nero's first wife, the ultimate victim, plots to murder Poppea in a setting that looks just like Frank Underwood's BBQ joint from "House of Cards."

Holman also said the theatrical experience will be tight, with the house as part of the staging area. With the small instrumental ensemble and the number of vocalists required, undergraduate singers will get an opportunity to perform in a venue that is not as intimidating as Macky Auditorium with a large orchestra.

Although all the other major roles are doubled between the performances, soprano Sara Lin Yoder, who made her CU debut in March as Despina in "Così fan tutte," sings the lead role of Poppea in all four.

"She really does great with the vocal style and brings out the emotion, which is not easy to do in this musical language," Holman said.

Added Carthy: "If anybody can pull it off, Sara Lin can."

The opera will be sung in Italian with projected English titles above the stage.