Conservatives have a serious case of the Waaaaa!s.

During a debate on CNN about the government shutdown, Amy Kremer of the Tea Party Express exclaimed “I’m tired of hearing that Oh, he [President Barack Obama] was re-elected!”

In other words, quit with the facts and the reality, people! Leave the Tea Party alone! Let them destroy this country because WAAAAA, they hate ObamaCare!

The Youtube comment section was a goldmine of Americans fed up with the Tea Party. From “i am a redneck white and i full support obama in everything he does even if he used union troops against the anti-tax anti-government nut jobs” to calling Amy a stalker who won’t let go of her prey, Americans are over the Tea Party.

Watch here:

Transcript from Youtube:

JOHNSON: The Constitution also shows that when a presidential election occurs and something has been ruled to be Constitutional by the Supreme Court, you allow the law to go through, and that would solve the problem.

KREMER: And, Jason, also – also, the American — the real problem is Obamacare. The American people don’t like it. And I’m tired of hearing that, oh, he was reelected. Well, guess what, had all this bad information come out last year, before November, I think we might have had a very different result.

JOHNSON: You couldn’t make your point in a two year presidential election. I think it’s about time to give it up.

The best part about this is seeing the 12% of the country who support the Tea Party that just shut our government down are now loathed and despised, even in Youtube comments. Where are all of the Koch Brothers paid trolls? So sad.

The two top comments:



Russ E

Russ E 1 day ago

So sorry﻿ to trouble you with reality and facts.

socialism.rules

socialism.rules 20 hours ago

why are all teaparty people ugly nasty not informed ﻿ scum

this woman needs healthcare- look at her she is sickly obese and probably is diabetic

oh i am a redneck white and i full support obama in everything he does even if he used union troops against the anti-tax anti-government nut jobs

And then:

Jack Keenan 1 hour ago

Amy Kramer…why does CNN give this lunatic any air time?

Newborn babies cry less than this skank.

Kramer and all her ilk on the extreme right are like stalkers who won’t let their prey(Obamacare) go…she’s like someone who has been told the relationship is over and refuses to believe it and now she is in stalking mode…she wont let﻿ it go…just utter madness from this lunatic.

·

Alan Dampog

Alan Dampog 10 hours ago

Screw the a$$hats of the GOP for shutting down the government. the GOP﻿ are a bunch of morons.

·

Aden Nak

Aden Nak 10 hours ago

Facts﻿ have a well known liberal bias.

·

socialism.rules

socialism.rules 11 hours ago

even george washington sent union troops against anti tax anti-government nutso’s

oh he even disbarred tory conservatives from owning guns- there goes your second﻿ amendment nutterly also



People are clearly beyond fed up with the Tea Party “stalkers”.

Is the country done being driven by these egomaniacal knuckle draggers yet? There’s nothing so infuriating as trying to “talk” to a screeching, dense moron whose only skill is their ability to spit propaganda out, rabid fire style. It’s misinformation on top of wild lies topped off by egregious misuse of words like “Constitution” as if by saying it a lot, it imbues their argument with gravitas.

And they are always so smug, because they are too ignorant to even imagine that they might be wrong. To them, having one tidbit of information makes them feel like they belong among the intellectual elite. It’s very exciting for them, and they cling to it and repeat it as a safety device against the realization that they really don’t have a clue what’s going on.

And no, I’m not talking about our average citizens who are too busy to keep up with politics. I’m talking only about the Tea Party types – the Sarah Palin, Michelle Bachmann, Ted Cruz types that we elevate because they’re the Kim Kardashians of the political world.

Their followers have no idea that they’re being played by con artists, and that’s how we end up with marks like Amy, being used as a missile of misinformation, acting as if not liking ObamaCare justifies violating the law. She doesn’t even know she’s advocating violating the constitution. I doubt she will ever realize that.

How can you even “talk” to people like this? They are the trolls of the political world. It’s truly frightening that we’re being run by them.

The only bonus of this whole shutdown nightmare is that this will eventually lead to the demise of the Tea Party for good.

The bad news is that once the Tea Party gets branded as the puppetry of demonic, secret dark money trying to overtake our government, the Koch Brothers will just rebrand the “new” version of the Birchers and we will have to wait another 4 years for the media and the public to catch on, as Rome burns again.