ENLARGE 'Bob Dylan - The 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration - Deluxe Edition' Columbia Records

The Recording

Absolutely Sweet Dylan

In 1992, Japan's NHK had the foresight to record a concert celebrating Bob Dylan's 30th anniversary with Columbia Records in high definition, even though few people had use for HD at the time. Now, one of most impressive lineups in rock history receives the full-length Blu-ray, DVD and double CD treatment. "Bob Dylan - The 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration - Deluxe Edition" features performances by icons such as Lou Reed, George Harrison and Neil Young, and 40 minutes of previously unreleased material. Available March 4; from £12 TG

ENLARGE 'Chineasy' system of learning in a book Thames & Hudson

The Book

Easy-peasy

If you've ever felt the urge to read Chinese but found the challenge overwhelming, help may be at hand. Technology writer and TED speaker ShaoLan Hsueh has joined forces with renowned illustrator Noma Bar to bring her "Chineasy" system of learning, created for her kids, to a wider audience. The system breaks a small number of Chinese characters down into visual building blocks—combining them lets you build enough new characters, words and phrases to read basic Chinese. Available March 10; £13, Thames & Hudson LB

ENLARGE Graffiti-scrawled tote Colette

The Bag

Tag, you're it

Karl Lagerfeld is no Banksy, but the designer is a prolific urban artist in his own right. An insatiable cultural appetite (he is also a photographer, a publisher and a curator) feeds the fashion-forward collections he creates for three labels. The most prominent of those, Chanel, is one of fashion's great bellwethers. So you can be sure when Mr. Lagerfeld sends something down the runway, it will be a trend coming to a store near you soon. Put your own tag on spring's art-centric look (courtesy of Chanel) with this graffiti-scrawled tote—exclusively at Colette until March 8. €2,590, colette.fr BS

ENLARGE Blaze Laserlight for bikes Blaze

The Light

Blazing saddles

Despite its looks, the Blaze Laserlight isn't a lightsaber—it's a bike light. But it does have some "Star Wars"-like qualities: Like R2-D2 with Princess Leia, the light projects an image of a bike onto the road, five to six meters ahead of the rider. The message is simple: Inventor Emily Brooke says "it increases a cyclist's footprint and visibility on the road and alerts drivers ahead of their presence." Completely waterproof, the light can be charged through any USB power source. The battery lasts up to 13 hours and the light can be set at either flashing or constant mode. May the force be with you. £125, blaze.cc JE

ENLARGE Rollei's new ski goggles with 5-megapixel HD video camera Rollei

The Goggles

Look ma, no straps!

Another small step in the advancement of wearable technology comes in the form of Rollei's new ski goggles. The German camera manufacturer has incorporated a 5-megapixel HD video camera into the goggles, obviating the need to have an extra camera strapped to your helmet. Off the piste, trade in your goggles for Rollei's Sunglasses Cam 200. With a similar 135-degree wide-angle lens and splashproof housing, you won't miss a shot of your holiday. €230, rollei.com JZE

ENLARGE Viking figures The Trustees of the British Museum

The List

The Vikings are coming!

To the British Museum (from March 6). Before they get there, here are a few facts you should know.

The Vikings heard London calling long before the Clash. In A.D. 851, 350 Norse ships traveled down the Thames to attack London.

Ryanair take note: Viking longships could hold up to 60 men and travel up to 200 km a day.

Modern-day York, Kiev and Istanbul were once thriving Viking trading settlements.

Contrary to most modern depictions, Vikings never wore horned helmets.

Viking king Rollo was the grandfather of William the Conqueror, making the Normans just two generations removed from their ancestral Norsemen.

Since 1962, Breckenridge, Colo., has hosted the annual weeklong Ullr Fest, celebrating the modern day patron saint of skiers.

Roskilde IV, a 37-meter-long warship from 1025 that was excavated in 1997, arrived at the British Museum in a flat pack from Denmark.

Seafood with "assorted whey pickled food and taste of Black Death" is offered as a starter at the Fjorukrain Viking Village Restaurant in Iceland. TG

—With contributions from Lucy Benson, Javier Espinoza, Jamie Z. Ewbank, Thorsten Gritschke and Beth Schepens. Email BigSmallTalk@wsj.com