School directors tonight approved a two-year Parkland Education Association contract that includes 2.25 percent annual raises for teachers.

The Parkland School Board voted 8-0 in favor of the contract, which is effective Sunday through Aug. 31, 2016, officials said. School director David Hein abstained because his wife is a member of the teachers union.

Under the contract, teachers' annual salary increases include step movement, or raises associated with longevity and education level. Stipends for teachers who serve as coaches and club or activity advisers will also increase 2.25 percent each year.

"This contract is a fiscally responsible and fair agreement for everyone. Because of savings that the district will accrue in healthcare costs, we can ensure that we remain competitive with respect to teacher salaries in the Lehigh Valley, thus supporting our efforts to put the finest teachers possible in Parkland classrooms," board President Roberta Marcus said.

Teachers for one more year may continue with the district's Classic Blue indemnity plan, paying $744 annually for individual coverage and $2,028 annually for family coverage, according to the contract.

In 2013-14, union members who chose Parkland's PPO6 plan contributed $390 for individual coverage and $780 for family coverage. Under the new contract, those contributions will increase to $672 and $1,344 for individual and family coverage, respectively, in 2014-15 and to $840 and $1,680 in 2015-16.

A new PPO option will allow members to pay nothing for individual coverage and $120 for family coverage, however it comes with higher deductibles -- $750 for individuals and $1,500 for family coverage -- and copays for services, the contract says. The PPO6 deductibles are $500 and $1,000, respectively for individual and family coverage.

Also under the new contract, teachers will be able to opt out of Parkland health insurance if they show proof of coverage through a spouse or parent. Employees who opt out will receive a $1,500 annual stipend from the district.

If a health insurance plan offered by Parkland exceeds the threshold requirements for an excise tax associated with the Affordable Care Act, the district and the union will split the cost, the contract says.

The contract also requires teachers to be paid via direct deposit, saving Parkland administrative, paper and processing costs, gives teachers who obtain National Board Certification a one-time $3,500 stipend, and includes a Workers' Compensation Panel of Physicians agreement.

"Both parties conducted themselves in a professional and collaborative manner throughout the negotiations process," Superintendent Richard Sniscak said. "The end result is a fair contract that is fiscally responsible while rewarding our employees for their skills and dedication to the important and varied roles they play within Parkland."

The union, which represents about 640 teachers, nurses, guidance counselors and other professional staff, ratified the agreement earlier today, officials said.

"Our membership is pleased to have earned a fair contract that rewards staff for ongoing graduate study and professional improvement. We are pleased that we could work collaboratively and come to a reasonable settlement worthy of the reputation for excellence that Parkland enjoys," union President Sandra Gackenbach said.

Sniscak and Gackenbach announced Aug. 8 that a vote on the new contract was imminent and likely to come before the first day of school, which is next Tuesday. Teachers' current two-year contract, which included a wage freeze in 2012-13 and a $1,250 raise in 2013-14, expires Sunday.

Contact Lehigh County suburbs reporter Precious Petty at 484-894-3854 or ppetty@express-times.com.

Like Lehigh County on lehighvalleylive.com on Facebook