The major North American rental companies are branching out again these days, only this time the focus is different. Instead of adding more general rental stores, these companies are making acquisitions and opening new locations that specialize in a variety of niches, like pumps, power, trenching, entertainment and more.

The reason these specialty branches are on the rise is quite simple. Companies like United Rentals, Stamford, Conn.; Sunbelt Rentals, Fort Mill, S.C.; and Hertz Equipment Rental Corp., Naples, Fla., see specialty rental as a way to drive up returns above the cost of capital.

“We’re prioritizing our specialty operations. We have a target to expand our specialty businesses to a total of $1 billion of revenue by 2015,” says Michael Kneeland, president and CEO, United Rentals.

“They’re high-margin operations serving high-growth markets, so top-line growth on the specialty side can help drive metrics like return on invested capital for the company overall,” Kneeland said.

To that end, in early March, United Rentals entered into a definitive asset purchase agreement to acquire National Pump, Beaumont, Texas, considered the second largest specialty pump rental company in North America, for $780 million. (see story on page 28)

In addition, United Rentals opened 18 new specialty locations in 2013, 12 of them in the fourth quarter, and plans to open another 13 “cold starts” dedicated to either power and HVAC, trench safety or tool and industrial solutions in 2014.

Hertz Equipment Rental Corp., which will spin off as a separate company from Hertz in 2015, also has been involved in expanding its specialty divisions.

“We operate specialty branches offering pump and power equipment, along with temperature control equipment like HVAC, chillers and heaters. We also service the entertainment market through our Hertz Entertainment Services and Cinelease brands, which rent lighting and related aerial products,” says Lois Boyd, president, Hertz Equipment Rental Corp. “Opening up specialty locations gives us the ability to capitalize on market opportunities with a very flexible, capital light model. For example, it allows for consolidation of resources in application engineering, technical support services, project management and field technical sales support for local branches

and customers.”

Boyd says the company also saw an opportunity in better serving the entertainment business years ago.

“Entertainment industry customers were renting cars from Hertz and then also renting some of our equipment, including generators, so we wanted to give those customers a more focused point of view,” Boyd says.

As a result, the company launched Hertz Entertainment Services and, in late 2012, also acquired Cinelease, a provider of lighting and grip rentals to the U.S. entertainment industry.

“Lighting made sense for our business. Having adjacent products for these entertainment customers helps us fill out that space, which means we can give those customers one point of contact for what they need,” Boyd says.

Sunbelt Rentals is another company that has expanded its efforts in specialty rental over the years and now has divisions for climate control services, oil and gas, pile driving, pump and power, scaffold and industrial resources.

According to Ashtead Group, Sunbelt’s parent company based in the United Kingdom, Sunbelt Rentals will continue to make acquisitions in specialty companies to broaden its exposure to markets where there is potential and where the business is marginally less cyclical than general rental.

For example, the company in 2011 acquired Empire, Baton Rouge, La., a specialist provider of scaffold rental, erection and dismantling services to petrochemical industries, and in late 2012 acquired JMR Industries, Odessa, Texas, a specialist in selling into the oil

and gas industry.

While the specialty trend takes hold in the U.S. and Canada, Kennards Hire in Australia may have been one of the first rental companies to launch separate specialty branches focused on a certain type of equipment category decades ago.

“I believe we launched the first specialty branch in the 1970s,” says Andy Kennard, who founded Kennards Hire with his brother, Neville, in the 1960s.

“How it came about is that we were in a recession and a lot of equipment was not getting out, so we employed someone to specifically go out and rent that category of equipment. We invited them to be a partner in the business and we ended up with four specialty divisions at that time,” Kennard says.

When the brothers decided to separate the business, however, the specialty divisions were disbanded until the early 2000s, when Peter Lancken, Kennards Hire CEO, resurrected the idea and launched “lift and shift” and concrete care divisions.

“We felt we had certain products that were within Kennards that weren’t getting the utilization and it was underdone in how we handled those because they required more expertise and knowledge,” Lancken says.

“More importantly, we thought there was a wider family of products you could bring into the fold that you couldn’t get hired out at Kennards. In the end, it helped with products that were slow movers and brought in more types of equipment,” Lancken says.

Today, Kennards Hire has specialist divisions in pump and power, traffic control, rail, lift and shift, and concrete care.

“The remarkable thing we’ve discovered in getting these businesses up and running is that we now have five mainstream specialty businesses that now represent 20 percent of the revenues of the group and 25 percent of the earnings. The specialty businesses out-earn their revenue performance,” Lancken says.

Lancken says the specialty divisions have their own general managers and branch managers, their own stock, transportation system, servicing and training, although they do link back into Kennards Hire’s back office for administration.

As companies like United Rentals, Sunbelt Rentals and Hertz Equipment Rental Corp. are discovering, Kennards Hire also has found that the specialty branches create crossovers that build the overall customer base of the company.

“It is remarkable how many new accounts we are opening because of people who have discovered us through the speciality divisions. Up until then, they either used a competitor or didn’t understand what we had to offer. Once they were hooked on something, like the concrete care rental gear, then they would take advantage of Kennards when they need other gear,” Lancken says