Topics: Democracy, Elizabeth Warren, morality, Nelson Mandela, Polls, Pope Francis I

What is America thinking? professional pollsters ask, day by day, week by week. The assumption is that opinions express the “reality” that those in the “bubble” somehow don’t get, because they’re ostensibly out of touch with the “real” America. The underlying premise is that democracy profits from any and all contact with the average citizen — that precious slice of real America.

But this modern twist on the Jeffersonian principle of listening to the modest, decent, hardworking, informed voter is less meaningful than it ought to be. We live in an America, and in political times, in which almost no attention at all is paid to the quality of information that voters possess. Polls fool us into believing that ideas matter. Polls are a mirage.

Ideas should matter. They should triumph over the blind course set by ideologues and demagogues, and the weak-minded elected officials who rationalize inaction and justify inertia. This explains why those who implicitly sense what American political culture is missing adore Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren for the clear-headed, no-nonsense critique she provides. “We all do better when we all do better,” her official website reads. The real purpose of republican government must be to help as many people as possible; that is what distinguishes the republican form from the autocratic. (And that, by the way, is the principle that the Affordable Care Act is meant to embody.)

Back in 2010, Warren responded to an interviewer’s question about the impact of the big banks’ outsize misbehavior: “I would have expected the financial crisis to sweep through Wall Street like a hundred-year flood – wiping out old business practices and changing the ecology profoundly. So far, the financial services industry has seemed to treat the crisis like a little rainfall – inconvenient, but no significant changes needed … Will [the industry] react to all the new cops on the beat just by hiring more lobbyists? Will it continue to spend $1.4 million a day to beat back anything that could mean more accountability and oversight? Or will the financial services industry finally begin to rethink its business models, lobbying approach, and attitude toward the public?” We all know the answer.

Sen. Warren is America’s version of the new, proactive pontiff. As Pope Francis truly understands the call for greater humanity in Jesus’ message, and says so in how he lives, she aims to identify hypocrisy and bad behavior in those who have wielded economic power with shameless disregard for the public interest. But neither of these idea-based public figures is “heroic” – that horribly overused term. They are simply refreshing for their candor.

They symbolize the importance of moral insight. They point us in the direction of fairness by declaring the obvious: that the historical tendency is to accept the powerful as implicitly deserving of their social position. This is the 18th-century notion of deference, which the American Revolution was supposed to have eradicated, but, of course, did not. Society presses (or languishes) on, unable to escape the protective bubble that protects not “the people” but the status quo.

The bubble is why America rests on its laurels, touting its morally ambiguous, yet morally assertive, “exceptionalism,” while appearing, rightly, to the rest of the civilized world as a place where gun violence is epidemic, and Congress lacks the courage to rein in gun manufacturers. In Australia, a nation not unlike the U.S. in its youth-worshiping, beer-guzzling ways, fewer than 50 people were murdered with guns last year; and only four in Japan. But you don’t hear a lot about Australian or Japanese exceptionalism. And check out the violence in the average PG-13 movie. It has been more than a decade since Michael Moore’s “Bowling for Columbine,” a year since the obscenity of Newtown; we don’t have to reproduce the list of murder scenes to project that future historians will be featured on scholarly panels seeking to understand why nothing was done, why entire generations saw the fatal flaw in their society and failed to act morally.

Anyone who professes to care what the founders of our nation believed in – as the U.S. Supreme Court is charged with doing – would be hard-pressed to find in the Federalist Papers any suggestion of institutionalized corruption, à la Citizens United. Powerful people with unlimited capital at their disposal can legitimately buy votes now, and Congresspeople spend expedient hours each day raising money for the next campaign. At what point will we be naming senators as we name stadiums and halftime shows, e.g., “the Exxon-Mobil senator from Mississippi”? We are truly pathetic if we allow ourselves to believe that there is anything “exceptional” about a nation that permits big corporations to underwrite politicians. What would be exceptional is if humane and helpful ideas triumphed over money with some regularity.