HARTFORD — U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren gave Connecticut Democrats a simple charge Monday in an impassioned speech before loyal supporters at the state party's annual fundraising dinner.

"This next election is up to you. You are the heart and soul and the living spark of the Democratic Party," the Democratic senator from Massachusetts told the crowd of more than 1,000 party faithful who attended the Jefferson-Jackson-Bailey Dinner at the Connecticut Convention Center.

"You make it happen," said Warren, who has emerged as a leader in a national party that is trying to recover from a disappointing election year and rebuild itself in time for 2016. The audience members, who paid $185 to attend the party's biggest event of the year, cheered loudly.

Connecticut Democrats "made it happen" here last year when they re-elected an unpopular governor in a Republican surge year, propelling Gov. Dannel P. Malloy to victory as other Democratic candidates lost. If Warren's speech was any indication, the national party is looking to seize on the effectiveness of the Democrats' message here and translate it to electoral success throughout the country in 2016.

Warren's message Monday night was rooted in economic populism, and she called for a return to the liberal policies of the mid-20th century. In those years, she said, "the 97 percent — not the top 10 percent — the heart of America, got 70 percent of the income growth in this country."

"Opportunity was not equal for all but we were heading in the right direction," Warren said, mentioning government investment in education, roads and bridges, and research. "It worked."

She cited her own humble roots — telling the crowd that after her father died of a heart attack, her mother, at age 50, took a minimum wage job at Sears so that her family could keep the house.

Warren said that when it came time for her to go to college, "It was a state school that cost $50 dollars a semester that opened so many doors for me."

"I am the daughter of a maintenance man who ended up in the United States Senate," Warren said, promising that the American Dream is possible if Democrats are elected to national office. "Never forget that I made it because America invested in kids like me."

Most of Warren's speech was devoted to a broader economic message. But she also joined in the victory lap as liberals who spoke Monday celebrated a series of wins last week, which opened with President Barack Obama signing an executive order to ban Confederate flags following the mass shooting at a black church in Charleston, S.C., and closed with Supreme Court decisions that upheld a key provision in the Affordable Care Act and legalized same-sex marriage nationwide.

"We believe that racism, sexism, homophobia, hatred, injustice and bigotry have no place in our country and we'll keep fighting," Warren said to loud applause.

To some in the party, it seemed improper that those remarks were delivered at an annual fundraiser named after slave owners — former Presidents Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson.

State Party Chairman Nick Balletto, who addressed the crowd after Warren left the stage, said that he wanted to rename the event and remove Jefferson and Jackson's names.

"Democrats are the party of inclusion, and that's why I believe that it is time to look at the name of our biggest event of the year to make sure it reflects the diverse makeup of our party," he said.

Balletto said he would ask the Democratic State Central Committee to take a "serious look at the event's name and the use of Jefferson and Jackson." Renaming the event, he said, could still honor John Bailey, a former state party and Democratic National Committee chairman.