The Asbury Park Toy Drive organizers have collected presents for more than 1,300 city children this year.

Buy Photo Laylanni Caldeira, 8, of Asbury Park greets Santa at the event. The Asbury Park Toy Drive takes over a vacant storefront in downtown Asbury Park as hundreds of people line up for gifts, clothing, and food. Asbury Park, NJ Saturday, December 19, 2015 @dhoodhood (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

ASBURY PARK - Toys crammed the shelves lining the walls of the shuttered storefront downtown. Stacks of Barbie dolls, trendy headsets, musical instruments and board games grew several feet high by the second week of December.

This vacant space was headquarters for the Asbury Park Toy Drive — "Toy Central," as the organizers call it."We're the female elves," said Mickey Carter, as she and Beth Foderaro sifted through bags of donations that Connie Breech collected the night before at Johnny Mac's. The three of them, as well as Barbara Lesinsky and Corey Lowell, lead the effort.

Fast forward one week: Shortly after 9 a.m. Saturday, a line of people stood outside "Toy Central," which was located this year in a space on Bangs Avenue donated to the toy drive by developer Carter Sackman.

Shivering in a cold wind, the families, many with young children in tow, waited their turn to enter the building and receive bundles of toys, along with warm clothing like coats, mittens and hats.

After receiving toys and clothing, the families stepped outside to an area at the rear of the building where volunteers allowed each child to pick out one extra donated toy, along with a book. Free hot dogs and hot chocolate also were available, courtesy of The Windmill. Santa Claus, aka Barry Bowling, handed candy canes to children and invited them to pose for pictures.

Buy Photo Nicole Andrews and Malachi Gary, both of Asbury Park, look over toys the received for their son Malachi Andrews Jr. The Asbury Park Toy Drive takes over a vacant storefront in downtown Asbury Park as hundreds of people line up for gifts, clothing, and food. Asbury Park, NJ Saturday, December 19, 2015 @dhoodhood (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)

Asbury Park residents Nicole Andrews, 45, and her boyfriend, Malachi Gary, 37, held a black garbage bag filled with toys that they planned to give to children Malachi Jr., 8, Isyss, 9, Kasim, 10 and Khadir, 16. Andrews' 21- year-old daughter, Jasmine, was also at the toy drive, where she received toys for her son Alijah, 2.

"It's a relief on our end," Gary said of the bag of gifts. "This way, more money can go towards the bills. Right now it's really hard to get by."

Asbury resident Giovanna Buenaventura and her daughter, Laylanni Caldeira, 8, stopped to say hello to Santa.

"Have you been a good girl?" Santa asked Laylanni. "Yes!" she assured him. When Santa asked her for a high-five she happily obliged.

"Every year I come here," Buenaventura said of the toy drive. "It's the feeling of Christmas that is here, and I get to take care of my daughter."

What started off as a small charity for a few dozen kids has grown into a full-blown holiday operation with an application process and dozens of sponsors. This year the organizers received more than 500 applications for more than 1,331 children.

Some families can't afford presents under the Christmas tree. Others have suffered from fires or other mishaps and lost their gifts. No matter what the situation, Breech said, it's the organizers' mission to get something for every child.

Buy Photo The Asbury Park Toy Drive takes over a vacant storefront in downtown Asbury Park as hundreds of people line up for gifts, clothing, and food. Asbury Park, NJ Saturday, December 19, 2015 @dhoodhood (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)

"We try to do the best we can to make everybody happy," said Breech, an Asbury Park police sergeant and one of the early organizers. "One way or another, they're all going to get something."

Humble beginnings

The toy drive started 16 years ago as a fundraiser hosted by Georgie's bar. Breech and Foderaro kept the tradition going the following years.

Foderaro remembers when Toy Central was the back of a friend's van. She and Breech, who were among the first volunteers, stood outside in the snow trying to pile dozens of large garbage bags with toys into the back. That was before parents had to submit applications.

Now the toy drive is a citywide operation. A property owner donates a vacant space to the organizers. The campaign gets donations from Jimmy's Italian Restaurant to the Wonder Bar and the Stone Pony, along with several other local businesses. The year after Sandy hit, the toy drive got $11,000 worth of Hess toy trucks donated from the company.

"One year we had a fire truck and Santa," Foderaro said. "We're too big doing this to even fathom doing that (this year)."

"Anything great, it starts like this," she said, holding her thumb and index finger an inch apart.

Buy Photo Lori Marie Ciello, a volunteer from the Monmouth County Sheriffs office distributes coats for those in need. The Asbury Park Toy Drive takes over a vacant storefront in downtown Asbury Park as hundreds of people line up for gifts, clothing, and food. Asbury Park, NJ Saturday, December 19, 2015 @dhoodhood (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)

And then demand swells.

Giving back

The toy drive has been around for so long that the first generation of kids has grown up. They have children of their own or come back to help out.

One of them is Jay'von Britt. He was around 10 years old the year he found an extra Christmas present under the tree. The bright angel sat perched atop the tree inside his east-side house as he opened the gift.

"It was a basketball and a football," Britt recalled years later. "I loved the gifts."

A budding athlete, he practiced with his new presents. He went on to join both the basketball and football team in high school, eventually playing varsity football and helping clinch the state championship.

Today, Britt is a 22-year-old patrolman for the Asbury Park Police Department. He volunteers for the toy drive from time to time, helping Breech sort through the gift bags and hand them out to the families before Christmas.

"I was a kid that got those gifts before, so I just wanted to help out," said the city resident. "It was wonderful because some people aren't fortunate enough to have families buy them gifts."

For Breech, it's about making the city a little brighter over the holidays, one toy at a time.

"It takes a village to raise a child," she said. "If it's in your heart to help somebody, that's what you do."

How to help

The Asbury Park Toy Drive accepts donations year-round. Volunteers also distribute toys to local churches, as well as to the Community Affairs & Resource Center Jan. 6, for families who celebrate Three Kings Day.

The nonprofit also hosts Easter basket giveaways, essay contests for Mother's Day and Father's Day and school supply drives.

Send donations to:

Asbury Park Toy Drive

PO Box 1469

Asbury Park NJ 07712

For more information, visit the organization's website asburyparktoydrive.com.

For more headlines check out the NewsBreak below:

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Democratic presidential debate; State trooper killed in crash; Star Wars: The Force Awakens premieres

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1lZBa2T