Getty Images/ Justin Sullivan

Friedman Fleischer & Lowe’s acquisition of a second platform in the optometry industry is a signal that consolidation in the industry is underway, and that private equity may play a more active role going forward.

Thomas Puckett, of merger and acquisition advisory firm HPC Puckett & Co., said the biggest challenge right now is for private equity firms to find sizeable assets to back.

“If someone is looking to put at least $250 million to work in the sector, that’s more difficult,” he said.

Mr. Puckett said investment opportunities are currently veering on the smaller size, with the sweet spot being entities with $10 million to $50 million in enterprise value.

HPC advises on deals in the optical and communications industry and has helped seal over a dozen optical transactions last year, including in optical retail, laboratory and coating.

Optometry is a $13.8 billion industry in the U.S., and has grown on average 1.6% annually in the five years to 2014. The industry is expected to expand at 3.1% annually between 2014 and 2019, according to data provider IBISWorld.

The expansion is likely buoyed by widening vision care coverage under the Affordable Care Act and optometrists expanding the scope of their services to include preventive care for the nation’s burgeoning elderly population.

FFL’s latest deal, Clarkson Eyecare Inc., operates in the higher end of the market, offering customers more detailed eye care such as LASIK surgery.

“There are more than 10,000 independents out there, most of them have just one-off locations,” FFL managing director Chris Harris said. “Clarkson is going to be a great platform to start consolidation.”

FFL’s November investment in Eyemart Express LLC leans towards the value segment of the market, providing consumers with eyewear at affordable price points.

HPC advised the sellers on both the Clarkson and Eyemart transactions.

Mr. Puckett said private equity is already involved in the optical industry consolidation game, especially on the retail side of the business.

Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. in February last year bought discount eyewear retailer National Vision Inc. for more than $1 billion from Berkshire Partners, the Wall Street Journal reported then, citing people familiar with the situation.

Boston’s Monitor Clipper Partners has been a backer of MyEyeDr., a vision care provider in the Washington, D.C. area since 2012. Cleveland-based Riverside Co. in August 2012 invested in IDOC LCC, an alliance of over 1,700 independent optometrists nationwide, while Varsity Healthcare Partners, of Los Angeles, acquired ophthalmologic and optometric services provider Katzen Eye Group to form EyeCare Services Partners Holdings LLC.

Mr. Puckett said he expects 50% of the optical retail industry will be consolidated in the next five years – some rolled up by private equity investors — producing more sizeable assets for buyout shops to acquire.

But so far, there is no clear market leader and national players with a broad network are far and few between. FFL’s Clarkson, based in Ellisville, Miss., has 82 locations in the Midwest, compared with Visionworks of America Inc. — one of the largest eyewear companies in the U.S. — with over 660 optical retail stores, according to its website.

“There aren’t many operators with over 100 locations, but there are quite a few independents with under 50 locations,” Mr. Puckett said. “It is logical for businesses to consolidate in a geographic area.”

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com