Sioux Falls, SD

Luann Strait of Watertown recently became a cancer survivor.

"I have a very strong faith, and without that I'm not sure I would have gotten through this as easily as I have, and being here tonight, and listening to this just brings that all to reality," Strait said.

It's intermission at the Christmas at the Cathedral concert held at St. Joseph's Cathedral in Sioux Falls. Music Director Dan Goeller explained the concerts' appeal after 18 years.

"I think watching Christmas at the Cathedral at home on Christmas night or attending a performance has become a lot of people's annual, one of their annual traditions of celebrating Christmas, and I think the other thing is that, but each year it's a little different, we have different artists, and different songs, so we rediscover fresh every year what Christmas is all about," he said.

This year takes a closer look at the manger scene's shepherds, "the first ones on the scene" at the first Christmas, explains producer, director and writer Mark Conzemius.

"The lowest in society had this really special place in society, they really became the first evangelists to go tell everybody this exciting story," Conzemius said.

Appropriately enough, money from ticket sales this year will benefit the new Bishop Dudley Hospitality House in Sioux Falls, which will serve people who also find themselves on the margins of society, homeless like the central figures of the Christmas story.

"But just think of that reality that, probably the most famous homeless couple, Mary and Joseph, were homeless!” Conzemius said. “So homeless, on the night of the birth of their son Jesus, they had to have him in a manger, in a cave, amongst animals."

Goeller and Conzemius, along with tenor voice Scott Piper, identify the concert's theme in springtime, and write the script during the heat of the summer. More than 200 volunteers help bring the shows to fruition.

For some, music is synonymous with the sacred. At these concerts, they're one and the same.

Tenor voice Mike Eldred grew up steeped in this outlook. His talents have taken him to Broadway, where he performed as Jean Valjean in Les Miserables.

"I can tell, I've been in here twenty minutes now, and I can tell how forgiving and enveloping this building is for a singer," Eldred said. "And I've been through a couple of songs already, and it just, it sounds so good. It's the perfect place to come to hear music, no question. And as a singer, we long for opportunities like this to just let it go, and have the building enhance what we do naturally."

That enveloping quality was echoed by others.

"In the cathedral, it adds its own color, and its own dimension to the sound and it also envelops the listener, in a completely multisensory experience both with sight and sound, which is very unique," Goeller said.

For Strait, that enveloping aspect of the Cathedral defined the concert performed inside its stone walls.

"I feel like someone's wrapped their arms around me tonight," she said.

Once again, KELOLAND Television will be airing an uninterrupted broadcast of Christmas at the Cathedral this Thursday, Christmas night.