The vandals, said to number between 40 and 50, sprinted down the store’s main aisle about 1:50 a.m. Sunday, “destroying merchandise displays and items,” a sheriff’s deputy’s report of the incident noted.

The fragile bonds of civilization that keep society peaceful and orderly are fraying in the face of mobs organized online. Last Sunday, an organized mob of about four dozen people attacked a Walmart in Macon, Georgia, intentionally doing damage to displays and merchandise and dragging a man out of motorized cart and throwing him to the floor. The Macon Telegraph reports:

Floors in parts of the store were “coated with broken merchandise,” the report added. “The length of the store from front to rear was lined with items which had been shattered, destroyed, turned over and thrown about.” When sheriff’s deputies got there, the crowd “began to flee into many different vehicles and leave the scene,” the report said.

To my mind, the most horrifying aspect is:

Some in the crowd also snatched a man, apparently a shopper at the Zebulon Road store, from a motorized shopping cart and dragged him to the floor, Bibb County sheriff’s officials said Monday.

A sole culprit has been taken into custody:

The teenager seen leading the rushing horde of young men and women told a Wal-Mart employee “that this was a planned event ... to see how much damage they could cause,” the sheriff’s report said. The teen, identified as 17-year-old Kharron Nathan Green, of Ashton Drive in northwest Bibb County, was arrested when he returned to the store to retrieve his cellphone. Green was jailed and later released on bond after being charged with inciting a riot and second-degree damage to property.

The odd (well, actually quite common) thing about this report and all the others I could find (including ABC News and Newsmax) is that in this age of hyper-consciousness about diversity, nobody dared notice that in the videos taken from multiple cameras (see embedded videos below), all of the miscreants appear to be black. This just shows the taboos that operate in American society and journalism. The endless propaganda that holds America to be a terrible racist place that has oppressed blacks is having predictable consequences, and these consequences are being erased from the public's notice insofar as possible.

This sort of thing never ends well.

Videos from the store’s surveillance cameras: