Buy Photo Six Make A Wish participants pose Sunday behind home plate at Louisville Slugger Field. From left in the first row are Rylan Morris, Robert Kenney and Gabe Kinderman; from left in second row are Austin Walker, Harper Wehneman and Becca Hall. (Photo: David R. Lutman/Special to The Courier-Journal )Buy Photo

One threw out the first pitch of the game. Another got to announce the batters. Still another pumped up the crowd alongside the team mascot.

In all, six Louisville-area youths with life-threatening illnesses got to play roles Sunday with the Louisville Bats minor league team during Louisville Slugger Field's Make-A-Wish Night.

While it wasn't their official wish — two have already gone to Hawaii and Disney World, and four others are waiting on other wishes — the event was meant to provide the six a special experience and raise awareness about the group.

"Most people know about us, but not that we're here in Louisville granting wishes," said Alana Karl, development officer for Make-A-Wish of Ohio, Kentucky & Indiana.

Ranging in age from 6 to 19, participants Robert Kenney, Austin Walker, Rylan Morris, Gabe Kinderman, Becca Hall and Harper Wehneman joined their families at the ballpark on Sunday for the 6 p.m. game against the Toledo Mud Hens.

Along with being junior announcers, others were set to help clean the bases between innings or do a radio interview. The six and their families got behind-the-scenes access at the park, and a commemorative bat.

"This is such a good thing for him," said Chad Morris, whose son, Rylan, a T-ball player himself, was all smiles Sunday despite his battles with a form of leukemia.

Since 1983, the chapter has granted nearly 12,000 wishes, which the organization says improve a participant's quality of life and state of mind. According to its annual report, it spent nearly $9 million on wish granting between August 2011 and August 2012.

Kinderman, 18, was suffering from headaches when he was diagnosed with a malignant brain tumor during his junior year of high school. He's since endured surgery and dozens of chemo and radiation treatments.

Hopeful that he'll become cancer free, he's an aspiring mechanic whose pending wish is to get his classic 1986 El Camino car restored. He plans to return to St. Xavier High and finish school.

He met the team mascot Sunday and walked with the help of a cane to the pitcher's mound, where he watched a fellow Make-A-Wish participant throw the ceremonial first pitch. Kinderman said he was grateful for the day. Meantime, he said, he's taking his difficult journey "one foot at a time."

Reach Chris Kenning at (502) 582-4697. Follow him on Twitter at ckenning_cj.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1m6WMHl