Sanders-021507-18335- 0004

Poll after poll shows that the American people are united in their anger and frustration with the status quo. They sense, correctly, that the deck is stacked against them.

While millions of people are working longer hours for lower wages, almost all new income is going to the top 1 percent. While people in the middle class pay their fair share of taxes, multi-national corporations avoid their tax responsibility by exploiting loopholes. While young people study hard to get a college education, many leave school with crippling debts that severely impact their futures.

The pundits tell us the American people are politically divided and drifting farther apart into red and blue states. I don’t believe it. Yes, there are significant divisions on some issues, but progressives, moderates and conservatives are surprisingly united on many of the most important challenges facing the middle class. We should build on that unity, not let powerful special interests divide us.

Despite the media’s insistence that the country is irreparably divided, let me give you just a few examples of where the American people are largely united.

The overwhelming majority of Americans believe our democracy is undermined by billionaires spending unlimited amounts of money to influence elections. People across the political spectrum want reasonable limits on campaign funding. They think the Supreme Court was wrong to equate buying elections with “freedom of speech.”

The overwhelming majority of Americans believe that the middle class in America is disappearing, that we need to make college more affordable, that unemployment is too high and that the federal government should create decent-paying jobs rebuilding our crumbling roads, bridges, railroads and water systems.

The overwhelming majority of Americans believe that growing wealth and income inequality poses a serious threat. They are deeply concerned that 95 percent of all new income generated in recent years has gone to the top 1 percent and that the United States has, by far, the most unequal distribution of wealth and income of any major country. They very much support tax reform which asks the wealthy to start paying their fair share of taxes and which eliminates huge tax loopholes enabling one out of four corporations to pay nothing in federal income taxes.

The overwhelming majority of Americans believe that the social safety net established in this country over the last 80 years is vital to the well-being of the elderly, the children, the sick and the poor. At a time when more Americans are living in poverty than ever before, they strongly oppose cuts in Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, veterans’ benefits and federal aid to education. In fact, they support expanding Social Security.

A strong majority of Americans believe that global warming is real and poses a threat to our planet. They want the federal government to limit carbon emissions and to move forward aggressively in energy efficiency and sustainable energy.

Let’s be clear. Elections have real consequences in terms of whether we create decent paying jobs, have pay equity for women, provide health care for all and address the planetary crisis of global warming — among many other issues.

The billionaire class fully understands the importance of politics and governmental decisions.

That’s why a handful of them are pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into the current elections. Their goal is simple: They want policies that make the rich even richer at the expense of everyone else.

We can’t let them get away with that. Let’s stand together. Let’s create a government which works for all Americans, and not just the wealthy few.

THE AUTHOR:

BERNIE SANDERS is a U.S. senator from Vermont. He is an independent, although he caucuses with Senate Democrats.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1oqJLpv