Just four days before the fifth anniversary of the shooting of Arizona Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, the NRA targeted a pair of Brooklyn lawmakers Monday with a menacing image of bullets next to photos of the two gun control advocates.

America’s 1st Freedom, an NRA publication, tweeted the image of state Sen. Roxanne Persaud and Assemblywoman Jo Anne Simon, both Democrats, weeks after they announced legislation aimed at controlling the sale of ammunition.

LUPICA: OBAMA'S BIG MOMENT AS HE TAKES ON GUN LOBBY

The two lawmakers and other local supporters — including Mayor de Blasio and Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams — condemned what came across as a veiled threat.

A National Rifle Association publication showed the organization's opposition to an ammunition limit bill with this tweet Monday morning. (@NRAA1F via Twitter)

“I think it is irresponsible in the times that we are living in to place a target around someone,” Persaud told the Daily News. “By placing someone’s picture with bullets next to them you are playing on the fears of people.”

EDITORIAL: DANGEROUS FIGHTING WORDS ON GUNS AND GUN CONTROL

Persaud said the picture has “the potential to cause harm” because you don’t know if a psycho who is upset about the proposal will react to something like that.

Simon agreed the photo was “irresponsible” and simply an attempt by the NRA to intimidate her and stir up its gun-loving base.

“They are clearly trying to be intimidating and it is not working,” Simon said.

The organization showed its staunch opposition in a blog post to a bill the lawmakers announced last month limiting ammunition purchases over a 90-day period.

NRA REACTS TO NEW YORK AMMO LIMIT BILL BY TRYING TO BULLY THOSE SEEKING GUN LAWS

Democrat State Sen. Roxanne Persaud of Brooklyn is one of two lawmakers who announced the gun control bill last month. (nysenate.gov)

“In truth, such legislation should simply be laughed off and quickly forgotten,” America’s 1st Freedom editor Mark Chesnut wrote.

“Unfortunately, the anti-gun climate in New York requires that we all take it seriously. New York gun owners should make sure their representatives know how strongly they oppose this ridiculous assault on their rights.”

EXCLUSIVE: MOM OF MURDERED TEEN ZAEVION DOBSON PRAISES OBAMA

A picture that was part of the tweet showed snapshots of the legislators surrounded by four bullets.

Simon and Persaud said they have received threatening emails and tweets since they unveiled plans for the bill on Dec. 20 with Adams.

Democratic state Assemblywoman Jo Anne Simon, shown in a February 2015 file photo, announced proposed new limits on ammo purchases with state Sen. Persaud. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)

De Blasio and Adams rushed to their defense.

“Knock it off,” de Blasio tweeted. “Your graphic is obnoxious and suggestive.”

Adams tweeted that the NRA “is shamefully attacking compassionate efforts” to reduce gun violence.

BARACK OBAMA WILL REVEAL EXECUTIVE ACTIONS ON GUN CONTROL TUESDAY

The borough president had proposed the idea of ammo restrictions to the two state lawmakers.

“The bills that we have drafted are intended to be a conversation starter, which will result in the right common-sense solution for New York,” Adams said in a statement. “We cannot be deterred by the level of hateful rhetoric that extremists are engaging in behind the cover of social media, which has already sparked a number of dangerous threats.”

This is truly disturbing! I hope the NRA is responsible enough to remove this tweet. https://t.co/hB8fznXwEo — Jo Anne Simon (@JoAnneSimonBK52) January 4, 2016

Knock it off, @NRAA1F. Your graphic is obnoxious and suggestive. I stand with @joannesimonbk52 & @senatorpersaud. https://t.co/eD0iMtmL6a — Bill de Blasio (@BilldeBlasio) January 4, 2016

.@NRAA1F we will not cower to your scare tactics. Proud to stand with @joannesimonbk52 & @SenatorPersaud https://t.co/4zpvcqisSc — Scott M. Stringer (@scottmstringer) January 4, 2016

City Controller Scott Stringer tweeted, “We will not cower to your scare tactics.”

An NRA spokesman did not reply to an email seeking comment.

Representatives for Twitter also didn’t immediately respond to a request to know whether the tweet violates the company’s policy against threatening posts. Company executives have declined to comment on specific Twitter accounts in the past.

Simon called the legislation an “anti-stockpiling bill” and said the goal is to limit the amount of ammo gun-owners can purchase to no more than twice the capacity of their weapons every 90 days.

Former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin drew ire in 2011 after the Tucson, Ariz., rampage by a mentally ill gunman that left six dead and nearly killed Giffords. Palin had posted a Facebook picture of Giffords and other Democrats who voted for Obamacare in rifle crosshairs.