LITTLE ROCK — A survey of 42 Arkansas hospitals found that most have seen decreases in emergency room visits and uninsured patients since the so-called private option went into effect, state Surgeon General Joe Thompson told a legislative panel Thursday.

The Hospital and Medicaid Study Subcommittee of the state Legislative Council also heard testimony from hospital administrators who said the private option is having a positive effect on their budgets and their patients.

Thompson told the panel that according to a survey in which 42 of the state’s 83 acute-care hospitals responded, Arkansas hospitals saw a 2 percent decrease in emergency room visits, a 24 percent decrease in emergency room visits by uninsured patients and a 3o percent decrease in overnight stays by uninsured patients in the first three months of 2014 compared to the first three months of 2013.

The survey also found that 26 of the 42 hospitals that responded saw a decrease in emergency room visits, 37 saw a decrease in emergency room visits by uninsured patients and 25 saw decreases in both categories in the first quarter of 2014 compared to the same period in 2013.

“We’re going in the right direction to improve the fiscal stability and well-being of our hospitals, but more importantly we’re removing a financial barrier for individuals who have needed care and needed service use so that they’re not waiting later to have more complicated, less effective, more costly outcomes,” Thompson said.

Rep. David Meeks, R-Conway, said he had concerns about how representative the survey was.

“I’m very hesitant and very concerned that we’re releasing information when not even half of the hospitals are even reporting, not knowing what the other 41 hospitals may or may not report,” he said.

Thompson told reporters later he was confident the survey was representative.

“This represented most types of hospitals — all regions, large and small, for profit, not for profit,” he said.

Last week, a group of Republican legislators who oppose the private option said during a news conference they will call for a new analysis of the program’s projected costs, which they said may exceed official estimates.

The private option is Arkansas’ program that uses federal Medicaid money to subsidize private health insurance for people earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level. The federal government is to pay the full cost for the first three years, if the program stays within spending caps, after which the state’s share of the cost is to increase gradually to 10 percent.

Enrollment in the private option began Oct. 1 and coverage began Jan. 1.

Administrative officials with White County Medical Center in Searcy, Baxter Regional Medical Center in Mountain Home, St. Bernard’s Healthcare in Jonesboro and Ouachita County Medical Center in Camden all testified Thursday that the private option is helping their facilities deal with cuts in Medicare reimbursement resulting from the federal Affordable Care Act, the 2013 federal budget sequester and other causes.

Ron Peterson, president and CEO of Baxter Regional Medical Center, said the hospital has projected that its Medicare reimbursements will decrease by more than $40 million over the next six years.

“Thank goodness that the private option came about, because that has helped eliminate some of that deficit. We’re projecting that we’ll have about $14.6 million through the private option to assist us with that offset,” he said.

Bo Ryall, president and CEO of the Arkansas Hospital Association, testified that Arkansas hospitals face an expected $2.5 billion reduction in Medicare reimbursements over the next decade and that their uncompensated care costs totaled $389 million in 2012.

“The private option is in no way going to back-fill those Medicare numbers, those reductions, or back-fill the uncompensated care, but we certainly need the private option for our rural hospitals to survive,” he said.