These pants, made by Umba Love, are great for yoga or dancing. ( Umba Love / Courtesy photo )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

5

»

Sometimes, the best things come when you're not focusing on them.

At least, that's the birth story of one of my favorite lines of locally made yoga pants.

Hilary Heath, of Boulder, started an activewear company called Sturdy Girl several years ago, specializing in high-impact sports bras in bigger sizes.

This topic interests me zero percent, for genetic reasons I'd rather deny.

While preparing for her first retail trade show and designing product displays, Heath realized she had nothing to put on the bottom half of her manikin. As an almost side note, she designed a pair of yoga pants.

She made a list of the features she loved and hated about different styles of athletic bottoms. Hates: the drawstring; shiny, see-through fabric; inner thigh pilling; awkwardly placed, too-shallow pockets. Loves: compression fabric that holds all your body parts in place; waistbands that stay put; a cut that lays flat against the body.

She pieced together all her favorite traits and created Sturdy Girl's yoga pants.

The response was surprisingly remarkable, she says — and it attracted athletes who might otherwise have no need for a, uh, Sturdy bra.

The La Jolla Pants are just as flattering as the more expensive and controversial lululemon line, and they're designed here in Boulder. The pants feature two strategically located pockets: one on the side hip, so it won't press into your back or belly when you're stretching or lying down, and another on the lower leg.

Sturdy Girl's La Jolla Pant with Las Vegas Tank-style bra. (Sturdy Girl / Courtesy photo)

But the waistband is my favorite feature. I call it the "muffin eater." Heath installed a few rows of tiny, light, soft, silicone gripper beads, which hold the edge flat against your body and in place (no sagging — even if you wear them for several days without washing; not that I've ever done that, every week). They actually hold your muffin top in and down, and then the compression fabric keeps your bumps smooth and concealed.

With yoga pants this flattering, who needs to do yoga?

Find the La Jolla Pants for $74 at sturdygirlsports.com.

Fortunately for Boulder, which is into locally grown food, there's no need to be sending money out of town for your yoga attire, either.

Here are a few of my other favorite local yoga pants companies, with products that rival even the biggest international names.

• Stonewear Designs (stoneweardesigns.com): This Louisville-based company was begun in 1996 to create more women-specific climbing clothes, but now you can find collections for a variety of active lifestyles (yoga, hiking, running and more). Clothes are made in the United States out of eco-conscious fabrics, with the ultimate goal to make clothes that help "women feel good about their bodies."

Check out the most popular style of pants, the Rockin' Pant, $78, made out of a wicking polyester-spandex blend. Stonewear Designs says these relaxed-fit athletic pants are durable, with a hidden side pocket on the leg. Looking for a design that's designed for comfort with a mid-rise waist? Try the Breathe Pant.

Buy Stonewear Designs online and at stores around the nation, including Boulder Bodywear, Neptune Mountaineering and Outdoor Divas in Boulder.

• Pacha Play (pachaplay.com): Looking for something different? Boulder-based Pacha Play designs three styles of pants that are comfortable enough to wear to a yoga class but fashionable enough to wear to town. This line is urban-influenced wearable art — designed for the "yogi-ninja-hero that lies in each of us."

The Scattered Showers Yoga Pant by Couture Tee. Custom-make your own handpainted, unique yoga pants through this Boulder shop. (Tristan Christopher / Courtesy photo)

My favorite: The Long Flair Pant with a ruffled bottom edge, $75, made from a super comfy cotton-lycra blend.

Pacha Play also makes men's clothing, including cropped and full-length yoga pants (I especially like the diagonal stitching details on the orange Men's Long Yoga Pants, $85).

Purchase Pacha Play on Etsy at etsy.com/shop/PachaPlay.

• Umba Love (etsy.com/shop/umbalove): This Boulder-based Etsy shop features unique, playful, artistic clothes that also are comfortable. The flowy, soft and slinky Mermaid Pants, $45, would work for a dance class or yoga, but they're elegant enough to wear out to a nice dinner. Pick from six colors. The Gypsy Pants with a side skirt, $55, are another feminine take on active clothing.

• Couture Tee (couturetee.com): If you're hunting for the perfect pair of yoga pants, why not design them yourself? Boulder-based Couture Tee has a Design Your Own store.

Select an image theme, and an artist will handpaint your pants and produce a one-of-a-kind design using a special imaging process. Every pair of yoga pants is made to order and unique.

Couture Tee recently teamed up with celebrity designer David Williams to launch new products, so keep your eyes open.

Pants are made out of organic cotton and spandex-lycra blends, all made in California and Boulder. Pants start at $44 and you can buy them at etsy.com/shop/coutureteedotcom.

• Tatica Designs (etsy.com/shop/taticadesigns): Erie resident Tatiana Moore founded this sportswear brand when she was pregnant with her first child. The right combo of fabric and style is important she says, and Tatica Designs uses a comfortable, high-quality cotton-spandex. Best of all, these prices are among the least expensive for locally made yoga attire —- only $32 for the red Karma Pant, my favorite style. These handmade pants have a colorful, fold-down waistband and back pocket.

• Skirt Sports (skirtsports.com): Despite the name, this well-known local company is not limited to athletic skirts. Skirt Sports also makes a variety of capris and pants — some with skirts built on top of them, like the new purple or black Levity Capri Skirt, $75. Not feeling the skirt cover-up? The new Redemption Capris, $65, come in four different colors made out of a quick-dry lightly compressive fabric that "hugs your muscles to keep them fresh."

Shop Skirt Sports online or in the small boutique at 6205 Lookout Road, Suite G, in Gunbarrel. The shop is open 9 a.m.-3 p.m. Monday through Friday.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/Aimeemay.