Photo

MARYSVILLE, Wash. — As this community continued to look for answers to why a popular 14-year-old would turn on classmates with lethal malice, and struggled to imagine how it might have been averted, details began to emerge about the attack, and especially the role of a young teacher many students are calling a hero.

The teacher, Megan Silberberger, was only about six weeks into her first job out of college — as a social studies teacher at Marysville-Pilchuck High School — when she came into the cafeteria on Friday morning and saw students on the floor and another student firing a gun.

Jaylen Ray Fryberg, a freshman, had opened fire with a .40 caliber handgun during a lunch period, witnesses said. In a span of minutes, he killed a female classmate and seriously wounded four others, each of them his childhood friends and two of them his relatives, before dying by a bullet from his own gun. A second victim died Sunday night.

Many students interviewed on Friday vividly remembered what happened after the initial shots were fired, as a woman grabbed Jaylen’s arm — few knew the woman as Ms. Silberberger at the time, perhaps because she is still so new to the school. A few seconds later, they said, they saw Jaylen fall to the ground as he either turned the weapon on himself or shot himself accidentally in the struggle.

Late Saturday, the president of the local teachers’ union released a statement from Ms. Silberberger saying that she has asked for time to heal. Her statement was simple and direct.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“This teacher did everything possible to protect students,” she said.

The union president, Randy Davis, said in an interview on Sunday that Ms. Silberberger, who he said is in her 20s, and did her student-teaching here at Marysville-Pilchuck last year, was “very traumatized,” and was with her family, declining interviews.

One of the wounded girls, Shaylee Chuckulnaskit, 14, remained in critical condition on Sunday at a hospital in nearby Everett, about half an hour’s drive north of Seattle. A second 14-year-old girl, Gia Soriano, died Sunday night at the hospital. Nate Hatch, 14, who was transported to a hospital in Seattle, remained in serious condition in intensive care, and Andrew Fryberg, 15, also being treated in Seattle, remained in critical condition. The boys were Jaylen’s cousins, family members said.

Neither officials nor relatives have publicly identified the other girl who was killed.

Jaylen came from a prominent family on the Tulalip Indian Reservation near Marysville, and the tribe’s chairman, Herman Williams Sr., issued a joint statement on Sunday with the city of Marysville, saying the two governments were collaborating fully in the investigation into the shooting, and the larger response in the community.

“The Tulalip Tribes and the city of Marysville stand together,” Mr. Williams said in the statement. “Our priority is now on our children and young people.”

Here in Marysville, on the suburban-rural fringe of the Seattle metro area, horses graze near the high school, but strip malls and housing tracts crowd in toward Interstate 5 a few miles away. On Sunday, a chain-link fence on the school grounds had become a destination for grieving and had grown thick with hundreds of flowers, messages and balloons. Many came on Sunday to leave something — a memento, a candle, flowers — others to read the tributes or simply stand and cry as a cold rain fell.

Joe Sheldon, 33, a real estate agent from Seattle who said he had never been to Marysville before Sunday, drove up with his daughter, Annika, 7, and his son, Donovan, 9, to leave flowers and say a prayer and talk about loving others. He hugged his children close, squatting down by the fence, and when he stood up, wiped away tears.

“This just hits too close to home,” he said.