Security: Computer security experts testify that the unfinished health care marketplace portal places the personal information of millions at risk on a poorly designed and built site that is a hacker’s dream.

Not only is the poorly designed and still only partially built ObamaCare website, Healthcare.gov, vulnerable to attack by computer hackers, it already may have been comprised, cybersecurity expert David Kennedy told a House Science, Space, & Technology Committee hearing on Tuesday.

“Hackers are definitely after it,” said Kennedy, CEO of data security firm Trusted SEC. “And if I had to guess, based on what I can see … I would say the website is either hacked already or will be soon.”

We’ve written about the security “glitch” that let a stranger download the personal information of Thomas Dougall of South Carolina from the website.

Then there’s Lisa Martinson of Missouri, who called Healthcare.gov’s customer service after forgetting her password and was told three people were given access to her account, address and Social Security number.

Kennedy even ran a hacker demonstration, showing the congressmen the webstite’s vulnerabilities and how he could pull sensitive information from it. He was one of four experts who testified of the risks of 500 million lines of untested Healthcare.gov computer code.

Those experts testified that the personal information of millions of Americans is at risk, including Social Security numbers, birthdays, incomes, home mortgages, and addresses. Rep. Mo Brooks, R-Ala., called it the “mother lode for identity theft.”

Morgan Wright, a cyberterrorism expert and CEO of Crowd Sourced Investigations, said trying to fix a line of code could open up a “Pandora’s box” of unintended consequences and security risks, and that changing a website on the fly was not a good idea.

“You create an unintended series of cascading events you have no control over because you don’t have a grasp of what the code is actually doing,” he said.

Fred Chang, distinguished chair in cybersecurity at Southern Methodist University, testified that security seemed almost an afterthought in the website design.

But aside from technical vulnerabilities is the fact that the “navigators” supposed to guide enrollees, including former members of Acorn, have been hired without basic background checks. At least one had an outstanding arrest warrant for check fraud.

Worse, Henry Chao, deputy chief information officer of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the federal agency that operates HealthCare.gov, said that up to 40% of the website, including the payment system, has yet to be built.

So we weren’t surprised to hear that Shane Smith, of Fort Collins, Colo. says his dog Baxter received a letter informing him that a health insurance account had been opened in his name. His dog’s name was supposed to be one of the security questions designed to keep his information private and secure.

Asked whether “any of you advise an American citizen to use this website as the security issues now exist,” each of the experts said no.

Indeed, it shouldn’t happen even to a dog.