When U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) announced his candidacy on Monday, some Latino groups dismissed him immediately, primarily because of his hardline views on immigration.

But Cruz’s political differences with Latino voters don’t stop with immigration, the issue most commonly associated with the Hispanic community. While the Texas Tea Party candidate hopes to become the first Hispanic president of the United States, his views diverge from prevailing opinion among Hispanics on a range of issues, from the role of government to gay marriage.

Size of government tupungato via Getty Images





It’s not a proposal that is likely to resonate with Latinos. In a 2011 survey by the Pew Research Center’s Hispanic Trends Project, some This is one of the areas in which Cruz least resembles the average Latino voter. In his speech on Monday, Cruz urged his followers to imagine a drastically reduced role for the federal government, including the abolishment of the Internal Revenue Service.It’s not a proposal that is likely to resonate with Latinos. In a 2011 survey by the Pew Research Center’s Hispanic Trends Project, some 75 percent of Hispanics favored a bigger government that provides more services over a smaller one that provided fewer services. Only 41 percent of the general population, by contrast, favored a larger government that provided more services.

Climate Change ASSOCIATED PRESS





But for many Latinos, climate change is a major concern. A poll carried out in February by The New York Times, Stanford University and the research group Resources for the Future found that Ted Cruz derides “global warming alarmists” and uses what PolitiFact refers to as “cherry picked” data to play down fears that human activity is responsible for rising global temperatures over time.But for many Latinos, climate change is a major concern. A poll carried out in February by The New York Times, Stanford University and the research group Resources for the Future found that 63 percent of Latinos favor action by the federal government to address climate change, compared to just 49 percent of non-Hispanic whites.

Obamacare ASSOCIATED PRESS





But while Obamacare may not be overwhelmingly popular among Latino voters, it’s also not as The gap between Cruz and the average Latino voter isn’t so pronounced when it comes to the Affordable Care Act. Some 47 percent of Hispanics support Obama’s signature legislative accomplishment , according to 2014 Pew survey -- about 6 percent points above the general public, but short of a clear majority.But while Obamacare may not be overwhelmingly popular among Latino voters, it’s also not as reviled as it is by the hyper-conservative Cruz , who appears likely to make repealing the ACA a the centerpiece of his campaign.

Gay Marriage ASSOCIATED PRESS





The Latino community, on the other hand, Cruz has publicly said he believes marriage to be between a man and a woman , but favors allowing states to decide whether to recognize same-sex marriage.The Latino community, on the other hand, tends to support gay marriage . Some 59 percent of Hispanic voters said their state should recognize same-sex marriages, according to a 2012 exit poll.

Abortion Abortion rights activists rally at the Texas Capitol, Feb. 26, 2015 (AP)

Gun Control Ted Cruz at a pheasant hunt in Akron, Iowa, 2013 (AP)