COLUMBUS, Ohio -- A two-year budget plan unveiled Monday by the Ohio Senate would restore funding for a pair of Medicaid-supported programs for poor women that the administration had targeted for elimination.

The programs provide coverage to women whose incomes range from 138 percent to 200 percent above poverty. One program provides health insurance coverage through Medicaid for breast and cervical cancer services. The other covers health and well care coverage for pregnant women.

The measure was cheered by advocates who had expressed fear that at-risk women could be left without coverage in a state that ranks among the worst in the nation for infant mortality rates.

"Ohioans spoke and politicians listened. We know the dangers of removing coverage for at-risk women seeking to have healthy pregnancies," said Kellie Copeland, executive director of NARAL Pro Choice Ohio. "If Ohio is ever going to make progress in eliminating infant mortality, we must maintain these programs."

In February, Gov. John Kasich's administration proposed cutting the programs as part of its efforts to streamline Medicaid services. Women with incomes above the 138 percent of the federal poverty level -- about $16,240 a year for a single person -- should be covered by subsidized insurance available through federal health exchanges, the administration said then.

But the administration was on board with adding the coverage back into the budget because of what it described as a glitch in the program, particularly for coverage for pregnant women.

Federal guidelines for the Affordable Care Act classify birth as a qualifying event that will allow enrollment for insurance coverage year-round. Pregnancy, though, is not a qualifying event.

Advocates for the poor feared some women would fall through the cracks and not obtain insurance, even though they likely would be eligible for federal subsidies. If they subsequently became pregnant, they would not be able to enroll for coverage to pay for well care.

Money for the programs wasn't in the governor's executive budget proposal or the version approved by the House of Representatives.

The administration said it had expected the federal government to add pregnancy as a qualifying event, but when that did not happen, it supported the Senate adding the money to its budget.

The program for pregnant women cost about $15 million in the last biennial budget. The screening programs cost about $2.5 million.