Magazines and websites routinely publish photographs of people who have altered their faces to look like a movie star, pop singer, Mattel product, Egyptian queen or, in the notorious case of the socialite Jocelyn Wildenstein, a wild animal.

Doctors say requests for these sorts of utter transformations happen regularly.

"About once a month, someone comes in who wants to look like a family member, friend or celebrity," said Dr. Sam Lam, a facial plastic surgeon in Dallas. "One guy wanted to look like his cousin who was a model. Another guy wanted a chin implant to look like his older brother."

Though a striking similarity can sometimes be achieved, it's impossible to recreate another person's image. Bone structure, facial proportions and ineffable characteristics all factor into people's looks.

"We really cannot make someone 'pass' for someone else," said Dr. Steven Teitelbaum, a plastic surgeon in Santa Monica, Calif., and a spokesman for the American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery. "At most, we can try to mimic a feature, such as a nice nose, or even to put in a grossly disproportionate chin implant to mimic the nearly cartoonish visage of Jay Leno."

Stacy Shanahan's fantasy doppelgänger is Heather Locklear. Shanahan, 49, an account executive in Mission Viejo, Calif., would give her right cheekbone to acquire the luster of Locklear, with whom she shares blond hair, blue-green eyes and delicate features.

"I know it sounds crazy, but I'd be happy being more like her," Shanahan said. "I wouldn't miss how I look. She's beautiful."

Shanahan was so determined that she asked Dr. Burr von Maur of Newport Beach, Calif., who had given her a breast lift, to help. Von Maur ended up performing a nose job on Shanahan (the cost: $6,500) to evoke the "spirit" of Locklear.

"You can never duplicate something; you can't clone somebody," he said. "It's best to enhance the patient's own features, so we can unearth the beauty that lies underneath without radically altering their appearance."

Doctors say a significant part of their job is weeding out patients with legitimate medical or aesthetic concerns -- arbitrary in itself -- from those with body dysmorphic disorder, an intense preoccupation with minor or imagined flaws.

"I had a patient who went from doctor to doctor trying to get surgery to look like Brad Pitt," said Dr. Amy Wechsler, a dermatologist and psychiatrist in New York City. "There was this sense of, 'My life will be so much better if I had this person's X, Y or Z.' It can become an obsession."

For years, Deborah Davenport, 41, who owns a real estate technology consulting firm in McKinney, Texas, was told that she was a dead ringer for the actress Cameron Diaz, which did not please her.

"My nose just seems to get fatter and fatter every year," Davenport said. "I look at photos and I'm like, 'Oh my God, what's happening to me?'"

She asked herself whom she would want to look like, and the answer arrived: Kate Winslet. She went to Lam, who shaved cartilage from her nose, injected the dermal filler Sculptra to plump out her cheeks and squirted a little Botox around her eyes to make her more Winslettish. The bill was $15,000.

Few things satisfy Davenport like being told she has a likeness to the Oscar-winning star. Never mind that Winslet has said she is opposed to plastic surgery.

"Here I am trying to have surgery to look like someone I think hasn't had surgery," she said.