Clayola Brown (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Protect this powerful pro-consumer idea, but don't regulate the Internet using old rules.

Numerous economists have said that these anachronistic rules could kill digital investment.

Congress must step in and pass real net neutrality rules to protect consumers.

Internet freedom or “net neutrality” — the idea that network providers such as AT&T, Verizon and Comcast should not be able to block or degrade Internet sites, apps, content or services — is critical to ensure the unimpeded flow of information to all Internet users and to ensure Internet providers cannot abuse their control over networks to stifle debate or discriminate online.

We need a strong and open Internet to continue driving economic opportunity, producing quality broadband jobs and to quickly close the digital divide.

Unsurprisingly, this powerful pro-consumer idea has widespread support, including from network providers themselves.

But the FCC’s approach to net neutrality — regulating broadband as a “common carrier” utility the way the “Ma Bell” phone system was regulated decades ago — is a serious mistake.

Numerous economists have said that these anachronistic rules could kill the goose that laid the golden egg and dramatically cut back the new investments needed for the next phase of the Internet economy.

Legal experts also think the courts are likely to invalidate them, leaving us with no open Internet rules whatsoever. That hurts consumers coming and going — less investment in new networks to give them faster service and no net neutrality protection at all.

Congress must step in and pass real net neutrality rules to protect consumers without the destructive baggage of utility regulation.

To be sure, legislation in this area would have to be fully protective of the open Internet and ensure there is sufficient future investment and job creation, propel economic opportunity and permanently bridge the digital divide.

The common carrier utility approach fails on this score. When tried in Europe, it led to considerably less investment, less affordable Internet service and fewer technology options for customers.

The heavy hand of “common carrier” regulations — with all the extra regulatory baggage and price controls it would bring — seems to drive away needed future investments, slowing deployment and making it harder to close the digital divide.

Why should workers and consumers care about investments by network providers in new and upgraded networks?

Research by the NAACP and the Communications Workers of America shows that, of the $230 billion invested in the Internet ecosystem from 2010 to 2013, network providers were responsible for a full 84 percent of the capital expenditures ($193 billion).

That investment means jobs — the largest network providers employed 869,000 people in 2013, more than three times that of leading “edge providers,” the companies that produce apps, technology and content.

Network providers employ people of color at high rates, comparable or exceeding their rates in the overall labor force (11 percent to 14 percent for network providers compared with just 1 percent to 4 percent for the Silicon Valley edge providers). And while network providers’ jobs are almost all in the U.S., many edge companies have a significant portion of their employees located overseas.

While high-speed networks in the U.S. are some of the best in the world, hundreds of billions of dollars of additional investment are needed to build the robust high-speed broadband capability needed for the applications of tomorrow and to meet the goals set forward in the FCC’s National Broadband Plan of bringing the very fastest networks into 100 million new homes.

With enough capacity, people will not have to worry about “fast vs. slow” lanes and we will be able to make real progress closing the final segments of the digital divide.

The FCC seemed to succumb to pressure to use the utility approach because its attorneys said it was the safest strategy to prevail in the courts. Other experts say the FCC lawyers are hopelessly mistaken and that the overreach will leave the rules more vulnerable.

But whoever is right, no one disputes that Congress has the power to enact an Open Internet law without the harmful and anti-consumer utility approach. Leaders of both parties have already expressed openness to this possibility.

Clayola Brown is the president of the A. Phillip Randolph Institute, the nation’s leading African-American labor organization.

Net neutrality (Photo: Cagle Cartoons)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RopUH2