Topics: Feminism, Football, NFL, Life News

This is a piece about football and feminism so before I proceed, let me offer an obvious but necessary caveat. I’m a dude. That doesn’t mean I shouldn’t be able to write about feminism. But it does mean that some readers can and will object to a piece by a guy about women who call themselves feminists and who also watch football.

So let me say for the record that I am not trying to mansplain the evils of football to feminists, or suggest how they should feel about something as complex as football. What I am trying to do is to understand why women, and feminists in particular, not only tolerate but in some instances consume (and therefore sponsor) a game as flagrantly misogynistic as football.

But before I get into all that, I want to talk about Hannah Storm, because she’s the one who got me thinking about all this. Last Sunday, Storm took a few minutes on Sportscenter to rebuke the NFL for its conduct around the Ray Rice scandal and violence against women more generally. The veteran broadcaster and ESPN anchor explained that she and her three daughters were all huge football fans. “One of my daughters has her first fantasy football team this season,” she noted. “But at breakfast this week, instead of discussing how her team was doing, we watched the Ray Rice video play out again, in all its ugliness.”

Storm added that she’d spent the week answering a series of “seemingly impossible questions” from her daughters about the league, then posed a few of her own, such as when the NFL would “take the lead on the issue of domestic violence,” and, more dramatically, “What exactly does the NFL stand for?”

The response to this soliloquy was a rousing chorus of Give ’em hell, Hannah! So maybe I’m the only person in America who came away with a few questions of my own — for Storm.

For instance: If you’re so troubled by the NFL, why do you collect a salary promoting it? Also, why would a mother watch with her own daughter a video of a man knocking a woman unconscious? And as a mother with three daughters, how do you justify glorifying a game that defines men as heroically violent warriors and women as sexual ornaments who jiggle on the sidelines?

Again: I realize this sounds like one of those smug cable-news questions, especially coming from a man. It’s not. I’m genuinely baffled. As a fan (a heartbroken former fan, anyway) I understand why football exerts such a powerful grip on men. The game is an exalted cult of hyper-masculinity, a place of refuge where dudes can escape the moral complexities and disappointments of adulthood, where heroism is defined as courageous and brutal and, above all, male.

But as a father of daughters, I can’t help wondering: What’s in it for women? This is an especially timely question not just because of recent events, but because the NFL is constantly bragging that women make up 45 percent of its fan base.

As it turns out, a number of female fans have addressed their fandom over the past few weeks. The most prominent of these pieces, by Eliana Dockterman, a writer for Time, carried the headline “Why Women Don’t Have to Boycott the NFL.” The entire piece, in fact, exuded a kind of panicky defensiveness.

“I am a feminist who writes about feminist issues,” Dockterman begins. “When accusations surfaced that the NFL commissioner Roger Goodell and many others in the league might have systematically tried to cover up a video of Ray Rice punching his wife, I was disgusted and outraged. And yet on Sunday, I kicked back and tuned in to football without any qualms. Am I a hypocrite?”

Oddly, she spends much of the rest of her piece detailing the many qualms about football that she absolutely positively doesn’t have, such as the fact that the sport is inherently sexist. “The NFL doesn’t care if I’m a conflicted fan,” she observes, “as long as it is getting my money … Only actions will bring about change because words of outrage result in lackluster press releases.”

The tag line of Dockterman’s piece is “An Argument for Feminists Who Watch Football.” But Dockterman never actually talks about feminism itself. She never addresses the belief (for instance) that women are entitled to equal treatment in the workplace and shouldn’t be reduced to sexual objects or otherwise marginalized.

The game Dockterman loves is, in fact, a $10 billion industry made up almost entirely of men: male players, male coaches, male trainers, male executives, male owners. Its gender roles aren’t antiquated; they’re medieval.

(In fact, about the only powerful woman in football is former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, a devout fan who is nearly a lock to replace Goodell when he gets the shit can.)

So what is Dockterman’s goal-line stand on behalf of the game? “Boycotting the NFL is simply not the best way to change its behavior,” she insists. Instead, female fans need to advocate “for change within the system.” How? Well, for instance, by tweeting.

“But let’s be honest,” Dockterman intones, “despite what I said earlier about hitting the NFL where it hurts the most—their wallets—nothing will ever stop the cash flow. If you feel strongly about women’s rights and have a platform from which to express your views (say, a Twitter account) then you can make a difference at least in your circle of friends and contacts by forcing them to think about the debate … Tune out if you want to. But the real solution is to scream at the top of your lungs.”

Dockterman, in other words, is attempting to guilt trip those female fans with the integrity (and common sense) to turn away from the game. It seems never to have occurred to her that one might protest football without actually watching it at the same time.

What’s most frustrating about this piece, and others like it, isn’t the illogic of its arguments but the absence of self-reflection. It simply never offers any insight into why some women love football, and how they square this love with their feminist beliefs.