ADVERTISEMENT

Tax season is a particularly perilous time of year, especially if you aren't cautious about filing.

You can try moving to a low-tax state, you can attempt to weed out the surprises in your retirement savings and you can scramble to make sure you have all of your documents, but you can't outrun every problem. Sure, you can stave off tax fraud by filing early, but you aren't doing yourself any favors if you've missed crucial information in your haste.

The Internal Revenue Service opened tax season on January 19 and expects more than 150 million tax returns to be filed this year. Yes, you have until Monday, April 18, to file tax returns and pay any taxes due -- thanks to the Emancipation Day holiday in Washington, D.C., falling on April 15. However, taxpayers in Maine and Massachusetts will have until Tuesday, April 19 because of Patriot’s Day observances on April 18.

Still, though the IRS received a minor budget boost this year, that's mostly going to help customer service after the agency answered just 37% of taxpayer calls last year. Meanwhile, hundreds of tax-compliance employees are expected to retire this year, with the agency having no means of replacing them. That means the odds of a taxpayer facing an audit will fall even from last year's 0.84%, yet the odds that folks with income of $1 million or more will be audited are still roughly 10%.

Did you have a good year this year? If so, are you still feeing lucky?

If not, our advisors suggest keeping the following tips in mind before rushing off to file your 2016 return. If your advisor or accountant isn't booked up, this might be a great time for a last-minute huddle:





Don't forget Obamacare

You might either grouse about it or praise it the rest of the year, but the IRS really just wants you to indicate that you're taking it seriously.

Robert Steen, certified financial planner for USAA, notes that not making sure you are covered with the minimum mandatory requirements will cost you 2.5% of household income, or $695 per person (whichever is greater), in penalties. If you're already doing this, you just have to check a box on your tax return.

If you are not, you should see if you qualify for one of many coverage exemptions. Meanwhile, if you signed up through the Health Insurance Marketplace during 2015 and received advance payments of the premium tax credit, you'll have to submit Form 8962, which requires Form 1095-A from the Marketplace. However, if you simply have your health coverage through an employer, don't wait to receive Form 1095-B or 1095-C from them, just file.