House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi sided with the administration on the Iranian nuclear arms deal Wednesday, by announcing her opposition to congressional approval of its terms.

The California Democrat is asking fellow lawmakers to reject Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker’s proposal calling for congressional review of any deal that has been struck.

“Diplomacy has taken us to a framework agreement founded on vigilance and enforcement, and these negotiations must be allowed to proceed unencumbered,” Pelosi said in a statement, according to The Hill.

“[Tennessee Republican] Senator Corker’s legislation undermines these international negotiations and represents an unnecessary hurdle to achieving a strong, final agreement.”

What’s troubling is that no one seems to know the terms of the framework agreement. Iran accused the Obama administration of lying after it touted its terms as a step toward halting Iran’s nuclear weapons program.

It’s all reminiscent of Pelosi’s 2010 statement regarding the Affordable Care Act:

“But we have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it, away from the fog of controversy,” she said of the legislation.

Others thought so also. Here are a few examples:

@thehill @NancyPelosi the old bag should retire. Why not pass it to see what's in it? And no, we haven't forgotten!! pic.twitter.com/fJ8ouXqMVy — Aaron cornett (@123aaroncornett) April 9, 2015

@thehill She should vote for and pass the bill so she can find out what is in it. — Sergeant Hulka (@Hulka_Sgt) April 9, 2015

@thehill We know witch, gotta pass it to know whats in it, you stupid freaking moron. You, & the rest of your kind need to get the hell out — Joanie CPC (@sunybandrick) April 9, 2015

@politico But of course. We must pass it to find out what's in it. Like her head. We must break it open to find out what's in it. — Jeff Gully (@jeffgully49) April 9, 2015

@thehill @RickCo01 Pelosi is an idiot. She needs to be removed from the house and retired before she can do anymore damage to the country — Matt Diaz (@matt831) April 9, 2015

@politico the wicked witch of the west doing what she normally does — Steve (@dididoitright) April 9, 2015

Pelosi’s statement continued:

“In the weeks ahead, we must give this diplomatic framework room to succeed so that we can judge a June 30th agreement on its merits,” she said.

One thing we do know that wasn’t a part of the deal was Iran’s ballistic missiles. Discussion of a nuclear delivery system was off the table, according to CNS News.

And assuming a final deal is hammered out when June 30 arrives, what then? Continuing with the Obamacare analogy, will we hear the president tell Iran, “If you like your nukes, you can keep your nukes? And will he mean it this time?

Be sure to also check out:

Video: President Obama uses Easter breakfast to take a jab at Christians

Judge Napolitano slams out-of-control Dem governor: ‘Who does this thug think he is?’