Health Americans Think Shopping For Health Care Is About As Fun As Getting A Cavity Filled CREDIT: AP Photo/J. David Ake

Obamacare’s second open enrollment period is currently underway, but the Americans shopping for insurance plans probably aren’t enjoying it, according to a new survey from financial research group Bankrate.

Nearly two-thirds of the participants said that selecting a new health insurance plan is at least as bad as having a cavity filled at the dentist. And more than 70 percent of the people surveyed said that the process is as unenjoyable as doing their own taxes or sitting in the middle seat on an airplane.

CREDIT: Bankrate

It makes sense that filling out an application for health care isn’t necessarily a thrilling prospect. Like filing taxes, enrolling in health insurance is often an overly complicated process that most Americans don’t understand very well. Previous surveys have found that the majority of Americans don’t understand the most common terms related to insurance, like “co-pay,” “deductible,” and “premium.” Even when they think they know how those health care concepts work, they’re often wrong.

Plus, people’s frustrations in this area have likely been exacerbated by Obamacare’s first enrollment period, which was plagued with website glitches that made it difficult for Americans to enroll. The rocky rollout for Obamacare’s new state-level marketplaces — as well as a constant barrage of bad press for the health law — has ensured that the Affordable Care Act remains unpopular with the American public.

Indeed, Bankrate’s survey found that the people who have recently shopped for insurance are more likely to rate the experience negatively. For instance, 82 percent of the Americans who selected a plan within the past two years said the process was as bad as doing their own taxes.

But administration officials are counting on the fact that the marketplaces will run more smoothly this year and consumers will be more satisfied with the enrollment process moving forward. So far, HealthCare.gov doesn’t appear to be having nearly as many technological issues, and people have reported being able to sign up within minutes compared to the hours that it took last year.

Plus, there are people available to help Americans through the maze of insurance jargon. Across the country, so-called “navigators” — the people who help guide customers enrolling in Obamacare plans — are available at retail stores, pharmacies, and enrollment centers. Peter Kochenburger, a professor of insurance and consumer law at the University of Connecticut School of Law, told Bankrate that’s what should make health care enrollment at least a little better than a dentist visit.

“After all, you’re not going to fill your own tooth — there’s help out there,” he pointed out. “It may not be the most enjoyable 20 minutes, but it’s sort of painless.”

Regardless of where the process ranks among cavities and airplane seats, the people who signed up for Obamacare aren’t done shopping yet. Because of the increased competition in the marketplaces, experts are urging Americans to shop around to make sure they’re getting the best deal, rather than simply automatically renewing last year’s coverage.