Read the report To read the Community Foundation's full TRENDS report, visit commfound.org/trendsmagazine. People or organizations interested in scheduling a presentation of the report and its findings should contact TRENDS Director Erika Stutzman at erika@commfound.org or 303-442-0436.

For a time, affordable Boulder County housing appeared mainly to be an issue inside the city of Boulder's boundaries, according to Josie Heath, president of the Community Foundation Serving Boulder County.

"It's now an issue in every community in the county," Heath said.

The Community Foundation highlights that countywide situation with a special chapter in its recently released 2015-2016 TRENDS report, the foundation's biennial look at selected quality-of-life indicators.

Erika Stutzman, the foundation's TRENDS director, said statistics show that the Boulder County housing market "has robustly recovered" from the 2008-09 recession, "with soaring housing prices, thousands of new units under construction and a plummeting foreclosure rate."

The report said there were 345 new housing units authorized in Boulder County in 2009, and 1,441 foreclosures after owners failed to keep up with their mortgage obligations.

Advertisement

In 2013, there were 1,391 new housing units authorized and 392 foreclosures. In 2014, 1,371 new housing units were authorized and there were 256 foreclosures.

"But Boulder County lacks adequate affordable housing, and the rising prices are not just in the city of Boulder, but all over Boulder County," Stutzman said. "Soaring housing prices are affecting the whole county."

In a chapter titled "The Housing Crunch," the foundation's TRENDS report said indicators showing a rebounding housing market and rising prices for purchasing or renting housing may be "good news for some, but not for everyone."

In 2005, the median price of a single-family home in Boulder hit above the half-million-dollar mark, and Boulder remained the only municipality in the county above that line until 2014, the foundation's latest report said.

"Now Louisville is on that list, with Superior not far behind," the report's authors said, citing figures from the Boulder Area Realtor Association.

A median single-family home sales price graph in the report showed that as of 2014, the median sales price for a Lafayette home was just over $400,000, was approaching $400,000 for an Erie home and was over $250,000 for a home in Longmont.

"As of mid-2015, there was no end in sight for rising home prices here," the foundation's report said.

'Thirty percent mark'

Heath said in an interview that "I really recognized" the extent of the affordable housing shortage after the September 2013 floods, when she learned that many of the Boulder County families displaced by those floods found it difficult or impossible to build or buy replacement homes or even to find places they could temporarily rent.

The report said soaring Boulder County housing costs are "pricing out not just lower-income residents, who face a dearth of affordable housing, but the working and middle classes as well. And those who can afford a home are spending more than the recommended amount of their income on mortgages and rent."

The TRENDS report said economists often talk about a "30 percent mark" when it comes to the portion of a household's income that ideally should be expected to be spent on a mortgage or rent.

Spending more than 30 percent "is considered economically unhealthy," the report said, but "in Boulder County in 2013, 30 percent of homeowners and 59 percent of renters spent more than that recommended 30 percent on housing costs," according to the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey.

That meant those homeowners and their families had less money to spend on other items, "things like dining out, movie tickets, food and clothing," with a resulting cost to local businesses selling those items, the Community Foundation's report said.

The housing-costs situation "is a real conundrum," Heath said, and one she said "is not something the non-profits can fix."

Providing affordable housing for people who want to both work and live in Boulder County will take a collaborative approach involving the private sector and government, Heath said.

'We struggle with an achievement gap'

Housing isn't the only focus of the 2015-2016 TRENDS report.

Its other chapters include statistics about and discussions of the Boulder County's diverse and aging population, its residents' education levels and school readiness, its health and human services, its economy, its environment, its recoveries from natural disasters, its arts and culture, and its civic participation and giving.

"You can't sustain a county's vitality without knowing how well it's doing, and where there are opportunities to improve," Heath said. "The TRENDS report presents key community indicators that we track, and expand on, over time."

Heath said the latest report's findings "reflect the rapidly changing landscape of Boulder County. Municipalities outside the city of Boulder have seen enormous growth. At the same time, we have a population that is growing older — 13 percent of the county is 65 or older. By 2030, it will be more than 20 percent."

The foundation's staff said data in the report "show that Latino children, and kids who are economically disadvantaged, are falling behind their peers academically, and that low-income families and Latinos are less likely to have health insurance — even after the implementation of the Affordable Care Act."

Said Stutzman: "We have highly educated community, with degree attainment among our residents far outpacing the national rate. We have more than twice the percentage of residents with graduate degrees, 26 percent, than the national rate.

"But we struggle with an achievement gap in our public schools," Stutzman said. A much lower percentage of Latino and low-income students are proficient readers in 3rd grade when compared with their peers, and Latino and low-income students are less likely than their peers to enroll in college after graduation."

Stutzman added, however, that both the Boulder Valley and St. Vrain Valley school districts "are working to improve outcomes, and full-day kindergarten enrollment in Boulder County has increased, although we still lag the state rate."

When it comes to incomes, "we have higher incomes here compared to the national rate, and the percentage of the highest-earning families is more than double that of the U.S. rate," Stutzman said. Twenty-six percent of families here earn more than $150,000 a year."

On the other hand, "our poverty rate is growing faster than the rate for U.S. children as a whole, and we have a higher percentage of Latino children living in poverty than the nation," Stutzman said.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc