The Broncos are Super Bowl-bound after topping Tom Brady and the Patriots in the AFC championship game Sunday. Here’s what players and coaches said after the game.

“Today was a better day. Last week, it was great to get over the hump. Plus we played well, so it was very exciting. We have to keep our focus. We’ll be one of two teams left. At the end, hopefully we’ll be the only one left. It’s so much fun to be able to do it here, in front of these great fans.”

–Broncos VP John Elway

“We couldn’t have done it without these fans. And I am so proud of this team, we have been through a lot.

—Peyton Manning, Broncos QB

“I went to the Super Bowl in ’07. I thought I’d be back the next season and every season. But it’s hard. It’s a tough league. You have to take advantage of it when you can.”

–Broncos WR Wes Welker

“Everybody made big plays. That’s why we’re moving on. It’s a great moment for the Denver Broncos.”

–Broncos defensive lineman Robert Ayers

“Losing is not easy.”

—Tom Brady

“It’s a tough loss. But we’ll re-group and get back at it next year.”

— Patriots QB Tom Brady

“To keep Tom Brady on the sideline is a good thing. That’s something you try to do when you are playing the Patriots. Our field position was never very good and overcome a couple holding penalties was a good thing. It would have been nice to score some touchdowns instead of field goals. But certainly was enough points.”

—Peyton Manning

“My advice yesterday to Peyton was, ‘Have fun.’ And it looked to me like he was having fun today.”

—Cooper Manning (Peyton’s older brother)

“I gotta give Denver a lot of credit today… They did a better job than we did. I thought we were ready to go. But not we didn’t do it well enough. Congratualtions to them. I’m proud of our team this year.”

–Patriots coach Bill Belichick

“Yeah, we brought it today. We went out with that attack mentality. …All week we heard about how they were going to run the ball, and how Brady was better than Manning. We went out there today to show what this team is about.”

–Broncos DT Terrance Knighton on Denver’s defensive intensity

“This is second to none. This is the greatest feeling I’ve had in my life. As a rookie going to the Super Bowl, I’m spoiled.”

–Broncos RB Montee Ball

“I wouldn’t rather do this with any other group of guys… It’s all or nothing. We worked so hard. I can’t really explain how I feel right now. It’s great.”

— Robert Ayers

“They’re a great team, a great organization. I’ve got nothing but love for those guys over there.”

—Wes Welker

“That’s what it takes. It’s not an easy game. The NFL is tough. Our guys stepped up.”

—Wes Welker

“Any time you play them, it’s gonna be a knock-down, drag-out fight. This time was no different.”

—Wes Welker

“I’m speechless. We’re going to the Super Bowl. It’s just a great feeling.”

—Demaryius Thomas

“I tell you what, it has been a terrific group. They have worked their tail off this whole year and I’m excited for them.”

—John Elway

“I think this team was very resilient. We just got beat today by a team that played really well. We just didn’t play good enough. Our guys fought hard, we just didn’t make enough plays.

—Tom Brady

“Certainly one of the greatest to ever play. Their defense played well and he had a great day.”

–Tom Brady, on Peyton Manning

“I’m an AFC guy. I’m biased toward this conference. It’s a hard conference to win. Whoever we are playing is going to be a terrific opponent. It’s still one more game to play. You definitely want to savor the moment. I know how hard it is to get there. You do need to take a moment to enjoy it. Starting tomorrow, we’ll start to look at who we’re playing.”

—Peyton Manning

“It’s crazy. It’s surreal. It’s a rewarding moment. We felt like we worked hard for this.”

—Duke Ihenacho, Broncos defensive back

“Certainly we were looking to score touchdowns and we were very disappointed in the first half when we had to settle for field goals.”

—Peyton Manning

“I’m telling you it’s hard to get there. I’m happy for Champ (Bailey). He played well today. He’s battled through some injuries. I’m certainly happy for him.”

—Peyton Manning

“Good team victory. To beat a team like the Patriots that have been here so many times is significant. I thought the crowd was great. Our team thrives on the energy they created.”

—Peyton Manning

“Every guy is dialed in. It’s really a brotherhood over here.”

—Chris Clark, Broncos lineman