Knox County Schools will pay higher substitute teacher rates at five more schools starting this year to help the district fill substitute teacher shortages.

The district started offering pay incentives in November with the hope to encourage more teachers to substitute at almost three dozen of the district's schools. And if they work on a Monday or Friday, there's an even bigger payout.

The five additional schools are Christenberry Elementary, Dogwood Elementary, Fulton High School, Inskip Elementary and Richard Yoakley; bringing the number of schools with differential pay to 33.

Ed Bardill said he was a substitute teacher in Knox County for five years, mostly working at Halls Middle School. But after hearing that some subs would be paid more than others, he quit.

"I didn't want to leave but I had such heartburn with getting the email saying, 'Look, we have a substitute shortage.' And I knew they had a substitute shortage. One day I had two classes at the same time," Bardill said.

But that didn't stop him from stepping away from the blackboard.

"The first thing I thought was, you're robbing Peter to pay Paul," Bardill said.

Here's how the newest proposed incentives play out:

If you are a certified sub, you get $68 dollars a day. If you work at a high need school on a Monday or Friday, you pocket almost 70 percent more than that.

And if you are a retired Knox County teacher who is certified, you can make up to $164 a day. That's almost double what a certified sub makes.

"If we want to make sure that we have the best and the brightest, and the best qualified and the most trained folks who are educating our children, that means we pay a little bit more for folks who have experience," said Knox County Superintendent Jim McIntyre.

Retired teachers and retired Knox County teachers will be getting additional incentives, too, effective Feb. 1.

And differential pay already seems to be working. Schools are filling those sub positions on Mondays and Fridays 15 percent more than before.

"We're not paying any substitute any less that we were. We're just paying certain categories of folks more in certain circumstances," McIntyre said.

But folks like Bardill, who was an instructor in the Army, said it's just not fair.

"You don't have to have a certified teacher to be a substitute. Not when you have a detailed lesson plan, and instructions and you've got some experience in doing it."

Knox County Schools said substitutes are still restricted to working 120 hours per month due to the Affordable Care Act.