Texas consistently ranks at or near the bottom on funding services for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities. But there’s a new pool of money rolling out that could help change that.

It comes from Obamacare. It’s an entitlement program. And Texas is one of five states taking part, thanks to legislation by one of the state’s most conservative senators.

The program, called Community First Choice, represents a relatively new idea of what housing for people with special needs should look like. The idea is that they should live in the community, in their own homes or apartments, instead of nursing homes and state institutions.

It’s a change in thinking that Texas has been slow to adopt. The state’s system of mental institutions spends about $581 million to house just 3,362 people. Meanwhile, more than 102,000 people are stalled on waiting lists for money that could help them live in the community.

Frustrated by those waiting lists, some North Texas parents started Community for Permanent Supported Housing to create housing options for their children.

In the past year, the group has secured affordable housing in the area for more than 50 disabled adults, with more co-ops on the way, in the hope that these options can take advantage of funding through Community First Choice.

Shifting policy

In the last couple of decades, national policy and court rulings have moved the country away from state institutions and group homes as the default for housing people with intellectual and developmental disabilities — conditions including Down syndrome and autism. Such places are costly, and they reinforce the physical and social isolation that segregates that population.

“It’s time for them to be living their lives like your kids live their lives. It’s not appropriate to be isolating this population because they look or act differently, because we all look and act differently,” said Robin LeoGrande, Community for Permanent Supported Housing president. “They are here to stay, and no amount of blindfolds is going to change that they are part of our society.”

Texas, however, is far from letting that institutional model go. It operates more institutions for people with disabilities than any other state: 13 centers for 3,362 people.

In 2012, Texas spent $166,643 per person to keep them in a state institution, compared with $39,947 per person it pays for people with disabilities to live in a community. The funding for community-based programs went down 5.8 percent in two years, according to the Texas Council for Developmental Disabilities.

This is why Texas has consistently ranked almost last in the U.S. in providing services for people with disabilities, said Kyle Piccola, government affairs director for the disability rights group ARC of Texas. He and other groups say the root cause is legislators’ general aversion to funding social programs like Medicaid.

Medicaid is supposed to provide adults with services to live in their own homes or apartments, but the waiting lists for it are so backlogged that tens of thousands are left waiting a long time.

“For so many people, Medicaid is a lifeline, especially with people with disabilities,” Piccola said. “And unfortunately for more conservative-thinking legislators, when you’re talking about Medicaid, you’re talking about something that has a really negative connotation.”

Years of waiting

Families have had to wait years, sometimes more than a decade, for these Medicaid benefits.

Virginia Phillips, one of the mothers with Community for Permanent Supported Housing, put her son Brent on a waiting list when he was 5. Now 23, he’s risen to around the 300th spot — which is a good number, she says.

Melissa Gale, spokeswoman for the Department of Aging and Disability Services, said the lists are so long because state funding doesn’t keep pace with the growth in demand, along with other factors like Texas’ booming population.

Even when people do get to the top of those lists, there’s no guarantee there will be a spot for them in a group home or that the home will be near the family and community they know. The state has group home vacancies, but those can be as far away as Corpus Christi.

And parents don’t want group homes to be the only option for their kids. Some of their children can drive, have jobs and have spent nights on their own. Not all of them need to be watched 24/7.

Frustrated with waiting, housing advocates are looking for ways around the waiver lists. But little was it publicized that the Legislature had already created such an option for them two years ago.

Conservative backing

Community First Choice, a program established by the Affordable Care Act, is now rolling out in Texas, one of only five states that have adopted it.

Texas’ participation was spearheaded by Sen. Jane Nelson, R-Flower Mound.

But the program comes with a big perk: a 6 percent bump in Medicaid funding from the feds.

“This was one piece of a broader effort to extend services to individuals with disabilities, many of whom have been on waiting lists for years to receive basic services that will help them live more independently,” Nelson said in an email through her spokeswoman.

Approved in 2013, the program has gotten little media coverage in Texas since former Gov. Rick Perry supported it while refusing to call it Obamacare. Yet advocates call it a massive shift in how the state supports people with intellectual and developmental disabilities.

Families won’t have to be at the mercy of years-long waiting lists anymore. People with disabilities who qualify can apply to the government for money to pay for community-based home services, and the state will have to give it to them.

According to Health and Human Services Commission spokesman Bryan Black, the state has approved $54.9 million for this fiscal year and $61 million for the next as it rolls out the program.

A place of her own

Advocates hope those funds will help people like Shayna Forrest, 24, have a good place to live.

This summer, with a learning disability and not enough money to afford her own place, Forrest went to a homeless shelter instead.

She woke up at 6 every morning on a top bunk in a room with three other women. She had dinner duty every night from 5 to 8. She did her laundry in the same washing machine as 30 other people.

She had wanted to live on her own in a house or apartment ever since she finished high school. But she couldn’t afford anything in the area with the $1,000 a month she gets from her grocery store job. The government doesn’t give her any aid, even though she has a disability, because she works.

“I try to be as financially independent as I can, but again, mental disability ... not exactly helpful in the normal world, you know?” she said.

Last month, Forrest finally got her own room in a brick house in McKinney through Community for Permanent Supported Housing’s advocacy. Rent is less than $300 a month. Forrest has two housemates, both with disabilities.

“Being in special ed, it’s just like, it’s really hard to catch up with everyone else. It’s always catch up, catch up, catch up,” Forrest said. “This is actually one of the first places that goes at our own pace.”

The adults who are housed through Community for Permanent Supported Housing are all supported by parents or service providers who help them when they need it. The group hopes that adults can eventually use Community First Choice funds to help pay for such caregivers.

The moms in their 50s and 60s who started the group did so to ease one worry that haunts them: If they die first, what will happen to their kids?

“If no more housing was available, where do these people go? They go to the prisons, and they go to the mental health hospitals, and they go to nursing homes, and down to The Bridge [shelter] in Dallas,” LeoGrande said. “And that is not what we as parents want for our children.”

@Kristen_Taketa