They are now 26 chapters and growing nationwide. Active satellites are emerging in places such as Ghana in West Africa, Toronto in Canada and London in the United Kingdom.

To date, they have organized nearly 1,100 known protests (and counting) throughout the world. They are now pop culture famous for their unapologetic, in-your-face hashtag, and they have managed to disrupt Democratic presidential primary campaigns into public acquiescence and agenda about face. One candidate has had his events either completely shut down or disrupted and the other, a shaky polling front-runner, has had terse private exchanges with their representatives leaked online. Republican presidential contenders occasionally lampoon or disparage them and conservative pundits have now turned to blaming them for a recent rash of cop killings.

But while the #BlackLivesMatter movement, originally born in digital space from the frustration of George Zimmerman’s post-Trayvon Martin murder acquittal, has undoubtedly amassed enormous social-media influence and overhauled the national race conversation, there are still mounting questions as to whether it can translate ambitious goals into real political clout and policy change.

Already, there are a significant number of state and local-level elections taking place in 2015 that have yet to gain any attention from the Black Lives Matter movement as it attempts to spread its wings into a much more complex and viciously contested political space.

“With the majority of Blacks and Latinos using their mobile devices to access social media, the Black Lives Matter movement could easily use their brand recognition to influence races,” notes Tkeyah Lake, a digital campaign strategist who has directed social media strategies for local and Congressional candidates. “The only thing that they are lacking is real-world grassroots effort and a determination to move outside their digital comfort zone.”

Still, this off-cycle presents a tremendous test-run opportunity for Black Lives Matter to mobilize African-American voters in such a way that not only prepares it for 2016, but also helps it channel energy into real, policy-generating influence. There are a number of crucial state and local races where elected officials could suddenly become existentially nervous as present national campaigns focus on the big trophy: 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. Three states, Kentucky, Louisiana and Mississippi, are holding gubernatorial races; the latter two state legislative races. And each state houses significant concentrations of politically active Black populations at 10 percent, 33 percent and 40 percent, respectively. Black voters in Kentucky averaged 11 percent of overall voter turnout in recent elections, and Louisiana and Mississippi are home to the largest delegations of African-American state legislators.

In Kentucky, home of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY), term-limited Gov. Steve Beshear (D-KY) is vacating a seat that Cook Political Report and others now consider a “toss-up” as Republicans seek a major win in a state that has experienced rocky political trends since President Obama’s election in 2008 and the passage of his landmark Affordable Care Act in 2010. Not only is Kentucky home to the leader of the Senate, but it’s also the base for presidential candidate Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY), a low-polling upstart who has asked Black Lives Matter to change its name as he’s made “minority outreach” a hallmark of his campaign.

In Louisiana, where term-limited Gov. Bobby Jindal (R-LA) prepares to leave Baton Rouge for a so-far lackluster 2016 presidential bid, the gubernatorial field is crowded with five candidates in what observers also consider a toss-up race.

In Mississippi, while Gov. Phil Bryant’s (R-MS) re-election bid is not viewed as threatened at the moment, it’s still within the realm of possibility that largely Black, low-income to working class and mostly Democratic voters could be mobilized in such a way as to pose a real threat to the states entrenched and very white Republican political machine. Recently, it was a smartened Mississippi African-American electorate that shifted itself into a bitter 2014 Republican primary to protect the re-election of incumbent Sen. Thad Cochran (R-MS) from a close-call Tea Party insurgent candidate.

Elsewhere, in New Jersey and Virginia, each containing Black populations that are 16 percent and 21 percent of the overall populations respectively, political machines are gearing up for major state legislative races. The first state is home to GOP presidential hopeful Gov. Chris Christie (R-NJ), a troubled candidate barely making the next debate stage, but nevertheless credited with crucial Republican gubernatorial gains in 2014.

There are also mayoral races in major cities where Black Lives Matter has either made a presence or spotlighted as part of its goal to spark more awareness around police misconduct in major urban centers. Philadelphia, 44 percent Black, completed a Democratic primary virtually picking the next mayor in which the BLM brand was absent. Other major U.S. cities such as Denver, Charlotte, Dallas, Houston, Memphis, Kansas City and Nashville that house large and active pockets of Black voters are all places where the issue of police violence has been highlighted by tragedies, but where Black Lives Matter appears either unwilling or unaware to influence the election of public officials who command municipal police departments.

“The question of political mobilization is really interesting,” notes Dayvon Love, Director of Public Policy for Baltimore-based advocacy group Leaders of a Beautiful Struggle. “Most folks who do political organization and mobilization are in a different world than those who organize in the social media space.”

Still, Love contends that “the real measure of the BLM movement is to the extent they are successful in these upcoming state and local races. It’s the real test of the advocacy. One of my anxieties is there is a lot of online, social media presence that have made people susceptible to conversations about race — but, those conversations can be absorbed into the political machinery and status quo where a shift in power doesn’t necessarily follow. I would see BLM involvement in those races done in a way that is directed toward real policy change.”

Yet, despite the powerful potential of Black voters sending a decisive message to both Democrats and Republicans in 2015, there is no indication that BLM is making any attempt to influence these races, even as yard signs go up and candidates are making their rounds. Previous queries to various BLM organizers or affiliates from The Tribune about their role in 2015 races have gone unanswered. And even though a late August Rasmussen poll found that only 31 percent of African-Americans identified with the term “Black Lives Matter,” the movement’s constant visibility as a national change agent suggests it could, hypothetically, pull together a decent voter-turnout infrastructure in the states above.

That’s not happening. “So far, Black Lives Matter hasn’t identified voter mobilization as one of their goals from a national or local standpoint from my vantage point,” says Peter Groff, a former president of the Colorado State Senate and an Obama ‘08 co-chair. “I think their ability to mobilize voters, particularly in this off-year cycle which traditionally produces an apathetic voter base, is very much in question.

“The irony is that the offices that will be on the 2015 ballot are the very offices that most directly handle BLM concerns, issues and justified complaints.”

Lake, however, gives BLM the benefit of the doubt. She argues that here is a somewhat unfair “assumption that social media and real world are diametrically opposed to one another.”

“That’s completely inaccurate,” Lake points out. “They complement one another. We’ve seen the power of social media activism in political campaigns numerous times, as in the cases of the Obama ’08 and ’12 campaigns, and now with Bernie Sanders.”

Of course, 2015 is what political strategists and prognosticators typically refer to as an “off year,” those under-the-radar and less prominently displayed or reported electoral cycles that most voters don’t pay attention to. Yet they do so at their own peril: as seen in Ferguson, Missouri (ground zero of the Black Lives Matter birth as a physical movement), the working-class suburban town with the 70 percent Black population had for years been run by a virtually all-white city hall (save one Black city councilman) — courtesy of a 7 percent municipal election voter turnout rate. Two more Black members joined the city council this past spring, but overall voter turnout was just 30 percent, along with 16 percent Black turnout and no recall of the white mayor in sight. Still low, considering all that happened.

And as University of Wisconsin researchers recently observed in a study of local elections since 2001, local voter turnout has continued to plummet from 26.6 percent then to just over 20 percent in 2011. Voter turnout in the equally “off-cycle” Congressional midterm elections last year only captured 38 percent of voters, thereby demographically allowing Republicans to retake the Senate as they expanded their grip on the House.

Of course, all eyes are focused on the presidential battle royale of 2016. The body politic has already been engaged in a rather early and spirited war of words, optics and gaffes.

And, as Quinnipiac University’s Khalilah Brown-Dean contends, “part of the challenge is defining what we mean by mobilization.”

“Holding massive voter registration drives is important, but not sufficient for connecting supporters to the political process beyond elections,” said Brown-Dean. “The viability of the Black Lives Matter movement isn’t contingent on its ability to align with a particular candidate or party. That would be a major blow to the organization’s credibility. However, BLM supporters can potentially be an important swing vote in states like Kentucky, Louisiana and Mississippi with sizable young populations.”

“Involvement in these races would be an important reality check,” Love said.