FOUNDATION SPOTLIGHT: St. Bernardine Medical Center Foundation Share Pin It 1 of 4 More Galleries Cast members from Life House Theater perform the “Wizard of Oz” at the 2015 Annual Gathering at Twilight Gala, a fundraiser for St. Bernardine Medical Center and its foundation. COURTESY OF ST. BERNARDINE MEDICAL CENTER FOUNDATION Related article »

For nearly four decades, the nonprofit St. Bernardine Medical Center Foundation has received and disbursed charitable gifts to the medical center, and in the process its has assisted those in need who cannot afford care.

In 1928, when San Bernardino was a rapidly expanding community with little access to quality medical facilities, Dr. Philip Savage, a local surgeon, envisioned a first-class hospital. Savage approached the Rev. Patrick Dunn, pastor of St. Bernardine Catholic Church, hoping to work with the Franciscan Sisters, who had hospitals around the country.

In 1931, the Sisters of Charity of the Incarnate Word founded the St. Bernardine Medical Center. The original hospital had 125 beds. It featured five surgery rooms, an operating theater for observation and teaching, six solariums, well-equipped clinical laboratories, X-ray rooms and modern kitchens.

Today, St. Bernardine Medical Center is a 342-bed, nonprofit, acute care hospital with the latest technology and advanced services, from family care to cardiac surgery. As a nonprofit, any funds generated that exceed the expense of running the hospital go directly back into the community.

St. Bernardine Medical Center Foundation administers the funds, but the amount of services and programming the foundation supports far exceeds what the hospital generates. So the foundation is also supported by Dignity Health, government grants and community donations.

“We have a huge underserved population that doesn’t have health insurance and cannot pay for medical services,” said Holly M. Valencia, the manager of foundation relations. “Even with the Affordable Care Act, we still help a large number of people.”

Many of the foundation’s clients are homeless or mentally ill. Clients are assigned a “patient navigator” who helps them make it to appointments, find a stable place to live and locate family. It even provides shoes and clothing. The foundation partners with many other organizations to ensure many of a patient’s needs are met.

“It goes beyond a medical necessity,” Valencia said. “We care for people, not just their conditions. It’s about not just looking at a disease or sickness. It’s about looking at a person and knowing that they are mother or father, daughter or sister (or) child.”

Beyond providing medical care, the St. Bernardine Medical Center Foundation offers a large array of programming to benefit the community. Its Family Focus Center, run by hospital staff, offers children a safe place to go after school and serves up to 80 kids a day. The foundation also offers a Stepping Stones program, which provides teens and young adults a chance to volunteer in various areas of the hospital, opening up learning opportunities and educational growth.

The community can help support the foundation by attending events. Its next fundraiser, the annual Charity Golf Classic for St. Bernardine, will take place June 17 at Morongo Golf Club at Tukwet Canyon in Beaumont.

“At the end of the day, it is our mission as a hospital to care for those who are poor and disenfranchised not only medically but wholly,” Valencia said.

For more information about St. Bernardine Medical Center Foundation, visit supportstbernardine.org or call 909-881-4516.

The Community Foundation’s mission is to strengthen Inland Southern California through philanthropy.

Contact the writer: community@pe.com