Drug firms pay doctors by the word

Dr. Brent Bost began in the audience, listening to issues that overlapped with his private research, and then he wanted to be the presenter.

So the Beaumont gynecologist gave a copy of his self-published book to a representative at the Pfizer event. Not long afterward, his phone rang. That's how Bost recalls landing his first job as a pharmaceutical spokesman, a sideline that lasted almost a decade.

Along the way, Bost read scripts written by the world's largest drug-makers to audiences of doctors and nurses. For lending his face, voice and credentials, he was paid hundreds of thousands of dollars, money he said doesn't cover what he lost from spending time away from the office, but money, nonetheless, the companies were willing to pay for his influence.

Medical ethicists have raised questions over whether such coziness between doctors and drug companies threatens the practitioners' independence and credibility when prescribing drugs.

In the last five months of 2013 alone, pharmaceutical companies paid doctors and teaching hospitals across the country $3.7 billion, according to the federal government.

The money was spent on high-dollar items, like research grants, speaking fees and travel costs, and innocuous expenses, like food, medical textbooks and coffee mugs.

Southeast Texas doctors received more than $200,000 from drug companies in that span, according to an online Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services database that details drug companies' reported payments to doctors.

Relationships between prescription drug companies and the doctors who decide whether to prescribe their medications doesn't mean doctors are selling their independence or medical judgment, Bost said.

New scrutiny by government and media has caused companies to back away from the marketing tactic, the ethics of which some have questioned. One of the largest companies has announced plans to end the practice.

"I don't speak for any of the drug companies anymore, at least at this point," Bost said. "That work has pretty well dried up."

Reporting change

The most recent set of data available shows that Bost wasn't the only local doctor cashing drug companies' checks.

From August through December 2013, Beaumont physician Robert C. Hood received $80,300 from pharmaceutical companies, according to CMS.

Of that sum, $77,500 was compensation for speeches, consulting or travel, as well as gifts and other professional fees, the records show.

Hood's compensation over that five-month span represented more than a third of the $222,200 paid to 392 doctors in Hardin, Jefferson and Orange counties, according to the records.

Hood, an endocrinologist at the Endocrine Clinic of Southeast Texas, did not respond to messages left at his home and office last week.

These disclosures were CMS' first as part of a mandate tucked inside the Affordable Care Act. The law went into effect for drug companies in 2013, and the first batch of data - covering only the year's last five months - appeared online in September 2014.

Previously, drug companies disclosed doctor payments on an individual basis, either voluntarily or under agreements with the federal government often reached during legal settlements.

ProPublica, an online, nonprofit investigative journalism website, catalogued amounts paid by those companies - which combined to represent half of the market share - in its publicly available Dollars for Docs database.

Bost's entry

In the pre-CMS era, Bost received about $260,000 from GlaxoSmithKline for speaking from 2009-2011, he said. The company paid him approximately $17,800 in 2012 and $1,700 in 2013.

Those sums don't include money Bost received before 2009, when he gave presentations on antidepressants for two different companies, information he volunteered during an interview.

Bost's book, originally self-published in 2001 as "The Hurried Woman," made international headlines. All 2,000 copies sold out after the local doctor appeared on "Good Morning America." Five years later, McGraw-Hill republished the book as "The Hurried Woman Syndrome."

Bost's thesis argued stress was a driver behind three symptoms in women: weight loss, decreased sex drive and fatigue.

The syndrome, Bost wrote, is a form of pre-depression. A summary on his website advises a treatment that focuses people on the symptoms' underlying causes, but Bost also notes that antidepressant drugs can help in this pre-depression phase.

After listening to a lecture at a Pfizer event that touched on themes familiar to Bost, he gave a copy of the book to a company representative, he said.

Pfizer called him back, and Bost began giving speeches on the company's antidepressant drug Zoloft in either 2004 or 2005, he said. About two years later, a GSK rep saw one of his speeches and recruited Bost to speak on behalf of Wellbutrin, an antidepressant manufactured by that company, Bost said.

Whose message?

Although drug companies recruit and pay doctors to speak on their behalf, they do not give them the freedom to write their own speeches.

GSK's disclosure website says that it sought doctors for their "valuable knowledge and insight about our medicines and the diseases or conditions our medicines and vaccines are approved to treat."

However, the website also notes that doctors are not presenting an independent message.

"Our speakers must use company-prepared slides to ensure that the information presented is aligned with the FDA approved prescription label for the medicine involved," it reads.

Sarah Alspach, a public policy spokeswoman for GSK's U.S. operations, declined to talk about the value drug companies get out of paying doctors to recite prepared remarks.

"We're focused on where we are moving in the future," she said, noting that the company has announced plans to end the relationships by 2016.

The only flexibility Bost had as a speaker was in the jokes he told to start presentations, he said. Any language not approved by the FDA to describe a drug and its uses could subject the companies to government fines, he said.

"It is zero independence now," Bost said. "Now, it's strictly scripted. 'Say what's on the slide. Do not add anything. Do not subtract anything.'"

Ethical questions

Without access to individual doctors' prescribing data, it's impossible to know whether habits changed for doctors who are paid large sums of money by the companies whose drugs are at stake.

Arthur L. Caplan, founding director of the Division of Medical Ethics at New York University, said doctors' speaking arrangements with pharmaceutical companies raise multiple concerns.

"When you're literally out promoting products and getting paid for speaking and sometimes letting the drug company provide the content, that's trouble," Caplan said.

These relationships create three concerns, Caplan said. Doctors may push a specific drug on a patient without fully exploring the alternatives; their speeches may influence the doctors and nurses in their audience; and doctors may be less willing to push for more expensive alternative drugs at costs insurance companies are reluctant to approve.

"Doctors say, 'We can't be bought.' The fact is, we can," Caplan said. Pharmaceutical companies do not sponsor events, paying for the speaker to market, the audience to travel and food for all "because they enjoy the company of 20 dermatologists," he added.

Bost said it's likely some doctors kowtow to pharmaceutical interests, just as people across various industries can be corrupted by money. But to paint doctors, drug companies and the speech-giving relationship as immoral or ethically ambiguous is wrong, he said.

"I find it insulting as a physician," Bost said, adding that doctors prize their independence and wouldn't sacrifice it for speaking fees.

Additionally, Bost said the criticisms don't make economic sense.

Payments for the dozens of speeches he gave each year, Bost said, were reimbursements for the time he spent out of his office, Southeast Texas OB/GYN Associates. Often, the payments covered about two-thirds of the income he didn't make because he was on the road. Sometimes, he said, he gave speeches for free.

"I was losing money," Bost said.

The allure is not the money, but being seen as "opinion leaders" who can educate their peers. "I think that's really kind of altruistic," Bost said.

Companies pay billions in fines

Still, the concerns are not unfounded.

GlaxoSmithKline is one of 11 major pharmaceutical companies that have settled criminal and civil cases with the Department of Justice since 2009.

GSK's $3 billion fine from a 2012 settlement is the largest in the industry's history.

Among the charges GSK faced was that, from 1999 to 2003, it promoted Wellbutrin for uses not approved by the Food and Drug Administration, including using the drug to treat sexual dysfunction and substance addictions and to spur weight loss.

GSK pleaded guilty to misbranding the drug, while also pleading guilty to another criminal charge of misbranding a drug and a criminal charge of failing to report safety data of a third drug to the FDA. The company agreed to pay $2 billion to settle the civil case.

"The United States contends that GSK paid millions of dollars to doctors to speak at and attend meetings, sometimes at lavish resorts, at which the off-label uses of Wellbutrin were routinely promoted ...," the Department of Justice said.

Services rendered

Bost eventually moved beyond pills and onto the topic of vaccinations, for which he said he did most of his speaking in recent years. He said he "felt better" giving talks on this subject.

"I felt like I was helping the public, helping my colleagues," Bost said. "I felt a mission to go out and tell them (about adult vaccinations)."

In one five-month span in 2010, Bost was scheduled to lead 15 webcast presentations on the topic, "Protecting Adults Against Vaccine-Preventable Hepatitis," according to a GSK document online. The suggested audience for these webcasts were primary care physicians, family practitioners and OB/GYNs.

GlaxoSmithKline, the only drug company Bost has spoken for since 2009, has announced that it would stop paying doctors for promotional appearances by 2016, becoming the first drug-maker to do so.

The company also said it would stop paying physicians to attend medical conferences and stop paying sales representatives based on the number of prescriptions a doctor issues.

Alspach, the GSK spokeswoman, said the shift was a way for the company to "invest in new ways of sharing information" with doctors and patients.

"I think that we felt that there is nothing wrong or illegal about the practice of doctors speaking on behalf of companies," Alspach said. "To help address any concerns about undue influence on prescriber behavior and to introduce more transparency into our marketing and educational efforts, we're phasing out payments to healthcare professionals to speak on GSK's behalf about our medicines by 2016."

EBesson@BeaumontEnterprise.comTwitter.com/EricBesson_news