<p>U.S. Rep. Randy Neugebauer</p>

By Greg Jaklewicz

Randy Neugebauer has won each election since 2004 with a growing percentage of the vote.

This year, though, he faces three opponents who hope to end the Republican’s string of five terms as U.S. Representative for the 19th Congressional District of Texas.

Running against the Lubbock incumbent are Neal Marchbanks, a Democrat from Lubbock; Richard “Chip” Peterson, a Libertarian from Lubbock; and write-in candidate Donald Vance, of Abilene.

District 19 covers 29 counties including Taylor and 11 other in the Big Country.

Early voting begins Monday, with Election Day on Nov. 4.

Neugebauer has had three opponents in the general election before. In 2006, he also drew a write-in candidate — Mike Sadler, who won only 197 votes, or 0.14 percent of ballots cast .

That year, Taylor County’s Fred Jones ran as the Libertarian candidate — the only recent time that Peterson’s name has not on the general election ballot. Peterson also has run in 2004, 2008, 2010 and 2012.

On his website, Peterson states that he runs to give voters an option aside from the two major parties, to present an option other than the incumbent and “to keep pressure on the present incumbent to keep him fiscally conservative and not let him pander to special interests.”

“Most pertinently, Randy has been very bad on civil liberty and citizen’s rights issues in recent years,” Peterson wrote an e-mail to the Reporter-News. “He has pandered to the establishment in order to curry favor and in the process has helped sell out many of our cherished constitutional protections.

“By voting for me, people can express a desire for Washington to treat them with respect and not interfere so much in their lives, and their pocketbooks.”

Neugebauer has represented District 19 since 2003, when he won a runoff for the seat vacated by longtime Congressman Larry Combest. He got 50.5 percent of the vote to 49.5 percent for Mike Conaway, who in 2004 would take the District 11 seat that includes 10 Big Country counties.

The next year, Districts 17 and 19 were combined, forcing Neugebauer into a race with longtime Democrat Charles Stenholm. Neugebauer took 58 percent of the vote to 40 percent for Stenholm, who had served in Congress since his election in 1978.

Neugebauer won re-election with 68 percent of the vote (2006), 72 percent (2008), 78 percent (2010) and 85 percent (2012).

Marchbanks is making his first run at political office, which contrasts to Peterson’s fifth effort against Neugebauer. Vance said he four times sought office in Arizona in the 1980s.

Here a brief recap of the four candidates:

Neugebauer

Randy Neugebauer is on the House agriculture, financial services, and science, space and technology committees. He has been rated by nonpartisan groups as the most conservative of Texas members of the House.

He twice has made headlines, and not in a good way.

In May 2010, he shouted “baby killer” during a speech on the floor of the House by Democrat Bart Stupak of Michigan. Neugebauer apologized, saying the remark was not directed at Stupak.

In October 2013, he confronted a female U.S. Park Service ranger at the World War II Memorial in Washington, D.C.. It had been closed due to the government shutdown. He later apologized to the ranger, saying his remarks were not directly as her personally.

He is against wasteful spending, the Affordable Care Act and has supported the farm bill as it supports the farmers and ranchers of this region. He believes President Obama has overreached his authority and supports House Republican efforts to sue the president for executive overreach. He believes the nation’s border with Mexico is not secure, the $17 trillion national debut is outrageous and the president does not have a firm strategy on dealing with the Islamic State. He is against term limits, other than the ones the founding fathers set, congressional elections every two years.

He has supported veterans health care and promoted the opening of a VA clinic on the Texas Tech campus in Lubbock.

Away from Congress, his work career has included banking and homebuilding.

MARCHBANKS

During a visit to Abilene to meet potential voters at the West Texas Fair & Rodeo, Neal Marchbanks spoke to the Reporter-News Community Advisory Board. He called Neugebauer “Dr. No,” and said the incumbent was part of the gridlock problem in Washington.

He said Neugebauer has put forth six bills that became law in 11 years.

“He’s made money” as a congressman, Marchbanks claimed. “If the people in the rest of the district were that wealthy, we’d all be in high cotton.”

A meteorologist who forecasted for the military with 33 years in civil service, Marchbanks questioned why there was not a Democrat opposing Neugebauer again. There was none in 2012.

“It was a travesty that we couldn’t get anyone to run. I am very dissatisfied with (Neugebauer) as our representative,” he said, citing the $1 million taxpayers spend annually on the congressman and his staff. “We used to have giants” in Washington, he said, naming Combest, Stenholm and George Mahon, who served 22 terms in the House. All were Democrats.

Marchbanks volunteered for Hillary Clinton’s unsuccessful 2008 campaign and has volunteered with the Lubbock County Democratic Party.

Marchbanks said he would be willing to work with the other party.

“If Republicans put forth a bill that’s good for the district, I’d vote for it,” he said.

He supports term limits — all three branches should have it, he said. He preferred sanctions against Mexico over sending the National Guard to the Texas-Mexico border to stop the flow of immigrants into the U.S.. There is a correct path to citizenship; amnesty “is not a good way.”

Drawing on his career as a weather forecaster for the military, he believes climate change is real and man made.

He believes in all the amendments, not just the Second Amendment that “Republicans like so much.”

An answer to the abortion issue, he said, is “don’t get pregnant.” He supports the Affordable Care Act, noting the millions of Texans who are not insured because Medicaid has not been expanded.

He said Neugebauer has a war chest to work with in his campaign but he was on a “shoestring” budget.

PETERSON

“I am a Libertarian because I believe in the principles espoused by present-day Libertarians and the founders of our country,” Chip Peterson states on his website. “I believe that government should be limited and should be the slave of the people rather than to treat people as its slaves. If government is limited, taxes can be low and markets can operate freely.”

Peterson is a professor emeritus at Texas Tech University. He previously was a professor of finance at Tech and assistant professor of economics at Southern Methodist University, CEO of Lubbock Asset Management Co. and a staff financial economist of the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System.

He does not accept campaign donation; those could force him to do paperwork, which he wants to avoid.

In 2010, he wrote that if elected, he would align with those who want to protect the Bill of Rights and cut wasteful spending and “excessive taxation.”

He continued, “While I recognize that my election to Congress would be a longshot, because of the unique status I would have as the only Libertarian member of Congress, with the help of others and a bully pulpit ... I could do a great deal to help the members of the 19th District and the country as a whole.”

VANCE

In a six-page letter delivered Sept. 15 to the Reporter-News to “officially” announce his candidacy, Donald Vance stated there are “numerous issues to be addressed in this election” and listed the four he deemed most important: Removing federal money tied to national and international programs that “directly or indirectly” support abortion; replacing Speaker of the House John Boehner; restoring the U.S. Constitution or “at least begin the process of doing so”; and reviving one man-one woman marriage.

Asked if abortion and same-sex marriage are issues that can fully support a candidate, he said, “They should be. I believe this is a perilous time.”

He does not believe Neugebauer “will challenge the Speaker. However, I am laying down a challenge to do the right thing.”

Vance believes Obama “should be impeached now” and calls what’s wrong in Washington “a common disease within the establishment — Potomac Fever.”

Moving from Illinois in June 2013, he chose Abilene over Tucson, Arizona — he previously had lived in Arizona — “because I believe Texas is in a far better position to regain its sovereignty .... I also was impressed with Senator Cruz’s Senate victory.”

He posts five blogs six days a week, he said.

“In a normal day, I am dealing with that for 12 or more hours. That leaves no time for me to campaign as normally understood,” he said.

Vance has been a high school teacher and coach, owner of Gunslinger Tax Consultant LLC (1980-2010) and currently owns Gunslinger Publications LC. He has launched a series of books titled “The Black Sword” and authored books on the Constitution, homosexuality and “The Bold Church of Jesus, the Christ.”

“Realistically it will take a miracle for me to have any (effect) on the election at this late date,” he stated in his announcement letter. He plans to run in the Republican primary in 2016.

“One thing is certain; I cannot win if I do not run.”