BRIGHTON — A Westminster man waived the reading of his first advisement Monday in a case linked to the disappearance of a 19-year-old Pueblo woman.

Christopher Adam Waide, 23, dressed in a jail jumpsuit, his hands handcuffed, appeared Monday in an Adams County courtroom in the disappearance of Lea Chali Porter.

Family members of both Waide and Porter were in court, but Waide made little, if any, eye contact with his family. He was stoic, staring straight ahead for most of the hearing.

In the hallway, after the brief court appearance, Michael Jackson, Porter’s stepfather, talked with the media.

Jackson, his eyes welling at times, pulled no punches.

“I want him dead,” Jackson said. “I want to kill him.”

Waide was arrested Friday on suspicion of murder and sexual assault in connection with Porter’s disappearance. She was reported missing by her mother June 5.

Westminster police said Waide was being cooperative in the investigation, and that investigators were searching for a body in the case.

As of Monday morning, Porter’s body has still not been found, said Cheri Spottke, a Westminster Police Department spokeswoman.

One location Westminster police may search is the Allied Waste Services Tower Road Landfill at Tower Road and East 88th Avenue in Commerce City, police said.

At the courthouse, Jackson said Waide has admitted to stabbing and strangling Porter, and then putting her body in a trash bag and then a garbage Dumpster.

But Jackson believes Waide could be misleading police on where a body may be found.

“He knows it is in his best interest that it’s not found,” Jackson said.

Jackson also talked about a document that Waide allegedly authored back in high school, in which he wrote about abducting, raping, and killing a woman.

Police investigators are aware of the alleged document and are “looking into it,” Spottke said.

Formal filing of charges against Waide was scheduled for this Friday.

The case file remains sealed.

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822, knicholson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kierannicholson