Highlights Barack Obama healthcare law

The largest ethnic organisation of physicians, representing over 100,000 physicians of Indian origin, would hold a Legislative Day in Washington in March to brief lawmakers on their views regarding healthcare issues.

A large number of US senators and House members are expected to attend the American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin's (AAPI) Legislative Day and governing body meeting from March 26 to 28 in Cannon caucus room on Capitol Hill.

Healthcare continues to be at the centre of the national debate, especially after the implementation of President Barack Obama's signature healthcare law, the Affordable Care Act, AAPI said in a media release.

One out of every seven doctors serving in the US is of Indian heritage, providing medical care to over 40 million people in the country, it noted.

"Just as their services to the community in the healthcare arena is very vital, so is the need for due representation, to listen to their voices, expressing their concerns and their needs," it said.

"AAPI will discover her own potential to be a player in shaping the health of each patient with a focus on health maintenance than disease intervention," said AAPI president Ravi Jahagirdar.

"AAPI is once again in the forefront in bringing many burning health care issues facing the community at large and bringing this to the Capitol and to the US Congress," said Mr Sudhir Sekhsaria of AAPI Legislative Affairs Committee.

As part of comprehensive immigration reform, AAPI has urged the Congress to include international medical graduates also along with the international students graduating with degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) being fast-tracked for Green Cards.

This proposal enables highly-skilled workers to remain in the United States after receiving their higher education in America, it said.

Among the areas where AAPI had sought US lawmakers to support their agenda included increasing 15,000 more Residency Positions.