Posted on June 12, 2014

Krauthammer: Obama Operating Under His Own Constitution, "Ruling Like A Banana Republic"

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

CHARLES KRAUTHAMMER: Look, if this is were a parliamentary system like Britain, we he would have a call for a vote of no confidence and the government would be out, we would have new elections. We have a presidential system. Terms are fixed. It doesn't matter a whit what's going on with the popularity of the president, he may lose the Senate, but he is governing without the Congress.



He has got his own constitution that he is operating under. He now regulates the entire healthcare system. And the story that was missed among all the scandals that are supposedly undoing his presidency is the climate change regulations. This is all by regulation; nothing in legislation.



He doesn't need the Congress, which is going to revolutionize and put control of U.S. energy, which is the U.S. economy, in the Environmental Protection Agency. You want to run America? Don't run for the presidency, get yourself appointed head of the E.P.A. It makes Stalin's five-year plans look like a picnic the way they're going to have control of the economy. He doesn't need Congress; he doesn't need popularity.



BILL O'REILLY: I think you will agree with me that the nation is at a crossroads now. Alright, America is at a crossroads. If it elects another liberal Democrat president -- i.e. Hillary Clinton -- again, the folks are basically saying, 'You know what? We want to be dependent. We want to have the government rubn everything. Energy. Healthcare. Whatever. That's what we the people want.' I believe that would be the message.



However, I do believe that perception now is that it is not working with President Obama. The folks are picking this up. Not the ideologues, the [Nancy] Pelosis, the [Harry] Reids or the radio talk show conservative guys. They are in their stone and they will stay there. But the regular folks are saying it's not working. We tried it. It failed. We want something different. Do you think that will happen?



KRAUTHAMMER: I think that is true. I think Obama has set back the cause of liberalism by overreaching, overshooting and combining it with incompetence in a way that I think has led to a crisis of confidence in liberalism and his brand of liberalism, which is exemplified, personified by Obamacare and as we will see by this over-regulation coming under the EPA for climate, which is essentially going to be controlled --



O’REILLY: I don't know if that will get traction because it's so far out, but I tell you the Bergdahl thing has traction and there's going to be more to come on this guy. He's going to come back to the United States. We now know there was nothing physically wrong with him. No big health issues. Alright? The Obama administration is caught in another deception. Alright? Almost all the Senators are furious with President Obama, even the Democrats. So it's now reaching critical mass and I don't think the Obama administration can come back from this.



KRAUTHAMMER: But critical mass for what? They are not going to impeach him and he doesn't need Congress because he is ruling --



O’REILLY: No, the Democratic Party is getting torn to pieces.



KRAUTHAMMER: He's ruling like a banana republic -- he's ruling like a banana republic by executive order.



O’REILLY: Fine. But his party will be damaged for decades. He's destroying the golden goose. Alright?



KRAUTHAMMER: That's fine. I think that's probably true. I think he is undoing a lot of the goodwill that liberalism enjoyed when he came in. They’re seeing it eight years in action. The worst recovery since the second World War, incompetence in doing Obamacare, incompetence and banality in running Veterans Affairs, abuse of the IRS. The list is incredibly long, and I think it will do lasting damage. I think the country is getting a demonstration of liberalism in action and they don't like it. But all I’m saying is we got to live through the next two and a half years, and that could change the country.



O’REILLY: Alright. But if the Senate goes to the GOP, then I think that his power declines drastically even though he's got his pen and his phone. Last word?



KRAUTHAMMER: Look, he's rewritten the immigration laws unilaterally. He’s rewritten the drug enforcement laws unilaterally. He’s changed ObamaCare 38 times and nobody has lifted a finger, and now he's going to deal with climate change, energy regulation, what has never been done before unilaterally. So he doesn't need the Congress, that’s the point I’m trying to make. This guy is on autopilot and liberalism will suffer, however, so will the country.