Call 573-815-1776 or email tribtalk@columbiatribune.com to contribute.

Jim Robertson, managing editor

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

“To those who think roundabouts are stupid, roundabouts are great. I suggest you learn how to negotiate the intersection. When everyone does what they’re supposed to do, there are many advantages. Most of all, it keeps the traffic moving. You save gas and brakes when you don’t have to come to a complete stop. Simply yield to the driver on your left. Like a lot of driving situations, use common sense. I wish we had more roundabouts.”

“Because of Obamacare, more than 20 million previously uninsured Americans now have health insurance. The percentage of Americans who lack health insurance is now lower than it has ever been. The caller who complained about the high premium should do what millions of Americans have done: Get the help of a navigator and use the federal exchange to find an affordable insurance plan that meets their needs.”

“I’m calling about the school bus parking. They’re all barned together on Clark Lane between Creekwood Estates Mobile Home Park and Hanover. They’ve been using a small street called Penn Terrace that runs between the school bus parking lot and Creekwood and Hanover. They run 200-300 buses a day or more back and forth on Penn Terrace. They’re even parking school buses on Penn Terrace, which makes it almost impossible to be safe when you’re trying to drive because of visibility, and Creekwood is a senior citizen park.”

“I’m against having the Palestinians talk at the library. I am a Christian. I lost close to 20 relatives in the Holocaust — great aunts, great uncles. I am not a Zionist. I’m not pro- or against Palestine. But I am against the killing of Jews and Palestinians and the hate involved.”

“Well, Speaker Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell are telling a lot of stories up there again. They know the Republican Party is unpredictable, and they block legislation that would help 98 percent of us, so neither one of them do their jobs. … The Republican Party is broken and doesn’t want to be fixed when the concern is more and more power. … They delayed Supreme Court decisions. They have not worked on this economy. We need to revamp the Affordable Care Act, Social Security and Medicare. We need to make college more affordable.”

“The city of Columbia needs to take a hard look at how they delegate the money being spent from the Parks and Rec tax. For instance, right now at the ARC you have areas in that building that are 115 degrees, areas that are 60 degrees and areas that are 90 degrees. You’ve got a mega amount of windows that do a bunch of thermal heating of the building and make that side of the building 120 degrees and areas of the building that are 90-95 degrees — all areas where you want to work out. It seems like a very bad design of that building.”