Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

MINNEAPOLIS (AP) — When Alan Page’s Hall of Fame football career ended, he charged into his new legal career with the tenacity that made him a feared member of the Minnesota Vikings’ Purple People Eaters, eventually becoming the first black member of the Minnesota Supreme Court.

After 22 years on the state’s high court, Page is preparing for another major life change in August when he hits the court’s mandatory retirement age of 70. His will be an active retirement, though, that will involve spending more time on his philanthropic work aimed at students of color, and perhaps even teaching.

“I may have to learn how to do this, but there might even be some down time along the way,” said Page, one of only two NFL defensive players ever voted league MVP.

In a wide-ranging interview with The Associated Press at his office near the Minnesota Capitol, Page reflected on his legal career, the current state of the NFL and his upbringing. Sitting near reminders of the segregation era, such as a “Colored Waiting Room” sign from a southern railroad, Page also talked about racial mistrust in the wake of the police shooting of an unarmed black man in Ferguson, Missouri, last summer.

“We’ve come a long way from that,” he said of the railroad sign. “But that being said, we’ve still got a long way to go.”

Page recalled growing up in Canton, Ohio, during the segregation era. He’s been pulled over, he said, for “driving while black.” He said he has had “the talk” with his four children about how to stay safe when stopped by police, as his parents did with him.

“Nothing new,” he said. “Those divisions have been there. They’re I think more visible now simply because we live in a time when news can be broadcast instantly.”

Page said he’d like to think he’s done some good with the Page Educational Foundation, which has awarded $12 million in grants to 6,000 students of color at Minnesota post-secondary schools in the 26 years since he and his wife, Diane, founded it. He said one of the “pleasant surprises” has been seeing differences disappear when students of African-American, Native American, Asian and Latino backgrounds are brought together.

“Some days you look at the way the world is and you just want to draw the shades, lock the doors and hide. And our Page Scholars, they give you hope for the future,” he said.

The roots of Page’s passion for education and young people run deep. He said his parents constantly emphasized the importance of education.

The message soaked in. Page was a first-round draft pick for the Vikings out of Notre Dame in 1967. He played in all four of Minnesota’s Super Bowls and was voted league MVP in 1971. He got his law degree from the University of Minnesota in 1978 while still playing. After the Vikings waived him in 1978, the eight-time Pro Bowler finished his career with the Chicago Bears.