By Susan Wade/For The Star-Ledger



Richie Crampton is a new father. After his showdown Sunday at the National Hot Rod Association's Toyota Summernationals, he has a new label: Top Fuel winner.



The rookie driver from Australia, who worked for seven years as the clutch specialist on his GEICO/Lucas Oil Dragster before stepping into the cockpit, used a 3.819-second, 320.51-mph pass on the Old Bridge Township Raceway Park 1,000-foot course to win in his first final round.

He and Funny Car winner Cruz Pedregon denied the Kalitta Motorsports duo of Doug Kalitta and Del Worsham sentimental victories they had hoped to turn into tributes to Scott Kalitta, the drag-racing champion killed here in a qualifying accident in 2008.



Crampton and Pedregon joined Jeg Coughlin (Pro Stock) and Andrew Hines (Pro Stock Motorcycle) in the winners circle at this ninth of 24 events on the Mello Yello Drag Racing Series tour.



"This is all surreal right now. I'm over the moon right now," Crampton said after becoming the NHRA's 100th different Top Fuel winner in only his ninth race.



He said he didn't think his day would end in triumph when it started out with a shredded front tire, and he wondered just when his luck would run out as he earned two more round-wins with help from mistake-prone opponents. Oddly, the final round proved to be the most worry-free, although he beat Kalitta (3.848 seconds, 317.34 mph) by a mere nine-thousandths of a second.



"I was happy it went A to B without the tires falling off or something silly," Crampton said. He added that daughter Emma, born May 20, "is the ultimate lucky charm."



After defeating Del Worsham in the Funny Car final, 4.126 seconds at 301.33 mph to 4.189 / 296.70, Pedregon gave his trophy to Scott Kalitta's father, Connie Kalitta. The team owner and drag-racing pioneer fields Worsham's DHL Toyota and Doug Kalitta's Mac Tools Dragster.



"Very few words were spoken. I hugged him, and that was that. I walked away," Pedregon said. The veteran racer and two-time series champion said the gesture was one of respect for Connie Kalitta's years in the sport and for Scott's memory, as well as his appreciation for Worsham and the satisfaction that "we went out there and slugged it out."



Pedregon, the No. 1 qualifier, earned his first victory of the season in his second straight final-round appearance. Overall, it was his 35th, which tied him on the career victories list with legend Don Prudhomme. Earlier Sunday he recorded his 300th Funny Car round-win.



In a rematch of their Pro Stock final-round meeting last month at Atlanta, Coughlin cruised to a 6.510-second, 213.94-mph victory. He denied Greg Anderson (10.314, 88.65) his sixth victory here since 2002 and his 75th overall. He handed his trophy to co-crew chief Mark Ingersoll to commemorate his 50th birthday and say thanks because he and colleague Adam Hornberger "did a heck of a job adjusting to the day."



Coughlin said he fought his Jegs.com Dodge Dart much of the day but his rivals "gave us enough time to figure it out – and we did."



In Pro Stock Motorcycle, winner Hines joked that only "five percent of me felt sorry" about robbing Vance & Hines Screamin' Eagle V-Rod teammate, best buddy, and neighbor Eddie Krawiec of a second victory at his beloved hometown racetrack.



Hines won this third consecutive all-Harley-Davidson final round with a 6.828-second elapsed time at 196.56 mph to Krawiec's 6.237, 196.30 in this pairing of three-time series champions who are 1-2 in the standings.



Von Smith drove his Camaro to a 5.966-second, 241.58-mph winning pass against Mustang driver Jason Hamstra in the Pro Modified final. Hamstra ran a 9.861, 91.12.



The NHRA Mello Yello Drag Racing Series moves to Bristol, Tenn., in two weeks for the Ford Thunder Valley Nationals at Bristol Dragway.