Dr. Ben Carson. Contributed photo

When Colorado Springs resident Mick Hartley mentions Ben Carson he gets either an excited proclamation about the need to get Carson to run for president of the United States or a confused "Who's Ben Carson?"

It's the dichotomy of being a rising star in the GOP with no political background.

Carson, a retired pediatric neurosurgeon who lives in West Palm Beach, Fla., will be in Colorado Springs this weekend for speaking and book-signing engagements.

Hartley is the El Paso County head of Run Ben Run, a political action committee working to get a million signatures on a petition to encourage Carson to jump into the 2016 presidential race. Hartley said he sees the Carson movement growing in El Paso County, where he has about 1,000 volunteers. He is expecting a big turnout this weekend.

"We're not going to get the far left," Hartley said. "But the middle people, I think once they have the opportunity to listen to this man they will be in his corner."

Carson said in a phone interview with The Gazette on Monday that he isn't sure if he'll run for president in 2016, but he's out laying the groundwork so he won't start behind if he decides to run.

The election results in November will play a big role in his decision, he said, noting a Republican takeover of the U.S. Senate would indicate the American people are ready for a change from liberal government.

He said the country needs a president who isn't a politician but who instead operates based on an honest concern for the country.

"There's no question that every place I go there are huge enthusiastic crowds," Carson said. "But I don't know that the political establishment or the media would be ready for such a thing because they wouldn't know how to deal with it."

Carson details in his first book "Gifted Hands" his rise from the poverty of Detroit to become a preeminent surgeon with Johns Hopkins Hospital.

The doctor shot into the national spotlight after his heralded speech at the National Prayer Breakfast in 2013 that was critical of the Affordable Care Act while President Barack Obama sat only a few chairs away.

Daniel Cole, director of operations for the El Paso County Republican Party, likes to joke he was into Ben Carson before it was cool.

"I used to teach Ben Carson's autobiography when I was teaching school," Cole said. "I think kids walked away feeling encouraged and inspired because his life story is so incredible."

Cole said there is an active and motivated group in Colorado working on the Run Ben Run campaign and he hears from them at least once a week.

"It's good to see a candidate drafted by a large number of people instead of putting himself forward," Cole said. "It's a throwback to the old days."

So how serious is Carson's hypothetical bid for the GOP nomination at the Republican National Convention?

Carson was second in a straw poll at the Texas Republican Convention although he was considerably behind U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz in that poll, the New York Times reported.

He came in third in a straw poll at the Conservative Political Action Conference behind Cruz, who was second and Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, who held a commanding lead.

Hartley said Carson brought down the house when he spoke at the Western Conservative Summit in Denver in July.

The novice politician has suffered some missteps along the way, however.

He withdrew from giving a commencement speech at Johns Hopkins University because of his comments comparing homosexuality to bestiality and statutory rape. Carson later apologized for the comment he made on Sean Hannity's TV show on Fox News, "Hannity."

But the main tenets of Carson's books and his developing political platform focus on creating a more open and honest dialogue about the issues that face America, particularly when it comes to the federal debt.

In a more recent political gaffe picked up by the national media, Carson compared Obamacare to slavery.

"This is what we see all over the country, people driving wedges into any little crack to create a war," Carson said. "A war on women, race wars, age wars ... and with political correctness we try to ensure that nobody talks about them. We need to talk about them honestly and openly."

He says after years of dealing with the politics of a hospital he has learned how to negotiate difficult subjects and how to practice exactly what he preaches in his latest book, "One Nation."

"It's very important that the American people realize that the kind of freedoms we enjoy, we cannot have as a spectator sport. We need to get involved," Carson said.

-

Contact Megan Schrader: 719-636-0644