People Moves of the Week: D.A. Davidson, Ropes & Gray, William Blair

D.A. Davidson brings in two M&A vets; Ropes & Gray hires partner; William Blair names Todd Speece head of West Coast equity capital markets

Adveq Management AG — The Zurich, Switzerland-based asset manager named Benjamin Alt, Sven Gasser, Sven Kupferschmid and Hagen Raab executive directors. Prior to joining Adveq, Alt worked at German Private Bank Sal. Oppenheim, while Gasser worked at a Swiss local government entity as a deputy finance director. Previously, Kupferschmid served as a trustee at Vogt & Partner GmbH, and Raab was an equity financial analyst at BHF-BANK, also a German bank.

Ballard Spahr LLP — Andrew Hough has arrived at the Atlanta law office where he has been named a partner. Before joining Ballard Spahr, he was with Greenberg Traurig LLP, also in Atlanta. His hiring comes on the heels of the firm’s strategic plan to strengthen its mergers and acquisitions capabilities nationwide.

Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. — The New York financial services firm has opened an office in Birmingham, Alabama,. Tracy Hunt, Jonathan Doss, Jay Simpson and Counce Drinkard have each left BBVA Compass to be a part of Cantor Fitzgerald's new branch. Hunt is a managing director, focusing on institutional sales; while Doss is a director in institutional sales. Simpson is also a director, and Drinkard is a vice president.

The Carlyle Group (Nasdaq: CG) — The Washington, D.C. asset manager and advisory firm has announced a slew of promotions. Eight Carlyle executives have been called up to partner: Pamela Bentley, Jonathan Bylin, Andrew Chung, Katherine Elmore-Jones, Andrew Marino, Hiroyuki Otsuka, John Redett and Catherine Ziobro. Nineteen deal pros were named managing directors: Jeremy Anderson, Zeina Bain, Michael Beaton, Andrew Curry, William Darman, Richard Dunne, Russell Farscht, Paul Ferraro, Jeffrey Gui, Karthic Jayaraman, David Johnson, David Kingery, Matthew LoRusso, Stuart MacKenzie, Patrick McCarter, Nancy Palleschi, Mahesh Parasuraman, Jay Sammons and Jamie Williams.

D.A. Davidson & Co. — The Great Falls, Montana-based investment bank has enlisted two M&A veterans to help launch an office in Denver. Steven Gilbertson focuses on the energy industry, and Tim Sznewajs focuses the construction sector. While D.A. Davidson is presently represented by other divisions in Denver, the two new managing directors represent the firm’s first investment banking presence. Gilbertson was recently an executive director in Oppenheimer & Co.’s energy investment banking team, completing over 100 transactions with a combined value in excess of $25 billion. Sznewajs recently served as the co-head of FMI Capital Advisors where he spent nine years working with engineering and construction mandates. Prior to that, Sznewajs held a variety of positions at Goldman Sachs & Co.

Davidoff Hutcher & Citron LLP — Brian W. Simon joined the New York firm's government relations group. Simon served as a senior staff member in the U.S. Congress, before being appointed to serve in New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo's administration as director of government and community relations at the Port Authority of New York & New Jersey.

Franklin Square Capital Partners — The Philadelphia asset manager has tapped Berta Aldrich to serve as the firm's chief marketing officer. Aldrich joins Franklin Square after spending the last 10 years with Vanguard, where she held executive positions in marketing strategy and planning, loyalty operations and investment education.

Goodwin Procter — Jay Schifferli has jumped to the Washington, D.C.-based law firm from Kelley Drye & Warren as a partner. Previously, he served as chair of Kelley Drye & Warren’s private equity practice.

Harvest Partners LP — The New York private equity firm named Jay Wilkins to senior managing director. Previously a managing director, Wilkins is a health care specialist who joined Harvest Partners in 2010 from DLJ Merchant Banking Partners. Wilkins also serves on the boards of Insight Global, PSSI, Driven Brands, AxelaCare and Athletico.

Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP — The New York law firm has added Elizabeth Prewitt to its antitrust and government investigations practices as a partner. Prewitt recently left the U.S. Justice Department as assistant Chief of the antitrust division. Over the course of her 16-year career as a lawyer, she secured major criminal fines against financial institutions accused of rigging Libor interest rate benchmarks. She also led the antitrust division’s investigation into manipulation of foreign currency rates.

KKR & Co. LP (NYSE:KKR) — The New York private equity firm has brought in Haroun van Hövell as a managing director and head of energy. Van Hövell will assist in sourcing deals across Europe, the Middle East and Africa. He joins KKR from Riverstone Holdings, where he worked as a managing director. In the past, he has worked for 4Gas Holding, the Carlyle Group (Nasdaw: CG) and Salomon Smith Barney.

Ropes & Gray LLP — The Boston law firm has hired Matthew Posthuma as a partner in its private investment funds practice. He is based in Chicago. Previously, Posthuma worked at Mayer Brown.

Veritas Financial Partners — The Boca Raton, Florida-based lender added Allan Gibbel as a business development officer. Based in Los Angeles, Gibbel will oversee sourcing new business relationships. Gibbel joins Veritas after spending 15 years establishing First Community Financial.

Western Reserve Partners — The Cleveland-based advisory firm has promoted David Dunstan to president. Ralph Della Ratta will remain the firm’s managing partner and chief executive officer. Dunstan is a founding partner of Western Reserve and leads the firm’s Business Services and Consumer practices.

William Blair & Co. — The Chicago investment bank brought in Todd Speece (pictured) as a managing director and head of West Coast equity capital markets (ECM) for the firm's investment banking group in San Francisco. He worked in the equity capital markets groups at Raymond James Financial Inc., also in San Francisco, as head of ECM, and at Piper Jaffray & Co. in Minneapolis, where he worked from 2004 to 2011.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: