WASHINGTON -- A majority of Americans think House Speaker John Boehner's lawsuit against President Barack Obama is a pointless waste of resources, according to a new poll.

Boehner (R-Ohio) is pursuing a lawsuit against Obama, saying the president used executive power to delay provisions in the Affordable Care Act that should have required congressional approval. While the speaker's proposed lawsuit has the backing of some Republicans in Congress, 51 percent of American voters view it as a "political stunt," according to Public Policy Polling. Only 41 percent of voters consider the lawsuit to be legitimate.

Public Policy Polling, in a poll commissioned by liberal advocacy group Americans United for Change, surveyed 1,161 registered voters and found a great majority viewed the lawsuit as a misappropriation of Congress' time and money. Fifty-eight percent said the lawsuit won't benefit people like them, and 63 percent said Congress should prioritize jobs over the lawsuit.

While Democrats have accused Boehner of using the lawsuit to bolster conservative support ahead of the midterm elections, 46 percent of those surveyed said they were less likely to vote for Republican candidates in November.

The poll from July 11 to July 13 and has a margin of error of 2.9 percent.

American voters aren't the only ones viewing the lawsuit as a political stunt. RedState.com editor Erick Erickson called it "political theater and a further Republican waste of taxpayer dollars." Former vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin said Republicans would be better off pursuing impeachment.

"You don’t bring a lawsuit to a gunfight, and there’s no room for lawyers on our front lines," Palin told Fox News' Hannity.

A third of Americans, and two-thirds of Republicans, think Obama should be impeached, according to a new HuffPost/YouGov poll.

Also on HuffPost: John Boehner's Lips Are Sealed John Boehner's Lips Are Sealed

1 of 27 Boehner Holds Press Briefing At The Capitol U.S. Speaker of the House Rep. John Boehner (R-OH) listens to questions during a news briefing February 14, 2013 on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. (Photo by Alex Wong/Getty Images) Share this slide:

Getty Images