Topics: Brazil, GlobalPost, microcephaly, Zika Virus, Media News, Life News, News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil — There’s no shortage of confusion about the mysterious and deadly Zika virus, which has captured the world’s attention and recently led the World Health Organization to declare a public health emergency of international concern.

While the virus is rarely deadly, a key worry has been over a possible link between Zika in pregnant women and birth defects in their babies.

It’s a scary thought. Here at GlobalPost we’ve been digging into one aspect of the story: Whether the statistics surrounding this crisis warrant the panic that has gripped some potential visitors to the region.

A key number for assessing the question: 150.

That’s the rough average annual number of reported cases of microcephaly, a condition in which a child is born with a smaller-than-normal head, across Brazil in the few years prior to the current crisis. In recent weeks, that number has become the baseline that journalists, policy makers and scientists around the globe have used to establish that Brazil has seen a huge increase in cases of microcephaly.

Here’s the New York Times: “Before the epidemic, Brazil recorded only about 150 cases of microcephaly a year.”

And the Washington Post: “In 2014, Brazil reported only 150 cases.”

The BBC: “Just 150 babies were born with microcephaly in 2014.”

And, to be fair, GlobalPost: “The authorities and media are repeatedly comparing the thousands of suspected microcephaly cases to typical averages of 150 or so per year. That number is about right.”

Well, here’s the thing: That number probably isn’t about right. In fact, it’s almost certainly wrong.

Indeed, there’s growing evidence to suggest there have been thousands of annual cases of microcephaly across Brazil in recent years — not 150.

“All of us knew that that number wasn’t true,” said Dr. Albert Ko, an epidemiologist at Yale University who has worked extensively in Brazil. “Usually, when you have an outbreak, you’re looking at observed over the expected, and those numbers for the expected [the 150 reported cases] were just off. Anyone who knows anything about births knows they’re off.”

Ko certainly isn’t the first expert to raise doubts about the dodgy data circulating about microcephaly in Brazil.

As we reported earlier, researchers in the northeastern Brazilian state of Paraiba who went back and looked at their data for newborns discovered something startling: hundreds of children meet the definition of “microcephalic” set by the Brazilian government. And that’s just at the 21 clinics they have data for.

Writing in the Brazilian daily newspaper Estadao, Fernando Reinach, a Brazilian venture capitalist and Cornell-trained biologist, estimated that there should be in the region of 19,000 children born with microcephaly in Brazil every year.