HIGH POINT, N.C., Sept. 4, 2015 – A phenomenal decade of transformation at High Point University has led to another historical moment.

After tripling enrollment, doubling faculty, adding more than 50 new academic and residential facilities to campus, and raising a university record of $57 million in the last 14 months alone, HPU will move forward with a $120 million investment for the School of Health Sciences and the School of Pharmacy – the single largest investment in the school’s 91-year history.

The groundbreaking ceremony is scheduled at 11:15 a.m. on Sept. 9 for a 220,000-square-foot complex to house the two academic schools. Gov. Pat McCrory will attend the groundbreaking to support the economic impact of these programs, which will create 100 new positions in the Triad, bring 700 new students to campus and prepare graduates to take on health care roles that are growing in demand in the Triad and across the nation. The event is open to the public.

The construction, technology and new equipment alone will have a $90 million, one-time economic impact on the Triad. Once completed, the schools will enhance HPU’s annual impact to nearly $500 million (adding $33 million to the current $465 million). The facility is scheduled to be completed in spring 2017.

The primary donors of the School of Health Sciences and School of Pharmacy are residents of the city of High Point and will be announced at the groundbreaking. Both schools will be housed in the state-of-the-art facility, which will include advanced biomedical research facilities, a cadaver lab, standardized client space that will record students’ interactions with patients to allow for critiquing, a medical simulation lab and much more.

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the future of health care requires more providers across the board to care for the aging baby boomer population and the millions of individuals being introduced to the system through the Affordable Care Act. Programs offered in these schools will prepare students to fill these roles right here in the Triad, throughout the nation and around the world.

About the Schools:

The School of Health Sciences began offering two new programs this year – a master’s degree in physician assistant studies and a master’s degree in athletic training, in addition to its existing exercise science bachelor’s degree program. It will grow to offer a doctoral degree in physical therapy starting in 2017.

The School of Pharmacy will offer a six-year PharmD degree and is scheduled to welcome its first class in fall 2016.

Jobs in High Demand:

BLS data shows demand for providers in these fields will grow up to 38 percent by 2022 – much faster than the average for most occupations. HPU will house the only pharmacy school in the Piedmont Triad and fourth in the state of North Carolina. The schools will create a cornerstone for medical innovation at HPU.

By the Numbers: