Let's be honest. Gov. Bobby Jindal's best quality is not honesty. For years, he's peddled fictional accounts of his fiscal conservatism, his devotion to education reform, his commitment to religious liberty, his concern about the state's environment and his belief in government transparency.

When Jindal is talking, he's usually spinning, which is why I was shocked to read that Jindal had spoken the truth about his ideas for the nation's health care system. Of course, when I realized that Jindal's remarks were made in private, it all made sense.

As described in a new book by conservative author Philip Klein, Jindal met last April in Washington, D.C., with a group of conservative journalists and policy experts. He was there to tout an Obamacare alternative created by his pre-presidential campaign organization, America Next. (Jindal's proposal is an "alternative" to Obamacare in the same way that the Cliff's Notes version of "War and Peace" is an alternative to Tolstoy's original work.)

As the group peppered Jindal with questions about his health care proposal, Jindal reportedly paid President Obama an unexpected compliment. Jindal said Obama had been willing, as Klein wrote, "to pay a political price to advance his agenda and [Jindal] said Republicans needed to be willing to do the same." Obama was willing to risk losing the Congress and derailing his other important legislative priorities. "He said Republicans should be thinking the same way and [be] willing to risk political blowback to repeal Obamacare and push a market-based alternative," Klein reported, ignoring the fact that Obamacare is, in fact, market based.

And what bold, politically risky proposal did Jindal proffer? Why, Jindal suggested Republicans abandon the notion that every American deserves decent and affordable health insurance coverage.

"If we start with the premise that we've gotta give every single person a card," Jindal reportedly said, "and that's the only way we can be successful, we're done. We've adopted their metric of success ... if the metric of success is gonna be which plan can say 'we've given people more cards,' they always win."

Oh, the shame of helping people to get health insurance! How do those dastardly Democrats sleep at night?

Jindal does seem quite eager to revoke those insurance cards. "I do think it's a mistake if we argue we can't take back what Obama has already given," Jindal told the conservative group.

Give Jindal points for candor, right? At least he heeded his advice and tossed out bold, politically incorrect proposals. Let's be honest and tell millions of Americans that we want to take away their insurance cards, he appeared to say.

Not so fast. In public, Jindal is not courageous. As recently as early January, in an interview with a Baton Rouge journalist, Jindal asserted that government is simply incapable of providing adequate universal health care. Nonetheless, he said, it is a basic right that should be available "to all our people. It's a question of human dignity."

Is it now Jindal's position that health care is a basic right and a matter of human dignity, but just not something with which a president or a governor should concern himself?

Jindal cannot have it both ways. A credible presidential candidate who fancies himself a health care expert cannot speak in public about "human dignity" while, behind closed doors, he drops all pretense of concern for those humans.

When you and I weren't listening, Jindal was far more concerned about proving to the far right that he will return to the pre-Obamacare days in which insurance companies refused payment for pre-existing conditions. And he's not interested in giving anyone, least of all his state's working poor, the dignity of health insurance cards.

Jindal's blather ignores an important point: Obamacare is a success. It has drastically cut the ranks of the uninsured. Those who have coverage are overwhelmingly satisfied with it. Health care inflation has slowed dramatically. And GOP predictions that it would crash the economy and bloat the deficit turned out to be ridiculous.

In touting the complete repeal of Obamacare Jindal might be staking out a bold and unpopular position. The far right in Iowa might embrace those ideas, although it's not clear how snatching away health insurance cards would make him an attractive candidate for president in a general election.

Jindal may not swagger like Chris Christie and Rick Perry. He cannot claim an ardent following like Rand Paul. He might lack the stature and money of Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney. To compensate for those glaring deficits, Jindal apparently has adopted the mantle of "he who would take away your health insurance card."

That, of course, won't fit on a bumper sticker, and Jindal does not possess the courage to utter it in public. But he will say it in private because it's the truth.

Robert Mann, an author and former U.S. Senate and gubernatorial staffer, holds the Manship Chair in Journalism at the Manship School of Mass Communication at Louisiana State University. Read more from him at his blog, Something Like the Truth. Follow him on Twitter @RTMannJr or email him at bob.mann@outlook.com.