Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal had some harsh words for President Barack Obama Saturday as he gave the country’s leader a little history lesson.

“I listened to the president last week as he appropriately conveyed Americans’ revulsion at this savage act and our grief at the Foley family’s loss. As usual, the president’s words were very eloquent. To his credit, the president was unequivocal regarding the evil of this terrorist group, and he took the time to list some of their crimes against humanity,” Jindal wrote in a Fox News op-ed.

“But there is a major problem with the president’s remarks. While he does a nice job of explaining our horror, his remarks on what America will do about it are insufficient, naïve, and just plain weak.”

Jindal then proceeded to tear apart the speech Obama gave after the video of ISIS beheading journalist James Foley surfaced line by line.

Obama: “We do what’s necessary to see that justice is done and we act against ISIL, standing alongside others.” Jindal’s take: “Here’s an idea — How about we offer these people death instead of justice? I understand that the President of the United States should not be prone to wild rhetoric. But this is ridiculous. “Justice” generally conjures up images of a courtroom with a government provided defense attorney. Here’s another way the president could phrase it, ‘we will hunt them down and kill them.'” Obama: The people of Iraq “must continue coming together to expel these terrorists from their community.” Jindal’s take: “Um, no. They do not need to be expelled. They need to be eliminated.” Obama: “People like this ultimately fail. They fail because the future is won by those who build and not destroy.” Jindal’s take: “This is the crux of the matter – we have a president who is disturbingly naïve and holds a dangerous utopian view of the world and the dangers therein. Earlier this year, President Obama downplayed the danger of the ISIS, comparing these terrorists to a ‘junior varsity’ team that does not pose the same threat as Al-Qaeda. For him now to assert, ‘people like this ultimately fail because the future is won by those who build and not destroy,’ is flat out absurd. The truth is, these people will only fail if we cause them to fail. It is not inevitable. Causing them to fail requires that they be defeated, destroyed, and yes, killed.”

While most other Obama critics have stuck with the easier criticism of the optics of Obama’s golf game following the speech, Jindal gets down to the core of the issue with the president’s plan or lack thereof.

“In World War II we did not win the future by building, we won it by destroying,” Jindal wrote. “Uncomfortable or not, that is the truth. The murderous fools who cut the heads off of Americans must be destroyed, and sent to their reward, such as it is, in the next life.”