WASHINGTON -- Predictably, a health care analyst who supports the Affordable Care Act views an alternative plan offered by Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., as unworkable, while an opponent of the health law considers his proposal a vast improvement.

NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune asked Ron Pollack, founding executive director of Families USA, and a supporter of the 2010 health care law, and Tevi Troy, adjunct fellow at the conservative Hudson Institute and an Obamacare critic, to assess Cassidy's alternative.

Cassidy, a physician turned lawmaker, last week unveiled details of his proposal, intended, he said, to replace the Affordable Care if, as he hopes, the Supreme Court rules that income-based subsidies -– a key element of the law -– can't continue in at least 34 states. These are states such as Louisiana that refused to set up state-run marketplaces, and are relying instead on federal marketplaces.

The Affordable Care Act contains language saying subsidies are available for enrollees in state-run exchanges, without mention of eligibility for federally run exchanges. The Obama administration and Democratic congressional members say the clear intent of the law was to make subsidies available to all enrollees who meet the income benefits.

Cassidy said a ruling against the Obama administration would make the law unworkable, by eliminating subsidies in 34, perhaps 37 states, and lead to a search for an alternative. His alternative would offer states a replacement for the Affordable Care Act –- a block grant program for the states. States, if they opt for his plan instead of the Affordable Care Act or doing nothing, would be required to use the block grant money -– equal to their Obamacare allocations -– to establish health savings accounts for residents along with a high deductible plan for low-income residents.

Pollack, the Families USA executive and a strong advocate for the Affordable Care Act, said the Cassidy proposal has too many flaws to be workable.

For one, he said, the Affordable Care Act's requirement that almost all Americans buy health insurance generates the needed numbers of young healthy enrollees to enable insurers to cover people with pre-existing conditions at affordable rates. Take away that mandate, he said, and insurance premiums would have to rise significantly to cover those with health problems.

Cassidy's bill requires insurance companies to base premiums on the age of the recipients, not on their health status. Pollack said the only way to achieve that would be "much higher premiums" for all enrollees, healthy or not.

Pollack said another major flaw is that the payments to people for setting up health savings account under the Cassidy bill are not means tested. That means a person earning $85,000 would get the same subsidy as someone earning $25,000 –- and that person earning $25,000 "would have a much harder time" turning that subsidy into affordable coverage.

"It's all the more outrageous given that all Congress has to do to fix the law (if the Supreme Court rules in favor of the plaintiffs) is to change a few words and say, as Congress intended, that people enrolled in both federally run and state run marketplaces are eligible for subsidies," Pollack said.

Troy, the Hudson Institute health analyst and former deputy secretary for the Department of Health and Human Services during the George W. Bush administration, calls the Cassidy plan a "much better" fix for the nation's health care challenges than the Affordable Care Act.

Troy said that health savings accounts, a key component of Cassidy's plan, provide people with the means to control their health care options -- choosing whether to use the federal money, and any contributions they might want to make, to purchase insurance, or use it to pay out-of-pocket expenses, or some combination of the two. He likes a feature in the Cassidy bill that requires health care providers to make available their "cash prices," for medical procedures so people can better shop for the best prices and quality.

All this, Troy said, makes people spend health dollars more carefully, which he predicts will lead to lower health care costs.

Troy also said the Cassidy bill deals with one of the biggest complaints by conservatives –- that the Affordable Care Act forces most people to get health insurance and businesses, with more than 50 full-time workers, to provide coverage to workers.

"Sen. Cassidy is a very smart and thoughtful person who has come up with an alternative that insures much more personal freedom, while providing a more efficient of way of insuring that people get health coverage," Troy said. Troy maintains the requirement that businesses with 50 or more full-time workers provide employer sponsored health care has led to cutting workers hours from full time to part time, a charge Democrats say has been greatly exaggerated by critics of the health care law.

Troy said he personally favors means testing of benefits, but wants to look more carefully at the Cassidy proposal, which doesn't means test benefits. Still, Troy said, he's encouraged that the Cassidy bill would phase out benefits for people when they reach the 25 percent tax bracket -- $85,000 to $90,000. "One can argue that's a form of means testing," Troy said.

Under the Affordable Care Act, a single person is eligible for subsidies if they earn $11,670 to $46,680. For a family of four, the income range is $23,850 to $95,400. The subsidies mean that health insurance for those eligible will cost between 2.01 percent and 9.56 percent of income for the silver plans -- with the lower percentages for the lowest qualifying incomes and highest for those closing in on the highest eligible incomes.