Jeff Forman/JForman@News-Herald.com Michael Oatman, of Euclid, pushes a ball against a wall during rhytmic stabilization exercise March 18 with help from student physical therapist Emmanuel Zerbo at the Tri-C Health Wellness and Preventative Care Center at the metro campus in Cleveland.

Michael Oatman suffered a stroke in January that left him without feeling in his right hand.

As a playwright, writing and typing are important parts of his work but when he first entered Cuyahoga Community College’s Health, Wellness and Preventative Care Center he couldn’t write his name or clench a fist.

“I used to be able to type 80 words a minute,” he said. “It’s a little slower now.”

Oatman said he recently signed up for health care under the Affordable Care Act, but did not have insurance when he first came to Tri-C for occupational therapy.

Tri-C’s Health, Wellness and Preventative Care Centers have been providing low-cost health care services to uninsured and underinsured adults since 2009.

In addition, the service offers students studying to become medical assistants, physical therapy assistants, occupational therapy assistants and dieticians experience in a clinical setting

under the supervision of licensed health care provides.

Oatman, a Euclid resident, first heard of the program after his mother came to the center a few years ago and had a good result after a rotator cuff injury.

He’s come to the center at the Metropolitan Campus in Cleveland every week, even in the bad winter weather, occupational therapist Debbrah Lisy said.

Tri-C runs centers at the Metropolitan Campus and the Eastern Campus in Highland Hills, which were started with a grant from the U.S. Department of Labor.

Since 2010, more than 2,500 appointments have been made at the centers, said Heather Foos, director of both preventative care centers.

Although the centers started providing services in 2009, Foos said the idea was a long time in the making.

“The reason we got the grant was for developing workforce training in Cleveland because there’s such a need for the programs we offer here,” she said. “The idea was to help train additional students while providing a community service for people who either don’t have insurance or have exhausted all their insurance for the services we have.”

Working at the center is a required part of the students’ curriculum. Students work at the center twice, once in their first year and again in their second year.

“Their perspective changes with the more schooling they get,” Foos said.

Services provided include screenings for blood pressure, glucose and cholesterol, physical and occupational therapy, physical rehabilitation for daily living and nutritional coaching.

“Our patients, it’s kind of unique, they don’t need a doctor’s referral to come here,” Foos said. “We’re what is called a direct access clinic. So anyone can be seen. They don’t have to go through a doctor, some of our patients don’t have a doctor.”

Judith Paradis, who is in her second semester studying to become a physical therapy assistant, said the program is challenging, but in a good way.

“For me it’s completely helpful,” she said. “It’s exactly what I need for learning. When you’re sitting in a classroom, you’re just writing on paper. But here, you get to see what you’re learning in action and really get to apply it. So it’s worlds different than the classroom. It’s amazing to apply what you’re learning and see how it affects and helps the patient too.”

The center also has a collaboration with Cleveland State’s Doctoral Physical Therapy program and works in conjunction with Tri-C’s students in the fall semester.

“They would do the physical therapy evaluations under supervisions and our students would help carry out the plans,” Foos said.

The Ohio College of Podiatric Medicine also comes twice a month to provide free foot screenings and in conjunction with Cuyahoga County, Tri-C offers HIV screenings at various times throughout the year.

Foos said physical or occupational therapy evaluations are $10 and $5 for a follow-up visit. Bone density, cholesterol and glucose screenings are $15 total. Blood pressure screenings and nutritional coaching sessions are free.

Services are offered in the fall and spring semester when classes are in session. The Metropolitan Campus’ center is open on Tuesdays between 2 p.m. and 5 p.m. The Eastern Campus’ center is open 2 to 5 p.m. on Thursdays.