State Sen. Lee Zeldin defeated former Securities and Exchange Commission lawyer George Demos on Tuesday in a Republican primary for the 1st Congressional District, representing a wide swath of eastern Long Island, in a race that was watched by both national political parties.

With 88 percent of precincts reporting Tuesday night, Zeldin had 63 percent of the votes to Demos’ 37 percent, in unofficial returns. He now faces incumbent Democratic Rep. Timothy Bishop, a former university provost, in November. Bishop is seeking his seventh term. Zeldin ran unsuccessfully against Bishop in 2007 before being elected to the state senate in 2009.

A National Republican Congressional Campaign spokesman, Ian Prior, last week called Bishop “one of the most vulnerable Democrats in the country.” He cited Bishop’s support of the Affordable Care Act and an ongoing ethics complaint that was filed against Bishop during the 2012 campaign.

Prior said the NRCC is reserving $1.1 million in cable TV time for ads.

More than $1.2 million was spent on the GOP primary by outside super political action committees seeking to portray candidates they opposed as too liberal to merit Republican support, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. The PACs have spent $854,000 against Zeldin and $380,000 against Demos.

Meanwhile, in Nassau, Nassau County District Attorney Kathleen Rice won the Democratic primary for the 4th Congressional District, beating Kevan Abrahams, who is the leader of the Democratic caucus in the county legislature, according to unofficial returns. In the Republican primary, former Port Authority of New York and New Jersey official Bruce Blakeman defeated political outsider Frank Scaturro, who has made several unsuccessful bids for the nomination.

Rice and Blakeman will face off against each other in the general election in November for the chance to replace retiring Democratic Rep. Carolyn McCarthy in New York’s 4th Congressional District.

McCarthy became a national spokeswoman in the gun-control debate after her husband was killed and son wounded in the 1993 Long Island Rail Road massacre. She announced earlier this year she would not seek a 10th term in the House after disclosing she was fighting cancer.