State officials are giving Pennsylvania insurers until the end of the year to officially revise policies to reflect the state's position that 3-D mammograms must be available for the same price as older two-dimensional exams.

In the meantime, the state expects insurers to make a "good faith" effort to immediately honor the policy, according to the notice sent to insurers by the state.

The state further said it expects the policy to have no significant cost impact on insurers, and therefore won't allow insurers to request changes to already-approved health insurance premiums.

A 1992 state law says mammograms, an important test for breast cancer, are preventive care that insurers must provide free of change for women 40 and over, and for younger women whose doctor recommends it.

State insurance department spokesman Ron Ruman says the state's position is that, for insurance coverage purposes, newer 3-D mammograms are no different than traditional mammograms, and women should face no extra charge.

However, the state has been hearing from women who faced additional charges of $50-$60 after receiving 3-D exams, Ruman said.

That led to an announcement by the Gov. Tom Wolf administration this week that such charges aren't allowed.

Three-dimensional mammograms, also called tomosynthesis, were approved in the United States in 2011. They are similar to regular mammograms, except the x-ray device moves around the breast, taking x-rays at various angles and creating a three-dimensional image. The process, which requires a more expensive machine, is considered better at detecting problems that can be missed when the breast is squashed during normal mammogram.

Dr. Scott Wise, director of the woman's imaging center for PinnacleHealth-owned Tristan Radiology Specialists, says it's "probably the best development that's come out in woman's imaging in the past 20 years or so."

A three-dimensional imaging machine costs more and, since it gives more images, it's more time-consuming and expensive to evaluate the results, Wise says.

But he cites studies done at Tristan, and outside research, suggesting tomosynthesis will lead to substantial savings. That's because it detects more cases of breast cancer, yet does so without the uncertainties which are common in conventional mammograms, and which trigger more expensive diagnostic mammograms.

He says three-dimensional mammograms are the rare technological advancement that increases the number of problems detected, while reducing the number of false positives.

"Hopefully, everyone will see a cost savings from this. I'm optimistic about that," he said.

In the past, Tristan has charged an extra $35 to patients who received a 3-D mammogram and whose insurance didn't cover it.

The 1992 state law regarding mammograms applies to commercial health insurance plans sold in Pennsylvania, including those made available under the Affordable Care Act.

But the policy, as with many state insurance regulations, doesn't apply to self-funded plans, which is the type of coverage offered by most large companies.

However, Ruman said self-funded plans tend to abide by the regulations which apply to commercially sold plans.

He further said "we're hopeful the federal government will soon have that opinion [that 3-D should be available at no extra cost] and it will apply to everyone."

A spokesman for Susquehanna Township-based Capital BlueCross said, "We will be working with the Insurance Commissioner to fully understand and implement the announcement and new requirement for the continued good health of our community as quickly as possible."

A PinnacleHealth spokeswoman said, "PinnacleHealth has been offering 3-D mammography for several years with no additional fees for patients. PinnacleHealth physicians advocate for the use of 3-D imaging for diagnostic mammograms. For women with dense breasts, adding tomosynthesis for mammogram screening can help diagnose cancer sooner or reduce unnecessary testing."

Ruman said people who believe they were charged extra for a three-dimensional mammogram should call the insurance department's complaint line at 877-881-6388 or fill out a complaint at the department's website.