You know Donald Trump as a businessman, family man, and a television celebrity. He may be in the spotlight often, but do you really know the real Mr. Trump when he is behind the cameras? Here are 10 interesting things you did not know about him:

1. Trump Prefers Cherry-Vanilla Ice Cream

Not chocolate, nor strawberry, Trump is a fan of hamburgers, meatloaf, and cherry-vanilla ice cream. For those of you who did not know, he hates pizza dough and prefers sticking to only the toppings by scraping them right off, oh and also, he prefers eating lunch at his own desk. Family meals and dinner times are also one of the things that he loves the most.

2. He Established an Empire worth Billions

Being a real estate developer, senior Trump had a massive net worth of $250-400 million ready to be inherited by his children. After graduating from Wharton School at UOP (University of Pennsylvania) with a degree in Economics, Donald Trump took over his father’s real estate business. According to his late father, Trump was always the boy who could turn everything he touched to gold. By 2011, his contributions to his father’s network help the network reach a net amount of $2.4 billion, now at over $8 billion.

3. He dislikes handshakes

“The Pull In” is a technique he created to let the people know how he may be feeling when he is forced to do something he dislikes. Trump just does not like handshakes, if he is forced to shake hands, he puts the individual in an uncomfortable position in which he pulls them near his body. He has pulled this one on several fans, Bill Ranic, winner of The Apprentice, and even Mitt Romney.

4. He is widely blamed for the demise of the USFL

Being a major player of golf, Trump has a soft spot for football as well. In 1983, Trump purchased his own team for United States Football League (USFL) called the New Jersey Generals. Unfortunately he was not successful with the team when he wanted to merge the league with the National Football League; the USFL soon came to an end.

5. Very Confident in Making Bold Statements

When it comes to women, Donald Trump is known to be a charmer, he has been married to an actress, Olympic star, and has currently tied knots with a former model turned designer, Melania Trump. In 2004, Trump made a bold statement openly claiming that all the women associated with him on the sets of The Apprentice would always flirt with him, consciously and unconsciously.

6. He had his own board game similar to Monopoly

Trump: The Game has an outline similar to Monopoly, and was launched in 1989. Unfortunately the game did not get a lot of success and was discontinued due to its review and being on the shelves for too long. He is the only presidential candidate who had a board game after them, till date.

7. Started His Own Vodka Brand

For someone who does not drink coffee, tea, or alcohol, does not smoke, nor takes drugs, starting a business associated with Vodka was something out-of-the-box for him, that’s just how he like to do things. In 2006, Trump Vodka hit the shelves with the slogan, “a superb product and beautifully packaged.” However, consumers thought otherwise and Trump Vodka was no more.

8. Almost had his Golden Locks Shaved in a Bet

In 2007, Trump almost lost his locks after placing a bet with the Chairman of WWE, Mr. McMahon. Given the title of Battle of the Billionaires, both tycoons selected a representative for their side. The bet was that the loser had to shave off his head, and the winner will ‘help’ them do just that. Trump won the bet; Vince McMahon was accompanied by him to help shave his hair in WrestleMania XXIII.

9. Won an Award for his Acting Skills

Trump appeared as himself in the 1989 production of Ghost’s Can’t Do It. The story is basically about a man killing himself, goes to the other side, and realizes he want to live again through possession, makes his wife kill a man so that he can return. It won the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Picture and got Trump the Worst Supporting Actor Award. It even won Worst Actress, Worst Director, Worst New Star (Trump was nominated), Worst Supporting Actress, and more.

10. Invites Obama to play Golf- Trump Rules and Regulations Apply

As much as Trump loves golf, he despises Obama; he invited the President to play golf with him at any course owned by the billionaire, under the condition that the President must end his term early. He criticized the President by saying he is not a great cheerleader, and that Obamacare is an idea he would repeal and repeat.