An increase in Medicare premiums set by the federal government could drastically raise the cost of Medicare for some Massachusetts seniors – and could blow a multi-million dollar hole in the state budget, if Congress does not act.

"This potential unbudgeted cost to taxpayers is of great concern," Gov. Charlie Baker wrote in a letter to Massachusetts' congressional delegation.

According to Baker, the Medicare premium increase could cost the state $38 million to cover just three months during the current fiscal year, and $150 million in fiscal year 2017, which begins next July. The state pays Medicare premiums for poor seniors through MassHealth.

For some seniors on Medicare, their monthly premiums could rise from $104.90 to $159.30, or higher for wealthier seniors. This 52 percent jump would be the largest increase in Medicare's history.

The increase is scheduled to go into effect on Jan. 1, 2016. The state would have to make its first payment through MassHealth in April 2016.

In Massachusetts, 179,000 seniors would have to pay the increases themselves and another 229,000 low-income seniors would have the increases paid for by the state, according to U.S. Rep. Jim McGovern's office.

Medicare Part B covers things like doctor's visits, x-rays and lab tests for seniors over age 65 and some disabled people.

The cost of Medicare is increasing because health care costs are rising. But the higher costs will not be spread out among all Medicare recipients. Due to the way federal Medicare is structured, seniors whose premiums are deducted directly from their Social Security checks can only see their premiums increase by the amount of their cost-of-living adjustment. However, in 2016, there will be no cost-of-living adjustment to Social Security benefits. So the 70 percent of seniors whose Medicare premiums are deducted from their Social Security checks will not see any premium increase.

That means the other 30 percent of Medicare recipients must shoulder the entire burden of the cost hikes. This includes: new enrollees; state and federal government workers who get public pensions, not Social Security; Medicare beneficiaries with annual incomes over $85,000, who already pay higher premiums; and low-income individuals whose premiums are paid for by state Medicaid.

In addition to the premium increase, all Medicare beneficiaries will see an increase in their deductibles next year, from $147 to $223.

Bills pending before Congress would freeze Medicaid premiums at their 2015 levels and authorize federal funding to pay for the additional costs. In Massachusetts, McGovern, U.S. Rep. Katherine Clark, and U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren, all Democrats, have signed on to these bills.

"Unless Congress acts, many seniors will find Medicare premiums and deductibles simply unaffordable next year. It would be unconscionable for Congress not to act immediately to ensure that health care remains affordable for all of America's seniors," McGovern said in a statement.

U.S. Sen. Edward Markey, D-Massachusetts, said in a statement, "I am very disappointed that Republicans in Congress have refused to hold a vote on common-sense legislation to stop the upcoming increase in Medicare Part B premiums for more than 400,000 Massachusetts recipients. After a lifetime of work, our seniors deserve the security that Medicare and Medicaid provide, without facing dramatically increased costs."

State Sen. James Welch, D-West Springfield, chairman of the Joint Committee on Health Care Financing, said state officials will pay close attention to the Medicare issue, even though a fix will have to come from the federal government.

"The last thing we want to have is any instability in the market, especially within the market of people on fixed incomes," Welch said.

The state is already facing high health care costs, particularly in MassHealth. "Additional financial burden on the commonwealth is something that we have to take very seriously," Welch said.

Andrew Scholnick, senior legislative representative for AARP, which represents retirees, said around 16.5 million seniors nationally will be hit by the Medicare premium increase, of whom 9 million are on Medicaid, so their premiums are paid by state taxpayers. The total cost to states nationally is estimated to be $2.3 billion.

Scholnick said AARP is urging Congress to act quickly to mitigate the increases. But the difficult part is determining where the federal government will find money to pay for rising Medicare costs, if it does not come from Medicare recipients.

"We're optimistic something will get done by the end of the year, but we don't know what form it will be," Scholnick said.