TRENTON — A healthcare consultant that recommended closing Saint Michael's Medical Center based its conclusions on erroneous data that overstated the number of empty beds inside the Newark facility, top officials at the beleaguered hospital said Thursday.

Navigant Consulting released a controversial report in March concluding there are too many hospital beds in Newark to be financially sustainable, and recommended turning Saint Michael's and East Orange General Hospital into outpatient facilities.

Saint Michael's, a small community hospital operating in the red, is seeking approval from the state Department of Health and the Attorney General's Office to be acquired by Prime Healthcare Services of California. Health Commissioner Mary O'Dowd has said she is using Navigant's report to inform her decision.

In a conference call with reporters, Saint Michael's executives said they have warned the state that Navigant's conclusions are flawed.

Navigant said an average 47 percent of the hospitals beds were occupied in 2013 but that figure is significantly off the mark, said David Ettinger, a lawyer and hospital finance expert retained by Saint Michael's. That year, 77 percent of the hospital's 147 beds were filled, Ettinger said, who said he could not understand Navigant's mistake. "They had no source for the information than us,' he added.

Saint Michael's is licensed for 357 beds, but the hospital voluntarily cut its bed-count to 147 and used the free space for diagnostic testing and other services, according to hospital officials.

Navigant's spokeswoman could not immediately be reached for comment.

Ettinger said Navigant also glossed over the number of Newark residents who would likely need to seek hospital care outside the city if both Saint Michael's and East Orange General closed.

Using Navigant's own analysis of hospital usage based on Newark zip codes, 1,807 people who used Saint Michael's and 1,730 people who relied on East Orange would need to seek care outside the city, he said.

Ettinger said the recommendation to close Saint Michael's and East Orange hospitals is based on the national trend influenced by the Affordable Care Act that promotes outpatient and preventive care. But Newark bucks that trend. Emergency department visits are up 10 to 15 percent from the prior year because there is a lack of primary care doctors who accept Medicaid.

"There will be more need in the city, not less. This is a challenged population. We have a very sick population in the Newark area," said David A. Ricci, president and CEO of Saint Michael's.

"We believe that this further examination of Navigant's projections makes clear that Navigant's vision would spell healthcare disaster for the people of Newark," Ricci added.

Ricci said he met with state health officials Wednesday to discuss how soon they would decide whether Prime will be allowed to acquire Saint Michael. Prime announced its intentions to buy the hospital in February 2013.

State officials indicated they had remaining questions they would soon submit in writing, and until all questions were answered, they would not make a decision, Ricci said. The health department has a 90-day after it deems a sale application complete to make a recommendation, giving the commissioner 120 days to approve or deny the sale, he added.

"The ball is in the state's court until we get the questions," Ricci said.

This is the hospital's second critique of the Navigant report. Its first analysis predicted the loss of hospitals would drive up costs because Barnabas Health would have a near monopoly in the Newark area.

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.