Topics: Body Wars, Boob size, Bras, Breasts, Coupling, Editor's Picks, Life stories, Los Angeles, Love and Sex, Sex, Life News

His head rests on my chest. We are naked, but he is unaroused. My push-up bra with extra padding lies on the floor. Was it a form of womanly deceit to hoist my small breasts up in cushioned cups, a bit of self-promotion to the coveted size C I’ve always longed for? Earlier in the evening when I tipped back a martini with extra olives, his eyes locked on my falsified feminine pillows. Now in bed together, I think of signposts, yellow and black, which warn of wet, winding roads ahead. But mine bears a straight line.

I turn to the window. The moon, like my heart, is almost full, but never quite. I’ve been single for three years now. When I first moved to Hollywood, I dated a TV showrunner. Accustomed to giving feedback against an audition line of beautiful actresses, he immediately saw my issue. “You’re not a girly girl,” he pointed out. “You know what you should do? Go buy some sexy nighties. Get in touch with your femininity.”

My heart wanes a little just remembering. I had taken his advice and gone to Victoria’s Secret to face down my insecurity over lingerie. Teenage girls ran through the store, giggling and laughing. They hurried back to try on bright pink bras and lacy hip huggers.

In the fitting room, it wasn’t long before the attendant knocked. “Need anything?”

“I have the smallest sizes. They just don’t fit.” I cracked the door to pass her items.

“Did you try on any push-up bras?” Before I could reply, she’d gone and come back with one in leopard print, the other a sultry shade of lavender. The Miracle Bra — the name held promise: make me more, maybe enough. But the showrunner didn’t notice. As he wolfed down yellowtail from a sushi platter, he simply said, “You’re more a guy’s girl. We should just be friends.”

His guy’s girl comment might not have bothered me so much, except it was true. I was raised by my father. He taught me to shoot a rifle and hunt wild boar. I can bait a hook and gut a fish with two precisely placed slices at the gills. He often took me to the driving range and snuck me into the clubhouse for a Shirley Temple. I loved this time with my father, but he certainly didn’t give me any helpful hints on how to be a woman.

My strategy of supplementation began in preparation for the eighth grade spring dance. My stepmother, who had large D-size peaches and an apple behind, took me shopping. I hoped that by some miracle of lighting or by finding the right dress my body would become more like hers, but the dressing room mirrors magnified my bony, flat body from all angles.

The first dress fit like a burlap sack. Where the cleavage should be framed, my ta-tas like tadpoles swam laps and poked their heads out for air. The dress I loved most was a blue-and-white strapless. It had a white slip beneath and an underwire that ran against the ribs and extruded out to make room for the womanly wonders I did not possess. Looking in the mirror, I was curvaceous; peeking beneath, two dirty pennies lay atop my flesh.

At the dance, the tissue I had used to stuff my strapless bra became loose and smashed, so I was forced to take breaks and repackage. The dress wasn’t my fault; the stuffing wasn’t my fault. I didn’t have a mother.

When a slow song came on, a cute boy named Marlon asked me to dance. We swayed as one that night, but when Marlon made eyes at me the next day, without my toilet tissue titties, I didn’t think he’d really be interested.