After the Republican-led Congress passed a $1.1 trillion omnibus budget bill, which was subsequently signed into law by President Obama, conservative talk radio host Rush Limbaugh said on The Rush Limbaugh Show last week, “The country was just sold down the river again by your very Republican Party.”

Limbaugh cited the bill’s funding of Planned Parenthood, its funding of what he called Obama’s immigration, refugee resettlement, and climate change agendas, and its delayed enforcement of “the punitive” aspects of the Affordable Care Act to allegedly “prevent people from learning what they are” as examples of the Republican Party’s “repeated stabs in the [backs]” of conservative activists.

“There is no Republican Party! You know, we don’t even need a Republican Party if they’re gonna do this. You know, just elect Democrats, disband the Republican Party, and let the Democrats run it, because that’s what’s happening anyway,” he said.

[RELATED: Reps. Amash, Massie Blast Congressional Spending Bill for ‘Unconstitutional’ Surveillance Measures]

Limbaugh complained that the Republicans who overwhelmingly won congressional elections in 2010 and 2014 on promises to cut spending instead became obsessed with avoiding disagreements with establishment Democrats that could result in a government shutdown, making it impossible for Republicans to use Congress’ power of the purse as leverage in negotiations.

“Everything Obama wanted, everything he asked for [in the budget], he got. You go down the list of things, it’s there,” complained Limbaugh.

[RELATED: Limbaugh on Trump: ‘A Genuine Conservative Would Not Go after Cruz This Way’]

He added, “And this is causing some people to wonder if they just dreamed all that stuff about Boehner resigning. And then other people are wondering if they even dreamed all that stuff about the Republicans winning the largest number of seats they’ve had in Congress since the Civil War. We had two midterm elections in 2010 and 2014, which were landslide victories for the Republican Party. The Democrat Party lost over a thousand seats nationwide in just those two elections. People went to the polls in droves wanting exactly what was rubber-stamped [in the bill] [to be] stopped.“