JERSEY CITY— Silvia Perez, the manager of a Jersey City McDonald's franchise store, is 43 years old — but "I look 36," she quickly adds in a quiet aside, before bursting into laughter.

Today, Perez can easily make jokes in English, on top of holding conversations, but not long ago she struggled when trying to say more than a few words.

A Jersey City resident who immigrated to the U.S. in 1991 from Honduras, Perez is one of 15 graduates of a free English as a Second Language (ESL) program that was started in 2006.

Its officiator? Mickey D's.

Called "English Under The Arches" (EUA), it is part of the fast food franchises's larger "Archways to Opportunity" education program that launched in 2015.

Jersey City, where Perez works, is considered the most diverse city in America, where more than 9 percent of public school students (2,600) need to take English-learning courses. About 43 percent of Hudson County residents are Latino, according to the U.S. Census, including many immigrants. English is a struggle for many area immigrants, some of whom recently took advantage of bilingual health fairs to enroll in Obamacare.

While franchise owners said they did not know of other fast-food restaurants with similar programs, Starbucks has a social responsibility program of its own, that helps finance college for its workers.

Bilingual fairs help Latinos sign up by Obamacare deadline

The first N.J. EUA class of 16 employees, from a McDonald's franchise based in Fairfield, graduated this summer, officials said. Three students came from French-speaking Haiti, and the other students spoke Spanish.

Perez was in N.J.'s second graduating EUA class, which was honored by New Jersey State Assemblyman Raj Mukherji. Her Union City-based McDonald's franchise is owned by a mother and daughter who run a total of 11 McDonald's in N.J.

"English Under the Arches":The facts Officially launched in: 2015 Total graduates: almost 4,000 managers and supervisors to date Total N.J. graduates to date: 31 Overall graduation rate: 76% Overall improvement rate: 84% 1 or more level improvement on the BEST Plus Standardized Language Test Restaurant retention rate of graduating students 1 year after class: 88% Retention rate 2 years after class: 78% Retention rate 3 and 4 years after class: 70% *Info provided by McDonald's

Perez took an intensive "basics" English course, from October through mid-December, she said. She will go on to take four other McDonald's-tailored courses for English learning: "Shift Conversation," "Shift Writing" and "Conducting Performance Reviews," McDonald's officials said.

Her next course starts Feb. 4, Perez said.

"I need more English, more classes, but the program helped me a lot. Now it's easier to communicate to the customers," Perez said. "I feel confident, you know?"

All of Perez's fellow graduates are from Spanish-speaking countries, including Honduras, Peru, Ecuador and Mexico, and work at their franchise owners' different restaurants in Newark, Jersey City, Irvington, Parsippany and East Orange.

Jessica Quintana owns the franchises with her mother, Celest, who came to the U.S. from Spain at 9 years old, only knowing Spanish. Her mother learned English through the Newark public schools and TV, Quintana said.

"To give them something that she didn't have, it's inspiring," Quintana said. "They can just continue on bettering themselves... A lot of them have children that were born in this country so this is going to help them do homework with their kids. This just helps everyone all around."

The program teaches English, as well as McDonald's lingo and language for improved customer service, she said.

ALSO: Starbucks college program allows South Jersey workers to stay close to home

Quintana said she suggested the program to employees like Perez, who is "very smart" and "very hard-working," and who she believed would stay with the company.

Perez has worked 11 years for Quintana and her mother, who both speak Spanish.

Perez said learning English was difficult because she worked long hours in a coat factory for years after coming to the U.S., with co-workers who also only spoke Spanish. Then, she worked in McDonald's making sandwiches with other people who didn't speak English, she said. She investigated ESL programs, but cost and time was an issue.

EUA takes place from 9:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. several days a week and is led by an ESL teacher sent by McDonald's, Perez said, and she was paid her normal wages as she learned.

Perez said the language skills have helped make her feel more comfortable talking with customers. She even has dreams of maybe one day owning "my own restaurant, a McDonald's restaurant," she said.

Laura Herzog may be reached at lherzog@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @LauraHerzogL. Find NJ.com on Facebook.