Continuous therapy topped fixed-duration treatment for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma in a retrospective review that will be reported during the American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting, which begins May 30 in Chicago.

Other oncology-related news in this edition of OncoBriefs includes a possible therapy to minimize penile shrinkage after radical prostatectomy and regulatory approvals for drugs used to treat a type of leukemia and colorectal cancer.

Continuous Therapy Gets the Nod for Newly Diagnosed Multiple Myeloma

Although continuous therapy prolongs remission duration in multiple myeloma, drug resistance at relapse might adversely affect overall survival. To examine the issue, investigators in Italy and Israel retrospectively analyzed data from two phase III trials that compared continuous versus fixed-duration therapy. The results will be reported by Antonio Palumbo, MD, of the University of Torino in Italy.

Both trials involved patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. One trial evaluated induction therapy with lenalidomide (Revlimid), followed by consolidation, and lenalidomide maintenance (continuous) versus induction and consolidation without maintenance (fixed duration). The second trial compared bortezomib (Velcade)-based induction and maintenance therapy versus bortezomib-based induction alone.

The analysis had three primary outcomes: first progression-free survival (PFS1), defined as the time from start of therapy to first relapse; PFS2, defined as the time from treatment initiation to second relapse; and overall survival.

A pooled analysis of data from both clinical trials comprised 452 patients randomized to continuous therapy and 461 to fixed-duration therapy. Median follow-up was 52 months.

Continuous therapy was associated with significant improvement in all three outcomes:

Median PFS1 -- 35 versus 24 months (HR 0.58, P<0.0001)

Median PFS2 -- 63 versus 47 months (HR 0.69, P=0.0001)

Median Overall Survival -- Not reached versus 70 months (HR 0.70, P=0.0019)

"Prolongation of PFS2 suggests that the clinical benefit observed during first remission is not canceled by a shorter second remission," the investigators concluded. "PFS2 should be included in all continuous therapy versus fixed-duration therapy studies to evaluate the risk of tumor resistance induced by continuous therapy."

PDE5 Inhibitor Reduces Penis Shrinkage after Prostatectomy

Early, continuous treatment with tadalafil (Cialis) after bilateral nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy led to a significant reduction in loss of penile length, a common after-effect of the surgery.

After 9 months of randomized therapy, men treated with daily tadalafil had a mean reduction in stretched penile length of 2.2 mm from baseline compared with a loss of 6.3 mm among men allocated to placebo (P=0.032). Men randomized to tadalafil on an as-needed basis fared worse than the placebo group, losing an average of 7.9 mm in stretched penile length from baseline.

Loss of stretched penile length was a secondary endpoint of the trial, Gerald Brock, MD, of the University of Western Ontario in London, said at the American Urological Association meeting in Orlando. Previously reported results showed significant improvement in erectile function and ability to engage in intercourse among men randomized to daily tadalafil.

The data showed a significant association between preservation of stretched penile length, scores on the erectile function component of the International Index of Erectile Function, and overall sexual satisfaction, he added.

The trial design included a 6-week washout period after randomized therapy, followed by a 3-month trial of open-label daily tadalafil. By the end of open-label therapy, men originally randomized to tadalafil as needed had erectile functions scores that did not differ significantly from those of men who took tadalafil daily during the randomized phase of the study, said Brock.

Oncology Drugs Win Approvals in US, Europe

The FDA has approved panitumumab (Vectibix) plus FOLFOX chemotherapy as first-line therapy for wild-type KRAS metastatic colorectal cancer, according to a statement from Amgen, which markets the targeted agent.

The approval was based primarily on results of two randomized phase III clinical trials demonstrating improved survival in patients who received first-line treatment with panitumumab, a monoclonal antibody against epidermal growth factor receptor. In one trial patients without mutations in KRAS exon 2 had significant improvement in PFS (9.6 versus 8.0 months) and in overall survival (23.8 versus 19.4 months) with FOLFOX plus panitumumab versus FOLFOX alone.

The second trial demonstrated noninferiority for panitumumab versus cetuximab (Erbitux) for treatment of wild-type KRAS metastatic colorectal cancer that had not responded to chemotherapy.

In news on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, the European Union Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CMPH) approved obinutuzumab (Gazyva) in combination with chlorambucil for previously untreated chronic lymphoid leukemia in patients with comorbidities that make them unsuitable for treatment with fludarabine.

Supporting data for the approval applications came from a phase III trial that showed an 86% reduction in the hazard for PFS among patients treated with anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody obinutuzumab and chlorambucil versus chlorambucil alone. Patients also lived longer with the addition of the monoclonal antibody to the chemotherapeutic agent. The combination also reduced the PFS hazard by 61% compared with patients who received rituximab (Rituxan) and chlorambucil.

The CMPH is analogous to an FDA advisory committee, and the final decision rests with the European Commission, according to Roche, which manufactures obinutuzumab (known as Gazyvaro in Europe).