A group of leading health economists are launching a non-partisan research organization featuring health care modeling systems to provide data and analyses on the outlook for the U.S. health care system. The Center for Health and/& Economy (H&E) will be led by former Congressional Budget Office Director and American Action Forum President Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Princeton Professor Uwe Reinhardt, and University of Minnesota Professor Stephen Parente. The 11 member H&E board includes nationally recognized academic experts in health economics, and spans the ideological spectrum.

H&E will be a resource for health care data and will issue projections, analyses, and “scores” of how various health care proposals would affect the U.S. The data and projections are based off two microsimulation models: A “Medicare Model,” analyzing the effects on those 65 plus, and an “Under 65” model analyzing the rest of the population.

The two models will provide insight into how current law or proposed changes affect: the number of insured Americans, the price of health insurance, the efficiency and accessibility of health care, and the federal budget.

Collectively the board of H&E possesses a diverse set of views and a comprehensive library of research upon which H&E analyses are predicated. Short biographies on each of the board members can be found on the Center’s website at: http://healthandeconomy.org/

H&E also has several new reports out today including:

Annual Baseline Report: This report is H&E’s baseline estimation for the state of American health care over the next ten years, for residents under 65 years old. The report estimates the effects of current health care law on insurance participation, premium costs, and the efficiency of health care systems. Read the report Here

Report on Age: This report projects the differentiated effect of current health care law on Americans under the age of 35, as compared to adults between 35 and 65. H&E compares the prices, subsidies, and policies available to young adults with those available to Americans approaching retirement age. Read the report Here

HR 574 Report: This report analyzes the impact of HR 574, the Medicare Physician Payment Innovation Act of 2013, sponsored by Rep. Allyson Schwartz (PA-13), as compared with current law. The proposal repeals Medicare’s “Sustainable Growth Rate” provision, reduces Medicare’s reliance on the fee-for-service payment method, and implements new payment models. Our analysis finds that compared with current law, the proposal increases the federal budget deficit by at least $153 billion over ten years. Read the report Here

Click Here to Read More on H&E.