Junior separates himself from the pack

Nobody ever just gets better.

There's no substitute for hard work and dedication. Jarrett Thollot knows this.

Every morning he went to work at 7 a.m. for a contracting company doing landscaping jobs. The kind of work that can break down and beat up the body, yet each day the Thompson Valley junior to-be would find a way to get a run in his schedule.

"I knew the harder I worked, the more I'd get out of it," he said. "So I just wanted to work as hard as I could to have a great season. Overall, how much work I put in over the summer, I was very surprised at what I got."

What Thollot got was a standout junior cross country season for the Eagles, finishing seventh in the 4A state race with the best time of any area boy runner, posting a 17:10.4 to help him become the Reporter-Herald runner of the year.

Thollot is joined on the all-area team by senior teammate Kaleb Simington, Mountain View's Peter Franklin and Julian Von Holten and Loveland's Marcus Quere.

Thompson Valley coach Matt Norton recognized a new commitment in Thollot's training that went beyond the previous summer. He points to the relationship between Thollot and his older teammate Simington as a big reason why as the two pushed one another to new limits.

Of course it helps when you're born to run.

"We haven't had someone who's as naturally a gifted racer as Jarrett," Norton said. "His mentality on race day is something that probably just about every runner around would aspire to because he has that mix of focus and intensity, and yet he's never nervous. That's a really good combo."

Advertisement

Thollot quickly established himself as the top male runner on the Eagles, culminating in a second straight regional title, where he came from fourth place half a mile out to close in the last 30 meters for the victory.

"I worked way too hard just to come in fourth," he said.

His continued development paid off for Thompson Valley, which already had Simington as an accomplished No. 1, leading the Eagles to a fifth-place finish as a team during the state championships.

Thollot brings up Simington often actually, quickly giving his older teammate credit for his growth. Both love to run Norton said, and neither let a battle for TVHS' top Eagle ruin their friendship or pursuit of team achievement.

"Being No. 1 on a team is one of the best feelings in the world, and I knew it was going to come down to me and Kaleb and we respect each other a lot," Thollot said.

With Simington moving on to run in college, Thollot will enter his senior season the unquestioned leader of the team. He says the plan is to push everyone just as hard as he once was, and that there's no doubt in his mind the team can crack the top three at state.

And if he believes it, the Eagles believe it.

"His personality is one that's attractive to everyone on the team. He's just got that blend of competitiveness and friendliness and ability to relate to everyone on the team," Norton said. "Everyone on the team tends to listen to what Jarrett says. I think the boys are eager to follow him."

Franklin — Mountain View's junior ran the third-fastest time at the state meet for the area, posting a 17:32.6, good for 22nd place.

Von Holten — As a senior for Mountain View he took 31st at the state meet with a 17:39.6, the fourth-best time in the area.

Simington — In his senior season at Thompson Valley he was the second-quickest area time at the state championships with a 17:30.5, which placed him 18th.

Quere — Loveland's junior ran the fastest time for the Indians in the 5A race with a 17:55.6 after leading the Indians all season.

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/RHpreps