Buffs running back shares a special relationship with man who shaped his life

Colorado running back Phillip Lindsay, right, is following in the football footsteps of his father, former Colorado State fullback Troy Lindsay, left. ( / Courtesy photo )

Phillip Lindsay is so amped up on the football field that Colorado head coach Mike MacIntyre calls him the Tasmanian devil.

When Lindsay talks, his words are just as quick.

Lindsay's father, Troy, laughed at that and admitted, "Sometimes I have to slow him down."

It's not easy to reduce Phillip's speed, but over the years, Troy has learned a few secrets. That's one of the tasks of being a dad, and in 30 years of being in that job, Troy has proven to be pretty good.

"He's a great dad, one of them fairy tale kind of dads," Phillip said.

On this Father's Day, Phillip will celebrate the man who raised him in their Denver home. But, really, it's not going to be much different than the average day, because Phillip and Troy are about as close as can be.

"I talk to my pops every day," said Phillip, who is entering his redshirt sophomore year as a running back for the Buffaloes. "I'm always checking in, making sure he knows what's going on with me and seeing his take on everything.

"It's always good to be able to go back to your father and be able to talk to him. A lot of people can't talk to their father about things; I can talk to him about anything."

Troy was a football star at Denver's Thomas Jefferson High School and then played at Colorado State. Since then, he's done a lot of coaching on the football field.

It's not the gridiron that has defined Troy, though. He's now 53 years old and spent the past 30 as a father, and it's a job that he's taken seriously since the start.

Advertisement

"Being a father is great," he said. "I wouldn't trade it for nothing in the world. Being able to go through all the stuff we've been through, and being able to coach them up and fuss at them, and laugh with them and cry with them. I couldn't see my life without them."

Troy and Diane Lindsay have five children, with their two daughters, Sparkle and Cheri, being the oldest. Phillip is the middle child, followed by Zach (a football player at Northern Colorado) and Marcus, who is a sophomore at Denver South.

"To me, I consider every day Father's Day," Troy said.

On the actual holiday, Troy doesn't want gifts or cards from his children.

"I just need them to call me and tell me they love me and that they're doing fine," he said. "I'm good with that."

Troy, of course, loves all of his children, but admits there's a special bond with Phillip.

"We have a real special relationship because he is my oldest son," Troy said.

That relationship has been strengthened through years of interaction, whether it was childhood games, football practices, martial arts, or their shared passion of riding bicycles.

"The most memorable thing with my father I would say is him taking the time out of work and stuff and ride bikes," Phillip said. "That's the thing that comes to mind with my pops. I can go to him and clear my head and we don't talk about football. We just ride."

These rides have been going on for years and still continue. In fact, earlier this week, Phillip said he has a new trail in Boulder he wants to introduce to his dad. Troy can't wait.

"That's our special time together," Tory said. "When we go on those bike rides, I want to get into his mind and the best way to do that is get him on the bike and go to a path and just ride. He just talks. I can kind of figure out what's going on with him, where he's at, just by letting him talk. We may ride two or three hours and just ride, not going anywhere in particular; just ride."

Although Troy has seen Phillip grow up as a football star who is a fierce competitor, he's also instilled in him a love of family and solid foundation of values.

Phillip may not have recognized all of that in years past, but he does now.

"(Father's Day) is very special because my father is everything," Phillip said. "My mom is a rock, but my father keeps everybody in place. My pops is involved in everything we do."

Like his father, Phillip has become known to many as a football player, first at Denver South High School and now at CU. All the yards and touchdowns he's racked up don't compare to the memories he's made with his dad, though.

"My moments are every day I get to spend with him," Phillip said. "I'm proud to say that my pops has been in my life and helped me through this."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.