In her decades-long career in the mental health and counseling field, Ecker Center for Mental Health boss Karen Beyer has seen some big challenges.

She almost went to jail for contempt of court.

The collapse of the Larkin Center's child-assistance programs with only a few days' warning and taking over most of that center's clients.

The Affordable Care Act revolutionizing the agency's method of getting money and paperwork burden.

But the worst, Beyer says, was when drastic state budget cuts rocked Ecker Center's programs in 2008 and 2009. And with the state budget in deadlock now, she and the heads of other Elgin-area nonprofit agencies are crossing their fingers that the crisis of 2009 won't hit them again.

Beyer was the roast-ee on Wednesday of the Elgin Area Chamber of Commerce's CEO Unplugged series, in which chamber officers and then the audience ask the leader of an Elgin-area business or agency everything from how they describe their leadership style to whether they prefer Cubs or Sox.

Elgin Area Chamber of Commerce, HANDOUT Karen Beyer Karen Beyer (Elgin Area Chamber of Commerce, HANDOUT)

Beyer has been executive director for 15 years at the Ecker Center, where 100 employees and numerous volunteers work with 4,000 people a year who are facing such mental issues as hallucinations, bipolar disorder and depression. Treatments range from visits with staff psychiatrists to living in group homes under the supervision of an Ecker staff member.

She said that in 1996 she was working for the Village of Hoffman Estates when she became involved in a landmark Supreme Court decision, Jaffey vs. Redmond and the Village of Hoffman Estates. A female Hoffman Estates police officer had shot a man to death. The man's family sued the village, the cop and Beyer in federal court, charging a civil rights violation. At one point a federal judge ordered her to turn over her records of her psychological counseling sessions with the policewoman.

When Beyer's lawyers countered that these therapist-patient records were confidential, the case went all the way to the Supreme Court. Beyer said the legal battle marked "the low point of my life." A possible jail sentence for contempt hung over her head. And then one colleague noted that if the high court ruled that counseling records were not confidential, "I would go down in history as the person who did that." The justices finally ruled in the village's favor.

She said a bigger professional challenge came when state aid to agencies such as Ecker was cut drastically in 2008 and 2009.

"We lost 17 positions," she said. To keep trained and experienced case managers on the staff, she laid off the support and clerical workers first and shifted the case workers into those jobs until the financial crisis was resolved. The agency also stopped buying new equipment and cut maintenance.

Like those at other not-for-profits, she said, the Ecker staff is watching carefully whether state aid again will be slashed during the budget battles in Springfield. Meanwhile, she said, the Affordable Care Act and changes in Illinois' Medicaid program have required the center to increase its insurance-billing staff from one person to six. "We are functioning more like a private practice ... working with insurance companies" and having to document treatment results, rather than just billing a state agency, she said.

During the personal questioning session, Beyer said she neither plays nor pays much attention to sports. She also doesn't watch TV. But she said she enjoys Motown records and classical music such as the Elgin Symphony. Her favorite movie is "A Beautiful Mind," the true-life story of a mentally ill math wizard.

"I have a great deal of respect for the people who come to us, because they are facing things that really disrupt their lives, yet they're working to get better," Beyer said. "It's wonderful to see their determination."

Sadly, she admitted, scientific progress in the treatment of mental illness has been frustratingly slow for the past few decades, except for developing medicines that have fewer side effects. But she noted that President Obama has made brain research a national priority and said she hopes that will lead to some breakthroughs.

DGathman@tribpub.com