Dallas-based Tenet Healthcare Corp. announced on Oct. 1 that it had finalized a $4.3 billion acquisition of Vanguard Health Systems, which owns Valley Baptist Health System.

On Monday, Tenet CEO Trevor Fetter was in the Rio Grande Valley to discuss the deal and the health care climate in Texas. On the latter score, Fetter expressed some frustration, though not with the decision to expand Tenet’s market share in the state.

Valley Baptist has hospitals in Brownsville and Harlingen.

“It’s a particularly great market for us,” Fetter said. “With this acquisition, we’ve doubled the amount of revenue we have in Texas.”

Tenet previously owned Brownsville Medical Center, which it sold to Valley Baptist 10 years ago. Texas is now Tenet’s largest market, Fetter said, noting that the company has operations in El Paso, San Antonio, Houston, Dallas, Nacogdoches and New Braunfels in addition to the Valley.

With the acquisition, the company has achieved roughly $15 billion a year in annual revenues, he said.

Tenet has 110,000 employees, making it the 65th largest employer in the United States, Fetter said.

“It will be a year of significant growth for us into 2014,” he said.

In addition, Tenet has the second largest number of medical residency slots of any health system in the country, experience that will come in handy with the new demand for residencies a medical school in the Valley will create, he said.

“We operate a number of hospitals that are teaching hospitals for medical schools,” Fetter said.

While Tenet loves the Texas market, when it comes to insuring more of its residents toward the goal of making health care less expensive in general, the state is missing a golden opportunity, he said.

Fetter cites Texas’ refusal to expand Medicaid eligibility as called for in the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

In doing so, the state is rejecting a huge investment in state dollars and allowing countless needy residents to fall through the cracks in terms of insurance — residents that would have otherwise been covered under some form of insurance.

Expanding insurance eligibility would mean fewer people using the emergency room as their primary source for health care, which serves to drive up insurance rates for everyone else, he said.

“The hospital industry in Texas has been very well aligned that (expansion) is the right thing to do,” Fetter said.

“We’re the ones who are actually caring for the people who come in and don’t have insurance, but we’re caring for them in the most expensive possible way, typically the emergency room, and it’s typically after they’ve had some condition that’s been untreated for a very long time.”

“From the industry’s perspective it’s the right thing to do to provide some safety net for people.”

He noted that business groups such as regional chambers of commerce in Austin, Dallas and Houston — groups that tend to lean conservative — support Medicaid expansion and in fact have adopted it as a priority.

“The reason is that employers generally, when you explain it to them, understand that they’re paying for it anyway,” Fetter said. “They’re paying higher insurance rates to help hospitals subsidize care for the uninsured. It’s an incredibly inefficient way to do it.”

Other conservative states where Tenet operates have handled it differently, he said. For instance, in Arizona, a state with politics similar to Texas, the governor found a way working with that state’s legislature to make Medicaid expansion happen, Fetter said.

“An increasing number of Republican governors are finding a path to do this,” he said.

Besides the economic and social benefits of a healthier citizenry and workforce, in terms of simple arithmetic Texas is doing itself a disservice by rejecting Medicaid expansion, Fetter said. The federal government would pay 100 percent of the extra cost initially, then roughly 90 percent over a period of 10 years, he noted.

“The return on investment for the state, if it were just a very cold financial calculation, would be enormous in terms of federal dollars matched for every state dollar put in,” he said.

“And you’re talking about making an investment in the health of the citizens, which makes them more productive, then they’re more employable and they’ll remain on the job longer.

The reason expansion hasn’t happened is that Medicaid has become politicized, Fetter said.

“If we were talking about road construction or the establishment of expansion of military bases, this would have been a very short conversation in Texas,” he said. “Because it’s Medicaid it’s gotten wrapped up in politics.”

sclark@brownsvilleherald.com