There was no “wow” moment. Those may come later in New Hampshire’s presidential primary campaign.

Click to watch News 9's coverage

Instead, it was an historic two hours. Fourteen Republican presidential candidates took turns on stage at the Saint Anselm College Dana Center in the Voters First Forum on Monday night and gave what were in effect to opening statements to rank-and-file New Hampshire GOP primary voters.

WATCH: Responses from all 14 candidates at the forum

In separate one-one-one interviews with moderator Jack Heath of radio station WGIR’s “New Hampshire Today” program, there was tough talk on national security, immigration, cutting the federal deficit, reforming the tax code and repealing the Affordable Care Act. There were several calls for defunding Planned Parenthood in the wake of the releases of controversial videos by a pro-life group.

U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky called himself “a different kind of Republican” and a constitutional conservative. Former New York Gov. George Pataki recalled being Sept. 11, 2001, saying, “I felt the flames.” Former Texas Gov. Rick Perry touted his work to have his state lead the nation in job growth, and on immigration, promised that if he is elected, “the will to secure the border will reside in the Oval Office.”

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and Pataki talked about being elected in heavily Democratic, “blue” states. Ohio Gov. John Kasich said he won 60 percent of the women’s vote in being elected chief executive of the most important general election swing state.

And so it went.

The forum, sponsored by the New Hampshire Union Leader and media outlets in Iowa and South Carolina, was organized in response to Fox News’ decision to limit participation in the first debate of the campaign, scheduled for Thursday in Cleveland, to the top 10 candidates based solely on national polling.

The forum was open to all presidential candidates with active campaigns in New Hampshire. Republican frontrunner Donald Trump and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee chose not to participate. Former Virginia Gov. Jim Gilmore announced his candidacy after the deadline for entry into the event.

Trump, despite his standing at the top of the GOP pack, was not mentioned.

Paul, calling himself a “constitutional conservative,” said that while Americans who are involved in combat against the United States should lose their right to due process. Those who oppose the country, but are not in combat against it, “do get the Bill of Rights.”

He repeated his patented call for less government collection of private records from individuals.

U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas called the Obama administration’s nuclear weapons deal with Iran “the single greatest national security threat facing America.”

He said President Barack Obama, Secretary of State John Kerry and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton “will become the world’s leading financiers of radical Islam” if the deal is approved.

“If this administration is responsible for sending billions of dollars to Iran, and those billions go to jihadists who use that money to murder Americans, Israelis and Europeans, then this administration is responsible,” Cruz said.

U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, meanwhile, called for not only a tougher stance against illegal immigration, but also for modernization of the legal immigration system.

“Legal immigration must be based on merit,” Rubio said, “on whether you are coming to be an American, rather than just to live in America.” Portraying himself as a youthful, optimistic alternative, he said the mood of the nation is “the fundamental question of this election.”

Paul, Cruz and Rubio appeared by satellite after voting on Capitol Hill in favor of de-funding the Planned Parenthood organization. The other 11 candidates appeared live. U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina skipped the vote to instead attend the event.

Former U.S. Sen. Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania focused on a need to restore manufacturing jobs with a new flat tax not only for individuals, but also for corporations.

Kasich said he balanced budgets both on the state and federal levels.

“We need a balanced budget amendment to the constitution, which I have been pushing since I was a very young man,” he said.

Graham of South Carolina said his goal as president is to “put radical Islam in a box and save us from becoming another Greece.”

“As the threats to this country grow,” Graham said, “we’re disarming ourselves and we’re moving to neuter the FBI and the CIA at the time we need it the most.”

Overall, he said, there are “too many terrorists, too much debt, too few jobs.”

Christie said he is the only candidate with a “concrete plan” to reform entitlements. He also promoted his plan in his home state to set up programs to mandate treatment, not prison, for nonviolent drug offenders.

Dr. Ben Carson said the Affordable Care Act “flies in the face of what we are as a nation,” but said it should not be repealed until an alternative is in place. That alternative, he said, should be “something that puts the power back in the hands of consumers and health care providers.”

Carson, in calling for the defunding of Planned Parenthood, said controversial videos that showed organization officials discussing the use of fetal tissue “show the level of depravity we have sunken to as a nation.”

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush said he was “not sure” that ground troops in Iraq are necessary to deal with Islamic terrorists and called for a multinational effort supported by U.S. air power.

Bush warned, “We let our guard down a little bit’ in the fight against terrorism in recent years.

Former business executive Carly Fiorina said it is time for leaders to challenge the status quo and said she has a “proven track record” of doing that in the private sector.

She said Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton, as secretary of state, “lied about Benghazi,” a reference to the Sept. 11, 2012 attack on the U.S. consulate in that Libyan city.

Graham, however, tried to top her, likening what he called Hillary Clinton’s lies about the Benghazi attack to what he called former President Bill Clinton’s attempt to mislead the nation about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky.

Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said he was “so tired of this president trying to divide us,” and said, “We’re all Americans.”

Walker, calling himself “pro-worker and pro-taxpayer,” said President Obama’s Clean Power plan to cut carbon emissions by 25 percent, unveiled Monday, “would be like taking a buzz saw to our nation’s economy. We need a leader in the White House who is going to recognize that balance.”

Pataki called for the elimination of the ACA and the Common Core education program, and for a reduction of the federal workforce by 15 percent.

And, recalling the Sept. 11, 2001 attack on the World Trade Center, said he “walked the streets of lower Manhattan.

“We cannot bow down to radical Islam anywhere,” Pataki said.

The campaign of Democratic presidential candidates Clinton criticized the Republicans as "out of touch," while former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley's deputy state campaign director said "a lot of denial" was heard at the event.