Topics: aol_on, Bernie Sanders, economic justice, Elections 2016, racial justice, reparations, Ta-Nehisi Coates, The Democratic Primary, White Supremacy, News, Politics News

On Tuesday, Ta-Nehisi Coates took Bernie Sanders to task in a widely discussed essay at The Atlantic for declining to support reparations for black Americans.

“No, I don’t think so,” Sanders recently said, when asked point blank if he would support the cause. “First of all, its likelihood of getting through Congress is nil. Second of all, I think it would be very divisive.”

Coates, to say the least, is not satisfied by Sanders’ argument that reparations’ political odds are too long, calling it “a correct observation which could just as well apply to much of the Vermont senator’s own platform.”

Coates continues:

“Sanders is a lot of things, many of them good. But he is not the candidate of moderation and unification, so much as the candidate of partisanship and radicalism. […]Sanders should be directly confronted and asked why his political imagination is so active against plutocracy, but so limited against white supremacy.”

The moral case for reparations is clear: Black people have been robbed for centuries and amends must be made.

The United States has long had a set of policies dedicated to bestowing economic advantage on white people and denying wealth and security to black people, a systematic plunder much more recent than slavery, as Coates and historians like Tom Sugrue and Ira Katznelson (the author of “When Affirmative Action Was White”) make clear.

New Deal housing and labor policies systematically excluded black people, who as a matter of policy were denied homes in government-subsidized white suburbs and isolated in segregated cities. Indeed, the political success of these “progressive” policies was made possible precisely because of their racism, which was key to winning the support of Southern Democrats. Black people were thus denied a key wealth-building asset and are to this day relegated in large numbers to separate and unequal public school systems—a system maintained by current policies like exclusionary zoning that keep poor people out of affluent communities.

“We cannot deny that African Americans suffer in this country disproportionately in all areas, whether it’s economic, social, political, physical, because of white supremacy,” says former Ohio state Senator Nina Turner, one of Sanders’ most high-profile black supporters. “That is in the DNA of this country and we have never fully addressed it.”

Turner, however, sees economic justice and racial justice programs as complimentary. The systematic oppression suffered by black people, as Coates documented in his article “The Case for Reparations,” was in significant part effectuated through economic marginalization and dispossession.

Turner points to Sanders’ support for raising the minimum wage to $15 an hour, which she says would “help the black family.” She says that Sanders has consistently spoken, including to white people, about the need to “eradicate institutional racism. That statement alone, to a majority white audience, says a lot.”

“Maybe he doesn’t call it reparations,” says Turner, but he “talks about institutional racism where he talks about how African-Americans suffer disproportionately.”

Just as economic marginalization was a key tool for maintaining white supremacy, economic justice programs focused on uplifting the poor would have a disproportionately positive effect on black people.