Presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton (R) gestures while standing beside Bernie Sanders during a photo spray of the candidates during the first Democratic presidential debate in Las Vegas, Nevada on October 13. REDERIC J. BROWN/AFP/Getty Images

With exactly one year to go before America chooses its 45th president, voters left, right and center say they crave “authenticity” in their candidates.

And though Americans disagree on exactly what the word means in a political context, nobody can deny that the notion of authenticity is having an unprecedented impact on the 2016 race for the White House.

Fueled by anger at government, partisanship, big money in politics, the hunger for the “real deal” is driving the polls like never before.

Republican Ben Carson, a soft-spoken neurosurgeon who has never held public office but gets high marks from his supporters for his genuineness, is leading Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton — a former secretary of state, U.S. senator and first lady who has been dinged for seeming cloistered, evasive and inauthentic — by 10 percentage points, a Quinnipiac University poll found this past week.

Bernie Sanders, Clinton’s Democratic rival, has drawn surprisingly big poll numbers, record crowds and millions in contributions with his unabashed democratic socialist populism. And Carson has only now caught up to Republican rival Donald Trump, the “authentic” billionaire who dominated the polls all summer despite often-outrageous, headline-grabbing statements.

So what makes a candidate the genuine article?

Is it a barrage of confident bluntness or taking and explaining clear positions on issues? A record of accomplishment in office, or “outsider” status and a vow to shake up the status quo? “Telling it like it is,” or smoothly telling people what they want to hear?

When Sanders, a self-declared democratic socialist with 35 years in public office, and Trump — who moonlighted as a reality TV star — both lay claim to the mantle from opposite ends of the political spectrum, it seems authenticity is in the eyes of the beholder. But the common thread might be saying what you mean without apparent handling or scripting and seeming not to care about the consequences.

“You know it when you see it, and you’ve either got it or you don’t,” said Garry South, a veteran Democratic campaign consultant who has worked with former Gov. Gray Davis, former Controller Steve Westly and 2000 presidential candidate Al Gore. South knows better than most that candidates seen as inauthentic are those who “come off as being stiff and not very comfortable in their own skins — and voters can smell it, they can see it, they can hear it.”

For example, South said Democratic presidential candidate Martin O’Malley came off as professional and articulate last month at the first Democratic debate, yet he sounded “like one of the audio-animatronic robots at Disneyland — programmed and stilted.”

On the other hand, Republican candidate Chris Christie has just gone viral with video of a town-hall meeting last month in Belmont, New Hampshire, at which he spoke about confronting addiction as a disease by discussing his mother’s struggle with cigarettes and a friend’s fatal descent into prescription drug abuse.

Advertisement

“That just came off as one of the most authentic moments that I’ve ever seen in my lifetime in politics,” South said, adding that some might see Christie as an overbearing bully, “but I think he’s authentic; he is what he seems to be.”

Blunt authenticity is what drew Dawn Garibay, 41, of Antioch, to Trump, and turned her off to most of the other candidates.

“Sometimes I feel candidates don’t say what they feel because other people might take it out of context, or it’s not really what people want to hear,” said Garibay, a mother of three who works as a care provider for the elderly and disabled. “But if you don’t say how you truly feel, nobody is ever going to know.”

For Vincent Casalaina, 69, of Berkeley, authenticity means the consistency he sees in Sanders’ policy stances.

“What sets him apart most in my mind is his ability to maintain a position over time, If you go back and look at the things he was fighting for in the late ‘60s and early ‘70s, they’re pretty much the things he’s fighting for now,” said Casalaina, a retired videographer. “Those are issues that are core to his being, and it doesn’t matter whether they’re in vogue or out of vogue.”

Since Friday, Carson has been in damage-control mode as he fends off a Politico report that he never was offered a “full scholarship” to West Point, as he claimed in his new book. But Carol Agaliotis, 80, of Morgan Hill, said she “fell in love” with him in 2013 when he spoke out against Obamacare at the National Prayer Breakfast, which President Barack Obama attended. “He confronted Obama when I thought it was very daring to do so -- I didn’t think anyone would have the cojones to do what he did.

“Ben Carson does say what he means and means what he says,” added Agaliotis, a retired foster care home operator for ailing infants, even if he lacks the policy chops of a more experienced politician. “He’s a brilliant man, and he would be able to get people around him who could coach him in the right direction.”

The polls show what authenticity is worth. Clinton’s poll numbers have spiked upward again since her relaxed, personable showing at the first Democratic debate and her calm, cool and collected testimony at House Republicans’ marathon hearing on the 2012 deaths of four Americans in Benghazi, Libya.

Trump, meanwhile, is hailed as a paragon of “telling it like it is” even though his positions on drug legalization, abortion, taxes, gun control, health care, Social Security and Hillary Clinton have all changed dramatically in the past 15 years.

Fellow billionaire businessman Mark Cuban might have summed up Trump’s appeal best:

“I don’t care what his actual positions are,” Cuban wrote in July. “I don’t care if he says the wrong thing. He says what’s on his mind. He gives honest answers rather than prepared answers. This is more important than anything any candidate has done in years.”

Trump couldn’t have gotten away with this in past presidential elections, South said, but “this is a year where moving outside the box and breaking the mold is being rewarded.”

“This year is sort of a breaking point for a lot of people,” he said. “Some of it is disappointment in Obama. A lot of it is disgust with the hyperpartisan maneuvering in Washington. And it’s being driven also by the negativity of the super PACs.”

Republican candidate Jeb Bush’s stiffly delivered attack on rival Marco Rubio’s Senate attendance record at the last GOP debate — and being caught flat-footed by Rubio’s smooth, forceful counterpunch—- underscored how vital firm, eloquent speech is to establishing authenticity, said Kathleen Hall Jamieson, director of the University of Pennsylvania’s Annenberg Public Policy Center.

Voters want someone who can create “a sense of spontaneous interaction with an audience, or at least ... of a deeply held conviction being voiced in real time,” she said. “You’re not hearing from advisers. You’re not hearing from pollsters. You’re hearing from that individual with all the flaws that individual has on clear display.”

It could be argued that voters have always wanted this, said J. Ann Selzer, a political pollster based in Des Moines, Iowa. The desire for authenticity was certainly there in 2012, when “you had one candidate up for one week and another candidate up another week,” she said, as people like Herman Cain, Michele Bachmann and Rick Santorum each had a moment in the sun.

But eventually the “we want something else” rallying cry was replaced by “let’s get it done,” Selzer said, and GOP voters rolled round to establishment favorite Mitt Romney.

Nobody knows whether that will happen again this year. But consider that Cain and Santorum topped the polls for only about two weeks each in the months before Romney clinched the 2012 nomination. Trump has now been leading the GOP polls for almost four months. And Carson has been in second place and climbing for three months. So something seems to have changed.

This year “it’s mattering more perhaps because there are more people fighting for that space” on the GOP ticket, Selzer said. “People are more sensitive this time around to the sense that candidates are going to say one thing and do another — they’re done with that.”

And so even a candidate who lacks a firm grip on policy is OK with many voters who simply want anything but business as usual, Selzer said. “It’s a good thing if a candidate doesn’t know how it works, because hopefully they’ll make it work some other way.”