Posted on by in High School Sports

This slideshow requires JavaScript.

By Gene Phelps

Daily Journal

OXFORD – It wasn’t a pretty sight.

Bassfield flexed its offensive and defensive muscles Friday in the Class 2A state championship game to rip and roar through East Webster 39-20 and win a fourth consecutive state title.

East Webster, which averaged 300-plus yards per game and scored 71 touchdowns, was held to 204 yards total offense. Most of that came in the final eight minutes.

The Wolverines (14-2) scored three touchdowns, starting at the 7:57 mark of the fourth quarter – one on quarterback Jack Wilson’s 4-yard run and the other two on his TD strikes of 33 yards to Malcomb Jones and 20 yards to Miller Hancock.

“You don’t see that every week,” East Webster coach Doug Wilson said of Bassfield’s strong, fast defense. “Nothing we did worked in the first half.”

East Webster’s lone first down of the first half came on the last play – a 13-yard screen pass from Wilson to Chase Keller.

Bassfield (14-2) rushed for 346 yards and finished with 427 yards total offense.

“They execute what they do really well,” East Webster linebacker Luke Wilson said. “They’re the best team we’ve played all year.”

The Yellow Jackets chewed up 74 of those yards on 14 plays on their first possession. The long drive resulted in a 1-yard scoring run by Gerald Reese. A blocked punt set up Bassfield’s second TD, a 1-yard keeper by quarterback Timothy Arnold that gave the Jackets a 12-0 lead midway in the second quarter.

Bassfield’s Sanchez Berry sprinted 77 yards to make it 20-0 with 3:47 remaining in the second quarter.

Extra Points

Turning Point: Bassfield’s dominating defensive play in the first half held East Webster to minus-8 yards total offense.

Point Men: Six players scored touchdowns for Bassfield.

Talking Point: “We put our defense in terrible position today.” – East Webster quarterback Jack Wilson

Notes

• East Webster’s defense stopped Bassfield on downs at the Wolverines 17-yard line early in the second quarter.

• Bassfield sacked or tackled East Webster backs for losses six times in the first half.

• The Yellow Jackets’ strong running attack controlled the clock for 16 minutes in the first half.

gene.phelps@journalinc.com

Twitter: @genephelps