BRUNSWICK | Recently, an image of Jay Floyd has been smiling down from billboards onto a lot of city streets.

That sort of advertising space is normally taken up by insurance agents and lawyers looking for paying customers, but Floyd is a physician looking for people who don’t have much money, if they have any at all.

He is the medical director of Coastal Community Health Centers, a federally qualified nonprofit that provides primary care for the indigent and others from an office just off Scranton Connector north of Glynn Place Mall. The billboards are part of an advertising effort to inform potential patients that the clinic is there and it has a doctor.

Asked who he treats, Floyd says, “Anybody who walks through the door.”

Barbara Myers, the CEO of the clinic, said only about 30 percent have some sort of insurance including Medicare, Medicaid or insurance from the Affordable Care Act.

“They rest are uninsured. Most of them fall through the cracks’’ in traditional health care, she said.

Some work but make too much to qualify for subsidized care or they earn too little to afford premiums, Myers said.

“If they can pay the premiums, they can’t afford the high deductibles so they may as well not be insured,’’ Myers said.

If they can pay but have limited means, the fee is based on a sliding scale. Those who can’t pay and have no insurance still treated, she said.

And Medicare isn’t always as free as many think.

“There are an awful lot of people on Medicare who can’t afford the copayment, which we’ve seen as high as $40. Sometimes, we can waive that,’’ Myers said.

To fill the cracks in the system, the clinic is funded by a grant from the Department of Health and Human Services and overseen by the Health Resource Services Administration.

As Floyd says, “Their job is to give money to people like us who take care of people who don’t have insurance or can’t afford to pay.”

The health center opened officially the last day of February 2014 with a nurse practitioner. It had a part-time physician from July until Floyd arrived in June.

Floyd spent three years in the Navy — primarily delivering babies, he says — and 10 in private practice. Before coming to Brunswick a couple of months ago, he was working in family medicine in Williamsburg, Va.

He sees a lot of the same sorts of things in Brunswick he has seen before, obesity, heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, high cholesterol, many of them the result of poor eating habits and a lack of exercise, Floyd said.

But at the clinic they tend to be worse, he said, because the patients haven’t had access to health care for such a long time.

“I’ve seen things I haven’t seen since medical school. In medical school you see the worst of the worst,’’ he said.

“Hypertension, diabetes are just terrible’’ among his patients, Floyd said.

He also tells people what to do to reverse — or at least ease — some of their health issues, but some don’t take it very well.

“When I tell people they need to exercise, they look at me like they’ve never heard that before,’’ he said.

There are times, though, when medicines are needed that the poor just can’t afford.

“People have seizures who can’t afford available anti-convulsants,’’ Floyd said, “although many of them are cheap.”

Coastal Community Health Center isn’t the only clinic that can help the indigent. Southeast Georgia Health System has a number of them in the area.

Floyd said the challenge for all primary care physicians who help the needy is getting them to specialists when it is necessary.

“Not one physician can know everything or can do everything that needs to be done,’’ he said. “It’s a collaborative effort to care for people. That’s why we went to med school. That’s why we’re in the business.”

Asked why he went to medical school, Floyd said it was a departure from the family business, which is business.

“When I was 5, I had to have surgery, a tonsillectomy, and I enjoyed it,’’ he said.

He wanted to be like his surgeon, but he lost that desire in medical school at the University of Maryland, he said.

Born in Martinsburg, W. Va., he grew up in Hagerstown and Baltimore, Md. He saw many of his classmates graduate after four years, go into business and buy houses and cars while he was still in school.

Now 51, he and his wife have a 22-year-old son who graduated from Savannah College of Art and Design. Floyd said he and his wife enjoy ballroom dancing although they haven’t found a place to dance in Brunswick.

He knows that there are some in the medical profession just for the money, but then there are others, “guys in the trenches,’’ he calls them, working every day treating illnesses.

“I think most of us are driven by that desire, to help people in need,’’ he said.

Myers said she expects Floyd to need help soon with the clinic seeing 17 to 20 patients a day.

Terry Dickson: (912) 264-0405