Sen. Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.) on Saturday backtracked from recent comments in which she seemed to suggest that Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) was getting more attention than she deserved by admitting what's widely known about Washington: everyone seeks attention.

McCaskill told The New York Times recently that she was "confused" as to why Warren had gotten so much attention over her opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an agreement with 11 Pacific countries that the Obama administration is negotiating.

On Saturday, McCaskill tweeted that Warren wasn't at fault for seeking the spotlight and deserved the praise.

We all seek attention (including me!) in Washington. Elizabeth Warren deserves it. She is strong, smart, and focused, — Claire McCaskill (@clairecmc) May 16, 2015

In a story published Friday, the Times pointed out that even though Warren has been the most visible opponent to Obama's trade deal, she has had little to do with the actual trade legislation in Congress. Warren has urged the Obama administration to make the details of the deal public and has said that it could allow banks and corporations to undermine the Dodd-Frank financial regulations -- something the Obama administration has said is untrue.

Obama has said that Warren is "absolutely wrong" on the deal, leading some to say that the dispute between the two Democrats has gotten too personal -- something that Obama has also denied.

Also on HuffPost: Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Warren

1 of 9 Introduces Financial Product Safety Commission Elizabeth Warren announced a bill creating a Financial Product Safety Commission with House and Senate Democrats in March 2009. The body was designed to have oversight over mortgages and other financial instruments to protect consumers against predatory practices. She said if the agency had existed before the subprime collapse then "there would have been millions of families who got tangled in predatory mortgages who never would have gotten them." HuffPost's Ryan Grim reported : Without all these toxic assets on banks' balance sheets, the institutions wouldn't be on the brink of collapse and the recession would be more manageable. "Consumer financial products were the front end of the destabilization of the American economic system." Sen. Charles Schumer's cosponsorship of the bill is notable because of his proximity to Wall Street. The bill's merit, the New York Democrat said, is that it regulates the actual financial product rather than the company producing it. Share this slide:

AP