Longmont Police are seen in the driveway of an apartment where police allege Dynel Lane attacked Michelle Wilkins on Green Place in Longmont on March 18. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Attempted-murder suspect Dynel Lane is scheduled to appear in Boulder District Court on Tuesday for her preliminary hearing — but whether the hearing happens or not remains unclear.

The Boulder County Public Defender's Office hasn't responded to requests for comment on the case, and Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett said on Friday he didn't know whether the hearing would go forward.

Garnett said that generally a motion to postpone would already have been filed with the court, and if the defense intends to waive the hearing, it likely will walk into court on Tuesday and do so without any advance notice.

The defense had not filed any motions to continue as of Friday afternoon, but could possibly do so on Tuesday at the start of the hearing.

Michelle Wilkins (Courtesy Photo)

During the past two years, about 55 percent of defendants in Boulder County have waived their preliminary hearings, according to the district attorney's office.

Prosecutors allege that Lane, 34, bludgeoned and stabbed Michelle Wilkins — who was seven months pregnant with a daughter — with a lava lamp before cutting her baby from her womb on March 18. Wilkins, 26, survived the attack, but her baby did not.

Wilkins had come to Lane's residence after responding to a Craigslist post that advertised baby clothes. Prosecutors said Lane and Wilkins talked for about an hour on a variety of subjects — including Lane's pregnancy — before Lane lured Wilkins into a basement and attacked her.

Advertisement

Prosecutors said that Lane, who is currently in custody at the Boulder County Jail, admitted to cutting the baby out of Wilkins.

University of Colorado clinical law professor Ann England, who has also worked as a public defender, said that in a high profile case, prosecutors are more inclined to put on more evidence at a preliminary hearing, because they know the public and media are watching.

"They are much more likely to have victims and victims' families watching," she said. "They want to show the public how strong their case is."

She said prosecutors will often set aside more time for a preliminary hearing on high profile cases and call more than one witness. In lesser cases, the lead investigator will often be the state's sole witness.

The district attorney's office said in a brief filed in advance of Tuesday's hearing that it intends to call one Longmont detective to testify.

A defense attorney, England said, can use a preliminary hearing to determine the strength of the case and cross examine witnesses who's statements might only constitute a paragraph or two in a police report.

"There is a huge difference in how people seem on paper and how they are in real life," she said. "It is an advantage to be able to cross examine witnesses before trial."

Denver attorney Craig Silverman, who is a former Denver prosecutor, said the defense can use preliminary hearings as an opportunity to gain discovery and "perhaps get a police officer to say something that might be regretted later."

"The defense might want to hear what the police officer has to say," he said. "They are not going to get an opportunity to cross examine the victim. I would be very surprised if the victim testifies at preliminary hearing like this."

Lane, 34, is charged with attempted first-degree murder, unlawful termination of a pregnancy and multiple counts of felony assault. She faces more than 100 years in prison if she is convicted on all counts, some of which carry sentencing enhancements.

Prosecutors allege that after Lane beat, stabbed, choked and attempted to smother Wilkins with a pillow, she left Wilkins unconscious and bleeding in a downstairs bedroom and placed the baby in an upstairs bathtub.

Longmont police said that Lane's husband David Ridley — who was not charged in the case — came home and found the baby lying in a tub. He took Lane and the baby to Longmont United Hospital.

Wilkins eventually regained consciousness and was able to call 911.

The case has garnered a significant amount of controversy, not only because of the gruesome nature of the attack but also because prosecutors could not legally charge Lane with murder for the death of the baby.

Colorado's Republican Senate approved a bill last week that would create a new crime of fetal homicide, but it is not expected to pass in the House of Representatives.

England said that it is possible the defense could postpone the preliminary hearing in a high profile case like Lane's if they are fairly certain that it will be heading to trial. She added that defense attorneys won't have all the discovery in the case this early.

"In a case like this, I can't imagine that the prosecution is going to offer anything but lots and lots of prison time, if they offer anything at all," she said. "It looks like that case is going to trial."

Silverman said prosecutors don't lose preliminary hearings because the probable cause standard is easy to meet in most cases; hearsay is admissible, and victims don't have to testify.

He said the probable cause standard prosecutors will have to meet in the Lane case is even easier because the "evidence seems overwhelming."

"I would not be surprised if the defense waives or seeks to continue the preliminary hearing," he said. "The less people think about this crime, the better for Dynel Lane. But people aren't soon going to forget what she did."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme