Support for state’s ‘Right to die’ bill

I write in response to the front page article on June 5 — “‘Right to die’ bill clears California Senate, 23-14.”

I have been an ordained Presbyterian pastor for 47 years.

Currently, I serve as pastor emeritus at the Sausalito Presbyterian Church.

Having visited numerous care facilities over many years, I have never left one saying to myself, “Someday I hope to be here.”

This in spite of the fact that I see staff and administrative people doing wonderful work.

What I say to myself is, “I hope I die before I need to come to a place like this.”

I’ve been an advocate of the “Right To Die” for many years.

Several years ago, I became a supportive member of www.compassionandchoices.org. I am also active in the Death Cafe movement.

I’m within days of sending my manuscript to the publisher for a book titled: “I Hear You’re Afraid of Dying or Afraid Someone You Love Will Die Before You.” It will be available July 9, 2015.

Today I added the following to the book:

“In June 2015 the California senate voted to move forward with an End of Life Option Act. When I read about it I smiled and immediately felt safer living here.

“If this moves through the Legislature and is signed by the governor, it will allow, with good cause and proper medical attention, we who live here the right to end our life if the reason is confirmed in the judgment of those we trust, those we love, and ourselves.”

— The Rev. George McLaird, Mill Valley

Lower taxes, better pay make housing affordable

“Affordable housing” is just a euphemism for taking from people who can afford and giving to people who cannot.

Aside from the injustice of this, it is never-ending because once you give, there will still be many who cannot afford.

This approaches the concern from the wrong end.

The solution is to create jobs that pay more. Then more can afford.

You do this with policies that reduce the burdens which the government imposes upon business and by educating people to acquire skills that are useful and necessary.

— Frederick J. Hass, San Rafael

Those who served and died in Vietnam were heroes

William Rothman of Belvedere (Readers’ Forum, May 30) insults every Vietnam veteran who died during that war. Shame on you.

He said that war was a disaster and that is not true. He said those who died serving in Vietnam did so “for no meaningful benefit to anyone.”

Advertisement

It appears that Mr. Rothman needs to satisfy his guilt by again saying it was a mistake and only the U.S. military industrial complex benefited.

Oh, have I heard that before.

But the boys and girls who died in Vietnam, died in a noble effort to protect the weak and indefensible civilians of Vietnam and Cambodia. Those right-thinking people knew the evils of communism but Mr. Rothman apparently did not. We were there like we were in Europe and Asia in World War II, to protect the weaker against fascism and tyranny. We were in Vietnam to fight the tyranny of the communists.

The anti-war people were successful in extricating us from Vietnam in 1975. Because of the anti-war effort, from 1975 to 1980, communist Pol Pot of Cambodia killed 1.7 million of this own people. Ho Chi Minh, the communist despot of Vietnam, killed 1 million of those opposed to communism.

This unfolded because we were no longer there to protect them.

Those in the U.S. military who died there were the heroes. There was a great meaning to their lives. They wanted the Vietnamese people to live in peace and freedom.

— Robert A. Casper Sr., San Rafael

Reaction to Jenner’s

well-publicized change

Who believes the image of Caitlyn Jenner featured on the cover of Vanity Fair and featured in the Marin IJ represents anything authentic about who she is or who we are?

The values she is presenting and the support she is getting (or not getting) are old and harmful stereotypes about women as objects.

That’s not a real woman or man. Can’t we support something better about being who we are than that?

— S. Price, San Rafael