Today's top stories:

President Barack Obama vetoed a measure to repeal most of his signature health-care law today, releasing a statement that extolled the virtues of his biggest domestic policy achievement while excoriating Republicans for trying to dismantle it. (Bloomberg News)

The world's most wanted drug lord, Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman, was recaptured in western Mexico today after a fierce pre-dawn gun battle that left five people dead. (Washington Post)

A 30-year-old man who allegedly ambushed and shot a Philadelphia police officer sitting in his patrol car confessed he did it in the name of the Islamic State, presumably referring to the terrorist group ISIS, officials said today. (CNN News)

National news:

The jackpot for Saturday's Powerball drawing is now estimated at $800 million after no one picked Wednesday's winning numbers. (cleveland.com)(CBS News)

At least three witnesses to the Laquan McDonald police killing were questioned for hours, threatened by officers and ordered to change their accounts to match the official Chicago police version of the shooting, the attorneys for the teen's estate say. (CNN News)

The Obama administration is overhauling its faltering efforts to combat the online propaganda of the Islamic State and other terrorist groups, U.S. officials said. (Washington Post)

Less than 48 hours after using racially-charged language to explain his state's drug epidemic, Maine Gov. Paul LePage at a Friday news conference semi-apologized for his wording "slip-up" but accused the press of trying to twist his words. (CNN News)

A federal jury today convicted Raymond "Shrimp Boy" Chow of all charges in a sweeping racketeering indictment accusing him of orchestrating San Francisco's Chinatown crime scene for years. (San Jose Mercury News)

An NYPD sergeant has been stripped of her gun and badge and charged internally in the July 2014 chokehold death of Eric Garner, the first official accusation of wrongdoing in the case that helped spark a national movement on the role of race in policing. (Associated Press)

In the latest demonstration of Mississippi's efforts to confront it's troubled racial history, state lawmakers gathered today to remember civil rights leader Vernon Dahmer, who was killed by members of the Ku Klux Klan 50 years ago. (Christian Science Monitor)

International news:

Two assailants armed with a gun, a knife and a suicide belt attacked a hotel in the Egyptian Red Sea resort town of Hurghada today, wounding two foreign tourists, security sources said. (Reuters)

Already notorious for its public and gruesome executions, a member of the Islamic State killed his own mother in front of a crowd in Syria this week after she tried to get him to leave the terrorist organization, according to reports. (USA Today)

At least 21 asylum seekers from the Middle East and North Africa are suspects in the New Year's Eve rampage of sexual assaults and thefts in the German city of Cologne, authorities said. (Washington Post)

Syrian rebels said they were under international pressure to make concessions that would prolong the war, adding to their doubts about a U.N.-led drive for peace talks due to begin this month. (Reuters)

South Korea today resumed propaganda broadcasts using loudspeakers along its northern border in response to North Korea's fourth nuclear test, taking a tough stance despite the risk of heightening tension on the Korean Peninsula. (Nikkei Asian Review)

Australian firefighters are battling a huge blaze that's engulfed the small town of Yarloop, and is threatening others south of Perth in Western Australia. (CNN News)