Topics: #blacklivesmatter, political correctness, Race, Thanksgiving, News

Public holidays are a type of ritual. They are a means by which individuals learn lessons about politics, identity, family and community. Holidays are also a type of habit. They’re part of a cultural routine, one that is usually followed without much reflection, contemplation or introspection.

Thanksgiving is a holiday ritual that celebrates family and community. In recounting one of the country’s founding legends—in which Europeans fled religious persecution, escaped to the “New World,” and then were helped by friendly “Indians”—the American people are supposed to reflect upon their blessings, fortunes and good luck.

Like most national holidays, Thanksgiving is a myth. It does the powerful political work of encouraging American Exceptionalism: a belief that the United States was preordained by “God” for a special place among all others; and that it is a “shining city on the hill.”

In reality, the arrival of the Mayflower (and other European explorers and colonists in the “New World”) would help to set into motion two of the greatest crimes in human history: the genocide of First Nations peoples and the enslavement and mass murder of black Americans. Stolen land and stolen labor are the twin bedrocks of American empire. Their influence was (and remains) so profoundly deep that it would take a civil war (what was really a second American Revolution) and then 100 years of additional struggle to strike down white supremacy as the formal public policy of the United States.

First Nations peoples can never be made whole for the land (and lives) that was stolen from them. Black Americans will never receive their reparations, be it 40 acres and a mule, or redistributive justice because of the material harm done to them by white supremacy from Jim and Jane Crow and in the present. These inequalities are now fixtures in American social and political life. There is no holiday that can repair those harms.

(One should not overlook how Thanksgiving was a source of political controversy during the American slaveocracy. The South refused to celebrate Thanksgiving because it was viewed as a way for “Abolitionists” and “Yankees” to undermine the institution of white on black chattel slavery. Thanksgiving would be fully embraced as an “American” holiday after the end of the Civil War when apartheid was reinstated across the South after the fall of Reconstruction. White America could celebrate Thanksgiving as one nation only when black American citizens were denied their equal rights.)

In many ways, Thanksgiving is a celebration of gluttony, sports, nationalism, militarism and waste. While some of the poor and homeless may be fed for a day, the institutions and structures that create income inequality and joblessness remain untouched. The day after Thanksgiving is called “Black Friday.” It is a festival of consumerist excess and greed. It is one of many moments throughout their lives when the American people are told the lie that “freedom,” “capitalism” and “democracy” are interchangeable. In reality, the gangster and casino capitalism of late 20th and early 20th century America is incompatible with a true “We the People” democracy.

* * *

This year’s Thanksgiving comes during the midst of a national debate about America’s national character.

Young people and others are protesting for progressive social change at America’s colleges and universities, participating in Black Lives Matter, and standing up against police thuggery and violence in cities like Ferguson, Missouri, and Baltimore, Maryland. The Confederate Flag, what is more accurately described as the American swastika, has been removed from some government buildings in the old Confederate South. Buildings, streets and roads that bear the names of white supremacists are being renamed.

Conservatives and other reactionaries have resisted. History and social change work is a story of “push and pull” factors, thesis and antithesis. Right-wingers in Texas and across the country are rewriting school textbooks with the goal of quite literally “whitewashing” American history, where any facts that undermine their lies about American Exceptionalism, and the many distortions needed to maintain the illusion, are removed.