Planned Parenthood of North Texas will celebrate its 80th year in North Texas and give out its annual awards at a luncheon March 26 at the Hilton Anatole.

Co-chairmen Sherri Cook and Shanon Schwimmer are bringing in Slate senior editor Dahlia Lithwick as the featured speaker, and Gloria Campos will be mistress of ceremonies.

Lithwick is a senior editor who writes columns about the U.S. Supreme Court and jurisprudence. She has written for The New York Times, Harper’s, The New Yorker, The Washington Post and Commentary. In 2013, Lithwick won a National Magazine Award for columns on the Affordable Care Act, and she has received two Online Journalism Awards for legal commentary. She is writing a book about the four female justices to have served on the Supreme Court.

Lisa Kraus, who chaired the group’s board from 2010 to 2012, will get the 2015 Gertrude Shelburne Humanitarian Award. She has been credited with helping smooth the transition in 2012 when groups in Austin, North Texas and Waco merged to create Planned Parenthood of Greater Texas.

Planned Parenthood of Greater Texas’ TeenAge Communication Theatre will get the 2015 Gertrude Shelburne Volunteer of the Year Award. The theater allows high school volunteers to create interactive theater pieces for their peers on such topics as abstinence, body image and bullying.

Dallas Morning News columnist Steve Blow will be honored with the 2015 Katherine Ripley Award for Media.

The First Unitarian Church of Dallas’ Our Whole Lives Sexuality Education Program will get the 2015 Katherine Ripley Award for Education Award. First Unitarian members created courses that are now offered at Unitarian Universalist churches nationwide.

Sponsors of the luncheon include:

$25,000: Dr. Norman Kaplan, the presenting sponsor.

$10,000: Debbie and Gerald Barnes, Rebecca W. Bruder, Sherri and Tom Cook, Amy and Lee Fikes, Lisa and Peter Kraus, the Lebowitz-Aberly Foundation, Megan and Casey McManemin, Margot Perot, Carolyn Perot Rathjen, Deedie and Rusty Rose.

$5,000: Cecilia and Garrett Boone, Lael and Peter Brodsky, Nancy and Clint Carlson, Sally and Tom Dunning, Dr. and Mrs. B. Henry Estess Jr., Marguerite Steed Hoffman/Cindy Rachofsky, Joy S. Mankoff, Janie and Cappy McGarr, Suzanne and Patrick McGee, Nancy Perot, Katherine and Eric Reeves, Catherine and Will Rose, and Dr. Shanon G. Schwimmer.

Planned Parenthood of Greater Texas Inc. has provided health care in North and Central Texas since 1935. Planned Parenthood of Greater Texas reaches more than 93,000 Texans annually at health centers in Dallas, Fort Worth, Paris, Tyler and Waco.

A few luncheon tickets are available at $150 apiece. Call Susan Pierce at 214-302-8382 or go to ppgreatertx.org.