SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The California State Assembly Health Committee passed SB 4 Tuesday on a straight party-line vote, but not without vocal objection from citizen lobbyists. The bill would appropriate $170-740 million annually in taxpayer funds in part to grant illegal aliens Medi-Cal coverage.

Californians from a number of organizations around the state traveled to Sacramento to oppose the bill in the hearing. Reports from those in attendance noted that filming was not allowed. Those present estimated 40 speaking out in support of SB 4, and 24 in opposition to the bill.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Breitbart News’ Adelle Nazarian previously reported on the State Senate’s passage of SB 4, specifying that the bill “would allow for illegal aliens in California to purchase health insurance through Covered California, pending a federal waiver; allow for illegal alien children aged 19 and under to enroll in Medi-Cal, the state’s insurance program for the poor; and allow for a limited number of adults aged 19 and over to enroll in the Medi-Cal program as state funding is made available.”

Expert witnesses appearing in opposition to SB 4 were, “Channel Temple, Spokesperson for the Black Community, Patrice Lynes, RN, Betty Robinson, RN, Dr. Robert Newman and former banking VP Janet West,” according to attendee Robin Hvidson.

Senator Ricardo Lara (D-Bell Gardens), lead author of SB 4, has promoted the bill as bipartisan, despite Republican support from only two Senators in a prior vote, as reported by Breitbart News.

Over 12 million California residents participate in Medi-Cal, the state’s healthcare welfare system, which has been overloaded with the current Obamacare-related enrollment.

Lara commented at an immigration roundtable forum, “I am very proud that Republicans continue to join us in assuring that we educate our immigrants…that we incorporate them into our communities.”

Lara claimed, “Every immigration bill that has come out of Sacramento comes with Republican support and that is is part because of our work that we’ve done to educate our Republican elected officials.” He then painted the Tea Party as the “fringe.”

Two of the group’s members stopped at the Kate Steinle memorial, according to Hvidson. One called the site a “hallowed and profound memorial.”

Steinle is the young woman killed at Pier 14 in San Francisco on July 1 by a five-time deported, seven-time convicted felon illegal alien.

Follow Michelle Moons on Twitter @MichelleDiana