The PulseContraception, Faith

The National Organization for Women calls them “The Dirty 100.” You might call them the Hundred Heroes. The pro-abortion feminist group released a list of 100 organizations that have filed lawsuits against the HHS mandate of the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as ObamaCare.

That provision requires all but a narrowly defined group of religious organizations to provide contraception, sterilization, and abortifacient drugs to their employees with no co-pay. The Supreme Court ruled that the HHS mandate violates the Religious Freedom Restoration Act last month in a 5-4 decision.

NOW made headlines by naming the Little Sisters of the Poor one of the “Dirty 100.” Also on the list are several Catholic dioceses, the archbishop of Miami, several evangelical Christian universities, and the ministry of Dr. James Dobson.

Click "like" if you are PRO-LIFE!

Less reported was the fact that NOW likened the ecumenical belief that it is wrong to participate in potentially abortion-inducing “contraceptive” practices with slavery, apartheid, and...the ecumenical belief that marriage is between one man and one woman:

[T]here are some “beliefs,” no matter how sincerely held, that should simply not be respected by the United States government or by any government. A “belief” that works to the detriment of a specific demographic group that has historically been subjected to discrimination and oppression is simply a religious mask for bigotry. The world has rejected the religious “beliefs” that were offered to justify the apartheid regime in South Africa. Our nation long ago rejected the Southern Baptist Association’s religious “belief” in slavery and segregation. And more recently, the religious “beliefs” offered up in 2008 to justify California’s Proposition 8 banning same-sex marriage are now being roundly rejected. So it should be with the “belief” that women can be singled out for restrictions on their access to preventive health care like contraception. (We note that Catholic doctrine considers vasectomy a sin, but the Catholic bishops have not been walking up and down the halls of Congress, or orchestrating federal lawsuits, to demand the government create special rules blocking men’s access to that procedure.)

The feminist group encourages people to “[s]tand with NOW and tell them it is not acceptable for employers to impose their personal beliefs on their employees.” You may wish to keep these groups in mind when making your business, college, or donation plans.

They are:

American Family Association

American MFG Co

American Pulverizer Co

Annex Medical

Autocam Corp

Ave Maria School of Law

Ave Maria University

Barron Industries

Beckwith Electric Co

Belmont Abbey College

Bick Holdings, Inc.

Cherry Creek Mortgage Co

CNS Ministries

Colorado Christian University

Conestoga Wood Specialities Corp

Continuum Health Partnership/Management

Criswell College

Doboszenski & Sons

Dordt College

Dr. James Dobson’s Family Talk

East Texas Baptist University

Eden Foods

Encompass, Develop, Design & Construct LLC

Eternal Word Television Network Inc.

Fellowship of Catholic University

Feltl & Co., Inc.

Franciscan University of Steubenville

Freshway Foods

Gilardi

Grace College and Seminary

Grote Industries

Hart electric LLC

Hastings Automotive

Hercules Industries Inc.

Hobby Lobby

Holland Chevrolet

Infrastructure Alternatives

Johnson Welded Products

Korte & Luitjohan Contractors

Liberty University

Lindsay Rappaport and Postel LLC

Little Sisters of the Poor

Louisiana College

M&N Plastics

Mersino Management Company

Michigan Catholic Conference

MK Chambers Company

O’Brien Industrial Holdings

Ozinga

Paul Wieland

Priests for Life

QC Group Inc.

Randy Reed Automotives

Reaching Souls International

Right to Life Michigan

Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Atlanta

Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York

Roman Catholic Archdiocese of St. Louis

Roman Catholic Diocese of Beaumont

Roman Catholic Diocese of Biloxi

Roman Catholic Diocese of Cheyenne

Roman Catholic Diocese of Dallas

Roman Catholic Diocese of Erie

Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Worth

Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort-Wayne – South Bend

Roman Catholic Diocese of Nashville

Roman Catholic Diocese of Pittsburgh

School of the Ozarks

Seneca Hardwood

Sharpe Holdings, Inc.

Sioux Chief MFG Co

SMA LLC

Southern Nazarene University

The Most Reverend Thomas Wenski

Tonn and Blank Construction

Trijicon, Inc. (AKA Bindon)

Triune Health Group

Tyndale House

University of Notre Dame

Weingartz Supply Co

Wheaton College (Wheaton, IL)

Willis & Willis PLC

WLH Enterprises

Zumbiel

Cross-posted at TheRightsWriter.com.