LEADVILLE — Their races couldn’t have unfolded more differently.

Ian Sharman, a Bend, Ore., resident, one of two favorites to win the 33rd edition of the Leadville 100 Trail Run, finally relaxed (if you can call it that) with about six miles left in the 100-mile footrace that pushes finishers to climb more than 18,000 feet. He knew his competitors were so far back it would have been impossible for them to catch him, as long as he didn’t walk. He won in 16 hours, 33 minutes, 54 seconds.

“It’s a huge one for me,” Sharman said at the finish. “It kind of all went to plan. I would have liked a faster time. But it was a more tactical race than a time trial.”

By contrast, Liza Howard, a 43-year-old mother of an 8-year-old and a 2-year old from San Antonio running the event for the fourth time, didn’t believe she had won her second Leadville 100 until she crossed the finish line in 19:34:09 — just 20 minutes ahead of Boulder’s Kara Henry. The second-place finisher behind Sharman — Denver’s Kyle Pietari — came in nearly two hours later in 18:16:04.

In a field of nearly 650 runners representing 47 states and 26 countries, Howard was the sixth person — male or female — to complete the race.

“Once I passed her (at Hope Pass), I just kind of kept going,” said Howard, who has finished second twice here. “And I was so comfortable, I went back to my plan. And then at mile 75, I realized she was right there — she was 90 seconds back. So the rest of the race was real stressful.”

A duel in the mountains

For Sharman, a native of Great Britain who moved to the United States in 2009, the relief and satisfaction of victory were tempered by the disappointment of the collapse of his chief rival, Arvada’s Mike Aish, whose uneven race strategy forced him to eventually drop out at the 86th mile. He pushed the pace early and then suffered from an upset stomach, unable to consume food and calories — a vital part of successfully completing an ultramarathon.

“Mike could have broken the record if he had just run a little bit more conservative,” Sharman said. “I really felt badly for him. I wanted him to have a good race. I wanted to beat him, but I wanted him to have a good race.”

Aish passed Sharman near the 24-mile mark at the Outward Bound aid station while Sharman paused for a bathroom break.

“He went off on his own, and he started speeding up. That’s what brought him down,” Sharman said. “I think he’d have probably won if he had stayed with me. So I’m glad he didn’t.”

Sharman was third at the Winfield aid station turnaround at mile 50, then eventually caught Aish just before Hope Pass. He extended his lead on the descent, and then he never saw him again.

“He wasn’t talking,” Sharman said. “But he went fast downhill, so he tried to match me on that. And I think that’s where it kind of broke his legs. He couldn’t go as fast later.”

Aish had been only six minutes behind Sharman at Twin Lakes about 15 miles before, but the gap grew to about an hour within a short stretch. Aish looked spent by the time he reached Outward Bound on the way back into Leadville, resting for 10 minutes on a cot in the medical area, sipping from a Crush soda, unable to keep down anything else. He hadn’t eaten in hours, and after his pacesetter urged him to go on, he reluctantly stood up before gingerly walking out to the road to continue.

“Some days you have good days, some days you have bad days and you can pull it through,” Aish said. “You know I was running on fumes about four hours ago. And now I’m just plodding.”

A return to Leadville

Howard’s connection to Leadville goes back years, when the New Balance-sponsored runner spent two summers in her 30s working at Outward Bound in Leadville, a location also used as an aid station about one-quarter and again at three-quarters of the way through the race. Her former boss even met her there and gave her a hug as she passed through.

“The ultrarunning world is such a small world,” Howard said. “I’m happy for the time, but ultrarunning has done quite a bit to give me extended family.”

Rumors about Henry infiltrated Howard and her camp. Howard started out behind Henry and was told by various people: She has never run a 100-miler before, she was young and inexperienced. All of that turned out to be untrue, but it only fueled her fear that she could be passed at any moment.

“I just really expected her to fly by me,” she said.

While Howard says this will be her last Leadville 100 — she plans to return to watch and help others race as a crew member — Sharman was enthusiastic about returning.

“I’ll definitely be back, probably next year,” Sharman said. “I’ll do this a few more times. I like it; it’s a lot of fun.”

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty