WASHINGTON — The big blockbuster movie out this weekend is The Martian. Matt Damon plays a stranded astronaut who figures out how to get stuff done — grow food, make water, phone home and survive long enough for a rescue mission to reach him.

In Washington, unlike on Mars as told by Hollywood, no one person gets much done — a lesson driven home hard last week for Sen. Ted Cruz.

Cruz’s capacity to irk and alienate Senate colleagues is enormous. So is the pushback, which is why fellow lawmakers and their aides were describing him last week as isolated, quarantined, outfoxed and shunned.

His popularity within the clubby U.S. Senate, already not great, dropped to new lows. Even the friction between Cruz and Sen. John Cornyn — usually shielded from public view by both Texas Republicans — bubbled over.

“I would say the jury is out,” Cornyn responded when asked whether Cruz has lost the ability to effectively represent Texas in the Senate, less than three years on the job. “Relationships are important in life and in politics. That’s a concern I have, is damaging those relationships perhaps on a long-term or permanent basis.”

That’s about as tough as Cornyn gets when it comes to Cruz, who has publicly called Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell a liar and accused him and other GOP leaders — including Cornyn, McConnell’s deputy — of weakness and capitulation.

Such allegations are central to Cruz’s positioning in the 2016 presidential field as an outsider willing and able to shake up Washington. Willing is indisputable. Able is up for debate.

The most recent dust-up involved funding for abortion provider Planned Parenthood. McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner resisted demands from Cruz and House tea party allies to force a budget showdown that could have triggered a government shutdown. A presidential veto would be inevitable, and Republicans wouldn’t have enough votes to overcome it. So, GOP leaders wanted to avert a politically and economically damaging rerun of the shutdown Cruz instigated two years ago over Obamacare.

Cruz’s isolation in the Senate came to a head Monday night, when he sought a vote on a measure to cut funding for Planned Parenthood and the Iran nuclear deal. The proposal was doomed, but Cruz wanted a show vote anyway. Cornyn and McConnell swatted him down hard, blocking his routine request with what Cruz labeled an “unprecedented procedural trick.”

He called out Cornyn by name — a rarity — as he vented frustration during an extraordinary hourlong indictment of fellow Republicans on the Senate floor.

As the week wore on, he asserted that McConnell sees conservatives as “the enemy” and would rather stifle them than tussle with Democrats.

“Republican leaders begin every discussion with a peremptory surrender,” Cruz told a Boston talk radio host Thursday night ahead of a two-day campaign swing in New Hampshire. “What we need is Republican leadership that isn’t scared of their own shadow, that doesn’t run screaming from Barack Obama every time he stands up to them.”

Cruz loyalist Amanda Carpenter mocked McConnell for denying Cruz “a simple protest vote,” then crowing about it.

“The fact this is supposed to be some great symbol of might and strength is laughable,” she wrote in Conservative Review, calling McConnell “myopically focused on his own diminishing power, at the expense of the party. It’s clear he’s devoted more time to shutting down Ted Cruz than any government program.”

Sen. Rand Paul, a 2016 rival and fellow tea partier, said the episode showed that Cruz is “pretty much done for and stifled” in the Senate and has only himself to blame. Unlike Cruz, Paul has cultivated a working relationship with McConnell, a fellow Kentuckian.

Calling people liars in public can tend to alienate them, he noted.

Across the Senate, lawmakers and aides dismissed the grumblings and attacks as self-aggrandizement from someone who puts ambition ahead of a focus on achieving results within the system — an astronaut marooned on an inhospitable planet who ignores tools within his reach.

Follow Washington Bureau Chief Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.

Email tgillman@dallasnews.com.