“There’s kind of a deer-in-headlights moment for those who say, ‘I have this new potential client, but if I bring them on, I have to hire five additional people,’” said Philip P. Noftsinger, the payroll unit president at CBIZ, a financial services provider for businesses. “They’re really trying to assess how much the 50th employee is going to cost.”

Nearly all large companies provide health care benefits, but only 54 percent of businesses with three to 49 workers offered coverage to their workers this year, according to an analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation. Paying even a portion of the cost can be expensive. The average annual premium for workers at small companies currently tops $6,100 for individual insurance and $16,600 for family coverage.

That premium is typically shared between the employer and employee. Businesses that fall under the health care law’s mandate are required to offer their workers “affordable” insurance, which the law defines as individual coverage that costs less than 9.5 percent of the employee’s household income. (Because employers do not know how much money their workers’ relatives make, their options for compliance include basing their calculation on only their own employees’ wages.) For a full-time, minimum-wage employee making $14,500 a year, an employer offering an average-price individual plan would have to pay around $4,700 a year.

Added to that cost are the administrative requirements. Starting this year, all companies with 50 or more full-time workers — even those not yet required to offer health benefits — must file new tax forms with the Internal Revenue Service that provide details on employee head count and any health insurance offered. Gathering the data requires meticulous record-keeping.

Photo

“These are some of the most complex informational returns we’ve ever seen,” said Roger Prince, a tax lawyer with the consulting firm Berry Dunn in Portland, Me.

Some of his clients, even small ones, have spent months reconfiguring their human resources and financial systems to track the information that the new forms demand. The health care law defines a full-time-equivalent employee as someone who works an average of 30 or more hours a week — and the hours worked by some part-time employees count toward the calculation.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For businesses that use many seasonal, variable-hour or temporary workers, like those in the hospitality industry, simply figuring out how many qualifying employees they have can be a challenge.

“I think companies are going to have to work with their payroll processor for the basic data, and then their accountant or attorney about what certain items mean,” Mr. Prince said.

The expense and distraction of all that paperwork is one of the biggest frustrations for one business owner, Joseph P. Sergio. His industrial cleaning company, Polar Clean, which is based in South Bend, Ind., but dispatches teams nationally, has just under 50 core employees. One of its business lines is disaster restoration, and after a flood or hurricane, its temporary staff balloons.

Mr. Sergio offers health insurance to his permanent staff, but the premiums have risen so quickly that he had to switch to a more restrictive plan, with a higher deductible. He is reluctant to go over the 50-employee line and incur all of the new rules that come with it. That makes bidding for new jobs an arduous and risky exercise.

“I’ve had to pull my controller and a couple of top people to sit and spend days going through this,” he said. “If you ramp up, and it pushes you over 50, there’s all these unknown costs and complicated rules. Are we really going to be able to benefit from going after that opportunity? It freezes you at a time when you need to be moving fast.”

Tony Lamb has 700 franchisees for Kona Ice, his shaved-ice truck business, but his corporate staff in Florence, Ky., has 44 full-time-equivalent positions. It took an outside consultant to confirm that; his internal accountant put the number at 42.

Kona Ice offers a retirement plan, profit-sharing and other perks, but no health benefits — and one of Mr. Lamb’s concerns about expanding is the salaries that he priced accordingly.

“I said, ‘Instead of paying you $50,000 and $15,000 in health care, I’ll pay you $65,000,’” he said. “You can’t go back on people and change the rules. No one wants a pay cut. I think it’s a very big deterrent to growth.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Of course, plenty of small-business owners offer health insurance without being required to do so. For many, especially those in white-collar fields, it’s an essential part of recruiting and retaining employees. Companies with a significant number of workers making at least $58,000 a year are much more likely to offer insurance than those at which a majority of employees make less, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation’s study.

Some owners who began offering insurance this year to comply with the new law have been surprised by how few employees purchased it. Participation rates as low as 1 or 2 percent are not uncommon in industries like restaurants and retailing, in which employees making close to the minimum wage may struggle to afford the premiums.

But Ms. Hunter, the salon owner, said that she could not afford the gamble. “I’m a single mom, and I’ve worked really hard at what I have, wanting to build something,” she said. “It’s very frustrating that the government has put something in place that’s restricting the growth plan I’ve been working toward for a decade.”