Topics: amazons, Don DeLillo, Fiction, Memoir, novel, review, The Weeklings, Writing, Media News, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on The Weeklings

Holt, Reinhart, and Winston published Amazons: An Intimate Memoir by the First Woman Ever to Play in the National Hockey League in the fall of 1980. “I played with them, I fought with them, I shared their locker rooms,” Cleo Birdwell, the memoir’s author explains, “I drove them half-mad with sweaty, aching, voice-changing, male lust.

“After a while, they began to accept me. What could they do, take me to the walls of the city and stone me?”

No woman has been on the roster of a professional hockey team, yet the memoir’s back cover has an author photograph of Birdwell, an attractive blonde with a come-hither expression in full New York Rangers hockey regalia. Her long hair and a slung-over-the shoulder black skate cover parts of her uniform, so that the word Rangers appears as the French word for Angel.

In over-the-top comically implausible prose, Birdwell, a twenty-three-year-old from Badger, Ohio, narrates her inaugural season with the New York Rangers. She has a Midwestern practicality and straight-forwardness, a sly humor, and an unusually subversive sexual candor and agency, chronicling—sans any standard female shame or hesitancy—her plentiful sexual liaisons with a gamut of neurotic men.

The dialogue is masterful and playful and the humor unremitting. Yet beneath Birdwell’s narration, a foreboding lurks—a tinge of sadness and an existential-like searching-ness.

That’s because Cleo Birdwell is a pseudonym for Don Delillo. Amazons was Delillo’s seventh novel, and it sold better than his previous books and doubled his income, all before he earned his reputation as one of America’s greatest writers.

Whether from embarrassment, personal reasons, a game he’s playing with his readers, or other reasons I can’t fathom, Delillo doesn’t want his name attached to the book and has never officially acknowledged writing it. He asked Viking to expunge the book from White Noise’s bibliography and won’t grant permission for the novel’s reprinting.

I came upon Amazons because of my women-centered sports novel The Peerless Four. In all the so-called classic sports novels by men, I claimed in an interview, none have female athletes as subjects.

Delillo’s former editor contacted the interviewer, who informed me of my mistake.

In all the so-called classic sports novels by men, none have female athletes as subjects. Except for Delillo’s fantastical Amazons, and in a strangely fitting twist, its author has divorced himself from it, and the novel remains out of print.

Amazons is laugh-out-loud funny and worth reading, and not just for Delillo fans. Both David Foster Wallace and Jonathan Lethem admired it. In an interview, Lethem acknowledged Amazons’ influence on Motherless Brooklyn (specifically a character inAmazons burdened with Jumping Frenchman’s Disease, causing him to involuntarily perform deep knee bends and bottom of the shoe examinations).

Along with sports and sex, Amazons revels in America’s phallic-centeredness. “The penis erect,” Birdwell explains, “can be impressive. It has the force of legend and myth. An engorged, murky thing. It loses its playfulness, erect. There is sometimes a purpling along the seams. It is a little beastly if the truth be known.”

Birdwell’s fellow hockey mate Eric “was a good-natured guy who stood about six-six in skates and had a penis so humongous it was given a separate identity by the other players. Eric was Torkelson; his penis was Torkle.

“A player would say, ‘How’s Torkle doing today?’ Or, “Who’s playing Torkle in the movie version?’ Or, ‘Is it true Torkle’s being asked to endorse Jimmy Carter?’ Or, ‘There’s a story the airlines aren’t counting Torkle as carry-on anymore. You’ll have to buy an extra seat for him.’”

Of Birdwell’s childhood friend and sexual compatriot Georgie, she says that he was “‘one of those boys who’s totally, everlastingly in love with his own penis. He never got over his first erection. He just loved flaunting himself. He was always playing with it. When he wasn’t playing with it, he was looking at it. Looking isn’t the word. He would study it. We’d be in the back room of his house when his parents were out and he’d be sitting there with his pants open and with the most absorbed, studious, dumb-kid look on his face, examining himself—wondering about it, marveling at it, softly blowing on it, dusting it. His penis was a never-ending discovery, I guess.’”