BOSTON - There's enough work to keep the hospital financial counselors busy – and then some.

The Massachusetts Health Connector website, the state's version of a health insurance exchange implemented under the national Affordable Care Act, has been plagued with glitches since it became operational in October.

Connector officials have established numerous workarounds to address the problems, and the state commissioned an independent review of the site. Meanwhile, providers and insurers in Western Massachusetts say the impacts have trickled down to their staffs, who must cope with billing problems and patients' uncertainty about their insurance plans.

"We're seeing a lot of patients coming in now not sure if they're covered or not, not sure what their deductibles are," said Dr. Mark Keroack, president and CEO of Baystate Medical Center. "I'm hopeful they're going to get it worked out soon. It's kind of a bureaucratic mess at this point."

According to the Health Connector, the automated determination process, through which the Connector figures out what subsidy someone is eligible for and what insurance program they should be in, has not worked. There have been problems in account creation log-in, slow performance, time-outs and sporadic error messages.

State officials have created workarounds to get people enrolled in insurance plans – using paper applications, call centers and multiple computer systems rather than the automated online system that the state contracted with technology vendor CGI to build.

The state is ensuring no one loses coverage by extending existing plans and providing temporary insurance for new enrollees. The state has not ruled out suing CGI to recoup its costs.

The problems affect consumers currently enrolled in Commonwealth Care and individuals applying through the Health Connector for the first time for subsidized or unsubsidized plans.

Keroack said Baystate providers are seeing patients who say they have Medicaid or a public insurance plan, but then the bill gets rejected. Sometimes, an insurance plan has changed and a patient is surprised by the amount of money due out of pocket. The hospital's financial counselors have been working with patients. "There's a fair amount of rework and time and trouble on the phone with insurance companies to clarify a person's status," Keroack said. "We have people who do that, but they're not ready for huge avalanche of folks uncertain about what their coverage is."

Lisa McCusker, vice president of corporate compliance for Mercy Medical Center, said the hospital had problems early on with patients being unable to connect to the website and coming to the hospital unsure about what insurance they had. The hospital's financial counselors used the old Massachusetts Health Connector website to check on a patient's status. "Now it seems to be getting less and less. It's easier for people to use and get on," McCusker said.

Mary Barnett, director of patient registration at Mercy Medical Center, said another problem cropped up when patients expected to receive a letter from the state detailing what kind of insurance plan they had, but had a medical appointment before the letter arrived, leaving patients unsure whether they had coverage and under which plan. Financial counselors have been calling the Connector or referring patients to the Connector to access the information.

McCusker said overall, the Springfield hospital's three financial counselors have been busier than usual, but the problems are manageable. "We're having not an easy time, but we've implemented it well, and are able to navigate the system with relative ease, with not a lot of burden to the system," she said.

Tim Gens, executive vice president of the Massachusetts Hospital Association, said most of the problems hospitals are facing are technical problems related to enrollment and billing. Patients may not be aware they have been enrolled in a different plan, may not be able to access information about their plan or may have billing problems. But he said hospitals are working with the state and patients, and the state has been actively addressing the problems. "There have been issues, but two things we're confident in are that this is a worthwhile change and that the problems are transitional, are temporary, and are going to be worked out," Gens said.

Meanwhile, insurers are also working with state officials to get people enrolled in new plans, but are finding the process challenging. Jim Kessler, vice president and general counsel at the Springfield-based insurer Health New England, said if the process were working, a customer could choose a plan through the state Health Connector website, and the information would be automatically transferred to Health New England, which would intervene only in case of a mistake. Instead, people are having trouble enrolling, the data is not transferred automatically and Health New England does not always know if a premium has been paid. Health Connector staff have been sending Health New England information on spreadsheets, which an employee has to put into the insurer's system manually. The company has also had to fix errors in which a person accidentally enrolled in two plans.

"There are a lot of moving parts, and a lot of moving parts are not moving," Kessler said. "(Connector officials) have been working workarounds, Plan B solutions, doing the best they possibly can. But it’s a big job."

Dave Przesiek, chief sales and marketing officer for Fallon Community Health Plan in Worcester, said the health plan does a fair amount of business with the Health Connector. "For good or for bad, they chose the same vendor as the federal government did, and they got similar results, which weren’t very good," Przesiek said.

Przesiek said Connector officials are doing everything they can to improve the process, and Fallon is working with state officials to accommodate its current customers and be available to potential new customers. Przesiek said some customers are confused about which plan they are on; others chose a new plan but have not yet paid or do not know whether they are eligible for a subsidy. "I think everyone wished it would have gone smoother," he said.

Bruce Bullen, chief operating officer of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts, said Blue Cross officials have been working with Health Connector officials on a weekly basis to make sure people who sign up for plans are actually enrolled. Bullen said there have been issues with connecting the information that comes into the website to the individual plans people have chosen.

"We're getting enrollments. We just have no way of knowing how many we're getting of people who actually chose us on the website," Bullen said. "People can be enrolled on the website, but the communication between the website and the health plans is the issue… The big fear is people think they're enrolled as of Jan. 1 and the health plan doesn’t know it."