BEAVER CREEK — EagleVail’s Mikaela Shiffrin did it again, but she gave a flag-waving hometown crowd a major scare Saturday en route to her third gold medal in slalom in the past three years.

Shiffrin, the 2013 world champion and 2014 Olympic champion, posted the fastest first run in defense of her world title but fell behind silver medalist Frida Hansdotter of Sweden at the two intermediate splits on the second run before turning on a burst of speed that carried her into the finish.

“When I was at the beginning of my run, I knew I was attacking but it was kind of a conservative line,” Shiffrin said. “I knew I had to charge down here and try to use the groove a little bit. It seemed like people were taking it too conservative down here. I think I made up a lot of time.”

It was the second gold medal in two days for the U.S., following Ted Ligety’s victory in giant slalom on Friday.

“It’s pretty crazy, now that I think about it,” Shiffrin said. “Just before the second run I was trying to convince myself how much I wanted to win this race. Some of that was good, but then I was like, ‘Stop it! Stop that! It’s about the process. It’s about the turns.’ I kind of pulled myself together.”

Ligety’s victory, the first gold medal for the U.S. here, eased some of the pressure on Shiffrin but in the end she reinforced her remarkable reputation for performing under pressure. She was the favorite at the 2013 championships and the heavy favorite at the Sochi Olympics. She was supposed to win, and she did. Now she’s done it again.

“Maybe I’m in a little bit of denial about it,” she said of the big event pressure she handles so well. “I always say that I don’t really feel pressure. I think I feel it, it’s just about how I handle it. It’s just about finding the right attitude and the right moment and putting it together for a win.”

How does a teenager who turns 20 next month put into perspective three gold medals in three years? How do those achievements compare, especially now with one coming four miles from her family home?

“It’s different because I probably know half the people in the stands,” Shiffrin said. “Oh, man, I don’t know. It is different, and I can’t really explain it. They’re all equally amazing. Tough hill, tough race, a lot of really fast racers, and I’m glad to walk away with this one.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer