Physicians and specialists in Athens are moving toward their goal of improving patient care and lowering health care costs through the collaborative efforts of the Coalition of Athens Area Physicians (CAAP) and its Accountable Care Organizations (ACO).

ACOs, a creation of the Affordable Care Act, aim to reform the current health system in which many health care providers — physicians, hospitals and insurers — have failed to coordinate patient care because they were not paid based on a patient’s health outcome, but for each procedure performed.

It’s a system critics say leads to higher costs and inefficiencies.

Through the new ACO model, policymakers hope to improve the quality of medical care patients receive and lower costs by financially rewarding providers that demonstrate they have kept their patients healthy at a lower expense.

Located in the Three Sixteen Professional Quarter in Bogart, CAAP is a multi-specialty Independent Physician Association with about 500 members, including doctors in almost every specialty available in the Athens area.

Formed in 1994 by a group of local primary care physicians, CAAP works to alleviate the burden of administrative work doctors face on a daily basis to free them up to practice medicine. It also manages two ACOs for physicians, specialists and others in Athens.

CAAP’s first ACO was formed in April 2012 and was one of the first 27 in the country to be approved by Medicare. A second one followed in January 2013.

“CAAP’s whole purpose is to be a service organization for doctors to help them perform medicine more easily,” said CAAP CEO Janet Parham.

CAAP assists doctors in raising the quality of care and lowering health costs by looking through claim information provided by Medicare to find patients who have had multiple trips to the emergency room for unmanaged chronic diseases such as uncontrolled diabetes and asthma.

“We’re focusing on unmanaged chronic diseases right now because we feel like that’s where we can make the most impact,” Parham said. “We are identifying the highest utilizers of emergency rooms and asking them why they are constantly going to the emergency room and then showing them how to manage the symptoms of their chronic diseases so they can stay out of the emergency room.

“That’s one way we are lowering costs. Going to the emergency room is much more expensive than seeing a primary care physician.”

Discovering the root of why people make multiple trips to the emergency room and getting them in to see a primary care physician to reconcile the problem also leads to preventive care.

Another way CAAP and the ACOs assist in preventive care is by ensuring that patients meet with a primary care doctor after their hospital release.

“CAAP’s goal is to make contact with the patient within 72 hours of discharge from a hospital so we can get them an appointment to follow up with their primary care doctor immediately,” Parham said.

Models similar to the ACO that CAAP created are used outside of Athens and, Parham said, as doctors in other areas of Georgia begin to work with patients, they will look to Athens to see how to respond.

“ACOs are very different from other models,” Parham said. “There’s an active outreach to patients to make sure they have whatever they need to be able to get the care they need. We’re one of the first in the country to do ACOs, and we’re definitely blazing a trail.”

• Follow faith, health and Blueprint reporter April Burkhart at www.facebook.com/AprilBurkhartABH.