Tom Ayres, wearing cap, with Leee Black Childers in the Ripchords' rent house on Creswell Avenue in Highland, 1980s. (Photo: John Andrew Prime.)

The death of rock icon David Bowie Jan. 10 after an 18-month battle with cancer brings to mind the late singer-songwriter’s ties to the Ark-La-Tex.

As far as we know, Bowie never visited Shreveport or performed nearby, though he gave concerts in New Orleans. But two people key to his career lived here and carved their own place in the annals of pop music and culture.

One was the late producer and visionary Tom Ayres, who died in late May 2000 in the Highland neighborhood, age 66, and is buried in Centuries Memorial Park.

Ayres, who settled in California in the 1950s after service in the Army’s Special Forces, worked for a variety of record companies through the 1960s and early 1970s, notably the Columbia, Capitol, Mercury, Epic, MCA, United Artists, Phillips, Smash, Posh Boy-Magnum Force and Donna-Del-Fi labels.

While with the music division of Hanna-Barbera, his participation in the soundtrack of “Jack and the Beanstalk” with Gene Kelly in 1966 earned an Emmy Award.

But it was his work with RCA Records, which brought him into contact with such budding artists as Linda Ronstadt, that made him a mover and shaker in the music world. And it was there that in the late 1960s he met and befriended a young British up-and-comer named David Jones who changed his name to avoid confusion with the Monkee of the same name (!) and who, on Ayres’ urging, moved to the RCA stable.

Ayres also is widely regarded as the “Major Tom” referred to by Bowie in “Space Oddity.” (According to the website TeenageWildlife.com, “audio still exists of Bowie playing acoustic versions of ‘After All’ and ‘All The Madmen’ on the floor of Ayres’ Hollywood Hills living room.”)

Later, Ayres would work with rock legends such as Gene Vincent and Dale Hawkins, assisting the latter in his career revival. But he also aided local bands ranging from the Wedgeheads to A Train, the near-legendary local rock/R&B ensemble he helped headline the Los Angeles Street Scene Festival. Ayres also assisted country legend Slim Whitman, a former local, and his son, Byron, also a singer.

Ayres also helped rockabilly-revival artist Levi Dexter, arranging a performance of Levi and the Rockats at the Louisiana Hayride on Benton Road, a concert subsequently featured in the Los Angeles Times. He also helped Dexter and his manager, the late Leee Black Childers, as well as the band the Ripchords, settle into the Highland neighborhood here for six months to season up. Such actions led to him being both on the Louisiana Music Commission as well as the Rockabilly Hall of Fame, where his career is described in even more detail.

Childers’ brief stay in Shreveport is the region’s second tie to Bowie, as Childers, a photographer as well as a visionary in pop and glam music, was one of Bowie’s friends, collaborator and mentor.

Though Ayres’ relationship with Bowie was financial as well as artistic, it never seemed to be about money. This columnist can remember visiting Ayres at the Oil City lakefront house he shared with his mother, the late Bonnie Marie Dowden Hicks, and seeing a five-digit check from Bowie’s music company Isolar, on a table. Visiting six months later, the same check, coated with dust, was still on the table. ( Bowie’s sometimes-drummer Aynsley Dunbar was an occasional visitor to the Oil City house.)

Shreveport lost another stellar musical figure Jan. 10. Blues stylist, guitarist, singer and songwriter Jerry Beach died after a lengthy struggle with heart disease, age 74. A mentor, teacher and father figure to many established and aspiring guitarists, he was for decades a member of the duo Danny and Jerry, which enjoyed a heyday in the 1960s and 1970s, notably on the Bossier Strip, a legendary conglomeration of nightclubs along U.S. Highway 80 east of the Red River. Johnny and Edgar played there, as did one of Beach’s one-time roommates, Dewey Martin of Buffalo Springfield.

Beach, who like many talented area people grew up in an Air Force family, survived the best and the worst that life could dish out. He lost two brothers, one in childhood and one as a young adult, and survived being shot four times with a .30-.30 rifle in the parking lot of a Bossier Strip nightspot Halloween night 1968. He also penned the tune “I’ll Play the Blues For You,” which was recorded by the late blues legend Albert King in 1972, rose to the top of the R&B charts and led to a Grammy nomination for Beach.

A 1998 inductee into the Louisiana Music Hall of Fame, Beach led spirited Monday night blues jams for 30 years, until late last year declining health made that impossible. The Oklahoma City native is survived musically by his daughter Robin Beach Black, who performed with her father but also carved her own niche in the local music scene through powerful vocal deliveries.

Beach’s funeral at Rose-Neath on Marshall Street Thursday was packed.

“It looks like all the Musicians’ Union is here,” said longtime Beach friend Zeke Seighman, who delivered the eulogy.

John Andrew Prime wrote for The Times for more than 37 years, from 1978 to late 2015. He is the coauthor of a book on Barksdale Air Force Base and has contributed to books on area music. He is co-author of the Arcadia/History Press book “Legendary Locals of Shreveport,” set for release in early February. Email him at japrime@bellsouth.net or visit his website at japrime.com.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/opinion/2016/01/19/rock-legend-bowie-ties-ark-la-tex/78939896/