A student at Georgia Southern University was reportedly fired from her job after dozens of her classmates called to complain about a Facebook post she wrote criticizing some protesters at the University of Missouri and Black Lives Matter activists.

Emily Faz, a senior st GSU, shared a Nov. 14 Washington Times article that highlighted how some Mizzou and Black Lives Matter protesters on social media were upset that media coverage of the terrorist attacks in Paris had overshadowed their movement.

Ms. Faz shared the story on Facebook and wrote above the link, “I swear if I see this B.S. at Southern I will make you regret even knowing what a movement or a hashtag is, and you’ll walk away with your tail tucked,” a local ABC affiliate reported.

She continued, “The whole black lives matter movement is misguided and out of hand. Maybe no one likes or takes y’all seriously because no one can see past your egotistical [expletive]. Some people might just look past it, but fair warning I am not one. All lives matter, that has always been the case, and you part of the problem if you think other wise [sic].”

Ms. Faz’s post soon went viral, and prompted some black students who considered her comment a threat, to respond on Twitter.

“Somebody should’ve warned this #EmilyFaz chick … dont come for Black GSU unless we send for you,” one GSU student tweeted.

“We gotta find this Emil Faz,” another user tweeted.

The same user later called for Ms. Faz’s expulsion tweeting, “Lol let the football team go on strike and they’ll expel #EmilyFaz before midnight.”

“#EmilyFaz getting police escorts for being RACIST and black people got 0 positive attention from cops at mizzou #whiteprivilege,” another user tweeted.

Another student urged activists to call the restaurant where Ms. Faz was employed about her post.

“Wanna have a word with the manage at Wild Wings Cafe about Emily Faz, here you go (912) 681-9453,” the student tweeted.

According to Everything Georgia, Ms. Faz lost her job.

In a statement on Tuesday, one day after Ms. Faz wrote her original post, Jean Bartels, GSU’s interim president, said some of the speech circulating over the past 24 hours (including the original post) “has resulted in a call for disciplinary action against the speaker.”

She said GSU takes threats very seriously and “will not tolerate behavior that is in violation with our Student Code of Conduct,” but she added that the school is a public institution and as such is “not permitted to restrict speech that is protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.”

Following Ms. Faz’s post, the GSU NAACP staged a “Black Out, Walk Out” on Tuesday and issued demands to the school. Those demands included hiring more black professors and expanding the African Studies program.

NAACP 2nd Vice President Jamar Boyd said the walkout wasn’t a direct response to the post, but it was about starting an important conversation.

“This is not necessarily in response to the comments the young lady made its to show that the black student population does matter,” Mr. Boyd told a local ABC affiliate.

KeyAnna Tate, a participant in the walk out, told the Statesboro Herald that the line between freedom of speech and threatening speech has become more blurred for white people.

“I think it’s important to know the difference between freedom of speech and a threat, and it seems like when it comes from a white student at this school, that sometimes the line is being blurred because of who it comes from,” she said.