Democrats say an anti-Koch message will motivate voters around the country. Dems' 2014 foil: Koch brothers

Democrats want to make the billionaire Koch brothers their 2014 version of Mitt Romney.

Harry Reid and vulnerable Senate Democrats turned up the heat this week on the Kochs and their affiliated Americans for Prosperity, which has unleashed a flood of TV ads bashing vulnerable Democrats for supporting Obamacare. Democrats’ message: Charles and David Koch are trying buy the election for shady special interests and big business.

Story Continued Below

Democrats feel that simply defending Obamacare may not be enough to keep the Senate in Democratic hands come November. Instead, they need something to run against – and they’ve picked the Kochs as an easy foil.

( Also on POLITICO: Koch bros. group to hit Udall in Colo.)

The Senate majority leader went to the floor on Thursday — following a Democrat’s loss in a Florida special election in which Obamacare was a major issue — to call out the Koch’s “radical” agenda, using that word 17 times. Reid has put a permanent target on the Kochs’ backs on the Senate floor, just as he did with Romney in 2012.

Barely a day passes that the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee doesn’t mention the Kochs’ influence in its fundraising solicitations. And outside groups like Senate Majority PAC and Americans United For Change are questioning both the veracity of the ads and who is paying for them.

“The American people don’t want to have their elections bought by just a few people. I think it’s very important that people know who’s paying for these ads,” said DSCC Chairman Sen. Michael Bennet (D-Colo.).

( Also on POLITICO: Dems seek the right ACA message)

Bennet’s predecessor and current member of Democratic leadership, Sen. Patty Murray (D-Wash.), said the anti-Koch message “is motivating not just to our base, but the country.”

But not everybody’s on board with the increasingly blunt Democratic messaging, particularly that of Reid, who has unapologetically described the Kochs as “un-American,” “radical,” and “shadowy billionaires.”

“That’s not my style, it’s not. They’re operating within the limits of the law,” said Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.), who agreed that the Kochs’ influence was “obscene” but disagrees with some of his party’s hardball tactics. “I don’t think that we’re going to prove anything with the name-calling. I don’t think we get many results from that anyway. It hasn’t worked before.”

Blaming the messenger is a tried-and-true campaign strategy and success with voters is far from guaranteed.

( Also on POLITICO: Reid: Kochs delaying Ukraine aid)

“The Democrats have realized that they can’t win on their ideas. Instead, they’ve resorted to personal attacks on the Kochs. This is not a new tactic,” said Rob Tappan, a spokesman for Koch Industries. “It’s escalated because Senator Reid is running scared and worried about losing the Senate and his job as majority leader.”

So far, Democrats are focused on the “fix it, don’t repeal it” Affordable Care Act message pushed by party elders. But now they also want to convince voters that GOP candidates will repeal Obamacare’s popular provisions, curtail safety net programs and roll back environmental regulations, all by winning the Senate with the support of AFP’s millions.

A Republican-led Senate would actually be a “Koch Brothers Congress” that would reflect their “richest-take-all policy agenda,” Reid said Thursday. This week the Reid-affiliated Senate Majority PAC launched an advertisement in Louisiana alleging that Senate candidate and Rep. Bill Cassidy (R-La.) would be “bought and paid for” by the billionaires if he beats Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.). Up for reelection this year, Sen. Mark Begich (D) unveiled a TV spot in his home state of Alaska devoted to telling the “Koch brothers go home.”

Begich sounds much like Reid when talking about the Kochs, accusing them in an interview of trying to “buy elections” and calling them “irresponsible” for the shutdown of an Alaska refinery under Koch Industries’ umbrella.

“What’s motivating that? They’re closing a plant and laying off 80 Alaskans and leaving dirty water that Alaskans have to deal with,” Begich said of his ad. “What’s motivating it? They’re irresponsible people.”

The Koch-bashing is a tactic that Democrats believe garners them rafts of free media exposure in an uphill battle against $30 million in AFP TV ads to date that Democrats say distort their record on health care and climate change.

Asked about the ads AFP is running in Alaska, Begich said: “What they’re saying is absolutely false. But they still run ‘em because that’s what they do. They don’t tell the truth, they just throw whatever’s out there and hope it sticks.”