Two years into the Affordable Care Act, there are still places in Alabama where a significant number of people don't have health insurance. You can cite many reasons for the issue – including the decision by state officials not to expand Medicaid – but the bottom line is this: an estimated 12 percent of Alabamians, about 588,000 people, don't have medical insurance coverage.

The New York Times recently mapped locations based on the percentage of people without health insurance. Using that data, here are the 15 Alabama counties where the most people live without health insurance.

20 percent uninsured

Sumter County – 20 percent

Perry County – 20 percent

19 percent uninsured

Macon County – 19 percent

Escambia County – 19 percent

Dallas County – 19 percent

18 percent uninsured

Wilcox County – 18 percent

Bullock County – 18 percent

Barbour County – 18 percent

17 percent uninsured

DeKalb County – 17 percent

Pickens County – 17 percent

Choctaw County-17 percent

Washington County – 17 percent

Conecuh County – 17 percent

Monroe County – 17 percent

Butler County – 17 percent

Interestingly enough, two of the counties – Escambia and Washington – have seen their numbers of uninsured grow since Obamacare was implemented in 2013. Escambia County's uninsured rate grew 2 percent while Washington County's grew 1 percent in the last two years.

Uninsured rates in the other counties either remained flat or improved slightly – none by greater than 2 percent – from 2013.

The lowest uninsured rate in the state was Shelby County, where 7 percent aren't covered. That's a decline from 10 percent in 2013.

Welcome to Tuesday's Wake Up Call. Let's get moving:



Trick or treat medications?

Police in Quebec are investigating how a woman's medication for bipolar disorder ended up being handed out to trick-or-treaters at a grocery store on Halloween.

Police said a customer dropped medication from her purse by mistake and another customer took it to the service desk at Metro grocery store. It was placed next to the candy and handed out to children by mistake.

It's not believe anyone swallowed the pills – which can cause suicidal thoughts, nausea and tremors – but at least one girl chewed them up before spitting them out.

Going to see Star Wars? Leave your costume at home

Star Wars' The Force Awakens comes out Dec. 18 but some theaters are already warning people to leave their costumes at home.

Cinemark Theater in Los Angeles is selling tickets but advising people that "no face coverings, face paint, or simulated weapons — including light sabers — will be allowed in the buildings."

The reason behind the ban is likely safety concerns, after the deadly 2012 shootings during a showing of "The Dark Knight Rises" and July's slaying of two at a Louisiana theater during a screening of "Trainwreck.:

Hastert portrait removed from House hallway

The portrait of former Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert has been removed from the House hallway where it had hung for years following his guilty plea in connection to fraud charges.

The payments from Hastert are tied to a $3.5 million payment the Illinois Republican was paying to a former student in connection to sexual abuse allegations.

New Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wisc., had Hastert's portrait replaced with one of Frederick H. Gillett of Massachusetts, Speaker from 1919 to 1925.

Bacon may soon get a warning label in California

Bacon is really having a bad fall.

First, the World Health Organization came out with a report that bacon, along with other red and processed meats, cause cancer. Now, a California group wants to see bacon, sausage, hot dogs, ham, beef, veal and pork come with a warning label.

The Center for Biological Diversity said California's Prop 65 required the state to list all chemical and substances on WHO's International Agency for Research on Cancer as "carcinogenic to humans." That means a label similar to the one now applied to tobacco products should be placed on meat products, the group said.

The California Attorney General's office has not responded to the idea.

Until tomorrow.