More than 200 people crossed the great chasm to worship during sunrise Easter Sunday morning at the Royal Gorge Bridge and Park. ( DC Spencer / Daily Record )

Dawn at the Royal Gorge Bridge and Park on Resurrection Sunday. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

Like the women who went to the tomb in pre-dawn darkness two millennia ago, the faithful came Sunday to the Royal Gorge Bridge and Park in moonlight. Some drove across the span, their headlights cutting a narrow path. Others traveled on foot above the shadowed depths.

And by the time the sun spilled over the eastern sky, more than 200 attendees had gathered on the south rim to celebrate life.

"Happy resurrection," said Grant Adkisson, preacher and president of the Fellowship of Christian Cowboys, Inc. How appropriate, he added, that the resurrection of Jesus Christ would be celebrated at the sight of the resurrected Royal Gorge Bridge and Park.

"Some glad morning," rang out against the stone walls as Jamie Bennett and Russ Bogle of the group, His Witness, led congregants in song.

The hat was passed, literally, as several black Stetsons filled with dollar bills earmarked to buy Cowboy New Testaments, the most-shipped Bible to Europe, Adkisson told the crowd.

Adkisson said he and Royal Gorge Bridge and Park general manager Mike Bandera recently tested the zip line.

"I'll see ya on the other side," Adkisson recalled telling a surprised Bandera. "Not death — the other side of the Royal Gorge."

Blackened snags dotted the area, alongside thriving pines. Adkisson challenged his listeners with the importance of death, for without it, there is no resurrection, he said.

"What good is that death?" he asked, speaking of the crucifixion of Christ. "What good is the fire?" that destroyed nearly every man-made aspect of the Royal Gorge in 2013.

Advertisement

"I think the good could be hope," Adkisson said. He prays that every person who visits the Gorge in coming seasons "will look at this and see resurrection ... see God's creation ... see hope in this life."

There is hurt and there are struggles, "but there's also hope because of Jesus Christ," he added. "We can be free and forgiven through Jesus' death and resurrection."

Sunday's traditional Sunrise Service was the first since the Royal Gorge Park was ravaged by fire June 11, 2013. Several participants were first-timers, as well.

More than 200 people crossed the great chasm to worship during sunrise on Easter Sunday morning at the Royal Gorge Bridge and Park. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

"She just wanted to come to church on Easter," Melissa Stotler said of her daughter Kaitie, a fifth-grader in Cañon City. "We haven't been to a sunrise service in a long time, so we came up here."

"It was cool," Kaitie said, reinforced by her mother's supportive, "literally and figuratively."

No wind buffeted worshippers, and temperatures remained near 40 degrees.

Jean Hansen and Jim Jones also enjoyed the picturesque church setting for the first time.

"I thought it was absolutely wonderful and very, very inspiring," Hansen said. "Grant just knows how to present the gospel, and the sun really did its thing this morning."

Jones agreed. "This was absolutely fabulous," he said. "It meant a lot to me."