National Tax credits for doctors giving pro bono services to poor sought

InterAksyon.com

The online news portal of TV5

MANILA - To encourage Filipino doctors to stay in the country and help their countrymen, a lawmaker seeks to grant incentives in the form of tax credit to physicians who render pro bono services to indigents.

Nueva Ecija Rep. Estrellita “Ging” Suansing (First District) raised the proposal in light of reports that some doctors in the country have taken up nursing courses as their stepping stone to higher paying nursing jobs abroad.

“This worsens the shortage of healthcare workers and lessens the access of our poor countrymen to basic health care services. Thus, there is a need to give incentive to Filipino doctors to persuade them not to leave our country and be of help to our countrymen,” said Suansing, a first-term lawmaker.

She said her proposal complements Article II, Section 15 of the Constitution which provides that the “State shall protect and promote the right of the people to health and instill health consciousness among them.”

Likewise, she said Article XIII, Section II of the Constitution provides the “State shall take certain steps to prioritize the needs of the underprivileged, the sick, the elderly, the disabled, and the women and children.”

“It is sad to note that many of our countrymen, particularly in the rural areas cannot afford the cost of seeking medication. Most Filipinos choose to spend for their basic necessities first over their health. If at all, many of our countrymen seek medical attention after their

condition has gone worse. Some, sadly, die without even seeking medications,” said Suansing, a vice chairperson of the House committee on women and gender equality.

This situation could be attributed to the high cost of medication and lack of healthcare workers in the provinces due to the exodus of doctors and nurses in foreign countries, according to Suansing.

In House Bill 2790, which is now pending at the House committee on ways and means chaired by Rep. Miro Quimbo (2nd District, Marikina City), Suansing said it shall be the declared policy of the State to adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to health development, and endeavor to make essential goods, health, and other social services available to all the people at affordable cost. The State shall also endeavor to provide free medical care to poor patients, according to the bill.

The bill provides that physicians rendering pro bono services to poor patients shall be entitled to tax credits to be deducted from their gross income.

The Department of Health (DOH) and the Philippine Medical Association (PMA) shall evaluate the pro bono services rendered by the physicians considering the number of hours and nature of treatment involved.

The Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), in consultation with the DOH and the PMA, shall promulgate the rules and regulations for the effective enforcement of the provisions of the proposed Act.