Flimsy paper gowns, beds with rails: these are the things that hospitals are made of, or at least, they were. Healthcare is changing. Since the Affordable Care Act passed six years ago, there’s been growing pressure to keep costs down by keeping people out of the hospital. And that’s finally starting to sink in across the North Country.

Now, Canton-Potsdam Hospital is building a new center for outpatient care. Other hospitals are teaming up with the goal of reducing admissions. But it’s hard to know when the public will be healthy enough to take full advantage.

Construction workers competed against the elements this year to build Canton-Potsdam’s new medical center on Route 11 outside Canton. It was about 10 degrees below zero the day I visited in March. But facilities manager Randy VanBrocklin still agreed to let me climb up onto an open steel deck that overlooks a working hay field. "This would be the second floor of the building," VanBrocklin said. "On this floor, primarily orthopedics, musculoskeletal services, pain management."

Those are services you don’t see a lot of in the North Country. Canton-Potsdam Hospital CEO David Acker said patients have had to drive to Syracuse or Burlington. "For many people, suggesting that they travel three hours — especially on a recurring basis — is tantamount to a denial of care," Acker said. At $23 million, the new building is a big investment. But Acker said Canton-Potsdam Hospital bet a long time ago that expanding outpatient care would pay off.

That’s been the trend ever since the Affordable Care Act passed in 2010; Insurance companies, Medicaid, and Medicare are all trying to promote preventive medicine. It’s a lot cheaper to send someone to the doctor than it is to put them in the hospital overnight. In other words, these health organizations want people to be more like Pete Bishop.

Bishop, who was pouring concrete at the Canton-Potsdam job site when I met him, is a pretty healthy guy. He goes to the doctor. And he wasn't fazed by the cold weather. "I’ve been working outside for 46 years, so I’m used to it," Bishop said. Bishop has lived in Massena all his life. But when it comes to his healthcare, "I go to Potsdam," Bishop said. "Because I was born in Potsdam. The doctors are there. That’s where I go. It's secure there."

Right now, people have their pick of 16 hospitals in the North Country. Healthcare consultant Dan Sisto said 16 might be too many. "You have very low population growth," Sisto said. "So it’s unlikely that these institutions are going to see growth in coming years, or new revenue, as the federal and state government tries to control their Medicaid and Medicare expenditures." Sisto came to that conclusion two years ago when the New York Department of Health asked him to chair the North Country Health Systems Redesign Commission. After looking at a patchwork of hospitals and doctors’ offices, the commission members suggested a more streamlined system. "We said, 'Look. Not every hospital should be saved just because they get in financial trouble,'" Sisto said. "Some of them should be allowed to close."

But there's another consideration, the people who actually use these facilities. Massena Memorial Hospital was heading toward bankruptcy before CEO Robert Wolleben took over in 2014. Wolleben said the hospital is doing better now. But Massena Memorial isn’t seeing a lot of healthy people, like your Pete Bishops. Instead, they’re seeing patients who are seriously ill. "We had a patient who came into our emergency room last week who had a blood sugar of 1353," Wolleben said. A healthy blood sugar is 180 or less , according to the American Diabetes Association. "It’s almost inconceivable. And this person hadn’t seen a doctor in six years. Well, the reason they came into the emergency room is they were damn near close to death."

Wolleben said he has a lot of stories like that, and you’ll find them all across the North Country. Rates of obesity, excessive drinking, and smoking are high compared to the rest of the state. There’s also a shortage of doctors who provide primary care. For a lot of people, the emergency room is their only stop. "So if we’re not here to take care of those patients, those patients are not going to be cared for," Wolleben said.

Massena Memorial and other hospitals get stuck in between two worlds. They are partnering up, looking for efficiencies, and trying to steer people toward preventive care. There’s also a big carrot, a pot of $7.4 billion that the Medicaid program turned over to the state. If the hospitals actually change and start producing better outcomes for their patients, they could get a piece of it.

But the hospitals can’t stop doing things the old way, treating the sick people who come to them. And none of them want to get left behind. Nate Howell is CEO of Claxton-Hepburn Medical Center in Ogdensburg. He said it supports more than just patients. "We’re the largest employer in our community and we have good jobs," Howell said. "I don’t want to be in the Ogdensburg that doesn’t have Claxton-Hepburn because it’s a tough life out there."

Healthcare is a huge part of the North Country’s economy. Howell said Claxton-Hepburn is doing its part to change. It opened clinics and added more outpatient care, but change is still hard. "We’re pretty good at providing care in the hospitals. We’re not as good at providing it up front in the communities, and that’s what we’re being asked to do," Howell said. "It’s a lot of change and a lot of challenge for these institutions, and that’s what’s hitting the North Country now.

It could take years before healthcare starts to change, and even longer before we see the effects. Sisto, the analyst, said he doesn’t know how long the reform movement will wait. "We’re still at a point where we’re too weak because we’re fragmented," Sisto said. "By hook or by crook, government is going to make sure that this change occurs."