Drought should trigger construction moratorium

With all the discussion about drought restrictions, water conservation, traffic problems and over-development (WinCup, for instance), I find the absence of any discussion of a construction freeze puzzling.

Considering the consensus that exists in our county that we don’t have enough water, space or infrastructural resources for the people and business we already have, why do we continue building more and more houses, offices, apartments and condos?

With a state of emergency operating at the county, state and federal levels because of the drought conditions we face, it occurs to me that the Board of Supervisors would be well within its authority to order a countywide freeze on the issuance of new construction permits at least until the state of emergency abates.

Such a freeze would show we recognize the limits of growth within our own county, and would stand as both an environmentally and developmentally sound alternative to the policies of unlimited expansion we have followed for far too long.

Short of immediate action, a debate on freezing new construction would be the next best thing, and should be included in any public hearing or discussion impacting zoning, building permits, or community development going forward.

I hope this debate will begin at once, as we have tarried in addressing the reality of the limits of growth in our county for far too long already.

— Michael Wyman, Greenbrae

Southern Marin board needs to take action

At its June 24 meeting, the board of the Southern Marin Fire Protection District met to approve its response to the grand jury’s report: “Pension Enhancements: A Case of Government Code Violations and Lack of Transparency.”

In his memo to the board establishing the grounds for the board’s required response to the grand jury, the district’s attorney wrote: “If the future annual costs determined by the actuary were not disclosed at a public meeting two weeks prior to adoption of the benefit increases, the district did not comply with the disclosure process under the statute.”

Though it tried, the district could provide no evidence this was done.

This grand jury said the same thing.

The district said in its required response: “Many factors contributed to the unfunded pension liability, making it difficult to isolate the impact of any particular factor. However, the district agrees that the benefit increases of the employers are a factor.”

The grand jury said the same thing.

The public and the district are now faced with the following set of facts:

1. The board has been told by its attorney and by the grand jury that it violated statutes required for the passage of pension benefits.

Advertisement

2. The board acknowledged in its response to the grand jury that the taxpayers have been harmed by this violation.

3. The board members are fiduciaries to the citizens of the district.

Once individuals are informed that people to whom they have a fiduciary obligation have been harmed they have a legal obligation to pursue a remedy. This is a serious, thoughtful, competent board, more so than most. What will it do?

Every taxpayer in the district and every governing body whose citizens are in the district should be watching carefully and, if necessary, pressuring the Southern Marin Fire Protection District board to take action.

— David C. Brown, Mill Valley, Citizens for Sustainable Pension Plans

Trump is right to speak out on immigration

I hope all the liberal Republicans and lefty Democrats are reconsidering the madness of not enforcing immigration laws for decades in light of the random slaughter on the Embarcadero by a five-time deported “undocumented” immigrant from Mexico.

Thirteen percent of California prisoners are illegal immigrants, costing the state’s taxpayers $1 billion a year to keep them.

Thirty percent of federal prisoners are undocumented immigrants, costing billions to taxpayers.

The Los Angeles County District Attorney’s Office has over 300 murder arrest warrants for undocumented immigrants who have fled back to Mexico and may reappear at anytime.

Enough is enough; when we deport someone they should not be able to just walk back into the country the next day.

Donald Trump is right to point out how twisted the system has become and while he may not be the best messenger, I support his right to speak his views and hope Univision, Macy’s, NBC and the leftist press will support American citizens for a change.

— Tim Peterson, San Anselmo

Can the United Nations make a difference?

The usefulness and justification of the United Nations has been challenged since its inception at San Francisco in 1945; and now re-emerges on its 70th anniversary. These critiques persist mainly because it has not achieved the successes for which many had hoped.

Its signatories — learning from the failures at the League of Nations — understood that a body involving multiple nations with differing interests could not function in harmony. Hence, they pursued a more realistic and flexible charter that could survive internal disputes.

Despite its flaws, the UN has provided inroads toward mitigating world problems, which could not have been pursued without such an organization.

It has been our sole means for aligning the world body and deflecting conflicts.

This leaves the question: Are we better off with the UN than without it?

— Robert Settgast, San Rafael

Offering equal access for health care?

Congress created Medicare 50 years ago to provide seniors with health care, giving them protection against financial ruin, and peace of mind.

All that was needed was proof of age and citizenship (or legal residency). It was so simple and straightforward that all seniors were enrolled in six months, in the pre-computer era — using index cards!

Congress could have and should have extended Medicare to cover all Americans, creating a single-payer system with the free choice of doctors and hospitals that seniors enjoy. Instead, it passed the hopelessly complex Affordable Care Act, with its malfunctioning websites and uneven coverage.

It has kept the wasteful and bureaucratic insurance industry in health care, wreaked havoc on the health care system, left millions uninsured, and millions more with woefully inadequate coverage.

It has also cost far more than simply extending Medicare.

It could be argued that by not extending Medicare to cover all Americans, the government is not providing equal protection under the law.

It is well known that people without insurance or with high deductibles wait longer to seek medical care, thus their illnesses or problems become more difficult to treat. They suffer more from injuries and disabilities, resulting in decreased productivity and poorer quality of life.

They face financial hardships or ruin (half of bankruptcies in the United States are due to medical debt). And, sometimes they die because they have no insurance (an estimated 50,000 every year).

Those with Medicare have more protection against the devastating effects of illness and injury, get more help overcoming or living with disabilities, and are protected against financial ruin.

“Equal protection” has been used, with some success, to improve access to education and, now, to allow same-sex couples to marry. It seems that an even stronger case can be made regarding access to health care — which is considered a right in every other developed nation.

— Ann Troy, MD, Terra Linda

‘Love and respect all people’

The ludicrous nature of Ray Schneider’s July 4 letter calling for magnanimity among Christians toward gay sinners is eclipsed by the hypocrisy of the disdain toward gays and the Supreme Court ruling shown by many who claim to be Christian.

If Christians follow their God’s wishes, and refrain from judging others, then why despair over the Supreme Court ruling sanctioning gay marriage?

Love and respect all people. Leave judging who is or is not a sinner to your God.

— Tom Short, San Rafael