CHRIS LIEBIG (Photo: File)

Should we spend three times as much on standardized testing as we currently do, or eight times as much?

That question captures the range of current establishment opinion. The establishment answer, of course, is eight times as much — and more.

Currently, Iowa requires schools to administer the Iowa Assessments every year. Because those tests are developed by the University of Iowa, we get them at cost: about $4.25 per student.

But in 2013, the state created a task force to determine whether to require a different set of assessments as of 2016-17. The task force considered two possibilities: the Next Generation Iowa Assessments and the Smarter Balanced Assessments. The former would cost $15 per student. The latter cost significantly more and would need to be supplemented with a separate science test, for a likely total cost between $30 and $40 per student. Those tests would also require unknown millions to buy and maintain the necessary technology; the task force — incredibly — didn't even try to estimate the cost.

The tests we've used for years are now inadequate, we're told. We need tests that incorporate "constructed responses" that require human graders, or tests that the students will take on computers, with technology that can adjust the difficulty of the questions to the student's responses. We need to make the kids sit through twice as many hours of testing as they do now.

The task force recommended the most expensive tests (though not unanimously). If you suspect there are diminishing returns from all this expensive additional testing, you're a Luddite.

What will get cut to pay for these tests? No one will say. Don't believe for a minute that the state will fund these new tests at no sacrifice to other educational funding. Every dollar the state spends on testing will be one less dollar available for general school funding — at a time when many districts are already making severe budget cuts. No matter how it's spun, the school districts are about to get hit with an enormous unfunded mandate.

Standardized testing is now the Defense Department of the school budget: Only the most deluxe, big-ticket, exorbitant program will do. Never say no, regardless of what has to be sacrificed. The testing companies get richer; your kids' education gets poorer.

The only thing standing between us and this enormous increase in spending on standardized testing is our Legislature. If your school district has to make class sizes larger, cut band and orchestra, eliminate foreign language classes, or worse — all so we can have the shiniest new standardized tests — you'll know who's responsible: state legislators who decided that no price was too high.

CHRIS LIEBIG of Iowa City has three kids in Iowa public schools and blogs about education issues at ablogaboutschool.blogspot.com, where he has posted an extended version of this essay.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1IzX4xr