Topics: Affordable Care Act, Andrea Tantaros, bush administration, Central Intelligence Agency, CIA, conservative media, Democrats, Fox News, Health care reform, jesse watters, Jonathan Gruber, Media Matters, Obamacare, outnumbered, Senate Intelligence Committee, Torture, Torture Investigation, torture report, Video, Media News, Politics News

The Senate Intelligence Committee today released the executive summary of its exhaustive inquiry into the Central Intelligence Agency’s use of torture in its interrogation of terrorism suspects, revealing appalling conduct by interrogation officers and agency officials’ pattern of repeatedly misleading lawmakers and the executive branch.

How are they taking the report over at Fox News, long an apologist for the Bush-Cheney administration’s war on terror policies? To say they came unhinged would, of course, falsely suggest that they were hinged to begin with. But you get the idea. Over at Roger Ailes’ network, they’ve decided that the report’s release is a grand scheme to distract the American public from Obamacare.

“I don’t want to know about it,” Fox’s Jesse Watters said on Outnumbered today, reacting like any good citizen of an authoritarian regime. “I think people do nasty things in the dark, especially after a terrorist attack.”

Watters added that he found it curious that the report’s release came on the same day that health care expert Jonathan Gruber, whose consulted the lawmakers who developed Mitt Romney’s health care plan in Massachusetts and Obamacare four years later, was testifying before Congress. Gruber has come under scrutiny for clumsy remarks insulting the intelligence of voters and once suggesting that Obamacare insurance subsidies were only available to those who received insurance on state-based exchanges, which is the key question in a hot-button case the Supreme Court will likely decide in June.

“I find it ironic that they’re dropping this report on the same day that Gruber’s testifying, to knock that out of the front pages,” Watters said.