U.S. Senator-elect James Lankford (R-Okla.) recently announced that he is going to use his “Biblical worldview” to fix the federal deficit.

During an interview with Family Research Council president Tony Perkins on Wednesday (video below), Lankford advocated repealing Obamacare, which he claimed would allow "people to pick insurance plans."

However, Americans can already pick their health insurance plans under Obamacare, noted CNN in 2013.

According to RawStory.com, Lankford stated, "I come from a biblical worldview in the way I address issues. I look at Nehemiah and how he handled things when he stepped into Jerusalem."

"It was that the people were in disgrace and the wall was broken down, but the two things that he focused in on was the constructive side of things and the debt," added Lankford. "Half of the Book of Nehemiah is just getting the people out of debt, so they could actually take on the other things.”

In the Bible, Nehemiah served as the governor of Judah where he reprimanded the rich for exploiting poor people and canceled the debts that the poor owed.

However, Lankford didn't go into specifics of how he would reduce the federal debt.

Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Krugman slammed the Republican Party's fiscal policies and their scary warnings about deficits in The New York Times today:

Predictions that deficit spending would lead to soaring interest rates, that easy money would lead to runaway inflation and debase the dollar, have been wrong again and again.

Governments that did what Mr. Boehner urged, slashing spending in the face of depressed economies, have presided over Depression-level economic slumps. And the attempts of Republican governors to prove that cutting taxes on the wealthy is a magic growth elixir have failed with flying colors.



In short, the story of conservative economics these past six years and more has been one of intellectual debacle — made worse by the striking inability of many on the right to admit error under any circumstances.

Sources: The New York Times, RawStory.com, CNN