The Linda Vista Health Care Center has nearly doubled its size, converting a blighted grocery store into a new annex that should accommodate 40,000 more patient visits per year.

While this addition is designed to serve a specific geographic slice of greater San Diego, it is also the latest example in the ongoing race to catch up with the region’s booming Medi-Cal population. Today there are 754,000 Medi-Cal enrollees in San Diego County, about 300,000 more than in 2013 — before Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion took effect.

The infrastructure upgrade, and others like it in the works at federally-funded health centers scattered across the region, are working not just to serve the poor and needy in their communities but to deliver on one of the core tenets of federal health reform: Shifting patients out of emergency departments and into doctors’ offices where disease can be detected earlier and expensive hospital stays can be avoided.

So far, that goal has not been realized.

Recently-released data from the state Office of Health Planning and Development shows that, while the state’s emergency departments showed a 700,000-visit reduction in uninsured patients from 2013 to 2015, Medi-Cal emergency visits increased 2 million during the same period.

To be sure, the state added nearly 5 million Medi-Cal recipients during that span, and they surely do have many legitimate emergencies that need tending to, but experts say that many turning up in in waiting rooms have ailments that could be treated in a doctor’s office or urgent care center. In San Diego, the trend reached an inflection point in late March when local public health and hospital officials announced in a news conference that more than half of all local emergency visits were for non-emergencies.

But getting patients to choose a doctor’s office, rather than an emergency room, for more routine medical problems is no simple task. Adding more capacity, as just occurred at the spacious new clinic on Linda Vista Road, is not enough. More square footage and more doctors are definitely necessary to handle the increase in Medi-Cal patients, but part of the need is cultural.

Low-income families and many single women with children have long been eligible for Medi-Cal coverage, but the latest group brought onto the rolls includes single men and women who never qualified before. These folks, experts note, may have been getting all of their care from emergency departments in the past and may be continuing with that habit even after they end up on Medi-Cal.

Henry Tuttle, chief executive of Health Partners of Southern California, a nonprofit that represents 14 local community health centers, said that, along with bolstering the amount of available services, better education is vital for the newly insured.

“There is a general need for a cultural shift around educating people who are not necessarily aware of the differences between emergency care and primary care in a doctor’s office,” Tuttle said.

Increasingly, the region’s clinics are starting to work more directly with nearby hospitals to let patients know that they do not need to sit in an emergency waiting room for three hours when they have a relatively minor health problem.

Dr. Sarah Dixon gives patient Alana Rufael, 16, some medicine during her visit to Linda Vista Health Center last week. — John Gibbins Share Photo 





✉

Connecting

While many may be drawn to its expansive new entryway, brightly-colored walls and 21 new exam rooms, one of the most important features of Linda Vista Health Care Center’s new building is that the extra space provides a little breathing room to work more directly with the emergency department at Sharp Memorial Hospital.

A few weeks ago, several Linda Vista doctors met with hospital officials and informed them that they would be happy to take direct referrals from the ER and that those referrals would be seen within 24 to 48 hours. The clinic has also started opening for ER referrals at 8 a.m. before regularly-scheduled visits start arriving. Making the first appointments in the morning available to emergency patients, said Dr. Aaron Zaheer, the facility’s medical director, is already starting to reduce pressure on the emergency department.