Dizzy Dean was no ordinary hayseed from Arkansas. His million-dollar arm got him a contract with the St. Louis Cardinals and eventually got him into the Hall of Fame. But when he turned pro, pitching for St. Joseph in the Western League, ol’ Dizzy acted like a kid. Because he was a kid.

He got into fistfights with roommates. He ran up debt all over town at shirt shops. And he married a woman one day after meeting her. He settled down only when the Cardinals signed his brother, Paul, to look after him.

When the Rockies selected high school players with their first five picks in Major League Baseball’s amateur draft last week, they were betting on future stars. They’re about to throw millions of dollars at kids they hope have Dizzy’s arm or Troy Tulowitzki’s bat.

The best teenage baseball prospects in the country are more polished and accomplished than ever. But they are still kids. And growing up isn’t any easier than it was for Dizzy Dean in 1930.

Brendan Rodgers, a high school shortstop from Florida who was drafted with the No. 3 pick, and Mike Nikorak, a right-handed prep pitcher from Pennsylvania taken at No. 27, soon will sign multimillion-dollar contracts with the Rockies. They’re riding high now, wining and dining with advisers, scouts and general managers.

But then real life will kick in. And they will realize they’re just kids living alone. How they respond off the field — how these kids turn into adults — will determine, perhaps more than their baseball talent, how far they go with the Rockies.

“It’s a tough sled for a kid that age,” said Colorado manager Walt Weiss. “It’s a very dog-eat-dog business we’re in. This is a tough racket. And there are some tough lessons to be learned.”

The odds are stacked in front of them like the Green Monster at Fenway Park. About 300 high school players were picked in the draft this year, among 1,215 total selections. But only 234 players made their big-league debuts last year — and only 46 of those were drafted out of high school.

In other words, a high school player who is drafted by a big-league team has about a 3-in-100 chance of making it to The Show.

Of the players on the Rockies’ 40-man big-league roster, only seven were drafted out of high school — Justin Morneau, Kyle Kendrick, LaTroy Hawkins, Nolan Arenado, Jordan Lyles, Tyler Chatwood and Tyler Matzek. Only Matzek was drafted in the first round by the Rockies, with their top pick (No. 11) in 2009.

Rodgers and Nikorak — along with third baseman Tyler Nevin and right-hander Peter Lambert of California and right-hander Javier Medina of Arizona — will likely report to the Grand Junction Rockies soon. They’re each 18 years old. And in the rookie-level Pioneer League, with a cheap per diem, long days of work and outsized expectations, they will travel by bus to Utah, Idaho and Montana.

“Your life changes dramatically, 100 percent,” said Colorado pitcher Rafael Betancourt. “But that’s how you learn to be a man.”

Walking the road alone

Rodgers, a power-hitting shortstop with a power arm, already looks the part of a pro. His goatee and mullet make him look like he’s 18 going on 30. He hits a ton. And he aced the showcase circuit for teenage prospects. He might have been the best high school prospect in the country even when he was a sophomore.

On a Florida select team, Rodgers worked with Miami Marlins second baseman Dee Gordon and Tampa Bay Rays shortstop Nick Franklin. In Little League, his hitting coach was Dante Bichette.

The night Rodgers was drafted — as the third pick he was the third shortstop taken, after two college players — the Rockies’ newest hope said he was looking forward to learning from Tulowitzki.

“He’s one of the best power-hitting shortstops to ever play the game,” Rodgers said. “He’s someone I look up to. And hopefully in a few weeks, I can get some tips from him.”

But Tulowitzki — if he was joking, you can decide — wasn’t having any of that.

“I know he mentioned my name. I think he said I was going to give him some tips, but I will probably give him no tips,” Tulowitzki said. “I will probably give him the cold shoulder, keep that edge and make it tough for him.”

Rodgers will have to walk the road alone. And it will be tough enough without cold shoulders. There’s a line of Rockies prospects in front of him, including Trevor Story, Cristhian Adames and Rosell Herrera.

Intensity on the rise

Young prospects play more baseball than ever. As teenagers, they travel year-round to showcase tournaments that play more like NFL scouting combines. It’s not just Little League; these players get churned through a baseball factory.

Nikorak throws a 97 mph fastball. Before his senior year, he started working with advisers and nutritionists who regularly work with professional athletes. He gained nearly 25 pounds to impress pro scouts.

And when he became bored throwing fastballs to high school hitters, he worked with a personal team to add pitches.

“I was pretty much dominating with my fastball in high school and I knew I could get away with it,” Nikorak said. “But leading up to the draft, and for the (higher) levels, I knew I would need to develop off-speed pitches.”

Weiss said the focus on prepping to become a pro has been a give-and-take process for young prospects.

“It’s a lot more intense, a lot more serious at a much earlier age now,” he said. “There is a lot of opportunity created by it. But I don’t know if kids get to enjoy the game and experience the pure joy of the game as kids, like we did.”

“Learn as you go”

Pete Kozma, an infielder with the Cardinals who was drafted in the first round in 2007 out of Oklahoma, looks back at his teenage days as a pro ballplayer without regret. But there were times when he wondered whether it was the right choice, he said.

“The hardest part was learning how to live by yourself — like, really live by yourself,” said Kozma, now 27.

“In college, you have roommates and you’re at your own pace, with people to help you along. But up here, guys are polished, they’ve been through it, there are guys from different countries. So you’re doing it all by yourself.

“You’re just a kid and you have to learn as you go.”

If Rodgers and Nikorak — or any of the 15 high school kids drafted by the Rockies last week — ever wear a big-league uniform, it will happen only after they grow up. Baseball is the same at every level. But kids can’t survive playing in front of a third deck at Coors Field.

“We drafted some very talented young kids who we feel have a bright future,” Weiss said. “But there will be some growing pains along the way.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke

This article originally omitted Nolan Arenado from the list of Rockies high school draft picks currently on the roster.