Although he’s dropped out of the presidential race, Chris Christie has not avoided making news. As a guest on The Tonight Show, he addressed some of the latest examples for the attention.

As soon as Jimmy Fallon asked him about “the big scandal that you have going on,“ Christie knew what he was referring to. Fallon explained how people saw Christie pouring his bag of M&Ms into a bigger box of M&Ms at a basketball game.

Christie explained that he had “a big choice to make,” since arenas sell boxes of M&Ms which actually just contain a bag of M&Ms. He reminded Fallon he’s “an enthusiastic fan,” and he didn’t want to be dealing with “a flimsy bag” which “could spill all over the place” if Christie was going to get up and cheer.

Fallon settled it with a gold dish for Christie to eat out of, reading “CC’s M&Ms,” which “Donald Trump doesn’t even have… at games.”

Christie also had to answer for his standing behind Trump on Super Tuesday, and the memorable expressions on his face. Fallon asked what was on the minds of many, “were you being held hostage at this time?”

To reaction from the audience, Christie told Fallon “this is what you would look like if you were standing behind Jay Leno when he was doing his monologue.” He explained “if you’re used to talking, it’s awkward not to talk. So if you’re standing there, I’m listening. What are you supposed to look like when you’re listening?”

The two debated what Christie could have actually done, with Fallon suggesting he move over. Christie also turned out to be a fan of the Christie and Fallon cutouts that were brought out.

Christie also defended his endorsement of Trump which he called “hard, it’s not like I drew it out of a hat. It was my judgment that I thought he was better than the other two.” Christie also said he would support Fallon if he had declared, especially since he was wearing a New Jersey pin.

In part because of his facial expressions, Christie has a hard time believing he would be asked to becoming vice-president. After his term of governor is over, Christie would “maybe like to play tambourine,” for The Roots.