The plea agreement that spared inmate Edward Montour from execution began Wednesday night, hours after opening arguments in the death penalty case that spanned more than a decade and cost the state millions of dollars.

After more than 11 years of litigating hundreds of motions, two different pleas, Montour’s requests to die and then live and three elected district attorneys, the case came to an abrupt end in less than six hours. But prosecutors and defense attorneys say the sudden conclusion was the result of events and decisions that go back years.

Eighteenth Judicial District Attorney George Brauchler withdrew the death penalty on Thursday, and in exchange Montour pleaded guilty to first-degree murder for killing corrections officer Eric Autobee in 2002. Montour, who originally pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity, was immediately sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole.

Montour was serving a life sentence for killing his infant daughter when he beat Autobee to death at Limon Correctional Facility. During jury selection, defense attorneys introduced evidence they say prove Montour was wrongfully convicted and sent to prison in 1998.

Brauchler said Douglas County District Judge Richard Caschette’s decision not to delay the trial and allow him to gather experts who would prove the infant died of abuse “hamstrung” prosecutors. As a result, he worried jurors would not only fail to sentence Montour to death, but might also find him guilty of a lesser charge or conclude he was insane.

The plea agreement stirred a mix of emotions in court Thursday. Defense attorneys smiled and cried as Montour was sentenced, but prosecutors called the sentence “partial justice.”

The total cost of the case — including defense and court expenses — was not available Friday, but the district attorney’s office estimates prosecution cost was around $1.2 million. The Department of Corrections has a contract with district attorneys to prosecute crimes in prison, and the funds used to prosecute Montour were reimbursed by the DOC to the four counties that house Brauchler’s office.

Brauchler is also seeking the death penalty against Aurora movie theater shooter James Holmes, who has pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity.

The total, average cost of a first-degree murder trial without the death penalty is about $150,000, according to research from Coloradans for Alternatives to the Death Penalty Foundation.

Defense attorney David Lane said Montour was willing to plead guilty for years in exchange for dropping the death penalty, and prosecutors’ relentless pursuit of the death penalty cost the state millions.

But Brauchler said his office didn’t hire additional attorneys to work on Montour’s case. Attorneys on the case handled 472 defense motions — 295 of which required extensive litigation — filed since 2007.

Montour originally pleaded guilty, and a judge sentenced him to death in 2003. The Colorado Supreme Court reversed that decision in 2007, and the case eventually fell back to square one in April 2013.

John Blume, director of the Cornell Law School’s Death Penalty Project, said Montour’s case was not rare. There is no precise data, but Blume said in cases in which a death sentence is reversed, about 75 percent of them end in some type of plea agreement.

“Sometimes the prospect of doing something again is not very appealing to anyone,” Blume said.

Jordan Steffen: 303-954-1794, jsteffen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jsteffendp