As more consumers are insured and their self-pay responsibility increases, healthcare providers need to update their collections approach to making sure revenue is coming in.

Hospitals in the U.S. are experiencing a change in their financial risk as a result of insured patients carrying more financial responsibility through their health plans, according to a recent analysis by Crowe Horwath LLP.

According to the firm’s report, since the enactment of the Affordable Care Act in October 2013, and 14.1 million people securing insurance, overall provider collections have improved and part of their revenue has “shifted to a more reliable payer source from previously uninsured self-pay patient responsibility.”

The firm examined patient account transactional data from 444 hospitals through June 30, 2015 to report on the changing landscape of hospital self-pay patient collections.

“Hospital financial risk is shifting as the uninsured self-pay population decreases and the newly insured population increases,” according to a news release from the firm. “This is due to the rising number of high-deductible health plans (HDHPs) and the reduction in the uninsured self-pay population.”

Notably, total accounts receivable (A/R) from insured self-pay patients increased 13 percent in the past year, according to the news release. Total A/R over the same time period from uninsured self-pay patients decreased 22 percent, mostly as a result of high financial risk patients joining Medicaid in expansion states.

Additionally, as the industry shifts to consumer-driven healthcare, many patients or their employers are moving away from health plans with lower patient responsibility for HDHPs.

“These two market trends have resulted in higher overall and average patient responsibility for insured patients,” according to the report.

The average amount collected from insured self-pay patients increased marginally from the first quarter of 2014 to the first quarter of 2015. Insured self-pay payments have a much greater impact on total patient collections. Insured self-pay is defined as “patient responsibility for accounts with an insurance payer source (copays and deductibles.)” Uninsured is defined in the report as “patient responsibility where self-pay is the primary payer.”

For every one uninsured self-pay patient payment dollar in the first quarter this year, there were approximately 22 insured self-pay patient payment dollars. Lower average payments from the insured self-pay population weigh more heavily than uninsured payments on a provider’s bottom line, according to the report.

“Understanding the performance of self-pay patient collections for both insured self-pay and uninsured self-pay patient types is a critical component of a provider’s financial success,” according to the report.

“While the uninsured self-pay patient population appears to be performing better from an A/R perspective, the expanding insured self-pay patient volume and A/R highlights the need for providers to focus on this area of growing financial risk.”

Based on the findings, Crowe Horwath recommends that providers create strategies for improving financial performance in collecting from patients with more financial responsibility.

Staff who is responsible for financial discussions with patients should be well-versed on HDHP plans and determining which payments have the ability to pay, according to the report.

This can be accomplished through creating unique HDHP codes to separate patients who have traditional lower copays and deductibles and high deductibles than can be more than $5,000 for one adult.

The firm’s analysis shows than only 16 percent of providers have unique HDHP codes and most of the providers with the codes in place are not effectively registering patients with the information, according to the report.

Recommendations for healthcare providers firm include tracking self-pay patient collections, as the performance varies for uninsured and insured patient sources, according to the report.

Providers can implement strategies specifically designed for the insured self-pay patient type and should use a more focused approach.

They should also, “establish and enforce policies that improve collections based on pre-service deposits for elective procedures and by providing payment options for patients who are unable to pay initial balances in full,” according to the report.

States that have adopted multiple portions of the Affordable Care Act continue to experience more improvement in their uninsured rates, according to new data from the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index released in August.

Across the U.S., the uninsured rate declined from 17.3 percent in 2013 to 11.7 percent in the first six months of this year, according to Gallup.

Another group of consumers, the underinsured, are likely to have high deductible health plans and out-of-pocket costs.

Thirty-one million people, or 23 percent, with health coverage in the U.S. were underinsured in 2014, according to a report released by The Commonwealth Fund in May. The share of working-age adults who had health insurance all year but were underinsured was statistically unchanged since 2010, after nearly doubling from 12 percent to 22 percent between 2003 and 2010. People are considered underinsured if they have had health insurance for a full year but have high deductibles or out-of-pocket expenses relative to their income, according to The Commonwealth Fund.

“The replacement of traditional health plans with HDHPs is creating more patients who are not only newly insured, but who bear significant financial responsibility via copays and high deductibles,” said Cory Herendeen, a principal in Crowe Performance Consulting in the news release. “This has created more financial risk from the insured self-pay population.

Follow ACA on Twitter @ACAIntl or Facebook for news and event updates. ACA’s LinkedIn Group includes news updates, member discussions, event promotions, jobs and more. Visit the group page and request to join today.