Photo

I WAS 7 or 8. My parents had divorced. My father had moved out. Perhaps in an attempt to solidify his place in our young lives in the wake of these changes, my father took my sister and me to Detroit.

This is the earliest visit I can recall with accuracy. It was spring, but still too cold out for us California girls. I worried about my father wearing basketball shorts and a T-shirt with the sleeves cut off in 50-degree weather. He rented a car and drove us around the east side, a neighborhood already stippled with blight in the early 1990s, and tried to show us where we came from.

“This was the church where I sang my first solo.” He pointed to an empty lot. Where he was baptized, where he had his first fight — more lots. I couldn’t paint a portrait of my father as a young man on those streets. Had new buildings replaced the old ones, I might at least have imagined that those littered fields of grass could support a structure as big as an arcade or a movie theater, as he insisted they once had. As it was, a field looked like nothing but a field.

I loved visiting Detroit for the warmth of my family and the cultural institutions that make the city great. I dreaded the drives around town with my father. The word “depressing” came to mind. I was a child then, yet I already used the language I’d later hear from outsiders who spoke about the city.

I returned to Detroit throughout my childhood, and more frequently as an adult when my grandmother’s health failed. The city found its way into the center of my first novel. As I completed the final draft, I realized that my desire to learn more about the city’s history was tied to my need to make sense of my father. Both had been in need of rehabilitation for some time, and in understanding one, I came to better appreciate the other.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

My father made music. He told jokes. He cooked us one-skillet breakfasts and gave each dish an exotic name even though they all tasted like eggs, cheese and meat. He was sometimes exuberant, sometimes morose, depending on how the songwriting had gone that day. He drank. He showed up on my mother’s doorstep in the middle of the night with tears in his eyes and liquor on his breath. He totaled cars and burned bridges. Through it all, he took my sister and me out to eat every single Wednesday. I loved him completely, and I did not understand why other people saw only the worst in him.

I was working at a reference desk at a library in a well-to-do neighborhood in Washington, D.C., when Muriel Bowser, a black woman, won the Democratic mayoral primary last year. An older white male patron whom I’d always been friendly with stopped by my desk to get the election results. He shook his head when I told him that Ms. Bowser had prevailed, defeating, among others, a white opponent.