Despite some first-rate theatrics and top-flight demagoguery, House Republicans couldn’t swipe health care from millions of people.They get an “A” for effort.

Nor were they able to prevent adults who love each other from getting married. Now, you can be sure that some Republican lawyers somewhere are burning the midnight oil trying to find an objectionable phrase or clause in the Affordable Care Act, but in the meantime Fox News needs headlines, so Benghazi beckons.

When four people, including an American diplomat, were killed during a terrorist attack in Benghazi, Libya in 2012, an investigation was appropriate. The diplomat, Christopher Stevens, was the first U.S. Ambassador to be killed in an attack since 1979.

And there have been thorough investigations. Several of them actually. According to Correct the Record, there have been 32 hearings (public or private) involving 10 committees.

The latest committee, the Benghazi Select Committee, is not expecting to complete its work until 2016, which — this is surely a coincidence — is when former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s name could potentially appear on the ballot as a candidate for president.

By the time it’s through, the Benghazi Select Committee will have been the longest Congressional investigation in U.S. history, spending as much as $6 million.

Various investigations have asked 2,780 questions and published 10 different reports on Secretary Clinton’s handling of the attack on the embassy. She has taken responsibility. Through all the money, man-hours, and reams of paper, there is not a single example of wrongdoing by Secretary Clinton or anyone in the Obama administration. Nor has there been evidence of an intelligence failure. Nor has there been proof that Clinton or Obama gave a “stand down” order.

But now, with Obamacare and same-sex marriage both lost causes, the fringe of the GOP will undoubtedly focus all their energies on trying to damage Clinton as she runs for president.

H/T: Politifact, Correct the Record