A goal to have students 'think more globally and critically'

If you go What: Mountain View Elementary new early childhood education wing open house When: 6 to 7:30 p.m. Thursday Where: 1415 14th Ave., Longmont More info: 720-652-8261

Preschool students at Longmont's Mountain View Elementary recently used plastic pipes, black tubing and wooden balls to make ramps in the common area outside their classroom.

The students were exploring the common area of the new early childhood education wing, STEM Discovery, that will be unveiled to the community at an an open house Thursday.

The open house will include information about the science, technology engineering and math preschool, a tour, a chance to talk to teachers and the opportunity to try a design challenge.

"We want to have students think more globally and critically," said Principal Jennifer Ryan. "Preschool is naturally full of wonder. STEM is a perfect complement."

Mountain View's $6 million renovation also included a new library, a secure entry near the renovated administrative area, overhead projectors in every classroom, a new sprinkler system and a new drop-off and pick-up loop.

The 13,000-square-foot STEM wing includes five early childhood rooms with "makerspace" areas, integrated technology and other resources to complement STEM learning, plus a new preschool playground.

In the middle of the classrooms is a common space for bigger projects. The space includes a magnet wall, a Fibonacci sequence wall, a wind tunnel, pint sized craft tables and bins filled with materials like foam blocks, pipe cleaners and cubes that can be used to make mini robots.

Now, Mountain View provides half-day preschool sessions to about 40 students. In the fall, the school will provide a half-day program to up to 150 students, plus add a wraparound program of before and after care for working parents.

To make room for the early childhood wing, fifth-graders moved this year to Longs Peak Middle School.

Preschool and kindergarten students will learn a design thinking process, which includes using empathy, prototypes and feedback to solve design challenges. As the students move up through the grades, teachers are expected to continue the STEM focus.

For a recent challenge, preschool students listened to a book about a gingerbread man who was eaten in the end, then made boats to get him safely away. They also tested their creations, made from foam, tape, clothespins and other materials, in water to see how long they would float.

"They can explore and investigate and find answers," said preschool teacher Gabrielle Fuehrer. "It gets their little brains thinking. The kids love it."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa