Justice Frontrunner In Iowa Senate Race Said Federal Officials Should Be Arrested For Implementing Obamacare CREDIT: AP Photo / Justin Hayworth Republican Senate candidate Joni Ernst.

Iowa State Sen. Joni Ernst, the Republican candidate for an open U.S. Senate seat and current frontrunner in that race, told a group aligned with libertarian former Rep. Ron Paul (R-TX) that federal officials who carry out their legal obligations under the Affordable Care Act should be arrested. Ernst expressed this view in a questionnaire distributed by the Campaign for Liberty to state senate candidates in 2012. As Talking Points Memo‘s Daniel Strauss reports, one of the questions on that survey, which Ernst answered “yes” to, was “Will you support legislation to nullify ObamaCare and authorize state and local law enforcement to arrest federal officials attempting to implement the unconstitutional health care scheme known as ObamaCare?”

CREDIT: Screenshot from Campaign for Liberty via TPM

Nullification is the unconstitutional theory that a state can unilaterally invalidate a federal law and cause it to cease functioning within the state’s borders. This theory directly at odds with the text of the Constitution, which provides that duly enacted federal laws “shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby, anything in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding.” As James Madison noted in 1830, nullification would “speedily put an end to the Union itself” if it were ever accepted because it would render every single act of Congress optional.

Nevertheless, the concept of nullification enjoyed a bit of a renaissance among tea party activists shortly after President Obama took office.

Arresting federal officials who are carrying out their duties under federal law is also unconstitutional. In 1889, California arrested and charged a US Marshall with murder after the marshall shot a man who made an attempt on Justice Stephen Field’s life (Field, as I explain in my forthcoming book, Injustices: The Supreme Court’s History of Comforting the Comfortable and Afflicting the Afflicted, was one of the most loathsome people ever to sit on the Supreme Court, although he was still entitled to security to protect him from threats on his life).

Not long after this incident, the Supreme Court held in In re Neagle that the marshall could not be prosecuted by a state for carrying out his official duties. According to Neagle, a federal official who “is held in custody in violation of the Constitution or a law of the United States, or for an act done or omitted in pursuance of a law of the United States. . . must be discharged.”

The same rule would apply to an attempt by Iowa law enforcement to arrest federal officials implementing a federal law.