Garr, a TN Health Care Campaign volunteer, is touring the state from a home base in Nashville with the sole purpose of making sure his fellow Tennesseans are informed. If that can be accomplished, he thinks the now three-times-failed Insure Tennessee Medicaid expansion program can take hold throughout the state.

“Our goal is to get Insure Tennessee passed this legislative session,” Garr said Monday.

Two local lawmakers, Micah Van Huss and Matthew Hill, will be in attendance for a town hall meeting at the Visitors Center in Jonesborough at 6 p.m. Aug. 11. Garr and Hill both said they would love to see as many engaged community members as possible at the meeting, Garr for the reason that he believes a lot of misinformation about the Affordable Care Act, or “Obamacare” has worked against all the good that would come out of getting more lower-income state residents health insurance. Hill said he wants a packed house because that’s how America should work on important issues.

“My job is to hear all sides of the issue and that’s what my goal is: to listen and to learn at the meeting,” Hill said. “It’s my number one goal to do what’s best for the families of Washington County and if that’s to vote “no” then that’s what I’m going to do. If that’s to vote “yes” then that’s what I’m going to do.“

To get to position of support for expansion of Medicaid, Hill said he’ll need answers as to how it will be paid for, how long that funding will last and what would happen after that initial funding were to go away and what the long term goals of such a program would be. Answers to those inquiries would go a long way for Hill. Dozens of his constituents have called him — in what he guesses is an 80-percent against, 20-percent for leaning — to share their thoughts.

Much of that, he said, comes from a general distrust of anything from the federal government.

”I understand that many distrust anything that comes from the federal government then we become even more distrustful of things that come from the federal government that have President Obama’s name attached to it,“ Hill said. ”Does that make me leery? Of course it does. It does give me pause, and that’s putting it lightly.“

In 2010, when the historic Obamacare law passed, it was mandated that states expand their Medicaid programs to lower-income residents. That mandate was rolled back in 2012 and Tennessee has, to this point, held the line of not expanding. When looking at the numbers, Garr said it’s clear how many poorer Tennesseans would benefit for an expansion, following the national lead, which has seen more than 21 million citizens go from uninsured to insured.

According to the Tennessee Justice Center, “statewide, 47 percent of all uninsured Tennesseans, ages 18 to 64, have incomes below 138 percent of the federal poverty level, which would make them eligible for Medicaid under the new law.

Expanding Medicaid, which is called TennCare in Tennessee, could extend health coverage to over 300,000 Tennesseans.”

In Washington County alone, by U.S. Census data, that number is 7,924. In Carter County, 4,011 would be eligible, 1,141 in Johnson County, 8,805 in Sullivan County and 1,219 in Unicoi County. All five of those counties border or slightly exceed a mark that represents half of their respective county’s uninsured adults.

It’s not just the health of many across the state that Garr and proponents of Medicaid expansion would benefit. Citing several studies, Garr said the accepted figure of 15,000 to 20,000 would the number of new jobs across the state to handle the influx of about 280,000 newly-insured citizens.

“That’s big,” he said.

Comparing Tennessee with nearby Kentucky and Arkansas, where expansion has already occurred and money has been made on the state level, the health care-focused volunteer sees Medicaid expansion in the Volunteer State as inevitable.

To get that to that point, he thinks people will need to get engaged in events like the upcoming town hall meeting in Jonesborough.

For more information on Insure Tennessee, go to www.tn.gov/tenncare/article/insure-tennessee.

Follow Tony Casey on Twitter @TonyCaseyJCP. Like him on Facebook at www.facebook.com/tonycaseyjournalist