The Jimmy Fallon Show

This week, Veronica Mars star Kristen Bell stopped by the Tonight Show and participated in a rousing game of Pictionary with Jimmy Fallon, Steve Harvey and Demi Lovato. Elsewhere, President Obama went on Zach Galifianakis' Funny or Die show "Between Two Ferns" to promote the Affordable Care Act, while Kevin Bacon explained the '80s to Millennials. And the YouTube series The Velveteen Lounge Kitsch-en offered some pointers on how to celebrate National Potato Chip Day. Check out those clips and more in our weekly roundup of the best online videos:

Alt TV: 21 offbeat shows you should be watching

Kevin Bacon explains the '80s: The Following star Kevin Bacon takes a break from chasing serial killers to explain '80s culture and technology to Millennials. Come for the reference to "OkTwinder," stay for the hilarious outtake at the end.

President Obama on "Between Two Ferns": Zach Galifianakis' hilariously awkward interview with President Obama is a must-see, regardless of your thoughts on the Affordable Care Act.

Strangers kissing for the first time: The director of this short video paired up random strangers and had them kiss for the first time on camera. Do you think the end result is strange or sweet?

SNL backstage exclusive: In this online-only sketch, Saturday Night Live host Lena Dunhamis trying to have a private conversation backstage with cast members Kate McKinnon and Aidy Bryant, but they're interrupted by Vanessa Bayer, who wants to show off the new Beyoncedance she learned in a gym class.

Tonight Show Pictionary: It's Jimmy Fallon and Demi Lovato vs. Steve Harvey and Kristen Bell in this game of celebrity Pictionary on The Tonight Show. Who will win?!

"@midday": Chris Hardwick introduces the upcoming spin-off of his Comedy Central show@midnight, which will air at noon on OWN and be called @midday. Plus, meet the show's host Chad Softwick (Will Ferrell), who promises that everything on the show will have an inspirational message and won't offend anyone.

Velveteen Lounge Kitsch-en celebrates Potato Chip Day: The YouTube comedy series "Velveteen Lounge Kitsch-en" transports viewers back to the 1960s, with women offering tips on how to create tasty party favors and "lovely libations." In this episode, the series celebrates National Potato Chip Day and National Chip and Dip Day. (via Tubefilter)