make the most of your year-end charitable giving by ensuring that your funds will go to the deserving programs

By Ralph Summerford, president of Forensic Strategic Solutions, Inc

It's that time of year – the time to be charitable and donate money to a charity or cause we believe in. After all, with over 1.4 million charities registered with the IRS, finding a tax-exempt organization in Alabama is no problem. Making a contribution is a win-win because the charity gets to use the money supporting a worthwhile cause, and we get a tax deduction.

Our decision should be so simple, but the reality is the decision is far from simple. We need to look beyond the surface before giving our hard-earned dollars to what we are told is a worthwhile cause that mirrors our beliefs. Unfortunately, in life we often learn too late that things are not always what they seem. Why should we not believe the charity does actually use the money for its programs and stated charitable purpose?

This may come as a surprise, however, very frequently, a charitable contribution is diverted to the fundraisers and executives. Oftentimes the fundraisers and executives are one in the same, since many founders will leave the charity to start a consulting and fundraising business which contracts with the charity. In these instances, a charity is not a charity at all. It is a conduit to the executives in salaries, fundraising and perks.

In June 2015, a lawsuit was filed by a bank against Habitat for Humanity of Athens-Limestone County for a $250,000 line of credit which has gone unpaid. In its defense, the charity alleges its former executive director wrote checks for his personal benefit, paid personal credit cards and co-mingled other Habitat funds with his own.

The Kids Wish Network, a national charity, gives only 2.5 percent of the donated money it fundraises to its kids' programs. Kids Wish Network was ranked the #1 worst charity in the U.S. by the Center for Investigative Reporting and the Tampa Bay Times. These rankings of the "worst charities" are based upon the amount of donations paid to professional, for-profit fundraisers. During the past decade, this charity raised over $141 million, but paid 82 percent of that money to fundraisers and 15 percent to administrative expenses. When looking at the books further, this has been the case for more than 16 years at Kids Wish Network!

Charities succeed when their resources are not tied up in fundraising. According to Charity Navigator, the top 10 inefficient fundraisers spent, on average, 92 percent of donations on fundraising activities. For example, with over $9.4 million in contributions, Walker Cancer Research Institute in Michigan spent $8.9 million (or 95 percent of its donated funds) for fundraising and spent less than $400,000 on its programs.

The Birmingham News reported in February 2015 that both the CFO and CEO of Birmingham Health Care were indicted for multiple charges of diverting more than $14 million of charity funds for private gain, conspiracy, wire fraud, bank fraud and money laundering, among other charges. Additionally, connected to this indictment was Central Alabama Comprehensive Health, whose mission was serving the poor and homeless as part of the nationwide Affordable Care Act's goal of providing health care to all. In unsealing the indictment, Joyce Vance, U.S. Attorney for the Middle District of Alabama, pointed out that "criminals don't get to live lavish lifestyles by stealing money meant to provide healthcare to the poor and homeless."

So, what are you and I to do when asked for a donation to what appears to be a worthy charity?

The answer is pretty simple. We need to do our own due diligence for information on the charity. I get the exact name of the organization, then type that name into Google and look at the hits. I also highly recommend going to CharityNavigator.org, Guidestar.org and the Center for Investigative Reporting.

To be qualified as a charity, the IRS issues rules. Each year, the charity must file a tax return on form 990, which is a public document. These websites will lead you to the tax returns and a wealth of additional facts and data about the charity, including information such as executive salaries, administrative expenses, the amount spent on programs and the transparency of the organization.

On the other hand, some very small, very worthwhile charities such as Full Life Ahead Foundation in Birmingham will not be listed on national websites such as Charity Navigator. It is listed, however, on Guidestar, which gives it excellent ratings, worthy of charitable giving.

To operate, most charities naturally incur administrative expenses by paying executive salaries—but these operational costs must be reasonable. My personal guideline is at least 90 percent of the funds raised by the charity should be spent on its programs. You will find this rule to be the case at the Jimmie Hale Mission and the United Cerebral Palsy of Greater Birmingham. You may find exceptions to this rule, such as a program where only 60 percent of the charitable funds raised go to the worthwhile programs, but a substantial amount of funds are used for advertising to reach individuals who might not otherwise give money to a charity.

This year, make the most of your year-end charitable giving by ensuring that your funds will go to the deserving programs you want to support – not the fundraisers and administrators.