BARRINGTON – A lot of division exists in Washington, but there is reason for optimism, U.S. Rep. Peter Roskam, R-Ill., told an audience in Barrington on Monday.

Most national-level political progress, the congressman said, has been made in the realm of trade.

"There's been a lot of discussion and success with our export policy," Roskam said. "The president wants to double exports within five years."

Trade, tax and health care were prominent topics as Roskam spoke locally at The Garlands of Barrington, 1000 Garlands Lane.

Roskam represents the 6th congressional district of Illinois, which includes Algonquin, Cary and Lake in the Hills.

Roskam had a long day ahead of him, which included a chat with the Greater Illinois Chapter of the Alzheimer's Association at the Barrington Area Library and a plane ride to Washington, but Roskam said his "long view of things" is what keeps him going. In the Nov. 4 election, Roskam will run for a fifth term.

"Our country works when everyone shows up," Roskam said. "When everyone participates."

Roskam was referring to House and Senate members, as well as federal courts. Roskam said the biggest challenge in Washington is the clashing of "two very different views of the economy."

"Conflict sells," Roskam said. "Over time, we find balance and get something done."

What's Roskam keeping an eye on?

"Our tax code is a throwback," Roskam said.

"The rest of the world has their tax code figured out and the U.S. tax code has not been reformed since 1986," Roskam said. "We used to have the most beneficial tax code in the world. Now, Singapore has less than half of the U.S. tax rate and U.S. corporations are earning most of their money overseas."

Roskam said this tax rate turbulence will continue until the U.S. tax code is reformed.

"We have a temporary tax policy and permanent spending," Roskam said. "That's wrong."

Roskam said the U.S. tax code will likely be discussed in Congress this November.

Addressing Obamacare, Roskam called the U.S. health care system a "gigantic Jenga game."

"The one player who pulls the last piece from the (health care) tower before it falls will lose," Roskam said.

Roskam referred to the passage of the Affordable Care Act as Congress' "second fallback position."

"I believe most people were in support of a single-payer system, which didn't work," Roskam said. "Then, the first fallback position was in support of a big, public insurance company, which didn't work either."