Novelist Stephen King speaks to creative writing students at the University of Massachusetts-Lowell in Lowell, Mass., in 2012. (AP Photo/Elise Amendola)

Since he joined Twitter nearly a year and a half ago, horror novelist Stephen King has tweeted just more than 600 times. He tweets mostly about movies and TV shows and his dog, Molly. But every so often, he sounds off on politics.

About 5 percent of King's tweets are political, ranging from the 2016 election to gun control. He has gone so political, in fact, that he felt the need to rule out a run for governor of Maine (his home state) a few weeks back.

Here's some of his thoughts, many of which earned thousands of re-tweets:

The 2016 Republican field so far

Cruz, Paul and Rubio, all running for President. Hey, I thought I was supposed to write the horror stories. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) April 16, 2015

Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act

Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration act is gay discrimination, pure and simple. You can frost a dog turd, but it's still a dog turd. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) March 31, 2015

Maine taxes

Maine Gov. Paul LePage (R) in March accused King, as well as former governor Ken Curtis (D) and Burt's Bees founder Roxanne Quimby, of leaving the state to avoid paying taxes. King said he did not and called for LePage to apologize. LePage did not apologize.

Governor Paul LePage implied that I don't pay my taxes. I do. Every cent. I think he needs to man up and apologize. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) March 20, 2015

No apology from Governor LePage. Some guys are a lot better at dishing it out than taking it back. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) March 22, 2015

Brian Williams's suspension

Little lie? Brian Williams suspended. Big lie? G. Dubya gets his own presidential library. Moral: go big or go home. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) February 10, 2015

Brian Williams: Suspended 6 months. George Dubya ("Chemical weapons in Iraq--EEK!") $200,000 per year in pension benefits. America, kids. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) February 11, 2015

Sexism in politics

Could a woman of Chris Christie's size be taken seriously as a presidential candidate? Just asking, although I think I know the answer. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) January 16, 2014

Ted Cruz's appearance

To me, Ted Cruz looks like a revival preacher on late night cable. I guess they like that in Texas. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) February 9, 2015

He (Cruz) also has this SAD look, like those big-eyed waifs in the velvet paintings. Don't mean to rap on him, but it's a little weird. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) February 9, 2015

That thing where politicians put on coats or fleeces when giving press conferences on big winter storms

I love it when politicians put on their "storm clothes," like they're going to fire up a plow and work all night on the turnpike. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) January 27, 2015

The 114th Congress

"AMERICA'S NEW CONGRESS looks like the same old (expletive) to me."

Negative ads

Before voting next week, why not make a list of the vilest negative ads and vote against those people, no matter what party. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) October 29, 2014

If a candidate approves or refuses to repudiate a vile negative ad, what kind of rep would he/she make, anyway? Smack 'em down. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) October 29, 2014

The tea party

Revised Tea Party Gospel: "Suffer the little children come unto me. Unless they're undocumented kids from Central America." — Stephen King (@StephenKing) July 22, 2014

Gun control

Multiple gunshot wounds last night at Red Rocks. We regulator booze and tobacco; it's time to regulate firearms. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) June 20, 2014

The Affordable Care Act

He doesn't seem to think Republicans have an actual alternative.