From the consumer protection folks over at the North Carolina Department of Justice:

North Carolina consumers have until Sept. 15 to file their claim forms in order to obtain relief under nationwide “Ocwen Settlement”

If you lost a home to foreclosure between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012, and if your home loan was serviced at the time of foreclosure by Ocwen, Litton Loan Servicing, or Homeward Residential (formerly known as American Home Mortgage Servicing or AHMSI), you may be eligible to obtain cash relief under the settlement.

Individual consumers will likely receive payments of between $679 and $1,235, depending upon how many eligible people submit claims. Payment checks are expected to be mailed in late 2014 or early 2015.

Background

In December 2013, Ocwen Financial Corporation, and its subsidiary, Ocwen Loan Servicing, agreed to settle a nationwide lawsuit, brought by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and the attorneys general of 49 states, and the District of Columbia.

The lawsuit alleged that Ocwen had engaged in systematic misconduct in its servicing of home loans, including the practice of “robo-signing” foreclosure documents, charging unauthorized fees, procuring premature and unauthorized foreclosures, and deceiving consumers about loan modifications.

As part of the settlement, Ocwen will be required to provide $2 billion in loan modification relief to its customers and $125 million in refunds to consumers whose homes were foreclosed. North Carolina consumers will receive $26 million of that total recovery.

Now the deadline for North Carolina consumers to obtain their share of the recovery is fast approaching.

Take Action

North Carolina consumers who lost their home to foreclosure between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012 and whose loans were serviced by Ocwen, Litton, or Homeward (formerly known as American Home Mortgage Servicing, Inc. or AHMSI) should have received a package from Rust Consulting, the settlement administrator. The package contained a cover letter, claim form and instructions in English and Spanish in the mail.

Consumers have until September 15 to return their claim form. So far only 35% of the approximately 3,400 North Carolina residents who were sent claim forms have mailed them in.

Consumers can also file claims online at www.NationalMortgageSettlementOcwenClaim.com.

Consumers who believe they are eligible but have not received information about the settlement should contact the settlement administrator at 1-866-783-5382 or settlementadministrator@nationalocwensettlement.com.

For more information about the Settlement, see https://nationalocwensettlement.com/mainpage/Home.aspx and http://www.nationalmortgagesettlement.com/