Palestinian schoolgirls in the West Bank city of Nablus hold pictures of President Mahmoud Abbas with the late Yasser Arafat, flowers and olive branches during a rally supporting the Palestinian U.N. bid for observer state status in 2012. ( Nasser Ishtayeh / AP )

Recently home from a sister city delegation to Nablus, I find myself wistfully recalling the charm of Palestinian culture. Having traveled to three dozen countries, I know that each has much to offer. It is, therefore, no surprise that Palestinians enrich their guests as any other peoples would.

Following is but a glimpse of some ways Palestinian society is desirable:

Sustainability is a hot topic and most acknowledge that we need to live with less to survive as a species. Palestinians are far more advanced than we in this department.

For instance, the Palestinian public transportation system is remarkably efficient and effective. "Serveeces," seven- or eight-seat vans, are an extremely popular means to travel throughout the West Bank. These vans operate on a "when full departure" as opposed to an "on-time departure" system. In other words, they do not leave at half-past the hour even if there is no passenger just because they are scheduled to do so.

On the contrary, they depart when every seat is occupied. During rush hour, vans depart every five minutes and, in slower periods, a passenger may need to wait 15 or, sometimes, 30 minutes. Along the way, "serveeces" turn off the main road dropping passengers at small villages. Empty seats are filled by people waving "serveeces" down — anywhere along the route. Other than the starting and ending points, there are no official stops.

Advertisement

Building design and construction demonstrated an intelligence that is noteworthy. Daily I marveled that I felt cool and comfortable inside while it was 95 degrees or hotter outside, with no air conditioning or fan operating. Why wasn't it stifling, as it most certainly would be in my home under similar conditions? On occasion I even felt downright chilled and ventured to ask whether there was air conditioning, even though I could detect no physical evidence. I was chided, "No, of course not! This is an 'old' building (hundreds of years)!"

In the winter, I was told, old buildings remain cozy and warm inside, without the assistance of heating fuels or devices. In other words, hundreds (and thousands) of years ago, with no modern technologies available, people built structures that remain cool in the sweltering Mediterranean summer and warm in the biting cold winters, not to mention the fact that they are still around today as proof of superior architectural prowess. As we seek to decrease CO2 emissions and utilize locally-sourced materials we need look no further than Palestinian builders.

Palestinian social mores have much to offer. For one, men are allowed to show affection toward each other in public. My son, a junior in high school, daily gawked as teenage boys strolled arm-in-arm or holding hands, radiating love and affection toward each other. My son was incredulous that these quite natural displays of affection went unpunished. He has seen how, in the U.S., male high school students face bullying, taunting, and teasing if they are "caught" appreciating each other the way we witnessed on a daily basis. Have we become so homophobe-icized that we have no idea of, nor allowance for, affection between same-gendered humans?

As a woman, I felt a wash of freedom with the absence of half-naked women's bodies blanketing magazine covers, billboards and advertisements. I only realized how liberating this felt when, once home, I noticed myself bracing internally upon seeing overly sexualized women's bodies being used to sell even the most mundane products and services.

Palestinians' tightly-woven social fabric elicits tremendous benefits: in three weeks in Nablus, where unemployment hovers around 25 percent, I encountered no homeless people and only four people begging. In Boulder, I come upon twice or thrice that in a 15-minute stroll downtown. Palestinian families care for all their members, even the most wayward.

What I have shared may run counter to the narrow portrayal of Palestinians we are accustomed to. Imagine that Americans were lumped into the same characterization as our most diabolical killers: Aurora, Littleton, Sandy Hook, etc. Shall our society be wholly judged because evildoers arose from within our ranks?

It goes without saying that this is true for all cultures of the world. However, when we consume limited representations of others, it is natural to form biased opinions, like the blind man describing only the portion of the elephant that he can feel. I hope I have introduced you to a fuller portrayal of the "Palestinian elephant."

Essrea Cherin is Chair of the Boulder-Nablus Sister City Project and a conflict resolution consultant. The subject of this piece is available in a more in-depth presentation - please contact: essrea@bouldernablus.com to arrange.