The typical employee on the iSolved platform is in a company of about 150 employees. In these organizations, complex regulations such as the Affordable Care Act (ACA) are driving the need for HCM solutions. Employers must unify their view of their workforce to be able to efficiently produce and file the required reports and forms. By having everything in one data source, iSolved delivers the analytics needed for employers to achieve proper compliance, while minimizing their time and effort.

The iSolved solution also offers a highly engaging mobile app where employees can handle self-service tasks at any time on their smart devices. Employers can reduce the time spent by their HR departments on answering questions, updating personal information or changing tax elections. The employee can do it all with ease through iSolved's mobile app.

The iSolved solution is delivered exclusively through iSolved Network Certified Partners and Infinisource. The iSolved Network is an innovative ecosystem that empowers regionally based payroll and HR providers to offer iSolved to their clients with substantial support and resources provided by Infinisource. Network participation has been so successful that the Network will begin closing off acceptance of new iSolved Certified Partners in order to maintain the highest level of service to members and their customers.

About iSolved

iSolved is Infinisource's comprehensive human capital management solution for payroll, time, benefits and HR that manages an employer's most important asset — their people. The cloud-based platform is delivered through elite, regional payroll providers who provide best-in-class service to their clients. This unique approach gives small to midsize employers access to a cutting-edge HCM solution, while retaining the local service relationship they prefer. For more information, visit www.infinisource.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150212/175218LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/isolved-hits-major-milestone-of-two-million-employees-300255466.html

SOURCE iSolved

Related Links

http://www.infinisource.com