Planned Obsolescence

Diabetes experts say a good part of what companies label as innovation amounts to planned obsolescence. Just as Apple customers can no longer buy an iPhone 3 even if they were content with it, diabetics are nudged to keep up with the latest model.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Medtronic is the dominant insulin pump manufacturer, serving 65 percent of American patients and the majority of those worldwide. Though smaller companies sell cheaper pumps, it is hard to make inroads: Once familiar with the Medtronic system and its extensive support network for troubleshooting problems, patients are reluctant to switch. Doctors are leery of prescribing equipment from a new company that may be out of business in a year; their office computer may not sync with the new software anyway.

Cost of Diabetes Drugs Diabetes prescription drug costs have risen sharply. Prescription drugs 2,000 Inpatient costs 1,500 1,000 Outpatient costs 500 Other costs 1987 2008 For diabetes Types 1 and 2; adjusted for inflation.

Medtronic declined to talk about specific prices, but said a core tenet was to make only “a fair profit.” Amanda Sheldon, a spokeswoman, added: “We are committed to reinvesting in research and development of new technologies to improve the lives of people with diabetes, and our current pricing structure ensures that we can bring new products to market.”

For the small meters to test blood sugar, “the technology isn’t very sophisticated — it essentially hasn’t really changed much in the past 25 years,” said Dr. John Pickup, a professor of diabetes and metabolism at King’s College London. “The test strips are based on an electrochemical reaction. The new meters are a bit more sophisticated — they can make charts and things like that. It’s a little bit of added value to the patient. But the companies can charge a lot more money.”

The types of insulin available have evolved as well, as has their price. Synthetic human insulin is safer for patients, who sometimes developed reactions to animal insulin. But it is made by only three companies: Eli Lilly, Sanofi and Novo Nordisk. Manufactured in microbes, each one’s product has minor dissimilarities that reflect the type of cell in which it was made. Since the companies owned the cell lines, it is nearly impossible for other companies to make exact copies or even similar versions that would be cheaper, even once the patents expire. And the pharmaceutical companies defend the patents ferociously.

What’s more, the three companies continued to refine their product, adding chemical groups that made the insulin absorb somewhat more quickly or evenly, for example. They are called insulin analogues, and their benefits are promoted tirelessly to doctors and patients.

Photo

“The insulins are tweaked for minor benefits that may help a small number of patients with difficult-to-control diabetes, and result in major price increases for all,” Dr. Pickup said. Because of analogues, he added, Britain’s National Health Service has had to spend 130 percent more on insulin in the past five years.

In the United States, said Dr. Zonszein at Montefiore, the price of Humalog, Lilly’s analogue insulin, was typically two to four times that of its older human insulin line, called Humulin. “There is not a lot of difference between Humulin and analogues,” he said, but he noted that Humulin was getting “hard to find.” Sanofi Aventis has stopped selling its older product in the United States, and Mr. Kliff, the financial analyst, said other companies were likely to follow suit, effectively forcing patients to use the costlier versions.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dr. Todd Hobbs, chief medical officer of Novo Nordisk, defended the rising prices of insulin, linking them to medical benefits. “The cost to develop these new insulin products has been enormous, and the cost of the insulin to the consumer in developed countries has risen to enable these and future advancements to occur,” he wrote in an email.

Patients get squeezed between insurers or employers, who are trying to limit their outlays, and the suppliers. The constant shifts in products and prices are a challenge for even the most sophisticated consumers.

Denise Lombard, an insurance broker in Oakland, Calif., whose 16-year-old daughter, Gabrielle Woodland, has diabetes, said many policies contained “not one word about how they are going to cover insulin and supplies.” Gabrielle’s current policy does not cover glucagon, a hormone injection — which retails at $272.72 a dose — that families of diabetic children are told to stock should they faint because their blood sugar drops too low.

Photo

Jonathan Lloyd, a pharmacist in upstate New York, has been frustrated trying to manage the care of his daughter, Erin, 25, who uses a pump with a built-in glucose meter and is teaching in Nicaragua. When Mr. Lloyd went to fill the four prescriptions for her supplies this year, he discovered many of them were no longer covered by his insurer, which had switched to reimburse a different brand of insulin and a different metering system, because the insurer got a better deal.

He now faces a dilemma: His daughter could switch to the new type of meter, which cannot communicate with her pump, which would mean her current meter would sit uselessly on her waist. Or he can pay thousands of dollars to buy supplies for the meter she already has. “It’s so complicated — there are all these hidden costs, and I’m a pharmacist, for crying out loud,” he said.

Meanwhile, as the price of supplies rises, endocrinologists remain among the lowest-paid specialists in American medicine, meaning severe physician shortages in many areas and long waits to see a doctor.

Chronic Diseases

Most other developed countries — with or without national health systems — provide free care and supplies for people with chronic diseases, reasoning that the disease is a natural catastrophe that fells its victims unpredictably. Also, with such policies in place, other countries and health care systems bargain hard with drug and device makers to bring down list prices.

In Germany, where everyone must have private insurance and contribute co-pays, people with diabetes get their care free; the price of pumps and insulin is negotiated by the government. In Britain, each hospital negotiates for pumps for its patients, getting prices that are typically less than half those in the United States, Dr. Pickup said. The vial of insulin analogue that Ms. Hayley gets for $200 at an American pharmacy is typically bought by British pharmacists for under $30 and dispensed free.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Some economists say manufacturers extract high prices in the United States to compensate for the fact that national purchasers overseas demand bargains. That may be justified in a world where bringing a new drug to market can cost $1 billion, they add.

“To some extent, Europe is getting a free ride from the U.S.,” said Robert J. Shapiro, an economist and chairman of Sonecom L.L.C., a Washington-based financial advisory firm. “Drugs and equipment makers operate in a global market, and our costs are higher because every other country applies price controls, and we don’t.”

Mr. Kliff, the financial analyst, said some companies were no longer willing to sell in Germany as ever-tougher price negotiations have eaten into their margins. “I’m not saying they can’t make money there — they can,” he said. “But they can’t make the kind of money they make in the U.S.” He added that diabetes treatments remained highly profitable in the United States; insulin, for example, yields profit margins of around 70 percent.

With growing frustration but limited tools, the federal government has taken some tentative steps to fight back. Medicare is not allowed to bargain for insulin prices. But for the first time last year it instituted competitive bidding for diabetes supplies, cutting reimbursements for test strips, for example, by about 60 percent.

Even when governments negotiate prices and foot the bill, patients may feel the rising price of diabetes care in other ways: While about one-third of Type 1 diabetics use pumps in the United States, that number is under 10 percent in Britain. What is the right number? Since pumps are complicated to operate, young children cannot use them, and some patients prefer syringes that operate like pens because they do not like having pumps attached.

The British government will not dispense these costly items unless a patient’s diabetes has proved uncontrollable using other methods, but many doctors feel the devices are underutilized in Britain.

In the United States, each patient with a chronic disease must make the cost-benefit analysis of each new high-priced treatment, weighing symptoms, disposable income and insurance coverage. They are often wrenching decisions.

For Kristen Bailey, 28, of Colorado Springs, who has Crohn’s disease, an intestinal disorder, that meant not marrying her fiancée so she could continue to qualify for drug company assistance programs that provide, at no cost, two medicines with list prices of more than $16,000 a year in the United States.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For Jeffrey Kivi, 51, a chemistry teacher at Stuyvesant High School in New York, it meant recently giving up an intravenous drug that, as an outpatient, he had had infused every six weeks for years to keep his psoriatic arthritis at bay. Before taking that drug, Remicade, Dr. Kivi was on high doses of steroids for debilitating joint pain that left him unable to walk at times.

But when his last three-hour infusion at NYU Langone Medical Center’s outpatient clinic generated a bill of $133,000 — and his insurer paid $99,593 — Dr. Kivi was so outraged that he decided to risk switching to another drug that he could inject by himself at home. That is true even though his insurer did not require him to make up the difference.

“I cannot, in good conscience, continue to force my insurance company to pay $100,000 to NYU each time I get a Remicade infusion,” Dr. Kivi, who was a drug company researcher for many years, wrote to the hospital. “That’s insane.”

Photo

In a statement, Lisa Greiner, a spokeswoman for the medical center, said Dr. Kivi’s charge had been high relative to that of other patients because he had been prescribed a high dose of the drug.

He had moved his care to NYU Langone to follow his longtime doctor, who had moved her practice from a nearby hospital where the same infusion had been billed at $19,000. The average price that hospitals paid for Dr. Kivi’s dose of Remicade late last year was about $1,200, according to Medicare data.

Changing drugs is not an option for patients with Type 1 diabetes, like Ms. Hayley. They need insulin.

She is resigned to paying her share of the new Medtronic insulin pump. And she is steeling herself for other new costs that will bring. The pumps are designed to work with yet another new device called a continuous glucose monitor — bought separately — that could be lifesaving for some patients with unstable diabetes, because it sounds an alarm and suspends insulin flow if it detects that blood sugar has dropped dangerously low, which can happen during sleep.

This device has two parts: a disposable probe, which is attached to the body and measures the glucose level in the skin, and a transmitter that attaches to the probe to calculate the results and send to the pump. The probes retail for over $100 and must be changed every six days; the transmitter costs about $600. (Since such devices are not precise enough to adjust insulin doses — they are meant primarily to detect trends — Ms. Hayley will have to continue pricking her finger for meter measurements as well.)

She does not yet know how well her insurer will cover those. “You want me to be able to afford good treatment,” she said. “Because otherwise I end up disabled.”