Wondering where Michelle Obama and Oprah Winfrey have disappeared to?

Haven’t seen them looking disapprovingly at inappropriate selfie-snapping or comforting a career-ravaged celebrity on a couch for a while? Well that’s because they’ve upped sticks and packed off to Hawaii together, reports suggest.

According to TMZ, the pair are currently holidaying on the paradise island. The First Lady is apparently bunkered down at Oprah’s sprawling luxury estate in Maui.

A source told the US gossip site that SWAT teams and members of the Secret Service are on hand at the 12-bedroom mansion to provide Obama with maximum security for the duration of her stay.

A caravan of black SUVs and Maui police cars were also spotted over the weekend.

Highly Improbable, But Definitely Real, Famous Friendships







12 show all Highly Improbable, But Definitely Real, Famous Friendships





















1/12 Barack Obama loves to let his hair down occasionally with a B ball game and a quick blast of hip-hop. Which is probably why he gets on famously with... AFP Getty

2/12 ... Jay-Z, who even admitted he gets texts from the president occasionally. The true mark of friendship. That and a Cuban holiday. Although Obama denied any involvement in the couple's approval to vacation in the embargoed country. Rex Rex Features

3/12 It seems unlikely that many famous faces would admit to being friends with North Korean dictator Kim Jong Un, thanks to his appalling human rights track record. But one man loves him above all others... Reuters REUTERS/Kyodo

4/12 ... Dennis Rodman. "He's my friend and I love him," the former NBA star told a group of journalists at Beijing airport. He was on his way to N.Korea for the dictator's birthday B ball game. Getty Getty

5/12 Wikileaks founder Julian Assange has many a celebrity admirer. But there is one UK-based musician who he lunches with at the Ecuadorian Embassy more than most... AP AP

6/12 ... Rapper MIA. In fact, Assange recently introduced the star via a web link to her audience during a recent gig in New York. Getty Getty Images

7/12 Elton John's a popular man, with one of the most enviable address books in the entertainment industry. But you may be surprised to know... Getty Getty Images

8/12 ... About his highly unlikely but definitely real friendship with Chris Brown. “I met Elton about a year ago, and he's been a good friend to me," he told Page Six in March 2013. Reuters Reuters

9/12 Equally surprising? Former presidential candidate Senator John McCain's random kinship with... AFP AFP

10/12 ... Snooki. Yes, as in Jersey Shore star Snooki. “How's my friend Snooki?” he asked an MTV reporter in 2012... Before he added: "Congratulations again to her on the addition to the family and I still agree with her that we should never, never tax tanning beds. That was one of the worst things about Obamacare that could possibly have happened." Tactical friendship perhaps? Getty Getty

11/12 Bette Midler is a Hollywood legend. So many were surprised to learn that she had forged an unlikely friendship with... Getty GETTY IMAGES

12/12 ... Erm, rapper 50 Cent? “He has really made my life worth living. 50 has been with me through thick and thin," she told MyParkMag. The pair met during a restoration project in Jamaica Queens. Press

A Maui local, Paul Meyer, told local publication The Maui News that his usual cycling path was interrupted by police barricades and “secret service agents”.

“Two young guys were there and Maui police officers, and they said the road is going to be closed for the next week,” Meyer said. “I asked, ‘Is Michelle Obama in town?’ and the policeman just nodded.”

Michelle was originally on a 17-day holiday to Oahu with president Barack Obama and the couple’s two daughters, Malia and Sasha.

But the rest of the family flew out of the State on Saturday, apparently leaving the First Lady to enjoy the rest of her stay in Winfrey’s company.

The vacation is thought to be ahead of celebrations for the First Lady’s 50th birthday next Friday 17 January.

Representatives for both Obama and Winfrey are yet to confirm or deny the reports.

Winfrey has long been a supporter of the Obama’s, both politically and personally. The hugely influential chat show host’s backing of Obama’s election campaign in 2008 marked her first ever political endorsement, and she joined the president on his trail from Iowa to New Hampshire, labelling him “the one” in front of scores of prospect voters.

Off the beaten campaign track, they became close friends, attending intimate dinners and parties together. But reports that the trio had fallen out emerged in July 2013, after a number of observers noted Winfrey’s absence from the president’s second inauguration.

Further reports in October suggested that Winfrey declined to promote Obamacare medical reform as a result of the couple’s “failure to bring her in as a confident,” a source close to Winfrey allegedly told the New York Post.

These reports were later denied by Winfrey’s people, and she was seen in the couple’s company once more during Mandela’s memorial events in December.