NFL week 2 open thread

posted at 12:31 pm on September 20, 2015 by Jazz Shaw

Jazz: We started off the season in pretty much the same way that we ended the last one. Out of six games I managed an impressive… 2-4. The good news of course was that the Jets started the season with a win. The closest I came to denting Ed’s pristine picks was when the Giants led the Cowboys all through the game until the last fifteen seconds. At that point they suddenly realized that I had picked them to win and decided to give the game to Dallas out of pure spite. But hey… it’s only one week. (Which I believe is exactly what I said in week one last season.) This week I’m going to do better for sure though!

Ed: Well, well, well … look what utter ignorance can do for predictions! I’ve been buried in a project all summer, and ended up paying no attention to the NFL at all in the preseason. And yet … a 6-0 start to the season. It’s all downhill from here, though, I’m pretty sure, so I’m going to enjoy it while I can. Oh … and I paid no attention to last week’s games, save for a few minutes of the Steelers loss and the Dallas Chokers Club. 12-0, here I come???

Jazz: This week the Jets visit the Colts in the Monday night match-up. Indianapolis is a seven point favorite, but they’re playing another AFC East team here. They got stomped by the Bills last week and the home town fans should get ready for a similar beatdown by Gang Green. The Jets will shock the world and carry the day 31 – 24. Meanwhile, the Steelers host the 49ers who took down the Vikings last week. Pittsburgh is a seven point favorite as well and I really can’t argue the odds on that one. I’ll throw Ed a bone and pick his team in a higher scoring romp, 35 – 27. And finally the Vikings are hosting the Lions in what’s predicted to be a tight match. Minnesota is the favorite by a slim margin but I have a feeling that Detroit learned their lesson from not getting any use out of Calvin Johnson last week and they’ll beat the Vikings 24 – 13.

Ed: All right, I’m done resting on my laurel. The Steelers get the 49ers in their home opener, and they’d better take care of business, especially on defense. They didn’t look good in Week 1, but they started figuring it out later in the game. I’ll go with momentum and pick Pittsburgh, 24-17. The Colts flopped on the road while the Jets soared at home, but it’ll go the other way around this week. Colts over the Jets, 27-17. The Vikings may not be a good road team, but they play pretty well at home, and the Lions won’t have a dome today either. Vikings in a scoreboard thriller, 35-31.

Jazz:Here we go with the rest of the picks.

Patriots at Bills (1:00 pm, CBS) – The game is rated in Vegas as a tossup but I can’t pick the Pats. Not that I want the Bills to go 2-0 but I’ll take them anyway in a high scoring, defense free match, 34 – 31.

The game is rated in Vegas as a tossup but I can’t pick the Pats. Not that I want the Bills to go 2-0 but I’ll take them anyway in a high scoring, defense free match, 34 – 31. Rams at Redskins 1:00 pm, FOX) – Washington’s ground game just isn’t looking very good even if Cousins has potential. I think the Rams take this one 24 – 13.

Washington’s ground game just isn’t looking very good even if Cousins has potential. I think the Rams take this one 24 – 13. Cowboys at Eagles (4:25 pm, FOX) – The Eagles were all about the passing game last week. They looked good in that regard, but I don’t think it plays against the Cowboys. I’ll go with Dallas 30 – 24.

The Eagles were all about the passing game last week. They looked good in that regard, but I don’t think it plays against the Cowboys. I’ll go with Dallas 30 – 24. Seahawks at Packers (8:30 pm, NBC) – The Packers are at home and find themselves a 3.5 point favorite in Vegas, but the Seahawks aren’t the defending champs for nothing. Aaron Rogers will go big in the air but Seattle will wind up stuffing some of those down his throat. I’ll go with the Seahawks in an upset, 20 – 17.

Ed:

Patriots at Bills (1:00 pm, CBS) – Buffalo is favored at home, but I’m going to take an angry Tom Brady here and the Patriots. Should be a good game, 31-28.

Buffalo is favored at home, but I’m going to take an angry Tom Brady here and the Patriots. Should be a good game, 31-28. Rams at Redskins 1:00 pm, FOX) – Can I root against both teams? Rams in a snoozer, 20-14.

Can I root against both teams? Rams in a snoozer, 20-14. Cowboys at Eagles (4:25 pm, FOX) – Let’s face it — Dallas was lucky to get the W at home last week, and the Eagles played tough on the road. If the Cowboys play as sloppy in Philly, they’re doomed, and … they probably will. Eagles 35-27.

Let’s face it — Dallas was lucky to get the W at home last week, and the Eagles played tough on the road. If the Cowboys play as sloppy in Philly, they’re doomed, and … they probably will. Eagles 35-27. Seahawks at Packers (8:30 pm, NBC) – The defending Super Bowl Chumps lost on the road to the Rams, while the Pack won on the road over the Bears. Going home to Lambeau makes Green Bay look even stronger. Packers 37-24 over the Seahawks.

Related Posts: