Schillinger (Photo: Submitted )

Recently, some opinions expressed in the Green Bay Press-Gazette and other news sources in Wisconsin have painted state utilities as against renewable energy.

These opinions suggest utilities are seeking to increase the fixed charge for residential and small commercial customers to make investment in rooftop solar systems or other on-site renewable generation less attractive. They say the utilities are trying to eliminate competition.

Stu Dalheim, vice president at Calvert Investments out of Bethesda, Md., recently wrote that Wisconsin and its utilities have a choice to make: “embrace competition or lose out on investment.”

The real choice/decision is: Do we allow on-site generation in the current business model that permits third-party investors, such as Dalheim, to earn on their investments at the expense of local customers who will be forced to pay more than their fair share of electric grid costs?

It isn’t a competition issue. WPS has explored the possibility of getting involved in on-site generation. But, under the current rate structure it would still result in non-participating customers subsidizing those who have on-site generation.

Simply put, WPS does not wish to take “advantage” of the “revolution” Dalheim supports because that advantage is gained at the cost of our non-participating customers — those customers who can’t afford (solar systems can cost $15,000-$20,000) or aren’t interested in on-site generation. It’s a fairness issue.

Utilities have a significant investment in, and responsibility for, the construction, maintenance, operation, and repair of the distribution and transmission systems that bring electricity to the customer’s door.

These fixed costs are necessary to deliver a reliable supply of energy to all customers regardless of a customer’s energy use.

Solar customers are connected to the grid and need energy in the evening, when the sun doesn’t shine or when their demand exceeds their ability to produce power. Today, customers who do not have their own system pay a greater share of the cost of maintaining a reliable grid — the poles, wires, crews, transformers, meters, customer service programs, and more — needed to keep energy flowing every hour of every day.

For example, if on-site generators get to zero use, all they pay is the current monthly fixed charge of $10.40. The remaining fixed costs are picked up by everyone else, including low-income customers. It isn’t fair to our customers who don’t have their own energy system to subsidize those who do.

Utilities fulfill the responsibility of maintaining the grid through a fixed charge and a use charge per unit of energy consumed. WPS and other utilities are proposing an increase in the fixed charge of customers’ bills and a decrease in the use charge.

It is not a penalty for those with on-site generation. It is simply including more of the fixed costs in a fixed charge — for all. It will help to ensure that customers with on-site generation are paying more of their fair share and to lower the subsidies that other customers are currently paying for those who own their own generating systems.

This proposed structure is not new in the energy business. For years, member-owned electric cooperatives have included higher fixed charges on their bills — in the $25-$35 range and higher. Most WPS customers will see little change in their electric bill.

The new rate structure is based on a simple theory: Everyone should pay equally for the fixed costs of the electric grid. It’s a fairness issue.

Patrick Schillinger is assistant vice president-regulatory affairs for Integrys Energy Group. Integrys is the parent company of Wisconsin Public Service.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/YAlbeV