Buy Photo Chef Chris Wiltfang, from Skaliwags in Algoma, serves a customer from his food truck the Skaliwagon during the Food Truck Friday event June 12 in downtown Green Bay. A proposed ordinance that would regulate food trucks in the city was sent back to committee on Tuesday. (Photo: File/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

The food truck craze has arrived in Green Bay and the City Council has tried to stop it in its tracks.

Nationwide, the food truck industry has been growing at an annual rate of 9.3 percent in the last five years, with $857 million in revenue last year, according to IBISWorld.

Northeastern Wisconsin might be a little late to the party, but interest in mobile food vendors here is increasing.

For example, On Broadway Inc. launched Food Truck Fridays this year, held on eight Fridays from June through September at Museum Place.

Also, city staff have crafted an ordinance that would regulate, yet promote, the presence of food trucks outside of the regular festivals and events where they're allowed.

Yet the City Council on Tuesday sent the proposed ordinance back to the Protection & Welfare Committee for more discussion.

The move is disappointing for several reasons.

It further delays the operation of food trucks, especially during a prime time of year when people are out and about and more likely to patronize these food vendors.

It also exposes an attitude of status quo and protectionism that stalls the development of a vibrant downtown and city.

Alderman Guy Zima took the opportunity to do what he seems to do so well and that is to offend — "I for one am not interested in seeing Green Bay become something like Tijuana, where you see a bunch of ragtag businesses lining the streets" — while presenting a legitimate concern — "I think this is an insult to the property owners of Green Bay."

Many food trucks are far from being "ragtag," as Zima worries. They often offer unique and exotic fare that is on par with brick-and-mortar establishments. Take, for example, Nistebox of Sturgeon Bay. When we wrote about them two years ago the food truck was offering Norwegian-influenced burritos and sliders.

Food trucks offer a quick and cheap meal for many who may not have been intending to go to a sit-down restaurant. Plus they appeal to a younger demographic, many of them advertising where they will be through social media.

The ordinance would also allow food trucks to set up in areas outside the downtown. In some cities you'll find them outside factories, shipyards, office complexes, catching the lunchtime crowd.

As to Zima's concern about property owners, the presence of food trucks isn't quite "an insult," but they do provide competition to restaurants in the area in which they operate and, we believe, complement those eating establishments, as well

There's nothing wrong with competition. Did the city block Hinterland from opening across the street from Titletown Brewing? Does the city stop new restaurants or bars opening right next to existing ones?

No. It allows these businesses carve out their niche and then lets the consumer decide.

It's true that brick-and-mortar restaurants that own property, and pay utilities and property taxes may not like these mobile vendors without those fixed costs, but as long as the ordinance doesn't give an unfair advantage to one business over another, then we believe it should go forward.

We believe the proposed ordinance does just that. It prohibits food trucks from setting up within 150 feet of a "public entrance of any business which sells a food product during the hours the particular business is open for sale" and 500 feet from any fair, festival or special event sanctioned by the city.

The ordinance sets licensing requirements, addresses health standards, allows existing restaurants to get a license at a discount, requires annual health inspections and limits the hour of service and the areas of operation.

It appears to regulate without being too onerous.

The city should foster an environment of economic opportunity. You don't want to put existing businesses at risk but you do want the diversity of options that attract visitors to thriving cities.

Whether food trucks are popular here and flourish remains to be seen, but the city shouldn't hamper that growth with burdensome regulations that put a damper on these mobile entrepreneurs.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1LlHc7y