Eric Decker spent four seasons in Denver after the Broncos drafted him in the third round of the 2010 draft, and he soon earned the starting job at wide receiver and became one of the most popular wideouts in the league. He compiled 222 receptions for 3,070 yards and 33 touchdowns during his time in the Mile High City, while averaging 86 catches and 12 touchdowns in his last two seasons, when Peyton Manning was his quarterback.

This past summer, he signed a five-year deal with the Jets, who ranked 31st in passing offense and 30th in total receiving yards in 2013, and whose quarterback is the young and inconsistent Geno Smith.

Decker recently spoke to New York Post columnist Steve Serby about his time in Denver, the transition from a working with a future Hall-of-Fame quarterback to one who’s still learning the ropes, his wife’s swag (Serby’s description, not mine), and even a prank by Manning that Decker will never forget. Here’s a snippet:

Q: How good of a practical joker is Peyton?

A: Very good.

Q: What’s the best one you’ve seen him pull off?

A: The best personal one I’ve seen him pull off was on me in Duke. We went out there just for a workout for a weekend, and at the end of the workout, we all went out to dinner. It was Eli and the Giants, us from the Broncos, the coaching staff from Duke. We’re having a good time, all of a sudden these letters are handed out, and assume they’re “Thanks for coming, it was a pleasure having you on campus,” whatever. And it was an invoice of getting your laundry done, getting picked up from the airports, the coaching fees that they charged to you. On everyone else’s bill it said, “Decker’s getting pranked, play along.” And on mine it was like $3,500. I still have it. It was my wife’s birthday that week and I was gonna take her to Napa. First year with Peyton, I figured I needed to kinda do what he asked. Once I saw that bill, I was like, “You gotta be kidding me,” and he played it for a good five minutes, and they finally told me it was a joke. And at that time — I still am — pretty frugal, so I was like, “Ohh, you gotta be kidding,” like I wouldn’t even ask the coach to help coach me if it was gonna be this much.”

Nice little practical joke Peyton drew up…making me think I have to pay for workouts in Duke t/week @mortreport pic.twitter.com/UbR2Vsq49J — Eric Decker (@EricDecker87) April 11, 2013

Q: How would you describe Peyton?

A: He’s The General, that’s kinda I think the nickname he gets, but he really is the general as far as once you walk into the building, everything that he does, everything that we do, is for a reason, it has a purpose behind it. I’ve never seen a guy that’s do focused for such a long period of time — this is a game that you can get mentally fatigued, you can get physically fatigued, it gets hard at times. The little things every single day, he’s on you about it, he’s on himself about it. It’s impressive. What he remembers, too — you can talk about a play from 1998, and he’ll tell you what exactly happened. It’s amazing.

Q: People always talk about going from Peyton Manning to a second-year Jets quarterback Geno Smith.

A: People are gonna say that because Peyton Manning right now … is gonna go down as one of the best quarterbacks to play this game, you know? You can’t really compare one to the other. Geno has an incredible skill set. He’s young, he’s learning, but being around him for these five, six months, I’ve been so impressed with the way he carries himself as well as the knowledge of the system, of how he throws the football, and the decision-making that he does make. It really is impressive for a guy his age. And I think if he progressing like he is, if he keeps working hard at it, I really do think he’s gonna have a great career as well.