Daily Events Under Feature

I think at this point in our collective national existence, “Trust me, I’m a Clinton” isn’t the best defense of one’s actions.

We won’t even get into prospective First Laddie Bill Clinton. Hillary Clinton is the woman (well, a woman) who blamed the Benghazi, Libya murder of four Americans on an Internet video. She claimed to have come under sniper fire in Bosnia. She claimed to have been named after Sir Edmund Hillary. Her long list of lies is legendary.

Mrs. Clinton has an equally troublesome history with transparency. The 900+ FBI files. The Rose Law Firm records. Her then chief of staff shuttling boxes and boxes of documents out of the late Vince Foster’s Justice Department office. And on, and on, and….

And cronyism?

Cozy. Now it has been revealed that she never, ever set up a government email account.

Her alleged reason? “I didn’t want to carry two devices” – which we now know is a lie.

Her alleged self-defense? “Trust me – I alone decided which emails were pertinent. Oh – and I deleted everything else.” When “everything else” was under Congressional subpoena.

Feel comfortable trusting her? Think this is a lifetime’s worth of truth and transparency? Me neither.

In this regard, Mrs. Clinton fit right in with the Barack Obama Administration. On truth:

And transparency:

And in moments of harmonic convergence – truth about transparency.

And cronyism.

Is this ceaseless dearth of truth, transparency and fair play exclusive to Administration Democrats? Of course not.

Is this ceaseless dearth exclusive to federal Democrats? Of course not.

Let’s look at Oregon, their attempt at ObamaCare and their disgraced, under-investigation, resigned-from-office ex-Democrat Governor John Kitzhaber, shall we?

Have some Oregon Democrat cronyism.

How’d that Kitzhaber crony do running the show?

Not so good. How about a little Oregon Democrat truth-transparency combo?

Want some more Oregon Democrat transparency?

Former (Oregon Democrat) Gov. John Kitzhaber’s and Cylvia Hayes’ Trip to Dump Brings Police Sweeping In The former governor and Hayes showed up at the Knott Landfill southeast of Bend in a pickup and an SUV about 2 p.m. last Friday and spent a few minutes dumping trash, according to Timm Schimke, the director of the Deschutes County Solid Waste Department…. (W)orkers recognized who they were dealing with and apparently decided the dumping might be of interest to law enforcement. Kitzhaber and Hayes are targets of a federal investigation.

Positively translucent. And of course this is as much a federal government problem as it is an Oregon one.

New Cover Oregon Allegations: ‘If It’s True, Someone’s Going to Prison’ Early in its life, Cover Oregon was given a $48 million “early innovator” grant from the federal government. That amount would later grow to $59 million. There were a few strings attached. To keep the money flowing, the website would have to hit specific benchmarks between 2011 and 2013. The state needed to show the feds it had picked a company to provide software and technical assistance; it had to demonstrate that the website was safe from hackers; and, most importantly, it had to show that people could actually sign up for insurance on the website.

Either the Obama Administration dropped the ball over and over and over again – or it simply allowed a fellow Democrat to run wild with hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars.

Thankfully, not everyone in Washington is quite so comfortable with this.

Unfortunately, this is likely made more than a little problematic by Kitzhaber’s little trip to the landfill – the old school version of Mrs. Clinton wiping clean her email server.

Regardless, the investigations must press forward. Of Mrs. Clinton – and both ObamaCare messes. In Oregon and D.C.

Truth, transparency and anti-cronyism are all being eviscerated. And like all political fish – this one is rotting from the head of state.

Start with the Obama Administration – and work your way down.