The past year was the wildest and most unpredictable in my 30-plus years of observing Louisiana politics. Besides the entertainment value, 2015 was a humbling 12 months, especially for those of us who were certain that a Democrat could never be elected governor. (I'm happy I'm not a betting man.)

With the year almost done, it's time for my second annual Good, Bad and Ugly in Louisiana Politics Awards. The competition was fierce. In almost every category, I could have chosen any of three or four nominees. I present here my choices for achievement in 10 categories. (Thanks to those who submitted nominations.)

Most Courage: Stephen Perry. In May, under the guise of "religious freedom," Gov. Bobby Jindal issued an appalling and legally questionable executive order purporting to give state and local officials license to discriminate against same-sex couples. While most convention, tourism and chamber executives initially dived for cover, one valiant leader stood tall and set the pace for the few souls who eventually spoke up. Perry, CEO of the New Orleans Convention and Visitors Bureau (also one of Jindal's appointees to the LSU Board), promptly issued a strongly worded condemnation of the order.

Most Cowardice: Louisiana Legislators. During the 2015 legislative session, most legislators opposed an immediate expansion of Medicaid for Louisiana's working poor under provisions of the Affordable Care Act. Sen. Ben Nevers pushed the bill in the Senate while state Rep. John Bel Edwards proposed the same legislation in the House. Now that Edwards is governor-elect and Nevers is his chief of staff, many of those cowardly legislators have suddenly seen the light. Most cannot wait to expand Medicaid.

Shameless Ambition: Bobby Jindal. For abandoning Louisiana for most of his second term while he indulged the folly that was his embarrassing and poorly managed presidential campaign, this category will hereafter be known as the "Bobby Jindal Shameless Ambition Award."

Most Embarrassing Statement: Attorney General Buddy Caldwell. When I heard his concession speech on election night, my first thought was that Caldwell was sloshed. It appears he was not drunk, only belligerent. Prospective political candidates should study his bitter, rambling and incoherent speech as a master class in how to end a campaign in the most insolent manner possible. Among Caldwell's incomprehensible statements was this jewel: "Out of the largest pile of manure, grows the prettiest flower."

Villain of the Year: Grover Norquist. Even though he is not an elected official, Norquist, president of the Washington-based Americans for Tax Reform, essentially ruled much of Louisiana government for the past eight years. Norquist held so much sway over Jindal that some legislators were reduced to writing the Grand Poobah of taxation in June, begging him to give the governor permission to raise revenue.

Shrewdest Move: LSU President F. King Alexander. When Alexander boldly declared in late April that budget cuts might force him to shutter the university for an entire school year and declare "financial exigency" – basically, bankruptcy – the debate over funding Louisiana higher education immediately changed. Alexander's statement was risky. It could have damaged LSU's recruiting efforts. It didn't. Instead, it forced reluctant legislators to vote for the revenue necessary to stave off crippling budget cuts.

Biggest Blunder: Sen. David Vitter. No doubt influenced by his easy 2010 re-election, Vitter did not think it necessary to deal with his 2007 prostitution scandal as he prepared to run for governor in 2014 and early 2015. By the late summer, when he came under withering attack from his GOP opponents and several super PACS, it was too late. Vitter was never able to mount an effective defense of a scandal he clearly assumed would be a non-issue.

Dissembler of the Year: Jindal. For months, Jindal flitted around the country spreading outrageous untruths about his disastrous fiscal record. He not only claimed to have balanced every state budget; he also said that he had slashed state expenditures by 26 percent. Both statements are patently false.

Most Innovative Idea: Matching Funds for Medicaid Expansion. A brainchild of the Louisiana Hospital Association (LHA) – passed overwhelmingly by legislators – House Concurrent Resolution 75 will allow the new governor to extend quickly Medicaid for the state's working poor. The LHA plan allows hospitals to levy a fee, which will eventually provide the state's matching funds to draw down federal Medicaid dollars. The shrewd LHA plan, championed in the House by Speaker Chuck Kleckley, not only left the expansion decision to the next governor; the resolution did not require Jindal's signature, meaning he could not veto it.

Best in Show: Gov.-elect John Bel Edwards. There was no close second to Edwards. While many political observers (this writer included) doubted he had the slightest chance of winning the governor's race, Edwards and his staff never lost faith in their cause. Not only did they correctly read the electorate's mood; they ran a nearly flawless campaign.

Congratulations to all the "winners."

Robert Mann, an author and former U.S. Senate and gubernatorial staffer, holds the Manship Chair in Journalism at the Manship School of Mass Communication at Louisiana State University. Read more from him at his blog, Something Like the Truth. Follow him on Twitter @RTMannJr or email him at bob.mann@outlook.com.