Ten companies that came out of Blueprint are on track to do $1 million or more in their first year of existence, Weinberg said.

"These companies are generating real revenue because they are solving real problems," he said.

Another reason these companies are making money faster is because they can't afford not to, said Malay Gandhi, chief strategy officer at Rock Health.

"I don't know if the rate of success is sooner or not, but it's fundamentally harder to go longer without profitability for digital health companies," Gandhi said. "So it forces a lot of companies to find revenue and customers early on."

Unlike start-ups in the consumer social space, digital health companies can't just focus on growing users and develop a business plan later. They can't be scaled fast enough for this model to work, Gandhi said. So they start to figure out how they are going to make money from the beginning—a priority that investors naturally like.

The public market is also starting to notice. On Friday, IMS Health—which provides analytics and services to pharmaceutical companies, health-care providers and payers—raised $1.3 billion when it went public, making it the second largest IPO in 2014.

Aside from early profitability, investors also believe these companies will help overhaul the overly complex and bureaucratic health-care industry--an industry that, despite institutional resistance, is unlikely to survive in its current form, Gandhi said.

"More investors are getting into the space because the longer they stare at it the more they realize how screwed up it is," Gandhi said.

For most of these digital health companies, the goal is saving health-care organizations money while also improving the quality of care, often by utilizing big data.

RubiconMD, one of the companies that demoed on Thursday, is trying to help save primary care physicians money by helping them avoid specialist referrals.

"Increasingly, physician groups are entering into value-based contracts with insurers. This means if they help their patients avoid unnecessary care they will earn more money. When done right patients see fewer doctors and receive better care," said Gil Addo, co-founder of RubiconMD.