Tuning out the clamor it’s inspired, I’ve been trying to actually understand the Georgia Religious Freedom Restoration Act, pending in the General Assembly as I write this. Since I’m not a lawyer, nobody should take anything that follows to the bank (especially the bank). The best I can offer is a hardcore nerd’s take on the bill (SB 129). I’m convinced that both the legislation’s most vocal proponents and opponents greatly overestimate its importance.

In 1993, prompted by a U.S. Supreme Court decision that Congress thought interpreted the First Amendment’s guarantee of religious freedom too narrowly, Congress passed, with only three dissenting votes, and President Clinton signed into law the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. It provided that government may not substantially burden a person’s exercise of religion except to further a compelling government interest by the least restrictive means.

Then in a 1997 case the Supreme Court held that the Religious Freedom Restoration Act is unconstitutional as applied to the states. In the wake of that decision, several states, Georgia being a laggard, enacted laws that basically incorporated the key provisions of the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

There are several things about the Georgia bill that I think make it pretty innocuous. For example, contrary to a nut job who somehow turned up in my Facebook newsfeed claiming that Georgia’s is “by far the worst” of all the state religious freedom restoration laws, it’s largely cobbled together verbatim from the relevant federal sources. Every single passage from the Georgia bill that this person quoted as evidence of the bill’s depravity was lifted straight from either the Religious Freedom Restoration Act that Congress voted on or from the corresponding sections of the United States Code. So the Georgia bill is no worse than the federal law it apes. I leave it as an exercise for the reader to decide how depraved that is.

Then there’s the view, apparently widely held, that if the bill is enacted into law, people will be able to exempt themselves from any legal requirement they don’t like just by saying, “Sorry, against my religion.” But anybody who seriously thinks that isn’t paying attention.

While the bill may leave it up to each of us to judge whether our free exercise of religion has been “substantially burdened,” it doesn’t leave it up to us to judge what the government’s “compelling interests” are. For example, the bill says, “The General Assembly finds and determines that,” (among other things) “Courts have consistently held that government has a fundamental, overriding interest in eradicating discrimination.”

It’s worth focusing on discrimination, a particular worry among people who read the bill as a license to discriminate against gays and lesbians in public accommodations, employment, housing and so on.

But I don’t see why they think that. As far as I know, Georgia has no statewide prohibitions against discrimination based on sexual orientation. So anybody who’s bent on discriminating against gays and lesbians on the basis of their sexual orientation doesn’t need the Georgia Religious Freedom Restoration Act’s permission. For all the state of Georgia cares, they can do that with impunity right now.

Maybe the concern is that the bill, if enacted into law, will give people a way to go after ordinances like those in the city of Atlanta that do prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, the aggrieved taking the Hobby Lobby route by claiming, say, that having to bake wedding cakes or take wedding photos for same-sex couples will violate their rights under the Georgia Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

But remember, Hobby Lobby’s owners won because they persuaded the U.S. Supreme Court that the government had ways of furthering its compelling Affordable Care Act interests less restrictive than requiring the owners to violate their religious beliefs. As far as I know, though, government has no way to advance an “overriding” interest in “eradicating” discrimination less restrictive than outlawing it. Elane Photography v. Willock, a celebrated case from New Mexico, which also has a religious freedom restoration law, is instructive here.

So my nerdy take on the Georgia Religious Freedom Restoration Act is that it’s a solution in search of a problem and would leave things pretty much as they are if it becomes law. That’s why it’s hard for me to quell the suspicion that the din emanating from the bill’s neighborhood is that of a now drearily routine phony war both sides welcome as a way to motivate and engage their forces. If the Georgia Religious Freedom Restoration Act becomes law, we’ll find out whether I’m right when the lawyers pile in.

Leon Galis, a retiree living in Athens, is an occasional contributor to the Athens Banner-Herald editorial page. Send email to lgalis@icloud.com.