SAN DIEGO, Jan. 16, 2014 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- American Specialty Health Plans of California, Inc. (ASH Plans), a subsidiary of American Specialty Health (ASH), has been chosen by L.A. Care Health Plan to administer in-network acupuncture services to its Los Angeles County HMO enrollees, effective January 1, 2014. L.A. Care, the nation's largest publicly operated health plan, will offer seven levels of acupuncture coverage, from Bronze to Platinum.

Enrollees will have access to nearly 50 LA County acupuncture providers through the ASH Plans network of practitioners. ASH Plans is one of California's premier specialized health care plans, providing access to and administration of a network of credentialed specialty providers, ranging from acupuncturists to chiropractors.

"ASH Plans' experience with acupuncture and chiropractic benefits in California, along with ASH's national experience and wide range of offerings in the specialty benefits market, makes it easier for health plans to offer the expanded core coverages required through the Affordable Care Act," said ASH Chairman and CEO George DeVries."We are pleased to have the opportunity to administer acupuncture benefits for L.A. Care Covered™ enrollees."

"We're excited to offer our new L.A. Care Covered product as part of Covered California, the state's Marketplace," said Howard A Kahn, L.A. Care CEO. "This product will provide another vehicle to ensure that Los Angeles residents and families have access to high quality health care, including specialty health care services like acupuncture. It is a perfect complement to the services that we already offer to more than one million members."

About L.A. Care Health Plan

L.A. Care Health Plan (Local Initiative Health Authority of Los Angeles County) is a public entity and community-accountable health plan serving residents of Los Angeles County through a variety of programs including L.A. Care Covered™, Medi-Cal, L.A. Care's Healthy Kids, L.A. Care Health Plan Medicare Advantage HMO SNP, and PASC-SEIU Homecare Workers Health Care Plan. L.A. Care is a leader in developing new programs through innovative partnerships designed to provide health coverage to vulnerable populations and to support the safety net. With more than one million members, L.A. Care is the nation's largest publicly operated health plan.

About American Specialty Health Plans of California, Inc.

American Specialty Health Plans of California, Inc. (ASH Plans) is a subsidiary of American Specialty Health Incorporated. ASH Plans is one of California's premier specialized health care plans, providing access to and administration of a network of credentialed specialty providers.

About American Specialty Health

American Specialty Health Incorporated (ASH) is one of the nation's premier independent and privately-owned specialty health services organizations, providing specialty health care networks and programs, fitness and exercise programs and population health solutions for health plans, insurance carriers and employer groups. Operating from offices in San Diego, Calif., Southlake (Dallas), Texas, Carmel (Indianapolis), Ind., and Columbia, S.C., ASH has more than 1,100 employees and administers services for nearly 34 million members nationwide. Additional products offered through ASH and its subsidiaries include Healthyroads®, FitnessCoach™, Active&Fit®, ExerciseRewardsTM and others. For more information about ASH, visit www.ashcompanies.com or call 800-848-3555. Follow us on LinkedIn or Twitter at @ASHCompanies.

Lisa Freeman 310-390-3070 Amy Gurango 213-694-1250, ext. 4389