It is given for a feature that lets drivers use energy captured during braking

Cadillac ELRâjQuery17208367801052518189_1390714895809s paddle shifters enable the driver to temporarily regenerate energy and store it as electricity in the battery pack for later use. (Photo: GM) Story Highlights Cadillac wins an award for its 're-gen on demand' system

It captures energy that the driver can use when he or she wants

Cadillac hasn't gotten a lot of credit so far its plug-in luxury car, but now it's won a rather impressive award.

The Green Car Journal has given Cadillac ELR its 2014 Green Car Technology Award. It was presented last week at the Washington Auto Show.

"Cadillac has cleverly evolved a common electric-drive efficiency system into an intriguing feature that adds a new dimension to the driving experience," said Ron Cogan, editor and publisher of Green Car Journal and CarsOfChange.com, in a statement.

It's called Re-gen on Demand.

Like most regenerative braking systems in hybrid and electric vehicles, the ELR's electric motor recovers otherwise wasted energy while braking. The power goes right back into the battery. ELR's system is different because it allows the driver to engage the stored regenerated energy by pushing the steering-wheel paddles. The ELR is Cadillac's new plug-in car.

Cadillac's ELR is an extended range electric (Photo: GM)

Cogan says Re-gen on Demand enhances driving dynamics. It induces re-gen drag that allows decelerating before turns. Drivers often don't need to brake. The engine does it for them.

"Regen on Demand is one of the key systems enabling the Cadillac ELR to merge performance with efficiency in a dynamic new way," said Jim Vurpillat, director of emerging markets at Cadillac, in a statement. "Putting regenerative braking at the driver's fingertips supports the ELR's 340-mile total driving range while also adding a fun-to-drive element."

In winning the award, Cadillac ELR beat Acura Sport Hybrid's SH-AWD powertrain; Audi's 3-liter TDI clean diesel engine; BMW's i3 carbon fiber reinforced plastic passenger cell; Ford's 1-liter EcoBoost engine; Honda Accord's plug-in powertrain; Hyundai's hydrogen fuel cell; Mazda's i-ELOOP brake energy regeneration system; Porsche's plug-in hybrid powertrain; and Ram's 3-liter EcoDiesel engine.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1n0onZV