President Obama continues to receive poor grades from Granite Staters, with his job approval rating and popularity far “under water,” the latest WMUR Granite State poll indicates.

The University of New Hampshire Survey Center polled 567 randomly selected adults May 6-22, finding that 40 percent approve of the job Obama is doing as president, while 52 percent disapprove and 8 percent are neutral. The margin of error in the poll is 4.1 percent.

The new rating is slightly worse than in the previous WMUR Granite State Poll, taken in February, in which 42 percent approved of Obama’s job performance, 53 percent disapproved and 5 percent were neutral.

Obama’s New Hampshire job approval rating has been “under water” since October 2013. His low point came in polls taken in August and October 2014. In both, 38 percent approved of his performance, while 55 percent disapproved.

How did his ratings affect the mid-term election?

In November 2014, Democrats Maggie Hassan, Jeanne Shaheen and Ann Kuster won re-election as governor, senator and congresswoman, respectively. But Republicans won the majority of the New Hampshire House and the Executive Council and the GOP also increased its majority in the state Senate.

The Survey Center, in its report on the new poll, said that Obama’s popularity “will likely be a key factor in the 2016 presidential election.” But the center noted his job performance rating is “significantly better” than former President George W. Bush’s rating was at this point in his second term. Bush’s rating then was 29 percent approval and 68 percent disapproval.

According to the poll, Granite Staters who consider themselves Democrats still strongly support Obama, with 81 percent approving of his job performance and 14 percent disapproving. A total of 88 percent of Republicans disapprove of Obama’s job performance, while 7 percent approve. But Obama is not viewed favorably by independents, with 27 percent approving of his job performance and 56 percent disapproving.

Women favor Obama by a margin of 48 percent to 44 percent, but 61 percent of men disapprove of his job performance, while 32 percent approve.

Obama’s personal favorability ratings also continue to remain low. He is viewed favorably by 42 percent and unfavorably by 51 percent, with 8 percent neutral.

Obama’s handling of foreign affairs has hit a record low in New Hampshire, the poll shows, with 33 percent approving and 57 percent disapproving, while 9 percent are neutral.

The poll also shows that the Affordable Care Act remains unpopular, with 34 percent favoring the law, 55 percent opposing it, while 11 percent are neutral. It shows that 41 percent of New Hampshire adults approve of how Obama is handling the economy, while 52 percent disapprove.

For full poll results, click here.