Nancy McBride, center, and her daughter Tiffany, both of Longmont, shop for Christmas presents at KB Toys in the Twin Peaks Mall in 2002. ( RICHARD M. HACKETT )

This will be the final holiday shopping season for the Twin Peaks Mall. The Times-Call asked its readers, through its Facebook page, to share their memories of Twin Peaks and holiday shopping there. Thanks to all who responded, and if you'd like to add your comments and memories please go to http://tinyurl.com/TwinPeaksMallmemories.

Here is a sampling of what we had heard as of press time for this story:

"I have many fond memories of Christmas seasons there. The most fond are the two seasons I spent as Santa."

"I loved the carousel back in the '80s."

"I was the assistant manager of the Stage Store (owned by Fashion Bar) when the mall first opened. It was a beautiful new mall back then and pretty busy. Time for a change :)"

The Twin Peaks Railroad train with Santa Claus onboard entertains shoppers at the Twin Peaks Mall in 2007. ( RICHARD M. HACKETT )

"I was there when it opened. Will miss it terribly."

"I remember before the mall had its makeover there used to be a fountain and a carousel. ... And the variety of food in the food court."

"Spent an enormous amount of time watching my kid and his friends in the play area that used to be in the food court."

"Worked there for eight years, it was such a fun place to hang out."

The "beautiful old-world carousel."

"I met the love of my life there while performing with California Actors Theatre."

"Steve and Barry's and having an indoor mall to walk to from my house when it was cold or rainy."

Advertisement

"Well, it is memories around the holidays! I remember going as a family to go Xmas shopping, all of us would split up, my mom and I would part from my brother and my dad, we would find a gift for the others and then switch partners. ... Great family memories at the once thriving mall."

Several posters mentioned long-gone stores, such as East Coast Pizza, Disc Jockey, J.C. Penney and Pet City.

"I enjoyed the two years of the Prison of Terror and two years of Purgatory. The mall helped us raise over $50,000 for local charities in the four years. Thank you!"

"Fond memories of the theater opening and going with my first real boyfriend, looking for prom dresses at Joslins and Dillard's with my friends." This poster also noted that her first job was at J.C. Penney and she later worked at Samuel's Jewelers (she still misses her co-workers from there) and DEB (a store she does not have fond memories of working for).

"The Holiday Mall Ball -- many years ago. TONS of FUN -- music, food and dancing! AWESOME memories."

"Goodbye to old memories, hello to new ones."

-- Compiled by Tony Kindelspire