The abandoned storefront at Regency Square mall is dull and gloomy, with blacked-out windows, fluorescent lighting, and walls that are bare except for a few stickers with the faded logo of a former occupant, Champs Sports.

An unassuming store, tucked between a Foot Locker and a Spencer’s Gifts, has found new life as the nerve center for the local effort to insure thousands of Jacksonville-area residents who lack health coverage. Every day, employees of non-profits and insurance companies sit at a row of tables along the wall, helping people sign up for insurance plans on the healthcare.gov marketplace.

It’s almost halftime for the Affordable Care Act’s second annual open enrollment period, during which Americans who are eligible for coverage can sign up for plans that will last through 2015. This year, the enrollment period runs from Nov. 15 to Feb. 15.

The local effort has faced some of the same challenges as last year, organizers say, such as enrollees without much computer knowledge and blips in the healthcare.gov website. But it’s benefited from innovations such as the permanent enrollment location at Regency Square, which was chosen because it serves as a nexus for several bus lines and because an analysis showed large numbers of uninsured nearby, said Tony Penna, regional organizer at Enroll America, a non-profit with a mission to spread health insurance coverage.

Another boon to the effort, organizers say, is an increase in partnerships between agencies seeking to cover the uninsured. More than a dozen agencies are helping with the enrollment effort, ranging from the Small Business Association to Aetna and including the city of Jacksonville. The agencies coordinate their efforts through an email listserv and a weekly conference call, said David Weiss, director of communications at the Health Planning Council of Northeast Florida, a local non-profit that’s also involved.

“Everybody is really focused on the same thing: getting the word out to people and making sure they have the right info,” Weiss said.

The Cover Jacksonville campaign, a city effort to enroll uninsured Jacksonville residents, has also been a boon to the enrollment effort, organizers say. Since it began last summer, the campaign has set up a call center that Jacksonville residents can dial at 211 to sign up for care under the Affordable Care Act and the Florida KidCare plan.

So far, this year’s enrollment period seems to be going faster than in 2013, when the calamitous rollout of healthcare.gov made it nearly impossible to sign up for coverage.

In the first week of this year’s enrollments, about 462,000 Americans signed up for coverage on the federal exchange, while another 303,000 people signed up in the second week, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Last year, there were about 365,000 enrollments in the first two months.

In Duval County, about 33,800 residents enrolled in plans on the Affordable Care Act marketplace last year, according to Enroll America. Another 500 enrolled in Baker County, 4,500 in Clay County, 1,800 in Nassau County, and 6,100 in St. Johns County.

In 2013, about 147,000 Duval County residents lacked insurance, or 17.2 percent of the population, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. There were about 3,500 uninsured in Baker County, 26,000 in Clay County, 12,000 in Nassau County and 24,000 in St. Johns County.

On Friday afternoon, three workers were helping enrollees at the Regency Square location, all of them from the First Coast Multi-Lines Agency, which collects commissions from insurance companies for directing consumers to their health plans over the exchange.

One of the employees, Dondy Vane, has many clients from the Spanish-speaking community, which many organizations are making an effort to reach during the enrollment period. Some Spanish speakers are wary of enrolling because they’re worried that it could lead to the deportation of relatives who aren’t here legally, organizers said. The language barrier is also an issue.

“They’re very skeptical because they don’t understand, and the website can be a little misleading if you don’t know what you’re looking for,” Vane said.

Throughout the afternoon, some shoppers from the mall stepped in for help, such as Susan Goss, of Jacksonville, whose was looking for plans for her two sons, who are in their twenties and have no insurance.

“They’re just too lazy,” Goss said. “They’re healthy and young and everything, thinking, ‘I don’t have to bother with that.’ ”

Others had appointments, such as Patricia Lovell, who wanted help finding a new plan after deciding that the $147-a-month one she enrolled in last year was too expensive. She was hoping to find a plan for less than $100 a month.

Even though her plan was too pricey for her liking, Lovell said she was glad to have insurance. She was uninsured before the Affordable Care Act went into effect.

“It was scary, but still, you have no other choice,” she said. “You can’t afford it.”

Richard Webner: (904) 359-4370