Hyphernkemberly Dorvilier was jailed Saturday on $500,000 bail. It wasn't known if she has retained a lawyer. (Photo: (Photo: Provided))

"There is no foot too small that it cannot leave an imprint on this world."

That was a Facebook tribute to a Pemberton Township infant authorities say was set on fire by her mother Friday night on Simontown Road.

The infant girl, whose age was not immediately clear, was badly burned but alive and breathing when police arrived. She was airlifted to St. Christopher's Hospital for Children in Philadelphia at about 11:15 p.m. Friday, where she died approximately two hours later.

Her mother, Hyphernkemberly Dorvilier, of Rutgers Avenue in Pemberton Township, was taken into custody at the scene.

According to a statement from the Burlington County Prosecutor's Office, police in Pemberton Township were called to Simontown Road shortly before 11 p.m., when a resident called to report a fire in the roadway.

Authorities say Dorvilier, 22, doused the infant with accelerant before lighting her on fire. She is charged with murder and is being held on $500,000 bail in the Burlington County Corrections and Work Release Center in Pemberton Township.

Community members set up a Facebook page to collect money for the infant's funeral and burial, and plan to hold a memorial service at 7:30 p.m. Wednesday at Browns Mills United Methodist Church, 2 Pemberton-Browns Mills Road.

There was an outpouring of grief and shock on the Facebook page entitled "Candlelight Vigil for Pemberton Infant," as well as promises of donations to give the baby a funeral and burial.

The person who created the page, Jenna Dilley, wrote: "Please do not come on this page bashing the mother or family. Mother is not going to be judged here. I pray she finds her forgiveness and that we send the message that love is NOT conditional. What I do want to see is all of us, as a community reaching out to that extended family, loving them, embracing them and letting them all know we are here for them."

Another poster, Susan Noble, expressed sorrow at the infant's suffering.

"I just am heartbroken that this sweet child had to suffer like this please know I am praying for your community and the sweet soul of this precious little baby," she wrote.

"I just can not imagine what lead her Mom to do that but I can't judge because clearly she is ill and needs help."

As more people posted pledges to attend this vigil or donate to assist with the baby's funeral expenses, Dilley noted how the community had come together:

"For the first time tonight, I have actually cried happy tears. I just am so overwhelmed by the outpour (sic) of love from our own community. I knew you all had it in you. So much love and non judgment. Caring about something that is so much bigger than yourselves. So many volunteers, donations, people showing up and showing out!"

An autopsy will be performed to determine the exact cause of death. The prosecutor's office did not release a motive for the killing.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Cbr2rt