No joke. (Photo: Sam Riley/Mass General Hospital via AP)

Penis transplants might sound funny, but they're no joke

Normally we'd have a quip here, but this is serious. Surgeons in Boston have performed the country's first penile transplant. The procedure could help severely wounded soldiers with injuries that can leave them despondent and even suicidal. Thomas Manning, 64, whose penis was removed due to cancer, is recovering well and showing no signs of rejecting the transplant. He'll regain full urinary and sexual function.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Massachusetts General Hospital has performed the first successful penis transplant in America. The entire surgery took fifteen hours to complete. USA TODAY

The Supreme Court did something weird and punted on a big Obamacare case

First, the back story. Non-profit religious groups don't like the role they're forced to play under Obamacare in providing contraceptive coverage to female employees. The groups took their battle all the way to the Supreme Court, and the so-called contraceptive mandate is one of the high court's biggest issues this term. The justices, still down one after the death of Antonin Scalia, took the unusual step Monday of booting the seven cases back to federal appeals courts. Meaning, they didn’t actually make a decision. *Fingers crossed* for a compromise.

Warren Buffett's company makes everyone feel better about Apple

When you're one of the wealthiest men in the world, people watch your investments closely. That's why Apple shares bounced back big Monday after Warren Buffett's firm disclosed it bet heavily on the tech giant. Berkshire Hathaway revealed it took a $900 million stake in Apple, which has been in free fall this year, dropping more than 14%, amid disappointing first-quarter results. But Buffett may not be the only one calling these shots, since change is in the air at Berkshire. Interestingly, the firm's other big tech bets have been a bust.

When airport security lines are so long you joke about 'being here all night' — and then you are

How'd you sleep, guys? About 450 travelers woke up Monday at Chicago O'Hare because TSA lines were so long Sunday night that they missed their flights and slept on cots at the airport. TSA staffing shortages — along with miscalculating how many would sign up for the agency's PreCheck program — have left passengers in hours-long lines at a growing number of U.S. airports. In Atlanta on Monday, travelers in long lines received free snacks and water. The TSA says it's taking measures to mitigate the woes but warned that a difficult summer may lie ahead. We might need something stronger than water.

Sinead O'Connor is safe

Sinead O'Connor has a history of mental illness, so when the Irish singer went missing in a Chicago suburb on Sunday, red flags went up. According to her Facebook page, about three hours after she was last seen she posted a long message that was unclear and confusing. It follows an alarming suicide threat she posted on Facebook in November. Thankfully she was found safe on Monday in the village of Wilmette, Ill. O'Connor has been up front about her battle with depression over the years and has publicly pleaded for help.

Sinead O'Connor performs in Milan. (Photo: Antonio Calanni, AP)

Extra bites

President Obama got emotional as he presented 13 police officers with the Public Safety Medal of Valor, especially when he recognized Sgt. Robert Wilson III, who was killed while buying his son a birthday gift.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Thirteen police officers were honored with the Public Safety Medal of Valor at the White House. President Obama grew emotional as he posthumously recognized Philadelphia Police Sgt. Robert Wilson III, who was killed while buying his son a gift. USA TODAY

Sadness. North Dakota's only wolverine in 100 years was killed by a rancher.

Shark bites beachgoer's arm. Shark goes to the hospital, still attached to the woman's arm. What?! The woman was treated and released. The 2-foot-long shark didn't make it.

Tim Gunn buys his first pair of sweatpants and becomes the oldest student at fencing school. Touché.

And Top Gun hit theaters 30 years ago Monday. Here are 30 of the best quotes from Mav, Goose, Iceman and the rest of the gang.

Want the Short List delivered straight to your inbox? Yeah, you do. Sign up!

This is a compilation of stories across USA TODAY.

Contributing: The Associated Press

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/27taLxn