“We have to stop using government funds to support the industry that is causing the problem,” said Stephen Kretzmann, executive director and founder of Oil Change International. “That would seem to be the low-hanging fruit of solving climate change: When you’re in a hole, stop digging. And yet we really haven’t made much progress.”

Photo

The International Monetary Fund has come up with a much higher estimate for the global total of fossil fuel subsidies — $5.3 trillion, which includes the costs of the effects of energy use on people’s health, the environment and climate change. That figure constitutes 6.9 percent of the global gross domestic product.

Whatever the estimates, they stand in sharp contrast to the money being spent on reducing the effects of climate change. Even the lowest subsidy estimates far exceed the pledge by advanced industrialized nations to spend $100 billion a year by 2020 to fight climate change.

A recent report from the Climate Policy Initiative, a nonprofit research and policy organization funded by the financier George Soros, suggested that to keep the global temperature from rising more than two degrees Celsius would require about $1 trillion per year.

Bill Hare, chief executive of the nonprofit research and policy group Climate Analytics, said taking action on direct subsidies could have a profound effect. “Emissions could be reduced by up to 20 percent from what would otherwise occur if you removed fossil fuel subsidies,” he added.

Critics of subsidies say their greatest benefits go to the middle class and the rich, who can better afford cars.

By keeping conventional fuels at low prices, subsidies also make alternative energy sources less affordable in comparison. The International Energy Agency’s 2014 World Energy Outlook report warned, “Fossil fuel subsidies rig the game against renewables and act as a drag on the transition to a more sustainable energy system.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That report noted that some countries spent a greater share of their gross domestic product on fossil fuel subsidies than on health or education.

Going into the Paris climate talks, China, Ethiopia, India, Mexico, Morocco, Singapore and Vietnam had committed to addressing subsidies, Mr. Kretzmann said. “Governments have a lot of incentive and opportunity to eliminate those now, with oil prices so low,” he added.

Photo

And as prices have dropped, subsidies have been reduced in many countries, including India, Indonesia, Mexico and the United Arab Emirates, said Dr. Hare of Climate Analytics.

While attempts to cut subsidies have led to social unrest, more recent efforts, including a gradual phaseout to soften the blow, have enjoyed quiet success.

But previous efforts have often been abandoned when global fuel prices rise and consumers are pinched. “If you look at the history of fuel subsidy reform, it doesn’t always stick,” said Michael L. Ross, a professor of political science at the University of California, Los Angeles, who studies energy subsidies.

A study from the Carbon Tracker Initiative, the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis and other groups suggested that eliminating production subsidies for the Powder River Basin coal region in Wyoming and Montana alone would raise the price of that coal enough to reduce demand for it by 30 percent in the long term, which the study estimates would equal the emissions from as many as 32 coal-burning plants.

More Reporting on Climate Change

Michael A. Levi, an energy expert with the Council on Foreign Relations, said that fuel subsidies were an inefficient way to help the poor, anyway. However, he noted that better ways were not necessarily available. Giving money directly to the poor to make up for the lost fuel savings would require a banking and credit infrastructure that often cannot be found in the developing world.

“You shouldn’t want to solve these countries’ fiscal problems on the backs of their weakest citizens,” Mr. Levi said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In the United States, a longstanding coalition of environmentalists and libertarians has sought to eliminate tax breaks and policies that support the fossil fuel industry. Eli Lehrer, the co-founder of the R Street Institute, a free-market think tank in Washington, said the oil industry did not need many of the tax breaks it received.

“I doubt that eliminating the intangible drilling cost write-off would reduce oil production at all,” he said.

Carlton Carroll, a spokesman for the American Petroleum Institute, said the tax breaks for his industry “are similar to other manufacturing sectors.” He added, “As an industry, we pay higher taxes than any other.”

Such arguments do not convince Mr. Lehrer, whose group is part of the Green Scissors coalition that includes environmentally conscious budget cutters across the political spectrum. “These subsidies on fossil fuels are a very good, transideological issue,” he said. “To the left, it’s a terrible act of environmental destruction. To the right, it’s crony capitalism. And both sides are true.”