Raleigh’s News & Observer doesn’t pull many punches with this morning’s scathing editorial about the state Department of Health and Human Services and its embattled leader, Secretary Aldona Wos. As the piece points out, Wos is simply over-matched:

“The secretary, who prior to her appointment had never done anything close to supervising a state department with over 17,000 employees, seems simply overwhelmed and underqualified for the job. Gov. Pat McCrory, well aware of Wos’s mega-fundraising for Republicans, continues to stand by his ill-advised appointment, digging in against calls for Wos to resign even as the problems at DHHS have multiplied… McCrory evidently believed that Wos’ being a medical doctor would be an asset to DHHS. That would be true only if her medical degree came with administrative experience involving a huge corporation or agency. No doubt McCrory viewed the hundreds of thousands of dollars Vos and her husband have given to Republican candidates as an asset as well.”

Is engaging in an absurd and almost pathetic game of blame-shifting:

“Unfortunately, Wos chose in appearing before legislators Tuesday to shift the blame for some of her agency’s problems to … drum roll, please … President Obama. Oh, why not? The Affordable Care Act, she said, came with all sorts of changes that have strained DHHS, causing confusion and problems. Whatever changes the ACA might have required should have been seen coming long ago. The law was drawn up, passed and signed by President Obama in March 2010. It was vetted and upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court. States have had plenty of time to get ready for its implementation. The fact that Republican lawmakers in North Carolina ignored the law and acted as if they wished it would just go away hasn’t helped prepare the state for its start-up.”

And really just needs to go: “Her claims that the agency has been a victim of changing federal rules don’t excuse the vast problems in DHHS or her personnel mistakes or the hiring of private contractors – one of whom came from her husband’s company – who’ve gotten hundreds of thousands of dollars from DHHS. This remains an agency plagued by disorganization and lacking in leadership. Enough is enough.” Read the entire editorial by clicking here.