Buy Photo The Red Hill Bay restoration project at the Salton Sea aims to cover 420 acres of exposed lakebed with wetland habitat. (Photo: Jay Calderon/The Desert Sun)Buy Photo

Sea action desperately needed

This past month, several young adult Sierra Club organizers in the Eastern Coachella Valley and I organized and turned out over 100 people to the Salton Sea Community meeting in Mecca. I was also a part of a group that went to the state water board meeting in Sacramento to testify on the Salton Sea.

Community concern is there and community support for action is there. What we need now is dust protections before habitat creations. We can’t wait any longer. The cost of letting the sea dry up – as measured by an increase in the number of deaths by respiratory illnesses from the exposed deadly toxins in the playa – far outweighs the monetary cost that would save the sea and the surrounding frontline communities of color.

We need Gov. Jerry Brown and the state of California to invest a lot more time and resources into the Salton Sea. We can’t afford to wait; lives are at stake.

Ruben Garza, Mecca

What about new development?

There was a glaring omission in your May 1 Our Voice opinion, “Officials must maintain smarter water policies.” There was no mention of growth in the Coachella Valley.

How can any water agency reduce its water consumption mandated by the state based on 2013’s water usage? If I used, on average, 10,000 gallons a month in 2013 and I use 6,800 gallons a month now, that’s a 32 percent reduction (per your rate for DWA) in my water usage. That’s fine. However, if one new house is built between 2013 and now and that house uses 6,800 gallons a month on average (like me) that would mean my water agency is now supplying 13,600 gallons (my 6,800 gallons and the new house’s 6,800 gallons) versus the 10,000 gallons I used by myself in 2013.

I believe the unspoken truth is no one wants to address development at all. It’s like if we don’t have growth (even smart growth) then the whole valley will just dry up and no one will want to come here anymore.

Just how big do we want to grow here in the Coachella Valley?

Ronald E. Zimmerman, Palm Springs

What about the drought?

I am having a hard time understanding why we are asked to cut back on our water, yet we can start hosting new mega concerts. Are these people not going to use water?

I have the same question about new housing in the Coachella Valley.

Come on, people, let’s wise up. How about a moratorium on building and concerts until we get our water under control. Or is this water shortage a farce?

Kathy Guttormsen, Palm Desert

Got to give it to Trump

The Trojan Horse made it!

The Republican party has the virus. Mr. Trump is, as predicted, “The Trojan Horse!” Like many others, I have become,“A-political,” however, my hat goes off to “the Donald!”

He truly is a mastermind at controlling the horizontal and the vertical. He has put the GOP in a tailspin that will take many years to recover from.

Rick Raum, Banning

We must seek inner peace

There is a change of consciousness in the political world. People are turning away from conventional thinking, ergo Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump.

There needs to be a change in the nation’s thinking. Unfortunately, this change not a sense of higher consciousness, but instead just a flip of the coin.

We can add Ted Cruz to the extreme change being considered. Then we have Hillary Clinton – the same old, same old.

What is not represented is a change of ego. The candidates come from an egotistical point of view, like most of the human species.

A higher consciousness would entail coming from a place of authenticity, deeper than the old thoughts. It would be the voice of Jesus, Martin Luther King, Gandhi, and all the great masters.

As much as it terrifies us, we are in a nuclear age. Either change happens before a catastrophe or a catastrophe happens to incite a change.

Whether you believe in a higher power or not, it is up to individuals to start with introspection. We need to live in love, not fear. Peace, Shalom, Salaam, Namaste and whatever language suits you. We are all the same.

Rita Firestone Seger, Palm Desert

Update this freedom

Larry Shapiro’s May 4 Valley Voice, “Freedom of expression dinged on campuses, 2016 campaign trail,” supports the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America, and rightly so. He decries mob reactions, and rightly so, he protests racial discrimination, and rightly so, he defends military registration, and rightly so.

However, he offers no solution.

It’s time to consider an amendment or a logical interpretation of that First Amendment. There are too many incidents occurring because of the obsolete interpretation of that amendment.

Flag burning, stomping, spitting, and using the flag in derogatory paintings. Using foul language or political cartoons that are neither witty or humorous in reference to our elected or other well-known individuals, etc.

Either the amendment or a re-interpretation by the Supreme Court is necessary before our so called Freedom of Speech takes us into a world of hatred and horror.

Dr. L.J. Friedman, Palm Springs

There is no debate

Thank you, Arthur L. Prosser (“Restroom debate is just propaganda,” May 4 letter to the editor) for explaining so simply why this restroom issue has just now come to surface.

I, too, have asked what bathrooms have the transgenders and sexual predators been using for the past hundred years and why, if the parents are so worried about their young children, don’t they accompany them to the the public bathrooms?

It all boils down to common sense. Stop creating problems. Let’s focus on the issues that matter.

Joan Helms, Indio

MORE LETTERS: Read all our letters to the editor

Coachella left fine impression

As a 69-year-old former elementary school educator who attended all three days of Coachella weekend 1, I take issue with the views of Erika Baily in Sunday’s “Your Voice” section. This was my first Coachella experience and at no time did I witness any drunken, sexual behavior that Baily somehow figures is taking place based on observing a few young women in “blatant sexual dress” at the Target store.

At Coachella I witnessed young people just enjoying themselves. Most were with a group of friends and I found them in every instance to be both friendly and polite. After three full days, I never once saw any drunken or sexual behavior. Yes, there were some in very skimpy dress; but the vast majority were dressed appropriately.

I felt that the festival was extremely well-organized and at no time did I feel uncomfortable because of anyone’s actions. I’m confused as to how an entire festival can be judged by the dress of a few girls in the Target store.

I needed to comment because, in my opinion, Ms. Baily is giving your readers an unfair impression of Coachella.

Barbara K. Wall, La Quinta

Dr. Ruiz, practice medicine again

Having read Dr. Raul Ruiz’s biography, it seems he possibly spent more time getting a medical degree than he did actually practicing medicine. I would think, if he is as interested in helping the people of this valley as much as he talks about in his campaign material that he would go back to practicing medicine full time and let some else who is in the business of politics handle that aspect.

He voted in support of the Affordable Care Act. However, one of the biggest problems facing the success or failure of this legislation, besides the cost, is the fact there are not enough doctors to deliver the services.

You don’t have to spend eight to 10 years in undergraduate school and in post graduate school, which in his case was Harvard Medical School, to be a congressman. So, let’s encourage Dr. Ruiz after taking a highly sought after slot in medical school to put his training to use.

If, Dr. Ruiz, as your political pitch says “it is my privilege to serve the people of Southern California from the 36th Congressional District” then serve them doing what you have been trained to do.

Barbara Ebel, Bermuda Dunes

More to this story

Let’s address the elephant in the room regarding the final pachyderm performance of Ringling Bros.: The immoral lengths to which animal liberation activists will go to attack businesses.

Animal rights activists alleged that Ringling abused its elephants, but they had their day in court and got trampled. First, they sued Ringling in 2000 for allegedly abusing animals – and after a decade in court, had their case thrown out after it was found that they secretly paid their key witness, who had lied under oath. Ringling countersued these activists for racketeering, witness bribery, and fraud, and in the end, these groups, including the Humane Society of the United States, paid $25 million to Ringling’s parent company. A law firm representing animal liberation groups was even sanctioned by the court.

Eventually, these activists were able to pass enough laws at the local level using misinformation to hamper Ringling from having elephant acts. But just because animal liberation groups claim to hold the moral high ground doesn’t mean they do.

Will Coggin, director of research, Center for Consumer Freedom, Washington, D.C.

Boost Indian Wells’ image

The proposed closing of the Ralphs store in Indian Wells is a blow to the community. But our Mayor is misdirecting responsibility by claiming the store is closing because of the California minimum wage law.

Rather than blaming a carefully considered law that gives California workers the opportunity to earn a decent wage, Mayor Reed should be directing his energy to finding a solution that will prevent its closing. It is a primary responsibility of the Mayor and Council to create an economic environment in Indian Wells that allows vital businesses to succeed.

Ginny Whitman, Indian Wells

Don’t blame the workers

Spoken like a true Republican who doesn’t want to see employees earn a decent wage, Indian Wells Mayor Dana Reed is trying to make the closing of Ralphs a wage issue.

How disgusting.

The store is underperforming and he blames the wage hike. Mr. “Rich Man” should get to work and find his constituents a new grocery store instead of blaming employees who want to better support themselves and their families.

Barbara Wintroub, Palm Desert

Be safe on the roads

May is National Motorcycle Safety Awareness Month. Typically this is the time of year that riders return to the roads, while here in the Coachella Valley we are blessed with year-round riding opportunities, beautiful weather and scenic roads.

Motorists, please remember to share the road and watch for motorcycles. And riders, please consider refreshing your skills to stay sharp and stay safe!

Dave and Allison Woods, So Cal Motorcycle Training, Palm Springs

Don’t see the logic here

I am amazed at the sheer arrogance of politicians in California. While they raise the age for buying cigarettes or vaping devices to 21 due to sincere concern for health, why not also pass a bill that says you can’t kill until you’re 21, as in, no Californian can serve in the military until age 21?

What would we do without California Democrats looking after our health?

Tom Simmerman, Palm Desert

Palm Springs, think about growth

I wholeheartedly agree with the comments Frank Tysen wrote in his May 5 Valley Voice, “ABCD also wants a better downtown.”

The city of Palm Springs’ development process is broken. No consideration is given to growth’s effect on traffic, occupancy rates, economic sustainability and, most importantly, resident tranquility and enjoyment.

City meetings (commissions, council, etc.) involve exchanges of opinions, gut comments and emotion rather than fact-based, reasoned exchanges.

It’s a sad affair.

Joe Wild, Palm Springs

Thanks, Sue

Congratulations to Sue Rappaport on her retirement after publishing 15 years of great articles in The Desert Sun's Food section.

I have thoroughly enjoyed them all and it was my go-to page every Wednesday. I loved reading about the people who submitted their recipes. We have some very talented cooks and bakers here in the desert.

All the best to you, Sue!

Ellie Dzuro, Desert Hot Springs

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1T4nbEr