POLITICO Pro Red states see insurance rise despite Obamacare opposition

Recalcitrant red states have done little — or nothing — to promote Obamacare. Yet their residents are getting health coverage by the millions.

Across the country, efforts to resist or undermine the law persist. Calls for repeal haven’t died down. Most of the states with Republicans in control aren’t running their own insurance exchanges, but their residents are still getting covered and still getting subsidies — unless the Supreme Court in an upcoming case rules that the subsidies are illegal in states using HealthCare.gov.

Story Continued Below

Only 10 states with Republican governors have accepted billions of federal dollars to expand Medicaid to cover low-income people. Alabama, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas and Wyoming, only one of which has a Democratic governor, aren’t enforcing Obamacare’s landmark reforms to the private insurance industry, so federal officials must do it. Local politicians in a host of states are calling for legislation to dilute the Affordable Care Act even more.

But from Maine to Mississippi, Texas to Wisconsin, enrollment numbers keep rising, no matter how they are sliced — total number of people enrolled, percentage of eligible people getting covered, the overall drop in the uninsured rate.

Those gains pose a challenge in the coming months for Republicans, who face the prospect that millions of people in 37 states will lose insurance subsidies if the Supreme Court rules against the Obama administration in King v. Burwell this June. Consumer advocates and congressional Democrats have begun to seize on this, highlighting the stories of people they say would be harmed. And new polling from the Kaiser Family Foundation finds that a majority of the public, including significant numbers of Republicans, say Congress and the states should fix any gaps should the high court strike the subsidies.

A Robert Wood Johnson Foundation study found that a ruling against the administration would disproportionately affect people who are white, Southern and employed — a demographic crucial to the Republican base. The foundation estimated that 6.3 million people could lose coverage if the subsidies end. Of those, 82 percent have modest incomes but are not poor, 62 percent live in the South and 61 percent are white.

Arkansas is the state that saw the largest drop in its uninsured population, after a bipartisan compromise on an alternative form of Medicaid expansion was developed under former Gov. Mike Beebe, a Democrat, and the Republican Legislature. The compromise approach, known as the “private option,” is at risk now, as Republican critics of the program have increased their ranks in the Legislature and are vowing to undo it.

Arkansas has company in its coverage gains. The latest Obama administration figures for the states using HealthCare.gov show sizable private insurance sign-ups in states like Florida, Maine, Michigan, Georgia and North Carolina, which have managed to cover at least 40 percent of their eligible residents.

“Even states where Obamacare is not popular with the governor and legislature can generate relatively robust enrollment, which is key to the ACA’s fortunes because so many state governments are not friendly to the law,” said Jonathan Oberlander, a University of North Carolina political scientist who tracks health policy.

His own state of North Carolina, which has become increasingly Republican in the past few years, is an example. Of the 1.1 million people who are eligible for coverage, 43 percent had signed up as of last Friday. That showing is stronger than expected, Oberlander said, “given that the state government played essentially no role in publicizing the ACA or helping to enroll the uninsured.”

Florida has the most sign-ups of any state, including big states running their own exchanges like New York or California. New data from the Department of Health and Human Services show that more than 1.3 million people in Florida have signed up or renewed their exchange coverage. That’s more than half of the 2.5 million who are eligible, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. Maine has signed up close to 63,000 of the 124,000 people who are potentially eligible.

Georgia has brought in 40 percent of its eligible residents. Wisconsin, led by possible 2016 GOP presidential contender Gov. Scott Walker, has gotten nearly 180,000 signed up out of an eligible 478,000 — well over a third in the state.

Health care experts say some of the states’ numbers are expected — for example, Florida, Texas and North Carolina had some of the highest rates of uninsured people. Plus, even though federal money for outreach workers has been thin, outside groups made a concerted effort on enrollment and messaging in populous red states. Insurers also have worked to market their products there.

Nonprofit group Enroll America, a White House ally, concentrated its staff in 11 states with lots of uninsured people — all but one has a Republican governor. They are Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Michigan, North Carolina, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee and Texas.

Larry Levitt with the Kaiser Family Foundation said substantial outreach resources have gone into Florida in particular, and outreach has also likely had an effect in places like Georgia, North Carolina and Michigan.

But the overall enrollment picture is still mixed. Some red states have covered less than 20 percent of those eligible for exchange coverage. And the states that have seen the sharpest overall drops in the uninsured are the ones that expanded their Medicaid programs, which most Republican states have not done.

“Exchange enrollment is only one side of the coin,” Oberlander said, referring to Medicaid.

Texas is close to topping 1 million people — it had almost 941,000 enrollees as of Friday. Still, that’s only 31 percent of the 3.1 million people who could get a plan.

“There isn’t a lot of effective outreach” in that state, says University of Texas professor Samuel Richardson, a health policy expert who also volunteers as a counselor to help people with their applications. Richardson said media attention around the law this year has been much more muted than last year, and he has seen less traffic during the current sign-up period. That could change in the next couple of weeks, as the Feb. 15 enrollment deadline approaches, but it remains to be seen.

“Given that Texas is a red state, it’s doing fine. But I wouldn’t put it as, this is a big surprise, Texas is going gangbusters. It’s somewhere in the middle,” Richardson said.

At the bottom of the list of HealthCare.gov states, Iowa has signed up only 37,338 people out of a potential 225,000, or 17 percent. South Dakota has signed up 18 percent of its potential market, and Alaska is hovering just under 20 percent.

In some of those states, Levitt said insurer marketing might be the missing piece of the puzzle. For example, Blue Cross Blue Shield is the insurer participating in the most Obamacare marketplaces. But not South Dakota’s or Iowa’s, so those states didn’t get as much advertising. In Mississippi, Humana actually sent buses around the state to persuade people to enroll.

That marketing has been “a secret weapon in getting people signed up,” Levitt said.