The first day of winter seemed more like the first day of spring across the Garden State.

Several record high temperatures were set today as unseasonably warm air moved into New Jersey, and on Sunday, virtually every temperature record in the state is likely to fall, according to forecasters.

In fact, in some places, the all-time record high temperature for the month could be challenged as temperatures could surge into the 70s a day into winter.

A brisk southerly flow is allowing mild air to push into the region from the south ahead of a powerful cold front moving into the center of the country, said Dean Iovino, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service’s Mount Holly office.

Newark, Atlantic City, New York and Philadelphia were among the major Northeast cities to break or tie records today.

The National Weather Service says both Atlantic City and Philadelphia reached 67 degrees this afternoon. That broke Atlantic City’s previous mark of 63 degrees, set in 2011, and bested Philadelphia’s previous high of 66 degrees, set in 1895.

In Newark, a high of 64 degrees was recorded, besting the previous mark of 62, set in 2011, and Central Park in Manhattan reached 62 degrees tying previous records set in 2011 and 1923.

Normal high temperatures hover in the low- to mid-40s this time of year, meaning Sunday's burst of warmth could push the mercury more than 30 degrees above what’s typical for late December.

It would take an exceptional bit of warming to set the record for warmest day on record in New Jersey, according to David Robinson, the state climatologist at Rutgers University. The highest temperature in the state recorded in December was taken in Belleplain State Forest in Cape May County on Dec. 7 1998, when the high was 78 degrees.

Still, considering parts of the state reached 70 today, it's not out of the question with a warmer day expected tomorrow, that individual weather stations could hit all-month marks.

Don’t get comfortable with the unseasonable conditions. A cold front is expected to push through the state Monday, and by Christmas Eve and Christmas Day temperatures could fall to normal or even below normal levels.

“It will just be back to reality,” Iovino said.

Moderate to heavy rains could affect New Jersey Monday as the cold front approaches, slowing holiday travel, but significant flooding is not expected.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.