As the cease-fire between Israel and Hamas ticks toward its close, the world asks the same question that innocent civilians on both sides of this conflict are asking: Will this conflict ever end?

Israel has agreed to extend the 72 hour cease-fire unconditionally. Hamas has vowed to continue to fight if it does not get all that it wants out of the negotiations. But, as a very successful businessman once taught me many years back, "the most successful negotiations are where both sides win and both sides lose. Both walk away with a lot of what they wanted, but there will never be a successful negotiation unless both sides have left something on the table and are willing to do so." Currently, that willingness is lacking.

The Israelis and Palestinians, though, need not just a ceasefire and not just an end to this conflict, but a solution to prevent conflicts from arising in the future. Unless something changes, groups like Hamas will continue to attack Israel. So how do we get them to stop? Perhaps the answer lies in something that has been presented as a part of the negotiations, such as the prospect of an opening of Gaza.

[SEE: Cartoons on the Middle East]

Even if the Israelis' desire to demilitarize Hamas is realized, unless the choke-hold felt by the Palestinians due to Israel's current blockade is loosened, nothing will ever be accomplished. And the reality is that Hamas can replenish its arsenal with worldwide support from other terrorist organizations, unless something changes drastically.

After 9/11, there were many experts who said, "If you want to end terrorism, give the terrorist a job." There is some truth in that. If you're hungry and the devil hands you a sandwich, you'll follow him. And that is what the Palestinian people did and continue to do.

Opening up Gaza and ending the blockade will do much more than meet one of the demands of Hamas. It will enable the Palestinians to create businesses and commerce. They need to be able to create their own economy. They need to be able to develop Gaza and the West Bank.

Obviously, there are security concerns on the part of Israel which are quite warranted, since Hamas still remains a terrorist organization and cannot be trusted; but the people will never turn on Hamas unless they are able to be fully sustainable on their own, and unless they view Israel as helpers rather than hurters. As President Barack Obama has stated, this problem goes beyond one organization.

[READ: Israel Has a Duty to Defend Its Citizens]

I just returned from a vacation in London. There, as with most of the EU and the world, Israel is not viewed as the victim that they and many American media outlets portray them as. The graphic photos and videos of innocent children killed while playing soccer on beaches, studying in school, lying sick in a hospital bed or sleeping in their own homes has gained them a great deal of sympathy from the international community. As of now, 1,800 people have died and approximately 65,000 have lost their homes. I agree with the president. "I have no sympathy for Hamas," Obama said. "I have great sympathy for ordinary people who are struggling within Gaza."

The idea that Israel, or anyone for that matter, can continue to keep people closed off from the world without any type of angry response is pure ignorance. Like a powderkeg, eventually it will explode. And now it has, and will continue to unless a permanent solution is arrived at by both sides. Israel can hope and pray that the Palestinians will just go away, but that is not going to happen. And unless Israel plans to kill each and every one of them, the only solution is for each side to have its own land, its own economy and its own state.