Photo: Bill Shaw/Indiana Public Media News The study found overall enrollment and spending each jumped an average of 14 percent.

Nationwide Medicaid enrollment and spending saw record increases in the 2015 fiscal year thanks to the expansion of Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act.

That’s according to a study from the Kaiser Family Foundation’s Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.

The study found overall enrollment and spending each jumped an average of 14 percent.

In the 29 states that elected to expand Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act, growth in enrollment was 18 percent and growth in spending was 17.7 percent. In non-expansion states those figures on grew 5.1 percent and 6.1 percent respectively.

In Indiana, the state established HIP 2.0, its own modified version of a Medicaid expansion. The federal government approved that program in January, and it launched in February, attracting 18,000 applicants in the first week alone.

The state offers three different kinds of HIP 2.0 plans and has enrolled hundreds of thousands of Hoosiers in the program since its launch, and some experts say the state is on pace to match states of comparable size and eligible population.

“Indiana is really reflective of what we’re seeing nationally,” Covering Kids and Families of Indiana spokesperson Caitlin Priest says. “We’re seeing an immediate, sustained uptake into HIP 2.o, and that’s layered over the immediate, sustained entrance into the ACA Marketplace plan. Altogether, we have a really robust pool of Hoosiers who are entering the insurance marketplace for the first time.”

Priest says recent estimates anticipate enrollment levels will taper — the Kaisier study also expects Medicaid spending and enrollment to taper in 2016, too, predicting a 4 percent increase in enrollment and a 6.9 percent increase in spending — but by the end of open enrollment in 2016, Priest says nearly 10 million Americans will be covered under the Affordable Care Act.

Priest says as more individuals become insured, long-term health care costs should decline.