Photo

Hillary Rodham Clinton has very noticeably and intensely trained her sights on a single rival candidate for president: Jeb Bush.

On Friday, she lambasted Mr. Bush, a former Florida governor, as he waited in the wings at a National Urban League conference in Miami, twisting his campaign slogan into a critique of his stands on the Affordable Care Act and raising the minimum wage. On Tuesday night in Denver, she called him “out of touch” for questioning, earlier that day, how much government should spend on women’s health — a quick insert into a speech in which Mrs. Clinton had already planned to hit Mr. Bush on immigration.

For Mrs. Clinton, going after Mr. Bush with such gusto offers a debate about policy instead of simply answering persistent questions about her email practices and her family’s foundation, which have helped to precipitate a dip in her approval ratings.

And attacking Mr. Bush before black leaders, on immigration and on women’s health, can only help fire up Mrs. Clinton’s core supporters.

Video

But Mrs. Clinton has not picked on Mr. Bush at random: Her aides, for the most part, believe he is likely to ultimately win the Republican nomination. And in a very crowded Republican field, in which Donald J. Trump is sopping up the news media’s attention, Mr. Bush has for the most part escaped the kind of sharp elbows that would normally have been thrown at such a high-profile candidate.

Mrs. Clinton seems happy to pick up the slack. She faulted his record on voting rights. She ridiculed him for saying that Americans need to “work longer hours.” And she went out of her way, in a CNN interview, to point out that Mr. Bush no longer supported a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The feistiness lives up to Mrs. Clinton’s promises to be a “fighter,” and could help satisfy liberals who want her to show aggressiveness on behalf of their ideals.

“For months now, she has been a piñata for the Republicans, the Koch brothers, the press and anyone else who wanted to take a swing,” said Paul Begala, a strategist in Bill Clinton’s 1992 campaign. “Hillary is a great counterpuncher, and I am glad to see her fighting back. Democrats will see she is not from the surrenderist wing of the progressive movement.”

The strategy may also look very familiar to veterans of President Obama’s 2012 re-election campaign, in which Mr. Obama’s basic message to his supporters was that Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee that year, “hates you,” as one former Obama aide put it.

Mrs. Clinton is taking a similar approach. Though she has criticized Republicans in general and a few of Mr. Bush’s rivals by name, she has recently narrowed her focus to Mr. Bush. “It makes sense to start trying to define the race against Bush as early as possible,” said Anna Greenberg, a Democratic pollster. “She’ll do much better in contrast to Republicans.” Steve Murphy, a Democratic strategist, was more blunt: “Forget about the Democratic heel biters and start drawing the contrast with him,” he said, referring to Mr. Bush.

The strategy is not risk-free: Mrs. Clinton could be accused of ignoring her own primaries, particularly by critics who will remind her of her 2008 loss to Mr. Obama, after she was initially seen as the inevitable nominee.

“This is the strategy of a weak Democratic candidate: to attack and be attacked by Jeb Bush, to rally Democratic antibodies to her defense and get her through an uncertain nomination process,” said Alex Castellanos, a Republican strategist.

Mrs. Clinton’s aides insist that they are not banking on Mr. Bush’s becoming the Republican nominee, and that Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin and Senator Marco Rubio of Florida cannot be discounted. But privately, several Democrats close to her campaign say they are convinced that Republicans will adhere to their practice of uniting behind the establishment candidate in the end.

On a conference call on Wednesday, looking ahead to the first Republican debate Thursday night, Mrs. Clinton’s pollster, Joel Benenson, responded to questions about her aggressiveness toward Mr. Bush by saying he had “created a rather target-rich environment.”

First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday - Friday.

Indeed, Mrs. Clinton’s attacks have offered a reminder that many conservatives still view Mr. Bush with skepticism, despite his demonstrably conservative record as governor. Instead of rallying to his side, some conservatives publicly rapped him on Wednesday for fumbling his comments about Planned Parenthood the day before.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Bush’s aides plan to begin airing online ads making the case to conservatives that he has drawn Mrs. Clinton’s fire because he is such a strong champion for their cause. “Hillary’s coming to Jeb because they’re concerned about his strength as a general election candidate,” said Tim Miller, a Bush spokesman.

It is possible that Mrs. Clinton’s attacks could expose Mr. Bush’s weaknesses in his own party. But Mrs. Clinton’s advisers privately acknowledge that Mr. Bush also has many strengths, including the ability to compete in the swing state of Florida.

If attacking Mr. Bush hurts him in his own primary, Mrs. Clinton’s advisers would not see that as a terrible outcome. And with so many Republican candidates to choose from — and given Mr. Bush’s troubles with conservative voters — being targeted by Mrs. Clinton may not be of much use to him in solidifying support in his own party.

“It should help him that Hillary’s attacking him,” said Joe Trippi, a Democratic strategist. “Unfortunately, the weird way the G.O.P. is situated right now, it probably won’t.”