KRASNAYA POLYANA, Russia – A bizarre women’s super-G resulted in another deflating performance Saturday for the U.S. Ski Team, which has only one medal in five alpine events at the Sochi Games.

Eight of the first 11 racers failed to finish the race, most of them going out in a tricky combination of gates just below a jump in sight of the finish. Julia Mancuso, the bronze medalist in super combined, was the top American in eighth place.

Austrians Anna Fenninger and Nicole Hosp took gold and bronze, respectively. Maria Hoefl-Riesch of Germany took the silver.

Midway through the alpine program, the U.S. racers are having to answer questions about what’s wrong with a team that won eight medals at the Vancouver Games four years ago.

“We probably expected a little more, to be honest,” said U.S. Ski Team alpine director Patrick Riml. “The Games aren’t over yet. We’re halfway through, and we have some strong performers and good events coming up for us.”

Leanne Smith was 18th Saturday and the other U.S. racers, Laurenne Ross and Stacey Cook, failed to finish. Last year they all made podium appearances on the World Cup, but none of them have this year.

“Every athlete is out here to do their best,” said Smith. “There’s definitely no lack of that on this team. Alpine skiing is a very difficult sport. It’s so competitive, and there’s so many variables and factors that go into it.”

In the men’s downhill, Bode Miller made one costly mistake that cost him a gold medal. In other races, U.S. skiers have appeared tentative, especially Mancuso in the women’s downhill. She finished eighth, on the same course where she was first in the downhill leg of the combined two days earlier.

“I think there’s definitely some disappointments, for sure in the downhill,” Mancuso said. “I wanted to have a better race, and Bode for sure wanted to do better. But it’s hard. There’s really only three spots that you can get a medal — first, second and third. There’s tons of skiers out here that can really step it up and have their best races.”

Miller and Ted Ligety still have medal prospects in the men’s super-G Sunday, Ligety will be the favorite in giant slalom Wednesday, and young star Mikaela Shiffrin arrived Friday for giant slalom Tuesday and slalom on Friday. She is the reigning world champion in the slalom and has been on the podium twice this season in GS.

“You can believe so much, and then you actually have to do it on the day,” Mancuso said. “Every time I cross the finish line, it makes me appreciate so much that I’ve been able to win medals. It’s tough because you want to be motivated to get more. It feels so good to stand on the podium, but everything really has to come together. It really has to be a magical day.”