As we say goodbye to 2014, Peninsula Clarion reporters Ben Boettger, Dan Balmer and Ian Foley asked people in the community what they are looking forward to in 2015. Here’s what residents had to say:

“I’m looking forward to getting all my projects done this summer. I’ve got a list of things a mile long.”

— Denise Kivi

“Continued growth. With the growth that’s happening up north with the oil, I want the peninsula to keep becoming more prosperous.”

— Diane Hurst

“I’m looking forward to getting rid of the grocery tax. It’s a tax that local people have to pay, and it’s particularly burdensome to large families and people on a fixed income.”

— James Price, Nikiski

“King (salmon) opening. It’s been 3 or 4 years since they closed.”

— Sam Shropshire

“I’m looking forward to fishing season and more sunlight. This is my first year and I’m excited to get my in-state license so I can dipnet for salmon.”

— Chandler Stevenson, Soldotna

“Looking forward to buying a house. I start my master’s program in Aeronautics around the same time so that should keep me busy.”

— Daniel Mahr, Soldotna

“I’m always optimistic about the New Year. I’m anxious to see what happens with new legislature, new governor and his administration. I want to tackle health care. From a mayoral perspective I want to start looking at things that require long-term planning because three years goes by really quick.”

— Mike Navarre, Kenai

“Getter better, healthwise. We’re Jehovah’s Witnesses, and we’re looking to go ahead and go on a missionary (trip), even though we’re in our 70s.”

— Steve Ratey, Kenai

“I’m looking forward to more work opportunities. I spray foam and hopefully a lot of oilfield jobs open up and I can get in on that.”

— Anthony Borromeo, Kenai

“I’m going to become a grandmother for the first time, so I’m looking forward to that. I’m going to have two new grandchildren. I’m very excited.”

— Mary Jo Joiner, Funny River Road

“Well, let’s put it this way — my life is so good right now. To continue it, is great. I’m not looking for major changes.”

— Chuck Thornton, Kenai

“Just enjoying life. Whatever there is, if something doesn’t work out, try another thing.”

— Frances Starkey, Kenai

“To remain healthy and happy.”

— Paula Rohloff,

Soldotna

“I recently relocated back to the peninsula after being gone for a few years, so I’m most excited to reconnect with the community and pursue everything Alaska has to offer.”

— Wes Remmer, Kenai

“Try to get rid of this beer belly.”

— David Harne, Kasilof

“Repeal of Obamacare. It has to go. Our premiums for the next five years are going to be $70,000. It’s killing the country.”

— Russ Morrison, Soldotna