TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie's administration has pulled the plug on a seven-year-old $118.3 million contract for what had been billed as a “comprehensive and cutting-edge” computer system to make Medicaid, food stamps and other social welfare programs easier to manage, including some that have been hobbled by backlogs, NJ Advance Media has learned.

The state Department of Human Services’ contract with Hewlett Packard to produce the Consolidated Assistance Support System, better known as CASS, “has been terminated, and an analysis is in progress to determine next steps,” department spokeswoman Nicole Brossoie confirmed. “The state and the vendor are still in talks regarding the contract termination, so it’s premature to discuss any other aspects at this time.”

A spokesman for the Palo Alto, Calif. information technology company declined to discuss what happened in New Jersey.

“Out of respect, HP does not comment on customer relationships,” Hewlett Packard spokesman Blair J. Hinderliter said in an email Wednesday.

Raymond Castro, a senior analyst for the liberal-leaning think tank New Jersey Policy Perspective, said the lack of a modern automated system “certainly has contributed to this enormous backlog in the Medicaid expansion” associated with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, in New Jersey.

As of Oct. 22, about 11,000 applications were pending from people who wanted to enroll in Medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor that was expanded to handle Obamacare applicants, a department official said.

Castro called the contract’s termination on top of the numerous delays in setting up the computer system “enormously frustrating.”

“They may well be making the right decision,” Castro said. "But it’s very late in the game. They have to come up with an alternative soon.”

The department is also facing an inquiry by the U.S. Department of Agriculture for taking too long to process people’s applications for the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly known as food stamps.

The state awarded the contract in 2007 to Electronic Data Systems, which was acquired by HP the following year.

Expectations were high for the project. The new system was meant to replace the 1980s vintage mainframe computer system that more than 7,000 county and state social service professionals use to enroll and manage anti-poverty programs that serve 1.5 million low-income clients. In addition to Medicaid and SNAP, the system would also handle county and local welfare payments, and NJ CARES, the subsidized child care system, according to state records.

Brossoie did not respond to a question asking how much of the $118.3 million Hewlett Packard had been paid, or how much of the cost had been borne by the state and federal governments. According to the Human Service response in the spring to a budget analysis by the Office of Legislative Services, “phases 1 through 5.5 of the CASS Project have been completed. The current status of the project remains in Phase 6-Testing and Conversion.”

It is also not clear whether any of the work HP could be used by another contractor.

“CASS is being developed from an existing software package that is customized for New Jersey’s specific social service needs,” according to an April 2013 newsletter, “CASS Connections,” Human Services produced to keep people abreast of the project’s latest developments.

Human Service officials discussed the CASS project during the 2005-06 budget cycle, and in 2007, anticipated the work would be complete in three years, according to state records.

Sen. Joseph Vitale, (D-Middlesex), the chairman of the Senate health committee, said he awaits an explanation as to what went wrong.

Vitale said it is also "important to understand how the state will now propose to connect recipients with the array of services available to them."

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.