Topics: From the Wires, News, Politics News

WAUKON, Iowa (AP) — On a collision course all week, Republican presidential front-runners Donald Trump and Ted Cruz were giving Iowa voters a look at their contrasting campaign styles Saturday.

What was a delicate detente has become strained as Cruz has jumped ahead in polls in Iowa, which holds the leadoff caucuses Feb. 1, while Trump tops opinion surveys nationally and in early-voting New Hampshire.

On display is a contest between the grinding Iowa campaign of Cruz — whose five stops Saturday complete a six-day, 28-event bus tour — and the splashy mega-rallies that have become as much Trump’s brand as his gilded hotels. Both have attracted overflow crowds: Trump at large halls and stadiums; Cruz in countless coffee shops, convenience stores, churches and diners.

The Texas senator and the billionaire have been quietly circling one another as they work to win over voters in the final stretch leading to the caucuses.

Trump late last year began efforts to undermine Cruz, questioning the senator’s religion and accusing him at recent events of stealing his idea to build a wall along the Mexico border. The intensity escalated this past week when Trump questioned whether the Canadian-born Cruz was eligible to be president.

Cruz has been careful not to take on Trump directly even as a few other rivals have savaged him. He chalked up the comments about his eligibility to the political “silly season” and said it’s a non-issue.

But he appeared to offer a counterpunch on Friday, when he suggested that Trump wasn’t devoting the time and energy to wooing Iowa voters that history shows is needed to win.

“There is an Iowa way of campaigning and deciding caucuses,” Cruz told supporters packed into a basement of a pizza restaurant in Decorah. “I believe the only way to compete and win in the state of Iowa is to come and spend the time asking the voters for their support. Looking them in the eye.”

He’s often asked how he can beat Trump.

“You know we are gonna continue doing exactly what we are doing,” he said in a Charles City coffee shop Friday when the question came up again. “You come here, you have the humility to stand before the men and women of this state and answer your questions. And you have the strength and courage of your convictions to say I can defend my record. And I can answer the hard questions.”