(ST. JOSEPH, Mo.) What started as an idea has turned into something more.



"Really it's all about making dreams come true, whether it be small or big," said Choices of St. Joseph Assistant Director Terri Zeamer.



Elizabeth, Crystal, and Kathy live together and are individuals at Choices of St. Joseph. An organization that helps adults with developmental disabilities. The three of them got together last June and decided to jot down things they would like to do...all within this year.



"This house of girls sat down and made a list of things that they would like to do and they called it a bucket list," said Zeamer.



Their lists include activities like playing golf and riding on a motorcycle. Something Elizabeth Brunette wanted to do was go to a Chiefs game. Even though she had to bundle up for the game it was something she always wanted to do.



"That was really cold, it was really cold that day. And my staff was colder than me," said Elizabeth Brunette of Choices.



And Kathy Lynn Zion got to take a tour of our very own television station and meet KQ2's Bridget Blevins.



"I like her, she's real nice," said Kathy Lynn Zion of Choices.



But some of their bucket list items include wanting to give back to the community.



"I'd like to teach baseball to little kids," said Crystal Bumphrey of Choices.



Zion says her list means a little bit more to her after being diagnosed with cancer in October. Zion's chemo treatments have been effective against the cancer and says she has special plans once her treatments are done and she's given the all clear.



"I want to go to the ballet and stay at a Kansas City hotel," said Zion.



Assistant Director Terri Zeamer says individuals at Choices have full control in what they want to do.



"It's their ideas, their plans, and we just help support them," said Zeamer.



Support like showing them how to budget their money, making phone calls, and looking up dates for activities. Crystal Bumphrey is still working on her bucket list but says she's been making memories by taking pictures along the way.



"I feel really good and I feel satisfied knowing that I've done it," said Bumphrey.



Zeamer says the concept of the bucket lists hasn't just helped individuals but everyone that works at Choices too.



"It helps us and gives us a purpose for our job, day to day," said Zeamer.



Word got out about the bucket lists among other Choices homes and they've adopted the idea as well.







Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.