In a Donald Trump-esque political moment, Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper defied all convention, all health and environmental fears about the Animas River, and took a drink of its water five days after 3 million gallons of pollution turned it orange.

The stunt came in response to a dare from the local media and Hickenlooper’s desire to show that the river is no longer a health hazard and that Durango, the southwestern Colorado city that considers the river its lifeblood, is open for business.

But the viral images of Hickenlooper drinking the water — which he first treated with iodine to kill bacteria and pathogens — also showcase the unusual political currents that flowed from the Aug. 5 wastewater spill triggered by the Environmental Protection Agency.

And how the EPA handles the spill is likely to affect its fragile reputation in Colorado, where local officials and businesses complain about a broader assault from the federal government on the Western way of life.

Hickenlooper, a Democrat, put himself at odds with the Obama administration from the start as he blasted the agency’s slow response and, from the banks of the river, eschewed the normal course in disasters.

Instead of highlighting the damage to provoke quicker action from federal authorities, the governor forcefully dismissed cautions about water quality in a public argument with the region’s EPA administrator.

“The point I was trying to make is that the river is back to normal,” Hickenlooper said in an interview after returning from Durango. “There’s a silver lining in all this. It doesn’t appear there is going to be lasting environmental damage or significant environmental damage, and what most of us were fearful of didn’t happen.”

But local leaders took a more measured approach in the days after the spill, emphasizing concerns about the long-term damage to the river, where heavy metals and toxins may lie in the river bottom sediment.

State Senate President pro tem Ellen Roberts, a Durango Republican, suggested the governor’s big sip from the river sent the wrong message.

“I wouldn’t have done that,” she said. “It was a bit of a head-scratching move. I believe it was well-intentioned, but I think, frankly, we have too many public health and safety concerns right now.”

Dan Olson, the executive director of the Durango-based San Juan Citizens Alliance environmental group, said he hopes the environmental damage isn’t so easily dismissed.

“This event made visual — dramatically — the pollution we live with so people could not ignore it,” he said. “But you already see, as the water column clears, how people are rushing back to their positions, their hope or belief that everything is good here, nothing to see, let’s move along.”

Responding to questions about the possible long-term effects, Hickenlooper said heavy metals on the river bottom are “normal sediment” and state scientists showed him “really good evidence that the river came back to its natural state — well, not its natural state, to its normal state.”

“Look, I’m a geologist, right? I recognize that you have to test everything and retest it and get redundant experiments,” said Hickenlooper, who once drank fracking fluid to make a point. “But the science that we have so far suggests that we don’t have the natural calamity … that so many of us were fearful of when we first saw those pictures.”

For a governor, said Bob Loevy, professor emeritus of political science at Colorado College, a disaster is a legacy-defining moment, and Hickenlooper’s reputation may depend on what scientists find in coming days and months.

“I think he has a political liability if he doesn’t show he was right and show the state has taken a role in ensuring the river gets cleaned up,” Loevy said. “How long this is a political liability for him depends on how bad the damage really turns out to be and how long it takes to clean it up.”

Floyd Ciruli, a Denver-based pollster and political consultant, said the coloring of the river was so dramatic “that I think people are going to be naturally concerned about the long-term residual impact.”

John Frank: 303-954-2409, jfrank@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ByJohnFrank

Staff writer Kevin Simpson contributed to this report.