ASHBURN – Now that the Washington Redskins finalized the 53-man roster Saturday, the next step is assembling a 10-man practice squad.

On Sunday, seven players that were cut Saturday had lockers set up at Redskins Park — an early indicator they are expected to sign to the practice squad.

According to a source, linebacker Houston Bates signed to the practice squad. The other six with lockers were offensive lineman Takoby Cofield, running back Trey Williams, tight end Je’Ron Hamm, cornerback Quinton Dunbar, linebacker Terrance Plummer and defensive end Corey Crawford.

The Houston Chronicle also reported on Sunday that full back Ray Agnew III signed with the Redskins, who was cut from the Cowboys Saturday and likely headed to the practice squad.

The Redskins cut fullback Jordan Campbell Saturday, who was designated as injured.

The decision to keep only two tight ends in Jordan Reed and Derek Carrier was curious considering Reed’s injury history, however coach Jay Gruden said Sunday they would address the need for a third tight end through the practice squad, which they have done so with Hamm.

Hamm, who spent time on the team’s practice squad in 2014, had three catches for 46 yards in the preseason.

“That would be a revolving door adding a third tight end,” Gruden said.

“Obviously, we’d have to make a roster spot somewhere else. So this roster is a 53-man roster and it’s set right now, but obviously throughout the season you’ll be adding maybe a tight end or taking out someone somewhere else. So right now we’re set, but we could definitely use another tight end or two on the practice squad.”

NFL teams are allowed to keep 10 players on the practice squad, with rookies and first-year players eligible for the squad. Teams can also designate a player for the practice squad if they have been on an active roster fewer than six games.

Teams can also sign and cut practice squad players at anytime, however, teams cannot sign another team’s practice squad player to their respective squad. Practice squad players earn a minimum of $6,300 per week, however, a player is awarded a new contract if he is promoted to the 53-man roster.

While the practice squad is getting settled, Gruden said he doesn’t envision much turnover on the 53-man roster over the next two days.

“It’s so hard when you’re talking about cutting a guy and adding a guy that doesn’t know your system and putting him up right away,” Gruden said.

“It would have to be a special, very big need for us or a special circumstance with a special player that we all know.”