LITTLE ROCK, Ark. -- KARK is Working 4 You to follow up on issues involving delays in ARKids application processing at the Department of Human Services after an overwhelming response to our first story highlighting one issue in the system.

A Pediatrician's Perspective

Every day there have been patients Dr. Laura Williams hasn't been seeing.

"That first year of life is critical," she said. "I saw a child this week with special needs with an infant sibling that I have not been able to do any of their wellness and the child is 6 months old. There are mandatory well child appointments that span two weeks, two months, four months and six months. But I couldn't see that infant because their coverage has been pending all that time."

Dr. Williams has worked with families with ARKids First coverage pending until their two-month-old checkup, but the approval process has drug on for some families past that date. ARKids First is healthcare coverage for kids that is funded through Medicaid.

Without approval, that means some children have missed check-ups but in others they couldn't be seen for serious conditions. And according to Williams, it's not just happening in her small practice.

"What has happened is no one is getting a number. Because they do not have insurance coverage, they are not getting seen," she said. "I have one colleague that has had to start sending his patients to Arkansas Children's Hospital treatment because he can't see everyone and still afford it. We have to keep the lights on at our clinics and we have to pay our staffs."

According to Williams, providers face a tough choice when it comes to kids they know should be eligible under the program but that have been caught up in a delayed approval process.

"It's so hard for me. I would love to see all of these families," Williams said. "But there's a risk to providers. If for some reason DHS decides not to cover the child, or they decide that the coverage won't be retroactive to cover the care they've received, those are costs you just have to absorb. As a smaller practice, I simply can't afford it."

According to Williams, she followed the directions of DHS to submit patients that were high priorities because of critical healthcare needs or conditions. Williams said it didn't produce results.

"Nothing happened. The only success story I've seen is for a baby girl who was born prematurely. She had severe health conditions and needed to be seen by both me and a number of specialists. We called, we requested for her to be approved. That only happened once her mother went down and sat at the DHS office."

Taking Your Questions to the Top

Last Thursday, KARK spoke with a mother who had been waiting for two of her children to have their ARKids numbers activated. They had been approved by DHS as eligible, but their profiles were not activating in the computer system. We were told by DHS that the system error impacting that family affected roughly 200 other cases.

Following that story, an overwhelming number of Arkansan parents reached out to us in phone calls, emails and social media messages, claiming they were experiencing the same delays or different issues. Many of them were left waiting for their newborns to be enrolled, which typically happens quickly.

"We see these cases every day," State Senator David Sanders, R - Little Rock, said. "Just yesterday morning I received an email from a mother who was told her children weren't eligible, but were showing as eligible in the system. I got on that case and helped resolve the issue. I'm just one legislator. There are 135 of us, and we're all getting these calls. And I would encourage anyone experiencing this to call their local legislator."

Sanders and other lawmakers supported efforts in 2013 to create a system that could conduct eligibility checks for those receiving state healthcare benefits. The change was required by the Affordable Care Act, but according to Sanders lawmakers wanted to see DHS develop the process for accountability, regardless.

"It was sort of like the Hotel of California when it came to Medicaid," Sanders said. "People checked in as eligible on the rolls, and then they never left. We took their word for it that they were eligible. And we have to be responsible with taxpayer funds to make sure they all are."

But the system upgrades became an overwhelming task for the Department of Human Services, according to DHS Director John Selig. Selig has said, both during our interview with him and at previous legislative hearings, that the eligibility checks required a new computer system to run effectively. The massive IT undertaking proved to be problematic.

The project went over budget by millions, and management of the transfer exceeded DHS's expertise and staff.

"We attempted to use our IT team to manage the project, to try and reduce taxpayer expenditures," Selig said. "But in retrospect we might have just been better off bringing someone else in to manage the project."

Sanders, saying he and other lawmakers have been frustrated to find the system failing to perform at the expected levels, adding he and other lawmakers were disappointed in the delays Arkansans have been experiencing.

"The system should work. It's heart-wrenching when you see things like that," he said. "When it doesn't work human lives are involved and there's a real human cost. You have the expectation that something you buy that is supposed to deliver you have an expectation that it will work."

According to Selig, DHS is acutely aware that the delays have created frustrations and challenges for families across the state. He noted there were unforeseen problems with the software and unforeseen client loads from the federal government redirecting cases to Arkansas to handle.

"That combined with the problems with the data system really got us backed up," Selig said. "We're digging out of that now, but I know people are frustrated as we wait and we're frustrated too. We don't want families to have to wait at all."

According to Selig, one of the issues was a problem with newborn applications being processed. The applications should have gone into the software system automatically and been processed from date of birth. It failed to do that, resulting in those applications having to be handled manually by staff. In the meantime, as new applications were coming in, renewals and verifications started during the summer.

"We started implementing this new data system well over a year ago. It's that new data system that's creating the issues, versus the renewals," Selig said. "The renewals exacerbate the issue because it's work you need to do. We didn't have the bodies to help with that, they got overloaded, and then the renewals just put us severely behind."

DHS: Doing What We Can

But according to Selig, during the summer Governor Asa Hutchinson's commitment to approve overtime and move workers into the unit has helped decrease the backlog. For instance, Selig said, 85 percent of newborn problem cases have been addressed, leaving roughly 1,500 newborn cases on the docket to be dealt with.

When it comes to new applications, since the summer DHS says the system has been reaching automated processing of about 70 percent, instead of the initial 20 percent. For renewals, that number has spiked to 80 percent.

Individual caseworkers are working on those other cases, and a special team was created to troubleshoot cases that had been escalated by the local offices as a "problem case". According to DHS, around 7,100 remain in the problem case category.

"It is frustrating for local staff who are working with these families. It's their friends, families and neighbors. They want to help, and we're making progress, but we're not there yet," Selig said.

"When do you think we will be there?" this reporter asked.

"There's definitely light at the end of the tunnel, it's still though -- it's not tomorrow it's over the next couple of months or so," he said.

The governor has put a pause on integrating or transferring any new services, like SNAP, to the new database system until all of the bugs can be worked out of the current software and applications and renewals for the current programs are coming in at a higher clip.

"All I hear is that it's getting better it's getting fixed. I want to tell you nothing has changed," Dr. Williams said. "We're continuously told that things are getting better, but I know for myself and other providers that we haven't seen it up to this point."

Dr. Williams is trying to serve patients as best she can in the meantime, without going broke.

"We're just scraping by and I do it because I love taking care of kids, but I can't operate at zero," she said. "We're shortchanging the children of Arkansas and it's not just me - it's everyone."

According to St. Sen. Sanders, the whole issue from Medicaid for adults to ARKids for children speaks to him of a larger question the state has to ask itself.

"What is the state government's core business. What do we do well? What could someone, whether it's private sector involvement or otherwise do better? This matter goes back to how this system was procured, how the project was managed and ultimately how it has performed," Sanders said. "It's about accountability, and it seems there has been a lack of accountability in this realm."

Governor's Office Helps Handle Calls

KARK also reached out to Governor Asa Hutchinson's office to see if the governor was aware of the issue and if constituents were contacting him.

Spokesperson JR Davis provided a written statement saying, "The Governor is aware of the issues facing the ARKids program, and our office is diligently working with DHS officials to make progress in these areas. We want to ensure our kids are being taken care of and will continue to have open lines of communication with DHS as the situation progresses.”

According to Davis, constituent services department within the governor's office has fielded roughly 400 calls and emails dealing with ARKids issues. He added the office has helped resolve about 200 cases.

Williams can only hope that the broken system gets better sooner rather than later, so kids' healthcare isn't what gets left falling behind.

DO YOU NEED KARK WORKING 4 YOU?

KARK Working 4 You is committed to highlighting issues that are important to Arkansas. If you have a story that needs to be covered, call Reporter Marci Manley on the Working 4 You Tipline at (501) 340-4448 or email at working4you@kark.com.