Global Markets Tumble on China, Greece Worries The Dow Jones Industrial Average opened sharply lower in response to global investors dumping risky stocks in favor of Treasurys and gold. WSJ's Michael Casey and Paul Vigna discuss. Photo: Getty.

Have you felt it? Getty Images

There has been an awakening. Have you felt it?

We refer not to the next “Star Wars” movie, but the capital markets, which have been unusually serene over the past two years. Oh, sure, there have been hiccups here and there, there always are, but for the most part, the market’s lulled investors into a sleepy contentedness. Several measures bear this out: the VIX has been historically low, and the St. Louis Fed’s market stress index has also been historically low.

Those golden slumbers may be ending.

Equity valuations by any number of measures are at a higher point that in any post-war era save the height of the dot-com bubble, noted Lindsey Group’s chief market analyst Peter Boockvar. We’re talking such measures price to sales, market cap to GDP, the cyclically adjusted PE ratio developed by Robert Shiller, or Tobin’s Q, a ratio developed by Yale’s James Tobin that measures a company’s market value against the replacement value of its assets.

High valuations aren’t necessarily a problem in and of themselves; Mr. Lindsey points out that the same circumstance existed a year ago as well. The problem is when valuations are high at the same time that the market shifts, because far too many investors will have very little margin of safety – the concept coined by the godfather of value investing, Benjamin Graham.

The margin of safety is essentially the difference between an asset’s intrinsic value and its market value. It’s a corollary of “buy low, sell high.” If you buy when prices are low but intrinsic value is high, you have a margin of safety. If you buy when prices are high, higher than intrinsic value, you have no margin of safety.

“I bring this up,” he wrote, “because with little to no margin of safety at current market levels, valuation in 2015 should be a key focus that investors should be more sensitive to (has already begun in small caps in 2014) because things are about to change with respect to the activities of central banks and it’s been central banks that have elevated the multiples across a broad spectrum of securities.”

The world’s three major central banks are all facing their own pivot points, and it’s not clear what that means for the support they’ve provided the market. The Fed is looking at its rate-hike regime, the ECB is struggling to craft a broad stimulus plan acceptable to all of its leadership, and the Bank of Japan is seeing that the massive stimulus plan it launched in conjunction with “Abenomics” has not revived growth.

“We are reaching the final act of central bank largesse that has never before been seen,” Mr. Boockvar said. “Central banks have got nothing left. We’ll now see who can stand on their own and who can’t.”

Or, to put it another way, is it really plausible that crude oil prices crash by more than 40%, but stock prices keep rising? “Given that crude has been a top story on financial networks and a major headline in the mainstream news, as well, it’s quite amazing that the [S&P 500] continued to inch higher the last few weeks,” said Frank Cappelleri, executive director of institutional equities at Instinet. “When a major asset class experiences perpetual pain like this, it can only be ignored for so long.”

Then again, maybe what’s happening is even bigger than that.

“In my view, we are likely witnessing the peak of the third equity valuation bubble in the past 14 years,” John Hussman of Hussman Funds wrote on his blog this week, “the first two which saw major indices plunge by at least 50%.” But of course, Mr. Hussman is one of the last bears standing, and he’s been saying variations of that dire pronouncement for some time.

Markets move in cycles, and Mr. Hussman is likely to be right eventually. The point isn’t whether or not that will happen. The point is that, when the markets strike back, people with a margin of safety are likely to feel safer than those without.