Print Article Email Article Auburn, NY and Atlanta, GA - MEDENT and Clinigence have announced that Clinigence technology, which includes clinical data analytics, data mining, predictive modeling and business intelligence, has been integrated into MEDENT's comprehensive EMR/EHR solution.



MEDENT is a software development and services company focused on automating medical practices. The company offers an "all-in-one" EMR/EHR, patient portal and practice management system providing a high level of interoperability and automation. The MEDENT system is available in the cloud as a service or as a server-based system in the medical practice.



"With the changing landscape in healthcare, it's vital that practices and healthcare systems have the ability to obtain and report on quality measures," said Gary S. Cuthbert, president of MEDENT. "By partnering with Clinigence, our customers can take advantage of advanced enterprise-wide reporting capabilities presented in a visual manner that will help them succeed in today's environment. We selected Clinigence based upon their capabilities and the ease of integration with our system."



The collaboration is already paying dividends for MEDENT customer The Greater Buffalo United Accountable Healthcare Network (GBUAHN). The organization is a Health Home created under the Affordable Care Act to coordinate care for people with Medicaid who have chronic conditions. GBUAHN operates under New York State's Delivery System Reform Incentive Payment (DSRIP) Program.



Raul Vazquez, MD, FAAFP, is the president of GBUAHN; the organization's 140 physician members use the MEDENT solution with the quality measurement enhancements delivered by Clinigence.



"We use Clinigence within our EMR in two ways," said Vazquez. "First, we are able to see clinical information at an individual and enterprise level. This is critical as we move toward becoming an Accountable Care Organization (ACO). Second, we are able to pull information into the system and use it to provide better care coordination throughout our Network."



Clinigence is a clinical business intelligence technology provider. Leveraging cloud-based semantic collaboration, Clinigence's solution fuels a continuous cycle of improvement in staff performance and process effectiveness while accelerating the creation of best practices.



"Improving both individual and population health is greatly dependent on the ability to access and leverage data to create insights that drive better healthcare coordination and outcomes, while lowering costs," said Kobi Margolin, CEO of Clinigence. "We are pleased to support organizations like GBUAHN that are successfully demonstrating that value-based reimbursement and quality patient care for fragile populations go hand-in-hand."



For more information, visit medent.com.

You Might Also Like... Webcast: Speech Recognition How this fits into EHRs and MTs' roles. Meeting the Unfulfilled Promises of EHRs Transforming data into action in healthcare. Why Are Claims Denied? Three reasons are at the root of most denials. Data Quality in EHRs-Not So Fast! The importance of patient information in clinical research.

Industry News Archives