LAS VEGAS — Once again, Floyd Mayweather Jr. has some explaining to do.

Nevada boxing regulators have ordered Mayweather to appear before them next week to answer questions about scenes aired on the Showtime network prior to his fight Saturday night against Marcos Maidana. Specifically, they want to ask Mayweather about two lengthy fights in his gym where neither fighter got a rest break, and another scene showing marijuana being used at his Las Vegas mansion.

“We all know TV is drama but our main responsibility is the health and safety of fighters,” said Francisco Aguilar, head of the Nevada State Athletic Commission. “Before we draw a conclusion about what we saw on TV we want to make sure we have all the information.”

Mayweather is shown on the “All Access” show promoting his fight cheering on two fighters at his gym who fought 31 minutes straight without taking a break. Mayweather explained on camera that the fighters would go until one of them quit, much like fights used to be in the early days of boxing a century ago.

“The dog house — the rules are you fight till whoever quits,” Mayweather said.

Aguilar said he is concerned that fighters could be hurt by not having rest breaks and proper attention in the ring. He said it is the commission’s duty to protect fighters, whether it is in sparring or in the ring during a real fight.

“I want to ensure that what they’re doing is in the best interest of fighters,” Aguilar said.

Mayweather will appear Tuesday before the commission both in his role as a fighter and a promoter. His Mayweather Promotions was licensed earlier this year to promote fights, and he has a stable of fighters who train at his Las Vegas gym.

Mayweather will also be questioned about a scene in the show where he watched as several women rolled marijuana joints in his home, though Aguilar said it was not his major concern. Mayweather did not smoke, but at one point told an assistant to go buy more rolling papers for the women.

Mayweather is listed as the executive producer of “All Access,” a promotional series which aired in the weeks before the fight. He has talked often about Showtime allowing him to be in charge of content for the show, which shows him and his opponent preparing for their fight.

Mayweather was also the center of controversy a few days before the fight when he suggested that Ray Rice’s original 2-game suspension should have been his only punishment, and that worse things than Rice punching his then-fiancee in an elevator happen behind closed doors in other people’s homes. Mayweather later apologized for the comments, saying he shouldn’t have been asked about Rice in the first place.

Mayweather won a unanimous 12-round decision over Maidana in their rematch to improve his record to 47-0.