Topics: Abortion, abortion rights, anti-choice activism, Birth Control, John Boehner, march for life, Rand Paul, reproductive health, Women's Health, Politics News

Every January, pegged to the anniversary of the Supreme Court’s landmark decision in Roe v. Wade, thousands of antiabortion protesters travel to Washington, D.C., for the annual March for Life. It’s also quite an event for many in the GOP. Last year, Republican National Committee chairman Reince Priebus delayed his party’s annual winter meeting to attend the march. He also chartered a bus to the march, inviting other members along. John Boehner has delivered remarks there, as have Rand Paul and Rick Santorum. This is all pretty standard, of course. Republicans don’t try much to hide their antagonism to abortion rights when asked about the issue, or when introducing and passing laws.

In fact, the party’s position against abortion is explicit in its platform:

Faithful to the “self-evident” truths enshrined in the Declaration of Independence, we assert the sanctity of human life and affirm that the unborn child has a fundamental individual right to life which cannot be infringed. We support a human life amendment to the Constitution and endorse legislation to make clear that the Fourteenth Amendment’s protections apply to unborn children.

But last year, the group behind the march, the March for Life Education Defense Fund, quietly filed a lawsuit challenging the Affordable Care Act. In the complaint, the group defined all hormonal birth control as abortion-inducing drugs:

Defendants seek, under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (“ACA”), to require the March for Life to provide hormonal birth control items or intrauterine devices, which may prevent or dislodge the implantation of a human embryo after fertilization (hereinafter “abortifacients”). […] In the category of “FDA-approved contraceptives” included in the Mandate are all hormonal contraceptives, IUDs, and emergency contraception, which March for Life and its employees believe function to prevent the implantation of a human embryo after fertilization in some cases.

The complaint echoes the language of other antiabortion groups like the Susan B. Anthony List that conflate birth control and abortion, revealing a dual strategy to restrict both that is selectively deployed in public debates about the issues. “Rather than applying the claim that some contraceptive methods in effect cause abortion consistently to all aspects of their advocacy, antiabortion groups ignore and often contradict their positions when it might hurt them politically,” wrote Joerg Dreweke in a study he authored for the Guttmacher Institute.

“If you want to ban abortion and you define abortion to include various birth control methods, then your agenda is to ban these birth control methods. It’s cynical and deceptive to stand by this position only when it’s politically expedient,” Dreweke told Salon, adding that recent attempts to restrict abortion should be considered part of the same agenda. “Antiabortion organizations and the conservative movement are conflating abortion and contraception to undermine access to both,” he said. “Attempts to restrict abortion after 20 weeks should be viewed in this larger context of broadly rolling back women’s ability to obtain a range of reproductive health services including birth control and abortion.”