She reportedly confessed to thefts of $109,000 from one business and $4.1 million from another.

Yet, so far, Caroline K. Richardson has faced nothing more than tax evasion charges.

Eight months after the case was first reported in The World-Herald, authorities say they are close to charging Richardson, 54, for her alleged crime against Colombo Candy & Tobacco of Omaha: the theft of $4.1 million.

Douglas County Attorney Don Kleine said that his office is wrapping up its investigation and that charges are “imminent.”

Kleine said this week that he is deciding what charges to file and how many, and that he expects to do so soon.

The news comes as Colombo and its owner, Monte Brown, proceed with two bold lawsuits — against Richardson's former boss for recommending that Colombo hire Richardson, and against the casino where Richardson frittered away the money.

Those lawsuits have taken strange twists, as lawyers are now battling over whether emails that Richardson and Brown sent to a so-called “spiritual medium” are private communications. District Judge J Russell Derr has reviewed emails of “the medium” and determined that most of the emails are not confidential and can be reviewed.

Attorneys also are poring over more than 117,000 pages of documents to try to determine whether Brown could have, or should have, discovered Richardson's misdeeds sooner.

In court documents, Richardson has admitted to stealing the money from Colombo and using the proceeds to fuel her gambling.

Kleine has said his office initially was hampered because no one from Colombo filed a police report on the theft. However, Kleine said, he has since met with Brown, the Colombo owner, and his wife, Jenise.

Richardson is expected to face multiple counts of theft by deception.

She already has pleaded guilty to three counts of tax evasion in Sarpy County and faces up to 20 months in prison on each count. She could face up to 20 years in prison if convicted of a theft charge.

Richardson's attorney, James Schaefer, said Richardson acknowledged her debt to Colombo and entered into a settlement agreement.

Schaefer said she has paid some of the money back. Neither he nor Colombo would say how much, though Jenise Brown called it a “drop in the bucket.” Court reports indicate that Richardson paid back about $360,000.

Schaefer said Richardson also cooperated in Colombo's federal lawsuit against Ameristar Casino, providing extensive details about her gambling habits. Ameristar has sought to throw out that lawsuit.

Implicit in Richardson's settlement agreement, Schaefer said, was that Colombo wouldn't seek prosecution. The business referred to her as “Jane Doe” throughout the lawsuit.

However, the Browns say they never agreed not to seek Richardson's prosecution. In fact, Jenise Brown said, the settlement agreement specifically states that it is not a “nonprosecution agreement.”

Kleine said the civil litigation has no bearing on a criminal prosecution.

“Our whole concern here is holding her accountable so she can't do this to anyone else,” he said.

Colombo well knows the price of unpunished crimes.

In 2009, a La Vista business, Waste Solutions of Nebraska, reported that Richardson had stolen $109,000. Richardson, an accounting manager, admitted the theft to the business owner and to Sarpy County sheriff's investigators. However, that prosecution died after sheriff's deputies failed to refer the case to prosecutors.

Colombo hired Richardson in 2010. Now, the candy and tobacco distributor is trying to recover, a process Monte Brown calls “a daily challenge.”

The theft caused Colombo to go from 52 employees to 22, Monte Brown said. Jenise Brown and about 10 employees were in court last week, watching as Richardson went before a Sarpy County judge on the tax evasion charges.

Several of the employees stared at their former co-worker. Richardson, scheduled to be sentenced next month, rarely looked up.

“The lives that have been devastated by this — it's unbelievable,” Monte Brown said.