Legacy senior, Girl Scout hopes trip in Uganda will help her plot her life's course

Legacy High senior and Girl Scout Samantha Gasaway, pictured Thursay while volunteering at Avista Adventist Hospital in Louisville, departs Tuesday on a mission trip with Olive Branch Ministries in Uganda. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

As a Girl Scout, it's one thing to recite the Girl Scout Law or the group's promise — it's an entirely different thing to go the next step and live those words.

Samantha Gasaway, 17, sat against the comfortable pillows on a couch in her Broomfield home Thursday, and recited a few lines she knows like the back of her hand, three fingers in the air in Girl Scout fashion.

"I will do my best to be ... considerate and caring, courageous and strong ... use resources wisely, make the world a better place, and to be a sister to every Girl Scout," she said with ease.

The Legacy High senior is about to embark on an international outreach adventure — a first for her — that will take her 8,600 miles from home, out of her comfort zone, placing her in Zziba, Uganda, Africa, about 35 miles southwest of its capital of Kampala.

The trip is through Olive Branch Ministries, a Brighton-based organization that provides aid in Uganda and Rwanda, founded in 2007 by Gary Dickinson.

She will work with orphaned and disadvantaged children who live in Joseph's Home, created by Olive Branch Ministries which sees those youth through high school and college.

Dickinson created Joseph's Home in 2007 after his first trip to Uganda, where he met Pastor Joseph Sezani and his wife in the small, rural village where Samantha will provide outreach. The couple cared for 12 children in their home at that time, in addition to 12 kids around the village with no outside assistance.

Advertisement

Samantha will tutor kids, assist in health care programs at an outpatient clinic, visit families in their homes in Zziba and help run a kids camp for several hundred children. She leaves Tuesday and will stay through Aug. 22. Two other high school students, four college students and 12 adults also will go on the trip.

Samantha's interest to help those in poverty wasn't just sparked — it was nearly ignited, as she explains it — after a mission trip to Waco, Texas, last summer with her church, Family in Christ Community Church.

"We basically acted as though we were homeless for two and a half days," she said, noting they had to do things like find quarters to collect enough money to eat, dig through trash cans to collect cans to recycle and more. "That was very impactful."

In another youth group exercise, one night at dinner kids were split into groups representing different countries, and were given food based on a typical meal for that country. Samantha represented the United States and was given a regular three-course supper, while others from impoverished countries received a single bowl of rice, for example.

The exercises opened her eyes "that we live such privileged lives in America," she said, grateful for the life she leads. That trip also possibly set the stage for what could be her life's work — she's working to sort it out right now in a major way.

Samantha said she's putting no expectations on her trip to Uganda, but hopes to take one huge thing away from it.

"To know how to dedicate my life to helping people less fortunate," she said, whether that means in the United States or abroad, and as a missionary or through other work related to global poverty.

Kind of all-encompassing for a 17-year-old girl from Broomfield. But her mother, Sheri Gasaway noticed the change when her daughter returned home last July. Samantha, an only child, was always easy to raise — never really asked for much, didn't beg her mother for toys or food and was low key.

So when Samantha told her she wanted to travel to a foreign country and planned to find a missions-type trip on her own, her mom listened.

"She felt this passion to devote her life to helping people and to help in developing countries," Sheri Gasaway said. "I knew this was very important to her. It's not that the doors were open, she found the doors and then opened them. It's been an incredible year."

Samantha found the trip details in October and worked to raise the $3,000 she needed to go to Uganda. But she knew she would have to devise a plan to raise the large chunk of money.

Though the trip is not directly related to Girl Scouts, the organization made it possible for her to fund the trip.

Samantha, a Girl Scout ambassador and a member of Broomfield Troop 1713, in December applied for the Look Wider International Travel Scholarship, which is meant for "individual girl travel," and was awarded the money in April.

The Look Wider scholarship is given by the Rae Ann and Richard E. Dougherty Look Wider International Travel Fund Endowment managed by Rose Community Foundation. Girl Scouts of Colorado every year awards scholarships through the fund, said spokeswoman AnneMarie Harper. It was established in late 2013.

"The scholarship is only available to Girl Scouts ... in Colorado. It's open to girls up to age 30," said Rae Ann Dougherty, of Boulder, who has been involved in Girl Scout for 54 years, and is on the Girl Scout of Colorado board of directors.

"Girl Scouts are a sister to every other Girl Scout," she said. "You connect in a way that's so important and so powerful. The opportunity to do international travel enables girls to understand the power of that international friendship."

International travel assists in leadership development, she said.

"In our diverse world, the more we get to understand" other people and other cultures, "the broader we become and the greater contributors we are" locally and internationally, Dougherty added.

About 20 people applied for the Look Wider scholarship, but it came down to three finalists and Samantha was the sole recipient of the $1,200 award, which was just enough to bridge the gap in what she'd raised and what she needed to make the trip.

She raised $1,800 from donation letters she sent to family and friends, supplemented by money she saved.

Samantha's outreach in her community and internationally is exactly what Girl Scouts are called to do.

"The Girl Scout Promise and Law is an integral part of everything Girl Scouts do. To see someone share that message with people across the world is truly inspiring," Harper said.

Sheri Gasaway echoed those sentiments Thursday as her daughter recited her commitment to the Girl Scouts.

"To hear those words, she's living that now," she said. "Those words come to life with this trip."

Kimberli Turner: 303-410-2649, turnerk@broomfieldenterprise.com