By CAROLINA ASTRAIN

Victoria Advocate

A black-tailed prairie dog, a classroom pet at Harrison Jefferson Madison Elementary School in Port Lavaca, was removed from a kindergarten classroom after biting and scratching a 10-year-old student.

“The student was visiting the classroom to tutor with a younger student when the incident occurred,” James Cowley, Calhoun County school district superintendent, wrote in an emailed statement.

The student’s parents were notified immediately and after the parents arrived at the school, they left with their child, Cowley wrote.

However, Angelica Hernandez, the student’s mother, said when she arrived on campus to pick up her child Wednesday, instead of extending an apology, campus administrators exerted what she described as an excessive amount of blame on the child.

“My daughter said the teacher told her to take it out of the cage to put it in a ball to roll around the classroom and when I got there, it seemed like they were more concerned with questioning her about why she took it out instead of calling an ambulance,” Hernandez said.

But according to the district’s statement, “the investigation conducted by the administration team discovered that the child in question was instructed to not touch this prairie dog. This information was (confirmed) by another student and the teacher.”

The mother said she was also upset about the district’s refusal to cover medical expenses for the hospital visit, in which her daughter received stitches and an antibiotic to treat the bite and scratches.

“They should be responsible for it because it was in their school and my child was in their care,” Hernandez said. “What disturbs me is that the school did not contact animal control, I had to do it.”

According to the district’s statement, the prairie dog received a physical from a veterinarian before being placed in the classroom.

The school district is also not legally obligated to assist with medical expenses except for when a motor vehicle is involved because of the Texas Torts Claims Act and the Texas Constitution, which prohibits school districts from extending credit, Cowley wrote.

“While this is an unfortunate incident, there is not a legal way for CCISD to pay for the bills,” he wrote.

Port Lavaca, a city of about 12,400, is located about 330 miles south of Dallas near Victoria.