Officials said project proposal does not meeting eligibility requirements

TEWKSBURY - A Community Preservation Committee meeting was held on Tuesday to discuss funding for Janet’s Place the owner of which is asking the Town for $90,000 to make the Navillus Rd. sober house handicapped accessible in accordance with the American Disabilities Act. While applying for taxpayer funds is not necessarily a bad thing, residents are not happy with the prospect of their tax money going to subsidize Janet’s Place.

The Temporary Town Hall was packed with residents out the door to hear the decision made by the Board as to whether or not the request would be granted.

Chairman Nancy Reed began the meeting with what would determine eligibility for funding for the sober house located at 40 Navillus Rd. The answer was not well received by those in favor. The main question asked by Reed in the determination of eligibility was “What exactly are the funds being spent on?”

She parsed out the language of the application, citing the verbiage in the application which scopes out a rehabilitation of the existing building.

“We looked at their application,” said Reed. “They have their deed, so they have already acquired the building. They are not creating housing.” She went on to state that rehabilitation housing must first be acquired using CPC funds and therefore Janet’s Place, which had not been acquired with said funds, is ineligible for funding from the CPC.

Jon Lazar, from East Coast Housing and a Development Consultant for Janet’s Place, appeared somewhat stunned. “Are you saying the application is refused?” Reed was steadfast in the answer, which was crystal clear. CPC funds cannot be used to rehabilitate the property.

Lazar told the Board that they are looking to lower the mortgage to be able to offer rents more affordable to cover Phase I. Their plan was to complete the joining of the two buildings on the second floor. They are already joined on the first floor.

Reed reminded Lazar that this is a state law. Lazar seemed confused and said he’d never heard of such a thing. He went on to say Janet’s Place is creating 4-6 rooms to add more people and want to add a bathroom and one unit both handicapped accessible. Phase II would add an eave of some sort, possibly a dormer.

At that point, residents began speaking out, voicing their opinions.

A man yelled to the residents, “Wait to be called before you speak!” at which point residents asked “Who are you?”

“I’m going to introduce myself,” he said, and turned to the Board addressing Reed. “Madam Chair, my name is William Gramer, counsel for Janet’s Place. He then suggested a continuance for the meeting.

Reed then informed Gramer, “There is very specific language that we request which would explain how your proposal would be eligible for funding. You did not do that.” She added, “Saying you didn’t have an opportunity to do that not once, but twice, does not sit well with myself.”

The attorney then told Reed, “They did not know what they were writing.”

‘They’ are Susan Timmons President and Director of Janet’s Place and her co-director Shaun Sughrue.

Reed also cited that $6,500.00 was paid to Lazar to do this application to see if funding can be awarded. Lazar then turned to residents to show a plan outlining how the home would look, but they were not impressed.

Reed told Lazar and Gramer that filing the application, which needed to be in by January 1st at the last minute, put the Committee at a disadvantage saying, “I don’t feel comfortable putting my Committee under the gun. There’s no mandate. We have to do our due diligence. Tonight we are going to talk about eligibility.”

Gramer told Reed, “You seem to have made a determination.”

Lazar said, “I’ve got to challenge this. I can’t wait to go home and see it [the process] again.”

“We’re not talking about sober houses right now,” said Reed. “I don’t particularly go by what other towns do with their CPC money. I’ve seen other towns use CPC money in violation of the Act. I don’t want to do that in this town.”

Reed then informed Gramer and Lazar, “There is nothing stopping you from revising your application. We’re not obligated just because we’re having a Town Meeting coming up.”

“You have distinctly defined yourself for rehabilitation” said Reed.

Lazar answered, “We are more than qualified.”

Reed then answered, “I’m sorry, have you not heard me? It [Janet’s Place] was not acquired with CPC funds. [The request] did not meet criteria.”

Gramer then asked Reed if there were actions to take, to which Reed responded, “We can’t go any further. There is no action to take.” Finally, Town Manager Richard Montuori made a motion to move on with the meeting.

Residents left feeling somewhat vindicated. Resident John Wade told the Crier “We can’t even put a kitchen in.” Wade’s wife Marie Wade said, “They don’t want this money to build ramps.”

Attorney Doug Sears who is representing residents Tom Skowronski and Walter Maciel who live on Navillus Rd. and oppose the project, told the Crier “You need to buy the lottery ticket to win. They didn’t buy the ticket right.”

The Crier asked Gramer if he thought it was viable for residents to use their tax dollars to subsidize the project. He declined to comment saying, “I’m just here for the eligibility piece.”