President Obama and the First Lady joined thousands from the Washington elite early Thursday for the National Prayer Breakfast, an event that hit a decidedly more spiritual tone in 2014 than the highly politicized spirit at the 2013 occasion.

The first couple was joined by Vice President Joe Biden for the annual affair, with USAID Administrator Rajiv Shah slated as the keynote speaker.

During Obama's message, the President highlighted the peril of those enduring religious persecution worldwide and praised America's commitment to freedom of worship, saying "religion strengthens America."

Obama’s focus on free exercise comes as his administration has been criticized for trumping the right of conscience for religious organizations who object to providing contraception, as mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

Calling the promotion of religious freedom a "key objective" in American foreign policy, he specifically mentioned the lack of freedom for Christians and Tibetan Buddhists in China, and other global spots known to suppress religious practices of the minorities. He also urged North Korea to release Christian missionary Kenneth Bae and for Iran to release pastor Saeed Abedini. Abedini’s wife has expressed her frustration at the State Department’s perceived hesitancy in addressing her husband’s imprisonment.

In discussing the State Department's commitment to work on behalf of universal human rights, he offered praise for Secretary of State John Kerry and his work on a Middle East peace deal, saying that the Obama administration will "stand against the ugly tide of anti-Semitism."

Kerry has faced criticism in recent days for alluding to those boycotting Israel in comments at a conference in Germany, earning scorn from Israeli leaders for seemingly legitimizing those in opposition to Israel's policies.

Obama’s speech was preceded by Shah’s message, in which he called on leaders to commit “to end extreme poverty in our lifetime.”

Referencing the parable of the Good Samaritan, he said the Biblical story was an example to all “to practice our faith the hard way by serving the least fortunate" and to "prioritize the poor."

In his speech, President Obama stressed the importance of religious freedom worldwide. (AFP PHOTO/Jewel Samad)

The message of religious freedom and protecting the poor marked a vast difference from conservative pundit Dr. Ben Carson’s keynote address at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast. He was criticized by some for using his speech to slam the President's healthcare reform instead of delivering a spiritual message.

Gospel singer Yolanda Adams and Christian contemporary artist Steve Green were on hand to serenade the crowd gathered at the Washington Hilton.

“Soul Surfer” author Bethany Hamilton was also among the guests at the head table.

Hamilton read two passages from the New Testament and then shared her story of recovery after she lost her arm in a shark attack as a teenager.

Haitian President Michel Martelly and Albania's President Bujar Nishani attended the event with other world leaders, members of Congress and some of Washington's most celebrated names.

The sitting President has always attended the event since it began 1953.

The event is sponsored by the Fellowship, an elusive Christian group also referred to as the Family. This year's gathering was hosted by Reps. Louie Gohmert (R-Texas) and Janice Hahn (D-Calif.)

llarson@nydailynews.com