Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

Producing a golf tournament has a certain rhythm to it. The telecast cuts from hole to hole, often joining a player just as he is about to hit a shot.

That timing is being upended for this year’s U.S. Open, and new broadcaster Fox is imposing that on itself.

As part of its pitch to the USGA to wrest the event away from NBC, Fox promised innovation. Upon winning a 12-year-contract in August 2013, network executives found themselves in the unusual — but helpful — position of a very long lead-up before airing the tournament for the first time.

A year and a half of planning has resulted in plenty of technological bells and whistles, though the executives behind them hope they don’t come across as bells and whistles but soon leave golf fans wondering how they ever lived without them.

The gizmos include the Rangefinder, where the live shot of the golfer is overlaid with graphics showing how far he is from not just the hole but the bunkers. There is also the Shaded Green system, which creates virtual shadows to show the undulations. Cameras will capture the action from new angles — including drones — and glide up and down or alongside the course for shifting viewpoints.

“The great thing about golf is it’s a different canvas from a flat football field or a flat tennis court,” said Mark Loomis, the coordinating producer of Fox’s U.S. Open coverage.

Loomis had previously produced 3-D coverage of the Masters, and while 3-D broadcasts of sports never took off, golf proved to be one of the best fits. The slope of the green, the distance to the hole — perspective that was lost in two dimensions — could suddenly be seen at home.

Technological add-ons now offer the chance to capture those details on a television screen. That Chambers Bay, site of this year’s tournament, is such a new course could also make the gadgets and graphics especially useful because fans are so unfamiliar with it.

Its layout is a good fit, too.

“Chambers Bay has been a perfect starting point,” Loomis said. “There are so many different ups and downs, twists and turns.”

Michael Davies, Fox Sports’ senior vice president of field and technical operations, said that brainstorming new ideas started with the premise of “Wouldn’t it be great if …”

The first hurdle was finding out if the items on the network’s wish list could be accomplished by its vendors, said Zac Fields, Fox Sports’ vice president of graphics and technology. But just because something was doable technically didn’t mean it was feasible to use on a broadcast.