Linebacker finishes with seven tackles after missing two games with injury

Colorado coach Mike MacIntyre, right, and the Buffs walk off the field as winners Saturday night after ending a 14-game Pac-12 losing streak at Oregon State. ( Timothy J. Gonzalez / Associated Press )

CORVALLIS, Ore. — There were a few moments on Saturday night when Kenneth Olugbode had to lean on freshman Rick Gamboa to get through a play.

"It took me a couple of plays to get back and then I felt normal out there," Olugbode said.

While the junior linebacker felt a little rust during CU's 17-13 win at Oregon State, he was pleased to get back on the field after a scary leg injury caused him to miss a pair of games for the Buffaloes.

"It felt great to finally, after two weeks, to get out there and play again," he said. "I really did not like (sitting out) at all. I watched the games. I was on the sideline for the Arizona game and that was probably one of the tougher things to do."

On Oct. 3, against Oregon, Olugbode was hit on his right calf, and throughout the game the leg kept swelling. Finally, during the second half, he realized there had to be something wrong. He was diagnosed with acute compartment syndrome and had emergency surgery that night to relieve the pressure in his leg.

CU initially thought Olugbode would miss five to seven games, but he never felt he'd be out that long.

"I could walk already right after the surgery, so I knew I was fine," he said.

The Buffs were happy to have him back on Saturday. Olugbode had started 17 straight games before the injury and, despite some early rust, he didn't seem to miss a beat. He finished with seven tackles and recorded his first career sack.

Advertisement

Adkins to redshirt?

Tailback Michael Adkins II missed his fifth consecutive game with a hamstring injury, and the Buffs are contemplating shutting the junior down for the year.

"We have to make some decisions if he's not (back soon)," CU head coach Mike MacIntyre said.

Because he would have played less than 30 percent of CU's games, Adkins could redshirt and gain an extra year of eligibility. MacIntyre said he hasn't talked to Adkins about the possibility, but as a coaching staff, "We've talked about it."

With five games to play, MacIntyre is still holding out hope that Adkins can return.

"You just never know," he said. "All of our running backs look healthy right now going in, so (redshirting Adkins) might be something we'd be able to do."

Flags

After losing 14 consecutive conference games, MacIntyre was happy to get a win in any form. He did not like the fact that CU was penalized nine times for 80 yards, though.

"The only thing I do care about, we had way too many penalties," he said. "We've got to get back and look at that. It kind of stopped after the first half, but as you noticed and looked how much we had to mix and match our line.

"Those guys were battling the best they could, but we can't have that many penalties at all."

CU was flagged three times for 25 yards on its opening drive, and had six penalties in the first half.

Not giving up hope

While the upcoming schedule looks daunting, the Buffs still believe they can get three more wins and achieve bowl eligibility.

"It's just one game and we definitely want to get more in the Pac-12 and be able to go to a bowl," MacIntyre said. "That's what we're shooting for and we still have a very good shot to do that, and we believe we can.

"We need to take that and build on it. This can't be the only one we win. We need to win some more, for sure, and that's what we plan on doing."

Notable

Tailback Christian Powell became the 18th player in CU history with 2,000 career rushing yards. He now has 2,016. ... Receiver Nelson Spruce became the 12th player with 3,000 career all-purpose yards. He's now at 3,053. ... All three of CU's scoring drives lasted at least four minutes, 11 seconds. During the first seven games combined, the Buffs had just six scoring drives of at least four minutes. ... Left guard Gerrad Kough (neck) didn't play and guard Jonathan Huckins was hurt late, but MacIntyre believes both will be fine next week. ... Corner Chidobe Awuzie recorded his fifth career sack. In CU history, Michael Lewis (6.5 sacks from 1998-2001) and Rashidi Barnes (5.5 from 1996-99) are the only defensive backs with more.

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.