A man protests outside at Wayne State University before an event to discuss Detroit a year after the city’s exit from bankruptcy takes place Wednesday. The event was cut short after protesters made it unable for the audience to hear. Jessica J. Trevino/Associated Press

Detroit protesters shut down a public forum meant to celebrate the city’s progress since it emerged from bankruptcy protection exactly one year ago, showing that many residents are still raw over the deep cuts made to their to health-care benefits and monthly pension checks.

Organizers behind “Detroit Bankruptcy: One Year Later,” held Wednesday evening at Wayne State University, ended the program in the middle of a segment with former bankruptcy judge Steven Rhodes, who presided over the city’s historic case. Mayor Mike Duggan, who had been scheduled to speak, didn’t get to take the stage.

As part of the bankruptcy process, Judge Rhodes ruled that city’s money-saving plan, which cut $7 billion in debt, is fair. His decision brought to a close the largest municipal bankruptcy in U.S. history.

Judge Rhodes was booed throughout his interview during the forum; so was Gov. Rick Snyder. The Detroit News reported that protesters were angry over the pension cuts, water shutoffs and the control of city’s leadership during the financial crisis.

Before being cut off by the forum’s organizers, Judge Rhodes did get a minute to clarify controversial statements from an earlier interview in which he said that bondholders fared worse than the city workers with pension cuts. (He said his assessment didn’t factor in the health-care cuts, just pension cuts.)

“If you’ll give me just a second here, I’m going to agree with those of you in the audience…who are concerned that we contracted democracy in the city of Detroit,” Judge Rhodes said above shouting from the audience.

Earlier in the night, moderator and local journalist Stephen Henderson scolded the disruptive audience, saying “this is not Detroit behavior.”

Detroit News reporter Christine Ferretti, who covered the event, wrote about the final tense minutes of the forum on Twitter.

Crowd continues to disrupt the program. Now chanting “black lives matter.” One disruptive member of the crowd was asked to leave. — ChristineFerretti_DN (@cferretti_dn) December 10, 2015

Program leaders threaten those behind the outbursts that they will cancel the rest of the event if they can’t respect the speakers. — ChristineFerretti_DN (@cferretti_dn) December 10, 2015

Program has ended without Duggan taking the stage. #DETNEXT. — ChristineFerretti_DN (@cferretti_dn) December 10, 2015

When he cleared Detroit to leave bankruptcy, Judge Rhodes urged those who fought the changes to try to move past their anger and help city leaders execute a $1.4 billion revitalization.

The 680,000-resident city filed for bankruptcy on July 18, 2013, to try to negotiate cuts to $18 billion in debt, blaming tax revenue that fell after the real-estate crash and the city’s population decline.

Throughout the case, Detroit leaders fought pressure from some Wall Street creditors and others to sell the city’s valuable art collection to repay a greater portion of the city’s debt. Federal mediators helped negotiate a deal to use more than $800 million from private foundations and the state of Michigan to avoid that sale and make the cuts to city’s worker pensions less severe.

City leaders eventually came up with a plan that called for the $1.4 billion reinvestment in removing blighted buildings and boosting police and fire services in the city.

When he approved that plan, Judge Rhodes said he realized that some residents weren’t happy about the bankruptcy. Some protested outside the federal courthouse, and he even gave them a daylong hearing to vent.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @KatyStech