Obama: “We should not be tolerating rape in prison, and we shouldn’t be making jokes about it in our popular culture.”

U.S. President Barack Obama waves after being greeted by Kenya's President Uhuru Kenyatta on his arrival at the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport in Nairobi, Kenya, on Friday, July 24, 2015. As part of his pitch last week for prison reform, President Obama told the NAACP national convention that “we should not be tolerating rape in prison, and we shouldn’t be making jokes about it in our popular culture.” (Photo: AP)

As part of his pitch last week for prison reform, President Obama told the NAACP national convention that “we should not be tolerating rape in prison, and we shouldn’t be making jokes about it in our popular culture.”

He’s right. Those who are incarcerated are wards of the state and thus the responsibility of the public. Known and pervasive sexual violence inside prison walls is on us as a society. But what has been done to end the problem?

In 2009, the National Prison Rape Elimination Commission reported its finding that sexual abuse in our nation’s prisons is “widespread,” and that there is a general public attitude that sexual abuse is “an expected consequence of incarceration” and “part of the penalty.” At some federal prisons, as many as 15.7 percent of the inmates are raped. For minors in juvenile detention, the rate of abuse is even higher, at approximately 20 percent.

The commission put the number of sexual abuse cases in prison at 60,500 a year, but more recent estimates peg the number of victims at more than 200,000 annually. Whatever the real toll is, rape is underreported in the prison system because guards and administrators cover up the problem, and inmates threaten more violence against anyone who snitches.

Congress and the White House condemn the problem, but enforcement of tougher standards to protect prisoners is lacking.

In 2003, Congress passed a law imposing financial penalties on states that do not take concrete steps to reduce prison rape. It took nine years for the Justice Department to issue guidelines for better monitoring and reporting inside prisons, but penalties for failure are weak.

States that are not in compliance only risk losing 5 percent of federal funds they would receive for their prisons, and even that penalty can be appealed. Only two states are in compliance, 41 are working on it, and seven have opted out altogether. Fines have totaled a little over $2 million.

Another barrier to ending prison rape is the reality that half of reported prison assaults are perpetrated by prison personnel.

The prosecution acceptance rate for sexual misconduct by federal prison officials is a low 49 percent. The Justice Department has refused to act on a major provision recommended by the commission that would set up a framework to ensure cooperation between prosecutors and prison officials in investigating cases.

The Constitution guarantees freedom from cruel and unusual punishment, yet there is evidence that prison rape may be growing instead of becoming rarer.

The national commission concluded that more top-down leadership was needed to address the culture of prison rape, and that new policies need to be based on “zero tolerance with teeth.” It’s great that Obama is speaking up about prison rape, but he also has the power to act. He should be held accountable for what happens in the next 18 months.

Brett M. Decker is a director at the White House Writers Group.

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1MQoQsR