Organización Sanitas Internacional and GuideWell Open Network of CliniSanitas Medical Centers

MIAMI, Sept. 23, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Organización Sanitas Internacional ("Sanitas") and GuideWell Mutual Holding Company ("GuideWell"), through their CliniSanitas joint venture, announce the opening of medical centers tailored to the needs and preferences of Hispanic consumers living in the United States.

"This strategic alliance allows us to partner with a well-regarded organization like Sanitas to provide culturally relevant, high quality, convenient and cost-effective health care to the growing Hispanic community," said Pat Geraghty, chairman and CEO of GuideWell and its subsidiary Florida Blue. "This effort enhances our ability to offer affordable and accessible options to our communities in a unique and impactful way."

"We're excited and proud to bring our proven patient-centered health care model to the U.S. and more than 40 years of experience providing quality care to over 2.5 million patients in Latin America," said Joseba Grajales, president of Sanitas. "Sanitas' vision is to expand to other markets in Florida and the U.S. with a network of CliniSanitas medical centers serving 5 million patients. Ultimately, this partnership can also build a bridge connecting the United States to Latin America for families who live, travel and receive medical care in both places."

To celebrate Hispanic Heritage month and the opening of the medical centers, CliniSanitas has launched the "Me Inspiras" (you inspire me) campaign to honor millions of Hispanics who have moved to the United States in search of a better life. CliniSanitas encourages families to participate in this video-collage of inspiring stories by creating their own video at www.clinisanitas.com/meinspiras.

"We're happy to begin our United States journey right here in Miami-Dade," said Dr. Fernando Fonseca, CEO of CliniSanitas. "We're opening three comprehensive medical centers in October in time for the Affordable Care Act and Medicare open enrollment periods. CliniSanitas will offer a world of health to our patients and their families, bringing the same proactive patient-centered care Sanitas is known for in other countries, guiding and educating our patients through the process toward better health and building a relationship for life with them."

To improve access to care and provide a convenient experience, the CliniSanitas medical centers will offer primary care, specialty care, urgent care or walk-ins, laboratory, diagnostic imaging and medications—all in one place. The centers will be open seven days a week with extended hours to serve the needs of working families. Prior to opening in October, CliniSanitas will also host several free community health events with its team of doctors and nurses.

For more information visit www.clinisanitas.com.

For press inquiries, interviews, photos or video please contact:

Natascha Otero-Santiago / 305.401.7172 / nataschaos@nos-communications.com.

About Organización Sanitas Internacional

Organización Sanitas Internacional (OSI) is a leading health care business group in Colombia, Venezuela, Peru and Brazil, through companies such as Colsanitas, Medisanitas, Sanitas Venezuela, Plan Sanitas, La Positiva Sanitas, Medisanitas Brasil and Vitallis. OSI owns a wide network of clinics and hospitals focused on health care services. In Colombia, this network includes highly-recognized institutions such as: Clínica Reina Sofía, Clínica Universitaria Colombia, Clínica Sebastián de Belalcazar and Clínica Iberoamérica, as well as more than sixty CliniSanitas medical centers, including some specialized in outpatient care, pediatric, women's health, ophthalmology and diagnostic services, among others. In addition, OSI has educational institutions for medicine and nursing with a Foundation with a corporate social mission. For more information, visit www.sanitasinternacional.com.

About GuideWell Mutual Holding Corporation

GuideWell Mutual Holding Corporation (GuideWell) is a not-for-profit mutual holding company and the parent to a family of forward-thinking companies focused on transforming health care. The GuideWell organization includes the leading health insurance company in Florida, a number of health care delivery businesses, a consumer engagement company, and a provider of administrative services to state and federal health care programs. For more information, visit www.guidewell.com.

Natascha Otero-Santiago (305) 401-7172