The progress being made by deploying new technology will be lost unless healthcare payment models change. That strong statement is all the more striking because it comes from a man who knows how much progress has been made in digital health.

Farzad Mostashari, MD, was the national coordinator for Health IT from 2011 to 2013. And he told the audience at the HIMSS15 session “National Perspective on Evolving and Emerging Healthcare Delivery and Payment Models “ that the efforts to engage the patient in their own healthcare are not working.

“A lot of health plans pledged to the Blue Button. But it’s not operational. You really can’t get the data,” he said. The heart of the problem, Mostashari said, is that health records are not being shared widely among providers and healthcare systems.

“If you want to share risk with anyone, you need to share data, so they can be prepared to take that risk,” he said. “Payers and providers need to share incentives with patients; the patient needs to have a more active role in how the decisions are made. “

Mostashari believes that the efforts to engage the patient are fundamentally misguided: “The standard trope is you put all this pressure on hospitals to create public report measures and patients don’t care and it doesn’t change patient behavior. But they’re the wrong measures. They’re payer measures. They’re not patient measures.

“Unless we understand the need to change the payment system the opportunity to improve care through technology will lie latent.”

Mostashari said the industry should learn from history. The reason there was a backlash against managed care, was because patients got the idea that everyone was making money by stinting on their care. And there was a backlash against insurance companies that resulted in bad policy. “Patients called their legislators and you end up with payment being approved for treatments like bone marrow treatments for cancer that don’t actually help the patient.”

The solution is that payers and providers need to share incentives with patients. The patient needs to have a more active role in how the decisions are made.

“Transparency is going to be key. Not just around cost but also around quality. People prioritize cost unless they know something about quality and that is made understandable to them. The standard trope is you put all this pressure on hospitals to create public report measures and patients don’t care and it doesn’t change patient behavior. But they’re the wrong measures. They’re payer measures they’re not patient measures.”

Without adequate information on quality, patients are left only with information on cost. One example of this is that “60 to 70 percent of people choose the wrong Medicare Part D plan.”

At heart of the problem is that independent providers “can’t get clinical data out of their health records without paying usurious fees. You need to be able to get that data out of those systems and right now there are a whole bunch of business practices that are closing population health. Access to the data is absolutely essential to have a functioning market.”

In spite of the problems, Mostashari said he is optimistic. He believes there is a lot of momentum to align the incentives among payers, providers and patients for the first time.

“There are a lot of investors willing to take risk,” he explained. “All of the capital needed to take the risk doesn’t need to come from hospitals.”

But, he cautioned, there will be no shared risk, without shared data.