U.S. Sen. Kelly Ayotte supports a plan advanced by Republican leadership this week to repeal what her spokeswoman called “the worst provisions” of the Affordable Care Act, to end Medicaid after 2017 and to redirect funding from Planned Parenthood to community health centers.

Gov. Maggie Hassan, who is challenging Ayotte's 2016 reelection bid, criticized Ayotte on the issue on Wednesday morning.

U.S. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell reportedly presented the plan to Senate Republicans on Monday, with a vote expected later this week.

Ayotte’s office said Tuesday that the bill contains the same language as a bill voted on by the Senate in August that redirects funding from Planned Parenthood to community health centers and does not reduce the overall level of federal funding for women’s health services.

Medicaid expansion would be continued through 2017 and then ended, presumably giving a new president time to propose a new health care reform law. It would also end the medical device tax and the “Cadillac tax” for high-cost plans.

If the bill passes the Senate and the House, President Obama is expected to veto it.

Ayotte spokeswoman Liz Johnson told WMUR.com in a statement:

“Sen. Ayotte supports the legislation the Senate will consider this week, which would repeal the worst provisions of Obamacare – including the individual and employer mandates, the Cadillac tax, and the medical device tax – that have resulted in lost jobs, higher costs, and less patient choice.

“The bill includes increased funding for substance abuse treatment and mental health, and extends Medicaid expansion through 2017, allowing a new president to work with Congress to give states flexibility to address coverage for the uninsured, increase patient choice, and reduce health care costs,” Johnson said.

Ayotte is seeking reelection in 2016 and is being challenged by Democrat Hassan.

Wednesday, Hassan released a statement:

"The people of New Hampshire have had enough with Washington politicians like Kelly Ayotte playing games with funding for Planned Parenthood and trying to repeal Medicaid expansion, which would take away health coverage from more than 40,000 Granite Staters and severely hurt our efforts to combat the substance abuse crisis.”

“I’m extremely disappointed that Kelly Ayotte has consistently put corporate special interests and her party's leadership ahead of New Hampshire, and that she has vowed to vote yet again to repeal New Hampshire’s bipartisan Medicaid expansion plan and defund Planned Parenthood.”

Hassan added: “As governor, I’ve fought to protect and expand access to critical health services in order to help our families thrive economically, and that’s exactly what I will continue to do as a United States senator.”

Ayotte campaign spokeswoman Chloe Rockow responded:

"Gov. Hassan should stop misrepresenting Kelly’s position on this issue and tell New Hampshire voters whether she supports the harmful provisions in Obamacare like the medical device tax and the individual and employers mandates that New Hampshire families and businesses have said are crushing them with higher costs.

"This repeals those provisions; significantly increases funding for substance abuse treatment; extends Medicaid expansion for two years to give Congress and the president time to work with states to improve coverage for the uninsured, lower costs, and ensure patients have more choice; and it preserves funds for women’s health by redirecting funding from Planned Parenthood to community health centers that provide women’s health services," Rockow said.

Meanwhile, U.S. Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, a Democrat, strongly denounced the Republican bill.

“A vote for this bill is a vote to deny Granite Staters access to health care,” Shaheen said. “In New Hampshire, this reckless proposal would revoke health care coverage for over 44,000 low-income families now covered under Medicaid, eliminate tax credits for 28,000 Granite Staters who receive coverage through the federal marketplace, and deny health services to the 12,000 women who depend on Planned Parenthood.

“The Affordable Care Act is not perfect, but we should work to strengthen the law, not eliminate coverage for tens of thousands of people in New Hampshire,” Shaheen said.