A true hero passes into history

Brooklyn: We cherish the stars — actors, athletes, etc. — and mourn their death when we know nothing about them. Nelson Mandela was a man — yes, a real man — who never showed bitterness or hatred for the 27 years he spent in prison. He won the presidency of a country where there were no gray areas, only black and white. Yet he did everything to bring his nation together. He is a true inspiration. Mandela has my ultimate respect, and my sympathy goes out to his family and friends. A true hero has passed away. David J. Gushue

Bronx: Nelson Mandela was a good and great man who became revered by freedom-loving people throughout the world. His refusal to be broken by the vile apartheid government of South Africa will serve as an inspiration for generations to come. What a great voice he was, as opposed to those hucksters and hustlers, Al Sharpton and Charles Barron. They could learn a lot from Mandela’s example. Jim Theobald

Odd man out

Clearwater, Fla.: Re “He was Lincoln, King & Obama — all at one time” (column, Dec. 6): How can Mike Lupica put the Obamunist on the same plane with Lincoln and King? Neither of the latter was a liar, opportunist or egotist. Stephen Makowski

CompStat, ShmompStat

Manhattan: New Yorkers are so gullible it’s not funny. Bill Bratton instituted CompStat as more smoke and mirrors for that phony, Rudy Giuliani. They claim it helped them figure out where the crime was (something we all already knew) and focus police power there. If it were real, then the safest place on earth should be where they put the most cops — Bed-Stuy, East New York and other neighborhoods, which still have among the city’s highest crime rates. Unless, of course, people admit that police don’t control crime rates at all. Mike Dobbins-Schaal

The wrath of Khan

Manhattan: With the appointment of Bill Bratton as police commissioner out of the way, Mayor-elect de Blasio needs to focus on the appointment of a transportation commissioner who will undo the damage created by radical Janette Sadik-Khan, who took direction from bicycle advocates at Transportation Alternatives and put New York on top of the list for worst traffic in the nation. Let’s hope de Blasio is listening to the complaints from the business community, pedestrians and motorists about the need for NYPD enforcement against bicyclists who treat traffic rules as mere suggestions. Susan P. Forman

History lesson

Westhampton, L.I.: You correctly praise Bill de Blasio’s excellent choice of Tony Shorris as the next first deputy mayor, as well as his concentration of authority in that position (“Bill swings into action,” editorial, Dec. 5). You err, however, in describing Ed Koch’s City Hall management structure as “lousy.” True, the first year and a half of Koch’s tenure was marred by a plethora of deputy mayors who, through no fault of their own, had overlapping portfolios. However, Koch then radically changed his City Hall setup by promoting his housing commissioner to be deputy mayor for operations, giving him direct authority over commissioners who previously reported to Koch and ultimately paring down to only three deputies. I remember all of this quite well, as I was that deputy mayor for operations. Nathan Leventhal

Not that again

Bellmore, L.I.: Re the Op-Ed favorably comparing Bill de Blasio to former Mayor John Lindsay (“De Blasio’s large shoes to fill,” Dec. 1): If that’s the case, we’re in for a very rough ride. Under Lindsay, there were riots in the streets and the unions picked the city’s pockets clean. Talking as a progressive candidate and governing as mayor are two different things. John J. Ferrante

Finishing the job

Whitestone: Congratulations to the newest firefighters (“FDNY’s most diverse class,” Dec. 6). It is great to hear that they are the most diverse class ever. Now, Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio must please finally appoint a commissioner more representative of the city’s diversity to lead them. Gerry Burke

A death in the family

Glen Head, L.I.: Reading your coverage of the Nov. 30 Howard Beach drunk driving accident, in which 37-year old Jimmy Sinisi was killed in a crash by James Celauro, was a surreal experience for me — because Jimmy was my brother (“Deadly ‘drunk,’” Dec. 1). Losing a brother is heartbreaking. Losing him this way is almost unbearable. While Jimmy was trapped inside a mangled steel coffin, his accused killer walked away with barely a scratch. My family is inconsolable. Our mother has had her heart broken beyond repair. His beautiful wife, Sue, is left a young widow. His nine nieces and nephews are without a loving uncle. His dozens of friends must learn to live without his love, passion and light. And his hundreds of fans will never know the limit of what Jimmy could have created. I invite you all to follow us on our journey to justice. Help us change the ending of the next story. Kelly Sinisi Lennon

Hell on wheels

St. Albans: Re “Too fast, 2 fatal” (Dec. 1): I’ve seen this scene in the Daily News and on TV before — a car torn in half and burned, and young people killed in the wreckage. My prayers go out to the Walker and Rojas families, but also to the families of other crash victims. All autos must be considered deadly weapons. Wayne Miller

Wake-up call

Brooklyn: I hope you elaborate on an important fact you reported about Metro-North engineer William Rockefeller — that he “had worked the afternoon shift for many years and just two weeks ago switched to the 5 a.m. shift” (“‘I was in a daze,’” Dec. 4). We don’t have all the facts, but that shift change is something we should contemplate — and Metro-North should probably be more disciplined when altering workers’ shifts. Rockefeller’s intention was to get to Grand Central safely; he made, however, a huge error in not staying awake. There are lessons here from which all of us can learn. Debbie Yorizzo

A patient in jeopardy

Astoria: To Voicer Suzy Sandor: I recently completed four weekly chemotherapy treatments for cancer that has returned after five years. It was grueling, but I found comfort in knowing that the affordable insurance that I have had for more than 10 years included my doctor and my care. I recently found out that my policy will no longer be offered by my employer next year. My doctor has confirmed he will not be part of the health-care exchanges. I was told that I would be able to keep my doctor and my plan. That is not true. Give in and accept this? No way. I will continue to fight against this debacle called Obamacare. Linda Ann Smith

Respectful silence

Coram, L.I.: We’ve seen an event that might indicate a return to decency and common sense: Fox News had access to the 911 tapes from Sandy Hook and chose not to air them. Congratulations to them for rising above a bad decision — one among many lately — by the court, which served no useful purpose. Since the murderer was dead, there was nothing to be gained. The only reason to put those tapes out there was to sensationalize an unimaginable tragedy. Arlene Reilly

On the cheap

Manhattan: I think it is outrageous, as Juan Gonzalez points out, that we taxpayers must subsidize the fast-food industry and Walmart — and, I would add, many private contractors that the city uses — because these companies pay their employees so little that they must go on Medicaid and food stamps (“Wage war heats up,” column, Dec. 6). Meanwhile, the corporate CEOs are millionaires and billionaires who refuse to pay their fair share of taxes. Ralph Palladino

Welcome to leave

Wantagh, L.I.: To Voicer Jack Cohen: Do you honestly believe the Yankees purchased Jacoby Ellsbury to get Boston fans to like us? If you hate the Yankees so much, why do you live in New York? Move to Boston! Jo-Ann Maginnis

Punch drunk

Little Neck: Re “Pol ‘knockout’ talk hit as anti-Semitic” (Dec. 5): If Councilwoman Laurie Cumbo believes blacks are justified in committing knockout attacks because of their resentment of Jews, then — by her own reasoning — racism against blacks could also be justified by the actions of the knockout punks. She should focus on correcting the criminal behavior of her group instead of justifying it by bashing another group. Reena Fettner