I won’t be blogging or columnizing for the next three weeks, barring a sudden nuclear war with Russia (and if the missiles fly quickly enough, maybe not even then); instead, I’ll be taking a little time to work on a book in which (I hope) neither papal encyclicals nor the Confederate flag nor Obamacare nor same-sex marriage will figure all that prominently. That means you’ll be spared endless follow-ups on any of themes I’ve written about recently. But I don’t want to leave you empty-handed, so here are a few links related to recent subjects, and a few others as well.

First, on same-sex marriage, if I were going to argue with a piece written after the Supreme Court decision, it would be this one from Rebecca Traister at New York, not least because it offers a cracked-mirror version of my own reading of the Anthony Kennedy decision and our cultural context. If I were going to recommend one piece related to the Christian response to the decision and the new realities of marriage, I’d cheat and recommend these two, both by Wesley Hill, one on the immediate and one looking longer term. And then the First Things symposium (to which Hill, among others, contributes) includes a range of opinions I agree with, and a few with which I strongly differ or regard as fanciful; you can try to figure out which I think is which.

I’m deliberately not going to link to any of the pieces that are popping up arguing that now we need to take away church tax exemptions, because the #hottakes that follow a big moment aren’t always the best guide to what comes next. But I will link, again, to my Indiana-inspired set of questions for liberals about the future of religious liberty, because they’re likely to remain … apropos.

Finally, I’m grateful as usual to Jonathan Chait for his kind attention to my arguments on same-sex marriage, I’m not surprised that they failed to convince, but I will gently suggest that his (mis)understanding of the historical roots of the traditional view of marriage is a case study in the phenomenon I described here, the politically-driven triumph of forgetting over memory.

On other matters, had I found time to follow up on the debate about Pope Francis’s encyclical, I would have liked to engage with these three posts by Alan Jacobs (one responding to my own column), which include among other things a sketch of a wonderful-sounding syllabus that includes both “Laudato Si” and “Mad Max: Fury Road.”

Other encyclical links: Matthew Schmitz in dialogue with Nathan Schneider (and Schneider with me); Robert Royal on the environment and natural evil; Schmitz on Romano Guardini’s influence on Francis; Rod Dreher’s love letter to the encyclical’s crunchiness; Noah Millman’s critique; and a symposium.

Millman also has an interesting response to my post on the South and the Confederacy, much of which I agree with; the part I don’t, unfortunately, would require 2000 words to get at.

On King v. Burwell and Obamacare, I thought that this from Yuval Levin and this from Brookings’ Philip Wallach got very nicely at the reasons to be unsettled by what the case’s unfolding says about the state of our constitutional system.

And finally, a miscellany: contrarianism on Pixar’s “Inside Out” from Eve Tushnet and Richard Brody, Derek Thompson contemplates a world without work, David Frum on a European dilemma that may be bigger in the long run than Grexit, and a critique of Scandinavia.

Back in three weeks.