Heritage Valley Health System stays out of rivals' fray, focuses on 'medical neighborhoods'

With all the focus on the battle between UPMC and Highmark Health for dominance of the health care market in Western Pennsylvania, it's easy to forget about the region's smaller health networks, such as Heritage Valley Health System, which owns hospitals in Beaver and Sewickley.

The same competitive forces that are pushing UPMC and Highmark — a long-term decline in hospital patients and greater government regulation — also are having an effect on Heritage Valley.

Norm Mitry, the health system's CEO, discussed the challenges with the Tribune-Review. Edited excerpts are below.

Trib: What have been the benefits and challenges of the Affordable Care Act?

Mitry: As we talk to our employees and medical staff, and board members, its hard to find fault with the vision of the Affordable Care Act. But the implementation has been flawed. The vision of having individuals in the country more accountable for their health is the right vision. Trying to provide high-quality services is the right vision. Transitioning from quantity to quality is the right vision. Focusing on the customer experience is the right vision.

Trib: What are the flaws?

Mitry: The biggest flaw that we're experiencing every day is individuals are choosing insurance plans with the higher co-pays and deductibles. They're betting the farm on not getting ill or having an accident. We're seeing folks come in because they have to come in. They've selected the higher co-pay and deductible, and they go home and end up with a bill for $10,000, and they are taken aback by it. They don't want to pay it. So it goes to collections, bad debt expense is going up. Think about the customer experience: A patient comes in, they have great care, they leave here doing well and they get a bill for $10,000 and they have a deductible of $10,000. Well, they own the whole bill. It's very administrative-laden trying to collect the bill, and the patient isn't happy. And they don't blame the health plan. Believe it or not, they blame the provider. They want us to write it off, and we can't.

Trib: Are people delaying care because of high deductibles?

Mitry: Absolutely. People are living with pain because they know they have the higher co-pays and deductibles, and they know they can't afford the care.

Trib: What steps is the system taking to deal with declining hospital admissions?

Mitry: We got out in front of it. We know things are going to be done in outpatient. In 2009, we opened clinics inside Wal-Mart. That has evolved into our medical neighborhoods. What we've done, we've taken existing services like primary care offices, and diagnostic imaging and phlebotomy and rehab, and we've put those into one site — we call them medical neighborhoods. It has really helped to deliver high-quality, accessible care in a community setting, close to their home. We're just trying to be more accessible.

Trib: What has the battle between UPMC and Highmark meant for Heritage Valley?

Mitry: Heritage Valley has been committed to being locally owned and independent. We have strong relationships with (Highmark's) Allegheny Health Network and UPMC. We try to stay out of that fray by working with both of them. And it has worked out well for us.

Trib: Why do you think you'll be able to remain an independent?

Mitry: The long-term future of health care in Western Pennsylvania is hard to know. But those that are high-quality, customer-focused providers will not only survive but thrive into the future. Might it mean that a couple community health systems come together? It might. There's nothing being talked about like that. But I think you're seeing more and more joint ventures going on between the community providers than you ever have in the past. At this point in time, there's no reason to drive Heritage Valley to want to merge with another system.

Alex Nixon is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.