WOODSTOCK – Hearthstone Communities “waited until the bitter end” to switch to electronic medical records.

It wasn’t because the switch wouldn’t be good for patients, Director of Development and Public Relations Dick Hatten said. It was because the nonprofit struggled to come up with the $50,000 to buy the equipment and supplies, and to train staff to make the change.

As more and more sections of the Affordable Care Act and other federal health care legislation take effect, the skilled nursing homes that largely have been unaffected by the overhaul are starting to see the impacts.

The legislation, commonly referred to as Obamacare, attempts to shift the health care system to one focused on patient outcomes and the overall health of the larger community and away from one focused on each individual visit and itemized care through the creation of accountable care organizations and the piloting of bundled payments.

It’s these two items that could lead to one-third of nursing homes in Illinois closing their doors over the next five to 10 years, said Larry Banks, the director of operations for The Springs at Crystal Lake rehabilitation center. The ones that survive will do so by focusing on long-term acute care and rehabilitation, something they can do economically.

As more accountable care organizations – which are voluntary groups of doctors, hospitals and other providers focused on providing a network of care – form and grow stronger, they establish lists of preferred nursing homes they give to patients, Banks said. Some nursing homes, likely the poor performers, won’t end up on that list and will see the number of patients they get shrink.

The hospitals at the heart of these organizations also are coordinating care, allowing a greater number of patients to go directly home instead of spending time at a nursing home or when they do transition to a nursing home, spending less time there, he said.

After Advocate Health Care became an accountable care organization, the average number of days a patient stays in a nursing home dropped to the mid-teens from the mid-30s, Banks said.

The percent of patients who end up back in the hospital within a certain period of time also has fallen to less than 14 percent from the mid-20s, said Denise Keefe, president of Advocate’s post-acute care network.

“When you reduce the readmission rates, you reduce the total cost of care,” she said. “That’s where everything starts to align. Those good outcomes really drive efficiency.”