Thomas LaValley

Beneath a broiling August sun, family and friends carried Thomas LaValley to a final rest Monday.

They had carried LaValley’s remains from the streets of Shreveport, where a lone gunman took the young police officer’s life at a domestic disturbance call, across the heart of our great state. They took him past Natchitoches, where he went to college. They carried him past Alexandria, where he lived some as a child, through St. Landry, where people lined the highway to show their respects to this fallen centurion, on to Ascension Parish, to the green spaces that he called home.

At a Gonzalez funeral parlor, they prayed the Rosary and displayed keepsakes, memorabilia that gave LaValley’s life both substance and grace. There was a yearbook from St. Amant High, where he wrestled. A binder held evidence of childhood achievements. A prayer to St. Michael, patron saint of police officers, rested in display outside the funeral home chapel where friends and family and fellow officers, some from as distant as California and New York, had traveled to share the young lawman’s last, long ride.

The sun bore down with no forgiveness outside Holy Rosary Catholic Church in St. Amant, where a small, quiet crowd gathered, mopping their brows, to await the funeral motorcade and the Mass of Christian Burial. When that motorcade arrived, it came in waves of men and gleaming steel machines, blue lights flashing, crossing a short bridge over New River and wending its way through the church parking lot. It came to a halt between the single-steeple, yellow wood-frame church, where LaValley had received the church’s holy sacraments, and a rugged wooden cross that beckons all welcome. Even the river stood still.

An honor guard, starched and crisp while others wilted, carried the flag-draped casket up the short steps and into the church, while the crowd spilled out into the midday swelter, the sun at its zenith. Mass completed, the hearse made its slow, solemn trek through the church graveyard, past silent souls and to a final stop.

The “brotherhood,” hundreds of men and women who protect us from daily harm, stood at attention. They might have wondered this — why him, not me — because a police officer’s day presents the chance of danger with every call, at every turn. All might have wondered this, too: What special grace, what awesome moral force, compels a young man to lay down his own life to protect the life of a stranger?

That was the grace Thomas LaValley bore to the end, to a green space he calls home. As a lone bugler played, as bagpipes resounded, as some officers sank to their knees in prayer under a relentless sun, a piece of God’s earth turned hallowed.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/opinion/2015/08/15/officers-soul-lends-grace-us/31706729/