Evacuations are occurring in the northeast region of the city

Water levels are rising in Fort Morgan. The Hwy. 52 bridge seen here is now closed and evacuations have been ordered in the northeast region of the city. (Rachel Alexander/Fort Morgan Times)

State Highway 52 north of Fort Morgan is now closed as emergency preparations continue in the city. Peak floodwaters on the South Platte River are expected to reach the city later tonight.

The highest floodwaters are now expected to reach Fort Morgan sometime between 8 to 10 p.m., although that is only a rough estimate, a 6:30 p.m. city press release said. The rise in the river has been gradual and moving eastward slowly, and the speed has varied as the surge passes through alternately wide and narrow areas of the river.

A second news alert said evacuations are being ordered for the Silver Spur Campground, the Comfort Inn, the Rodeway Inn, Maverick's Restaurant and the Conoco Outpost. These locations are north of Interstate 76 at Barlow Road.

Police are also notifying locations south of I-76 at Barlow Road to be prepared to react quickly if an evacuation order comes. These include the Walmart store and the service stations near Exit 82 from I-76.

The Colorado Department of Transportation decided about 5:30 p.m. to close off Hwy. 52 at the Rainbow Bridge river crossing. Riverside Park was evacuated and closed earlier in the day.

The river has already inundated areas of Highway 144 west of Fort Morgan, and the towns of Orchard, Goodrich and Weldona have been evacuated. The Morgan County Sheriff's Office said pre-evacuation orders had been issued for Log Lane Village, telling residents to be prepared to leave.

River flooding is not expected in the Fort Morgan city proper, because it is well away from the river and elevated from the river basin. If significant rain occurs in Fort Morgan, however, localized flooding could occur in the city. That would be caused by filled storm drain lines that cannot discharge into the river due to the high water levels and the pressure of the fast-moving current.

No problems had occurred at either the Fort Morgan water treatment plant west of the city or the wastewater treatment plant to the east, and no such problems are anticipated at this time. The water treatment process is functioning normally and the city's water supply is safe.

The city has established an Emergency Operations Center at the Fort Morgan Police Department and is coordinating efforts with the sheriff's office, the Morgan County Quality Water District and other agencies. Incident command centers with city and sheriff's office officials were established as mobile units that can move as conditions change.

Fort Morgan Mayor Terry McAlister and Mayor Pro Tem Ron Shaver spent most of the day at the city's EOC.

"I was impressed with the city staff's response," McAlister said. "I know they have trained and conducted drills for situations like this, but this has been beyond my expectations. They seem to have a good handle on things."

McAlister said he was concerned about neighboring communities, as well as Fort Morgan.

"I think we have good preparations in place, and I hope we'll be able to assist them if the need help," he said.