Reprinted from ACO BUSINESS NEWS , a hard-hitting monthly newsletter on the latest industry actions to design and create ACOs, for hospitals, physicians, health plans and their advisers.

Amid growing questions about the short- and long-term viability of the federal Medicare Pioneer initiative and Medicare Shared Savings Programs (MSSP) (ABN 10/14, p. 1), Sharp HealthCare stands out as a company that’s making accountable care work — but couldn’t make it work in the federal programs.

Sharp’s results in Pioneer were good — excellent, in fact, says Alison Fleury, the provider’s vice president of business development. Sharp was cutting inpatient days by double-digit percentages and moving the needle on readmissions.

“By all indications, we met the triple aim: We reduced cost, we improved care, and we improved patient experience,” Fleury tells ABN. But “the financial model in Pioneer does not at all correlate to the utilization we were seeing.”

So Sharp withdrew from Pioneer. It also elected not to join MSSP, even though other Pioneers have done so upon leaving Pioneer.

“Our model is very much dependent on knowing who our patients are and offering our care management programs to those patients,” Fleury says. Unfortunately, MSSP only allows for retrospective patient identification, which would hamper Sharp’s efforts to get at-risk patients involved in those care management programs, she says. “Churn” in patient attribution often reaches 30% a year in MSSP, she says, making it a particularly bad bet for an organization that depends on knowing which Medicare fee-for-service patients are attributed to the ACO and which are not.

However, Sharp’s withdrawal from Medicare Pioneer is less a cautionary tale about an ACO failure than it is a tale of how well an organization can do in value-based care — including both shared savings and capitation — without being involved in the Medicare ACO programs.

Sharp actually prefers fully capitated contracts to the type of shared savings arrangements in Pioneer and MSSP, Fleury says. Under this capitated approach, the health system has invested in telemedicine and in an after-hours nurse line to help in coordinating care. “These programs are great for patients,” she adds.

The health system has negotiated fully capitated contracts with Aetna Inc., Anthem Blue Cross, Blue Shield of California, Cigna Corp., Health Net, Inc., UnitedHealthcare and Care1st Health Plan, Fleury says.

It also has its own insurance arm, Sharp Health Plan, which serves about 70,000 members and participates in California’s individual and small-group marketplaces. Sharp HealthCare contracts with Sharp Health Plan on a fully capitated basis, Fleury says.

Some 34% of Sharp’s total revenue is fully capitated, Fleury says. That number does not include fee-for-service contracts with shared savings. Sharp does participate in Medicaid managed care, but is not holding risk for those patients, she says.

Sharp covers 33,000 Medicare beneficiaries in value-based Medicare Advantage contracts with private insurers, Fleury says. “Medicare Advantage is 42% of Medicare in our market, but fee-for-service is still a significant component of our book of business.”

The health system also has three commercial ACOs, covering about 28,000 lives: two with Aetna and one with Anthem Blue Cross in California. A fourth — another Aetna ACO — will open its doors on Jan. 1. All of Sharp’s commercial contracts are based on shared savings, says Fleury.

“When we look at fee-for-service, as we have payers who would like to work with us to care coordinate their fee-for-service population, we’re willing to work with them,” Fleury says. Of course, this is different from Pioneer because “on the commercial side, we do get paid a care coordination fee. In Pioneer, our physicians were funding those programs.” In addition, patient alignment on the commercial side is more favorable to the health plan than it was on the Pioneer side, she says.

According to Fleury, Sharp bases its care management program on seven separate programs. These are:

(1) Hospital care. Sharp embeds care managers within the hospital to make sure discharges occur according to Medicare’s criteria. These hospital-based care managers coordinate with care managers from the medical group to ensure follow-up care once the patient is discharged.

(2) Care transitions. These care managers follow patients for 30 days post-discharge, making sure they attend scheduled appointments with their physicians and remain compliant with other medical instructions.

(3) High-risk chronic care. In this program, care managers follow Sharp patients who are deemed to be at high risk for complications, regardless of whether they’ve been hospitalized recently.

(4) Disease management and chronic care. This is for patients at high risk of complications from specific conditions such as diabetes or congestive heart failure, again, regardless of whether they’ve been hospitalized recently. The chronic care nurse works with patients to ensure compliance with medication regimens and self-care.

(5) Skilled nursing. Patients who are discharged to a skilled nursing facility can see Sharp physicians and nurses at the facility, even if the facility itself isn’t owned by Sharp.

(6) End of life care. This includes hospice, palliative care and home infusion. Fleury says that the ACO paid for Medicare Pioneer beneficiaries to have access to those services for which Medicare fee-for-service does not reimburse.

(7) Out-of-network management. Sharp subscribes to a service by Passport Health Communications Inc. that uses pre-certification data to notify care managers whenever a Sharp patient is admitted to a non-Sharp hospital or emergency department. This triggers outreach for those patients, Fleury says.

The programs seem to work. In 2013, Sharp saw a 17% decrease in inpatient bed days per 1,000 for its group of 28,000 Pioneer beneficiaries, Fleury says. In addition, the group’s readmission rate fell from 14.8% at the beginning of the year to 13.1% at the end of the year, she says, adding, “our goal is 13%.”

Quality metrics also were high — an average 84% compliance rate — in the Pioneer population, she says.

However, these results weren’t reflected in programmatic savings with Pioneer. That’s because the Pioneer program uses a national spending benchmark that “has nothing to do with the actual rates we’re paying providers,” Fleury says.

In addition, the formula doesn’t account for the fact that Medicare pays more to hospitals that see lots of Medicaid patients as a way of making up for the low Medicaid reimbursement rates, she says. Because of this quirk in Medicare reimbursement, and because California expanded Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act, “we’re paying hospital providers more in 2014 than in 2013,” Fleury says, adding, “it’s millions of dollars. The way the model is designed, it has the ACO paying for the expansion of insurance in the state.”

These factors — not Sharp’s track record in improving quality and reducing costs — made it a bad business decision for the health system to continue in Pioneer, Fleury says. “Despite the fact that we’re doing well, when we looked at 2014, we said we’re running a significant risk of writing a check to the government — even though we were doing well,” she says.

Therefore, Sharp notified CMS that it was dropping out of the program on June 20 — just 10 days before it would have been held contractually responsible for shared losses in 2014. It made its decision public in a financial filing in August (ABN 9/14, p. 5).

When Sharp withdrew from Pioneer, it discontinued offering those fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries its seven care management programs, which Fleury says are responsible for its strong results. The ACO had 34 caregivers staffing the programs just for Pioneer, and it saved $3.4 million per year by withdrawing that support from the Medicare members who had been enrolled in Pioneer. The staff members were absorbed into other parts of the business, she says.

Sharp is pretty pleased with its seven care management programs, and has no plans right now for additional programs, Fleury says. “We’re going to be augmenting what we have and figuring out how to use technology better. For example, we’ll leverage having nurse practitioners taking calls on our nurse hotline.” She adds, “Our whole infrastructure is really based on keeping patients well.”

Unfortunately, other factors undermined that approach in the Medicare Pioneer program, Fleury says.

“I believe accountable care can work, but the model has to support the underlying work involved,” she says. “That is a real problem with the Pioneer program. There should be a direct correlation between utilization and shared savings, but there wasn’t.”

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

For more timely news and business strategies on Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D and Managed Medicaid, check out Medicare Advantage News at the AIS Marketplace.