As companies providing remote treatment begin comprising a boom industry, investors hurry to stake claim

With increased access to healthcare in the recent mental forefront of individuals as well as employers, healthcare providers have been investigating all possible ways to provide quicker, cheaper, and all-around more efficient care to the patient boom. One method gaining steam (and backing) involves taking advantage of a resource many Americans already have in spades: sophisticated tech at home.

As Popular Mechanics reported, a recent study by IMS Research estimated that the telehealth (or telemedicine) industry could be worth $6 billion by 2020. In the past year alone, three of the nation’s top web-based healthcare companies — Teladoc, MDLive, and American Well — processed over 400,000 medical interactions online, more than doubling the amount processed in 2011. In the past year, numerous telehealth trials, such as in Howard County, MD elementary schools, have begun testing the method’s efficiency, as well as the ability of existing frameworks to integrate it. Harry Wang, Director of Health & Mobile Product Research for Parks Associates, a market intelligence group, takes predicting the telehealth industry’s success one step further:

The number of doctor-patient video consultations will nearly triple from this year to the next, from 5.7 million in 2014 to over 16 million in 2015, and will exceed 130 million in 2018.

Founded in 2002, Teladoc is a current industry leader: after growing its revenues by 100% in 2013, it just received $50 million in its latest fundraising round, bringing its approximate total funding to $100 million, according to CEO Jason Gorevic. With nine or more venture capital firms behind it, the company’s remote services are becoming more popular, comprehensive, and far-reaching. Companies such as T-Mobile and Home Depot have already included Teladoc coverage in their employee plans, and, because the service is a cheaper alternative to an emergency room visit, plans supported through the Affordable Care Act — such as Aetna Blue Shield in California and Oscar in New York — are starting to incorporate Teladoc, too. As Fortune reports, the Affordable Care Act “is certainly an accelerator for us,” Gorevic said. According to recent survey by Towers Watson and the National Business Group on Health, more than half of large employers plan to offer telehealth services in their 2015 coverage plans, a 28% increase from this year.

In the past year, Teladoc acquired AmeriDoc and Consult A Doctor, its two main competitors, to make it the largest telehealth provider — with, Fortune reports, a total of 8 million individual patients from 4,000 clients. In their spare time, over 550 doctors make themselves available for providing care through the company’s online network. This system closely resembles other models in the widely heralded new ‘sharing economy,’ which allows individuals with a marketable skill or asset — say, the ability to pick up groceries, a personal vehicle, or a medical degree — to earn primary income or income on the side. “It’s a lot like Uber,” says Gorevic, would-be Teladoctors must queue up on a waiting list in most states. “We were first, though,” he adds.

In general, telehealth doctors can — and frequently do — treat flu symptoms, rashes, allergies, urinary tract infections, and bronchitis without ever physically seeing the patient, and can even send prescriptions to a local pharmacy. As Gorevic explains, company nurses serve to review the charts and effectively audit the diagnoses and treatment. As for more serious conditions, Teladoc reportedly refers about 1% of its patients to the E.R. after online consultation, and 5% to 6% to a primary care physician or urgent care center.

Overall, both investors and healthcare providers seem eager to propel telehealth services into prominence and popularity. According to a U.S. News and World Report health survey, telehealth stand to provide convenience for the individual, in terms of time saved receiving treatment, as well as significant economic benefit to employers, in terms of price per consultation and additional employee hours logged.

As recently reported, the University of California, Los Angeles represents another institution to join the telehealth movement, its physicians having joined a telehealth pool to better serve students and faculty when their own doctors are not available. Samuel Skootsky, M.D., chief medical officer of the UCLA Faculty Practice and Medical Groups, recently praised the change in structure and direction:

What we need in healthcare is multiple avenues of access. Showing up in a doctor’s office is one way. You can show up in an ER, but that’s expensive and it’s unnecessary for many simple problems. You can also show up in an urgent care facility. [UCLA’s program] LiveHealth Online is another, more convenient way for people to access healthcare. We think this has value and that patients find this convenient, and I suspect that this kind of connection with the healthcare system will only grow over time.

Fortune



Getty Images, Baltimore Sun, Teladoc