Topics: Alex Jones, aol_on, conspiracy theory, Greg Abbott, Operation Jade Helm 15, News, Politics News

The Pentagon’s Jade Helm 15 military training exercises wrapped up on Tuesday, and here’s a shocker: Conspiracy theory goons like Alex Jones were wrong. Again.

Naturally, there wasn’t a takeover of either Texas or the broader southwest, nor were there military personnel and vehicles parading through the streets of various towns desensitizing citizens to the idea of a slowly boiling military presence, eventually leading to martial law, for some opaque reason that Jones and the others have failed to elaborate upon.

If you happen to live in Texas, the ambient noise you most often heard every night throughout the course of Jade Helm were crickets chirping — definitely not the sound of U.S. Army Special Operations Command troops (who, by the way, I thought we were supposed to support) marching through your town, implementing Obamacare, pardoning undocumented workers and replacing the Constitution with Sharia Law. But don’t hold your breath waiting for Alex Jones or Texas Gov. Greg Abbott to concede they were horribly wrong about the whole thing.

For Jones’ part, his ridiculous prediction of a bloody civil war never occurred. That prediction, made earlier this summer, went as follows:

“[The government] needs the police and the military to wipe out the liberty movement, and we wipe them out. […] I estimate in the civil war, 300,000 police will die. I estimate that if the military marches out against the gun owners, half a million dead. Two million dead on the side of the patriots. Won’t matter, we’ll have another 10 million where that came from. But it’ll be a real war once they start it.”

Of course, Jones will spin and revise the lack of an invasion to suit his agenda. He’ll weave breathless, gravelly-voiced yarns about how the military has disappeared underground, perhaps hiding in abandoned Walmart stores until the “patriots” in the “liberty movement” let their guard down. Then, when they least expect it: Boom! Martial law. In fact, it’d be well within Jones’ style to simply tell his people that Jade Helm is an ongoing black-op and that we can’t truly know whether the military has redeployed from the so-called occupied areas. As he likes to say: He has the documents to prove it. (Never mind that his documentary evidence is usually just printed blog entries from InfoWars.)

It’s worth noting that Jones has already segued to another world-ending crisis. He recently published a video in which he announced, literally as breaking news, that the “global meltdown is underway.” He went on: “This is a total emergency alert. Get yourself and your family ready defensively and offensively, get out there out there and warn people.”

His reasoning? According to Jones, the inciting incidents ranged from the temporary drop in the stock market to a particularly hilarious chunk of nonsense about globalists evacuating their homes. Not surprisingly, Jones announced the previous global meltdown back in June, which clearly didn’t happen. But, chances are, there will be a global meltdown every few months. Why? Because his disciples are so utterly paranoid, and Jones is so effective at manipulating them, that they’ll simply not care that he’s always wrong about the meltdown. It’s like the various televangelists who routinely predict the exact date of the End Times, then invariably extend the deadline when it predictably fails to happen.