Texas Senate, District 24

(open; longtime Sen. Troy Fraser is retiring)

Candidates: Dawn Buckingham, Susan King. Both are Republicans.

Susan King and Dawn Buckingham were the top vote-getters in the March 1 primary. King got 32,512 votes to 29,533 for Buckingham out of more than 119,00 votes cast.

Jon Cobb, the third-place finisher, has cast his support for King. He received more than 24,000 votes.

This is a long, north-south district made up of 17 counties, including most of Taylor, Callahan, Brown, Comanche and Mills in the Big Country.

Ms. King, of Abilene, has served the past 10 years in the Texas House as District 71 representative. Before that, she was on the Abilene ISD board for eight years. She is a registered nurse.

Ms. Buckingham lives in Lakeway, near Austin. She served on the school there for a year and is an ophthalmologist who specializes in reconstructive and cosmetic surgery.

You may think this election would be focused on medicine, and some ways it does. Neither candidate is a fan of Obamacare, for example.

The gritty campaign certainly hasn't been for the faint of heart.

The two candidates have been at odds almost from the start. Though both claim to be conservative, Ms. Buckingham claims to be more so and on a quest to join the Republican-controlled Senate to move it more to the right. She has called Ms. King a liberal disguised as a conservative.

Ms. King has fired back that her opponent lacks political experience, was part of an effort to close state supported living centers, including the one in Abilene and that Ms. Buckingham was behind efforts to make public what Ms. King believes should remain private medical records..

The story behind this dispute goes back to the fall, when Ms. King briefly suspended her campaign to address clinical depression. She announced her return to the race the last day to file for office. Later, it came to light that a 911 call was placed in October. The released of that information was sought, including Abilene media, but Ms. King blocked that effort with an injunction. Then, a trial regarding the request was set for Austin in November, after the May runoff.

Ms. King said she made the call after a concerned relative asked for a check on her welfare when her husband, Dr. Austin King, was out of town. She said she thought someone was trying to break into her home. Ms. King said the visit became a medical welfare matter, which, by law, is private matter.

She insists the information is the same anyone has a right to keep private, and not based on her status as an elected official.

Ms. Buckingham was an appointed citizen member of the Sunset Commission, which is tasked with reducing waste in Texas government. The commission looked at the closing of the state's living centers, and it took on that task.

Ms. King believed the commission should not hold such power without legislative approval.

Asked if Ms. Buckingham, then, was the enemy, Ms. King said yes. Asked if she was, Ms. Buckingham responded in an email to the Reporter-News "that is categorically false and lie my opponent is pushing." She denies the Abilene facility was targeted.

The effort to close any living centers was staved off in the last legislative session.

Our recommendation: Susan King.

This race is clear cut. Ms. King is by far the most qualified and experienced, better understands the entire district and is not bringing a personal agenda into the race — nor would she to the job.

The top issue in Texas may be border security, which certainly has an impact on District 24. But our senators and representatives also are tasked with a different kind of homeland security — their district. It seems as if everyone is touting 2nd Amendment rights, conservative government and displeasure with how our border is defended.

But what about life east of I-35, water, transportation and public education? What about our military bases and taking care of our veterans, and making sure our facilities are not closed.

Ms. Buckingham did not meet with our Community Advisory Board and we found contact to be difficult. In an email, we asked her to name the three top issues in the district beyond those with broader national impact. She still pointed to the border, Syrian refugees and Obamacare. What about issues specific to District 24 that our next state senator can address?

Eight points in favor of Ms. King:

She knows who's in the Senate — both personally and what drives each politically. And she knows how the House operates. She wants to find ways for the House and Senate to work together, and she is qualified to do so .

She has been a frequent face back in her district, holding town hall meetings and attending events. Constituents have access to bend her ear, and she listens.

She understands that public school education, whether others believe it or not, remains one of biggest issues in Texas. She does not believe that taxpayer money should fund a private school education. Public school education will be a hot topic next session despite Friday's court ruling on finance. She sees teacher burnout as significant collateral damage to what will be ongoing budget problems.

She has a proven record of speaking up for veterans and supporting Dyess Air Force. As a senator, she promises to fight to keep our bases open — Fort Hood is in District 24 — and more valuable to the nation's defense.

She understands the complexities of a large district that is urban in areas but is very much rural.

She saw our need in District 71 and stepped to the plate. She fought against efforts to stop the gassing of rattlesnakes for Nolan County residents, and to keeping Taylor County's state supported living center open.

She has learned the art of working with others, and knows that a rural district state senator — and District 24 is mostly rural — has to play extra nice with colleagues from more populous districts. That does not mean caving in, but helping each other to pass legislation beneficial to all Texans.

She has taken a higher road and run a campaign to promote herself, not demote her opponent.

Like Glen Robertson in the 19th Congressional District race, Ms. Buckingham has resorted to attacking her opponent. For a true conservative, she certainly has poured a lot of money into this campaign — $1.2 million, according to Ms. King.

Ms. Buckingham seems more geared for a run for U.S. Congress, but District 24 should not be simply a stepping stone.

We strongly urge a vote for Susan King.