The Board of Directors of the AIDS Foundation of Chicago ( AFC ) unanimously voted to name John Peller as AFC's new president/CEO. An innovative national and local leader in the HIV/AIDS field, Peller most recently held the position of Interim president/CEO at AFC. Previously, Peller led AFC's advocacy and policy work at the city, state and national levels as vice president of policy. Peller is an accomplished nonprofit leader with an expertise in policy, advocacy, programs, grants management and operations. Peller will take the helm as president/CEO immediately.

"The board undertook a rigorous national search to find the strongest leader for AFC. John's proven leadership, accomplishments in advancing HIV/AIDS policy, and keen understanding of innovative approaches to navigating the new health care landscape make it clear he is the best person to lead the organization," said Ben Stringfellow, chair of AFC's Board of Directors.

Peller will oversee AFC as the organization approaches its 30th year of service in 2015. During the next year, he will lead the process to develop AFC's strategic plan that will guide the organization over the next few years.

"I am honored to lead AFC during a time of unprecedented opportunity to impact the HIV/AIDS epidemic," said John Peller, incoming president/CEO. "Through new prevention technologies like Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis ( PrEP ), our knowledge about treatment as a method for prevention, and expanded health care access, we are in a stronger position than ever before to support individuals living with HIV/AIDS and to virtually end new infections. I look forward to partnering with individuals and organization throughout our community to meet the needs of people living with and vulnerable to HIV."

Peller's recent areas of focus have included the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and ensuring that new federal and state health care systems align with the health care needs of people with HIV. He also has an expertise in Medicaid policy, federal and state budget and appropriations, and the Illinois AIDS Drug Assistance Program ( ADAP ).

Peller created the HIVHealthReform.org project, which aims to prepare the HIV community for health care reform. He has participated in webinars reaching thousands of people with HIV and people working in the HIV field. Peller's advocacy promoting affordable access to HIV medications on marketplace plans attracted national attention from the Wall Street Journal, Time Magazine and the Washington Post.

Peller started at AFC in 2005 as AFC's state lobbyist. He worked in Springfield to enact sound HIV/AIDS public policy, defend the rights of people with HIV/AIDS and advocate for increased services and prevention for people living with and at risk for HIV/AIDS.

Before coming to AFC, Peller worked at Chicago Children's Advocacy Center, National Association of State Medicaid Directors and American Public Human Services Association. He has a Bachelor's degree from the Johns Hopkins University and a Masters in Public Policy from the University of Chicago. Peller was born and raised in New York City and lives in Chicago with his partner, David Jablonowski.

Peller has trained with Team to End AIDS ( T2 ), AFC's endurance sports fundraising program, since 2003, completing five marathons, two half marathons and several triathlons with the program. He has raised tens of thousands of dollars for the fight against HIV though T2.

Founded in 1985 by community activists and physicians, the AIDS Foundation of Chicago is a catalyst for local, national, and international action against HIV/AIDS.