With up to 2 feet of snow expected in Colorado’s mountains starting this weekend, early Christmas holiday travelers have fair warning to expect dangerous driving conditions — including whiteout conditions — with winds up to 70 mph.

A winter storm warning is in place for the mountains Saturday and Sunday, with the heaviest snow expected Sunday afternoon.

“We’re encouraging travelers to be aware of a winter storm warning,” said Kari Bowen, meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Boulder. “If people are driving through the mountains, they should expect poor visibility and slow speeds.”

Between 1 and 2 feet of snow could fall at elevations above 9,000 feet, Bowen said.

Looking ahead, Denver could get a small amount of snowfall by late Christmas Day, according to Bowen. A trace is possible, she said.

A storm trough from the northwest is expected to enter Colorado late Thursday, giving a light chance of measurable snow in the metro area, Bowen said.

Early next week, rain, sleet and snow could reach Denver by Monday.

Tuesday and Christmas Eve should be great travel days in Colorado, Bowen said.

“It is expected to be dry. Temperatures should be pretty nice,” she said.

Denver likely will have typical weather on Christmas, with temperatures climbing to the low 40s and a better chance of remaining dry than having snow.

White Christmas days are somewhat rare in Denver, according to the Weather Service.

Using the definition of a White Christmas as at least an inch of snow on the ground, that has been the case only 38 percent of the time in the 114 years since 1900 — but 50 percent of the time in the past 30 years.

But for those who believe a White Christmas means at least a trace of snow must fall from the skies that day, that has happened only 14 percent of the time in 132 years since 1882, and 17 percent of the time the past 30 years.

The most snow ever recorded on the ground in Denver on Christmas was 24 inches, the day after the blizzard of 1982. The heaviest snowfall on Christmas was 7.8 inches in 2007, which broke a 113-year record.

A relatively recent Christmas considered another “truly white Christmas” was in 2006. A snowstorm Dec. 20 and 21 dropped 2 feet of snow. By Christmas, there was still 15 inches on the ground.

That came just one year after the balmiest Denver Christmas on record, when temperatures climbed to 69 degrees under sunny skies and the low temperature remained above freezing at 35 degrees.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kirkmitchell, denverpost.com/coldcases