SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Following the release of March 15 Republican presidential primary election results, Tea Party Patriots Citizens Fund Chairman Jenny Beth Martin commented on candidate Sen. Ted Cruz’s position in the race.

Martin issued the following statement:

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Tea Party Patriots Citizens Fund continues to be proud of the successful campaign Ted Cruz is running. He has consistently proven both the pollsters and the doubters wrong by winning states in all regions of the country. He is the only candidate left who can defeat Donald Trump. Conservative grassroots activists support Ted Cruz because they can trust him to uphold the promises he makes to voters and stand up to the Washington Establishment even if that means standing alone. Our supporters know Ted is best fit to be our next President because he will fight to repeal Obamacare, secure our borders, and appoint a Supreme Court Justice who will protect our Constitution the way late Justice Antonin Scalia did. Marco Rubio could not defeat Donald Trump in his home state and John Kasich has proven he’s the choice of only his home state among a couple dozen others where he has repeatedly lost. John Kasich may have won Ohio but hasn’t won anywhere else yet. Kasich should drop out of the race so the Party can unite behind Ted Cruz. He is the only candidate who can unite the Republican Party and defeat Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton to become our next President.

The Tea Party Patriots Citizens Fund officially endorsed Cruz just before voting began in Iowa’s first-in-the-nation Republican presidential cuacus. Cruz won the Iowa caucuses. He has since slipped to number two in the race for delegates behind frontrunner Donald Trump. Going into Tuesday’s elections, Cruz remained within less than 100 delegates of Trump.

Cruz did not secure the greatest number of votes in Ohio, Florida, North Carolina, or Illinois on Tuesday. Ohio’s Gov. John Kasich won his home state, while Donald Trump carried the other three. After the day’s primary elections, Trump leaped ahead into the 600 delegate range.

Florida Sen. Marco Rubio dropped out Tuesday night after a crushing home-turf loss to Trump. Cruz came in third in Florida, but didn’t net any delegates from the winner take all state.

Cruz did pick up over 25 delegates in North Carolina, where Trump took the number one slot with a few delegates more. Ohio Gov. John Kasich took all of his winner-take-all state’s 66 delegates.

Follow Michelle Moons on Twitter @MichelleDiana