GoCPAP.com

GoCPAP.com was created by a team of sleep therapy experts with over 54 years of combined experience in the Home Medical Equipment industry. GoCPAP.com began by offering patients with high deductible health insurance plans the ability to purchase the CPAP machines and supplies they need at a price they can afford.

The changing landscape of health insurance can be confusing and scary to navigate at times, and while many consumers have managed to find affordable health care plans for themselves and for their families, the plans often come with a high deductable. High deductible health plans are initially an attractive choice for consumers, as the monthly premiums can be substantially lower. If the beneficiaries are fortunate enough not to require any health care services throughout the year, they will have saved a significant amount of money.

However, should a beneficiary need to purchase many common health care services such as an x-ray, or more expensive health care such as hospitalization or surgery, they must first pay large out of pocket expenses until they have met their yearly deductible, which can range from $1,250 to as high as $10,000.

This can place a large financial burden on consumers when they require medical services beyond the standard doctor's office visit or blood test, and many patients often face a difficult choice—find the money to purchase the care or services they need, or go without them and suffer the unfortunate results. Insurance companies and DME providers often provide little recourse for individuals or families struggling financially, as the DME Providers contracted with insurance carriers are not permitted to offer equipment and supplies at discounted prices.

New Health Care, Same High Costs

Even the new health plans offered through the Affordable Care Act, though more comprehensive in what types of basic health services they cover, can have extremely high deductibles. Health care expenses are one of the largest causes of consumer debt in the United States, and there is often little availability for low cost alternatives for various types of prescription medicine and medical equipment and supplies.

Low Cost Solutions for OSA Patients

GoCPAP.com understands that Obstructive Sleep Apnea is a life-threatening disease that is often difficult to manage. To help patients with OSA and related conditions, the modern, high-tech CPAP machines sold by GoCPAP.com provide affordable treatment for OSA patients, and feature a wide range of options to best suit the patients individual symptoms and condition. Offering popular machines produced from high quality and reputable manufacturers, the team at GoCPAP.com is proud to be able to offer OSA patients these machines and supplies at exceptionally low prices.

Visit GoCPAP.com and speak to a caring and helpful team member through Live Chat, Toll-Free or e-mail to discuss all of your CPAP equipment needs. Our expert staff is always ready to help by providing exceptional customer care assistance to help you get the care and service you need all at a time that is convenient for you.

About GoCPAP.com

GoCPAP.com provides traditional hometown service and state-of-the-art quality CPAP supplies delivered directly to their customers via the internet. GoCPAP.com is committed to the patients they serve, from answering questions about products to helping you navigate your insurance coverage, you can count on the knowledgeable staff at GoCPAP.com to deliver unparalleled customer service with the highest quality and best prices on CPAP devices, masks, and accessories across the country.