The video was shared thousands of times over the weekend, showing three pit bulls attacking a fourth pit bull.

The investigation is ongoing into a viral video showing Oklahoma City dogs attacking each other. Animal Welfare is involved in the investigation, but said misinformation and threats against its officers are making things difficult.

The video is graphic and may be difficult to watch.

Animal Welfare Director Julie Bank said this is a case of dogs that attacked each other in a backyard and the homeowner is cooperating.

The video was shared thousands of times over the weekend, showing three pit bulls attacking a fourth pit bull.

Animal Welfare and Oklahoma City police investigated. They found the homeowner's son and several teens at the home, but not the homeowner.

According to the report, “The dog was inside the garage, lying on a dirty blanket…there was an overwhelming smell of infection and feces.” It also said, “The dog was hot to the touch and was covered in an ooze.”

Police and Animal Welfare took the injured dog from the home for medical treatment on Friday. The dog is now doing well and had minor injuries.

“We promise you that we are doing right by these animals,” Bank said.

According to the report, police were not able to make contact with the homeowner until Saturday. The owner was given four citations, but the agency cannot reveal why just yet.

Now the agency is dealing with people online who are threatening animal welfare officers and even sharing officers' personal information as a way to pressure the agency to do more to the homeowner.

“Unfortunately, it's very easy to sit behind a computer and type bad messages,” Bank told News 9.

Animal Control told News 9 they were at the home several times on Friday when the video was reported, but had to follow certain procedures before taking the dog.

Bank said the agency's officers cannot charge into a home if they want a case to stick.

“You really just can't come in like a renegade because of an allegation and invade someone's property or take someone's property in the case of an animal,” Bank explained.

Allegations were also made that the homeowner was keeping puppies inside a hot garage. Bank said those claims were unfounded.

“Don't start pointing fingers and accusing, we want you to assume that we are caring as you are,” Bank added.

Because this is an open investigation, we could not get video of the dog, but we were allowed to see him off-camera. He was running around and eating, with medicine on his bite marks on his head and back.

Animal welfare will keep the dog until the case is closed. According to the report, charges are pending.

The pet owner did not want to talk to News 9, but said the remaining three pit bulls that were not seized are no longer on his property.