BUFFALO, N.Y. -- This is how more and more women are deciding to bring life into the world. Birthing Centers are a growing alternative for women who choose not to have their baby in the hospital.

Dr. Katherine Morrison opened the Birthing Center of Buffalo nearly two years ago, because she says women want more choices.

"The maternal mortality rate in the United States has doubled in the last 30 years," Morrison said. "In addition to that, in the past decade, we're one of only eight countries in whom the maternal mortality rate has gone up rather than down. I think birth centers and out-of-hospital birth are a response to those statistics."

Since 2010, 113 birthing centers have opened across the United States, 11 of them in the last two years. The Affordable Care Act also required state Medicaid programs to pay the birth center fee, giving women more access to the service.

Michelle Castiblanco is a mother of two who will soon deliver her third child. After having her first delivery in a hospital, She's chosen a birthing center for her last two pregnancies.

"I had to be confined to the bed, I had to be induced when I didn't want to be," Castiblanco said. "Over the course of the labor, at least for me, taking away all of my options, it leaves me just shutting down and waiting for it all to be over."

A study in the Journal of Midwifery and Women's Health reports women with low-risk pregnancies are more likely to use birthing centers. With low-risk pregnancies, women are generally healthy and the chances of complications during birth are minimal.

Many moms who use birthing centers also use a doula, a person trained to assist the mother during and after child birth.

"They're with you before the birth, usually for 3 to 4 meetings beforehand. They are with you through labor, through the birth and also afterwards. So yes, also through the postpartum period," said Luanne Conti, birth assistant and doula at the Birthing Center of Buffalo.

Critics of birthing centers say unexpected emergencies make birthing centers high-risk. All of these are factors to review when deciding where to deliver.

In it's first year, over 20 babies were born at the Birthing Center of Buffalo.