Park Ridge residents aim to boost area's reputation

East Longmont does not have a reputation for being an art district, but a handful of artists in the Park Ridge neighborhood are hoping to change that with a new artists group.

Resident Janet Strickler, a mixed media artist, launched the East Side Artists with a few of her creative neighbors as a way to boost the area's art community and support nearby artists.

For more info Visit: https://facebook.com/EastSideArtists

The group is currently made up of five artists, including four residents of Park Ridge and one artist that lives nearby, who specialize in jewelry, homemade soaps, oil paintings, prints, mixed media and painted furniture and home decor.

East Side Artists hosted their first event, an art sale and open house, Nov. 22 and 23 at Strickler's home. While the artists are hoping to build a reputation for the east side community, Strickler said, the main goal of the group is to support one another.

"The idea is for us for us to be able to encourage each other," Strickler said. "I'm hoping we'll do workshops, get togethers, have time to work on unfinished things, experiment together and build that community and through doing that, then we can encourage one another to reach the public."

Painter Kathleen Reilly has lived a few doors down from Strickler for five or six years. The two connected quickly over their art, Reilly said.

"There are not a lot of artists that live in this part of town," Reilly said. "We tend to get fewer artists on this side of town so when you do meet someone you sort of hold on."

As the group continues to develop, Reilly said, she hopes the group will boost the reputation on the east side of town attracting artists and art-lovers alike.

Right now, the group is fluid, Strickler said. The artists are winging it and testing the waters to see what works and what doesn't.

Jewelry maker Nan Sanford looks over her display while setting up for an East Side Artists show. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

East Side Artists is taking their cue from other art communities across Boulder County that have launched something similar, Strickler said, including intimate art groups in Boulder and Lafayette.

Members — which seems too definite a word to describe the artists at this early stage — will continue to participate in larger art groups in the area, Strickler said. The idea was to supplement what is already available to area artists, not replace it.

"There are the Longmont Council for the Arts and the Longmont Artists Guild, and most of us are involved in those too," Strickler said. "But it seemed nice to have something a little smaller and local to develop relationships amongst ourselves and collaborate and do something together, something greater than what we are individually."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter