Sen. Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina and a candidate for president, stands to be an interesting social test for American voters, and a good modern "first" for a group that has long been maligned in our marriage-centric culture: single people.

Graham has never been married, and if he were elected president, he would be only the third U.S. president to enter the White House as a bachelor. James Buchanan, who remained single his whole life, was the first. Grover Cleveland married while in office (something that would be nearly unthinkable in today's world of social media and media obsession with politicians' personal lives, especially since his bride was 27 years his junior and had been his ward). Several other presidents were widowers when they took office, and several more lost their wives while they were serving as president (one of those, Woodrow Wilson, didn't stay unmarried long; he remarried while still in office to Edith Bolling Galt).

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

The questions have already been thrown at Graham, who for some reason is expected to come up with the name of some female who could step into the role of first lady. That alone is absurd – we don't need a first lady or gentleman to do anything in particular; it's merely a title given to the person whose life is completely upended for no other reason than that he or she (until now, only she) has chosen to marry someone who became president. In fact, the role is limiting – no matter how innocuous the cause a first lady takes on, she is castigated by someone (as Michelle Obama has been in her admirable quest to reduce child obesity). But Graham, pressed, said he had a sister who could do the job, and that it could be a "rotating" position.

Ideally, having a single president would bring some more attention to the second-class role unmarried people have been assigned. There is first of all the presumption that the status is merely temporary, that all single people are desperate to marry and reproduce. Ask any single adult, particularly one older than 30 or 35: their married friends have no problem opening up conversations inquiring about their love lives, yet those same people would be appalled if the single friend countered with, "How's the marriage going? Still having sex?"

[READ: National Security Hawks Give Lindsey Graham’s 2016 Bid Its Wings]

Single people are seated with children at wedding receptions. They are given the worst tables at restaurants (if they are eating alone) and the bunk beds when they share beach houses with fellow adults. They vastly subsidize the health insurance of their married-with-children's "family" plans, which never cost as much, per person, as the single person's plan. Some married people complain about the so-called "marriage penalty" (affecting some couples when their combined incomes put them in a less-desirable tax situation than if each was single and filing separately), but it's not fair to call it a penalty. People who act and live as some sort of human corporation ought to be treated as a single tax entity, their salaries combined as one. Otherwise, there should be no benefits that go to marrieds, such as receiving surviving spouse Social Security benefits and other payments.

And at work? Long gone are the days when people with children were denied consideration (though mothers still face push-back at work). More and more firms are "family friendly," which really just means single people work nights and weekends. A parent who wants to attend a child's soccer game over a weekend is given a pass. Try being single and making the same case for taking a yoga class. The reality is that married people's social lies are viewed as being more substantive and somehow not selfish or frivolous, as single people's private lives are deemed. Yes, the single person's social life might be glamorized in the movies, but it's not accommodated in the workplace or in the tax code.

[READ: The Republicans' King v. Burwell Problem]

Graham might not be a crusader for single people's rights, but his mere candidacy is a good reminder that you don't have to be married to be taken seriously or do serious work. And it's a reminder that it's foolish and just silly to expect the president and his or her family to serve as some sort of social model for the rest of the country.

Unfortunately, Graham's single status was reduced to an offensive characterization that insulted both Graham and all women. His colleague, Illinois Republican Sen. Mark Kirk, just couldn't resist commenting on Graham's marital status at a congressional hearing, referring to his South Carolina colleague as a "bro with no ho." Bro is hardly the word we ought to use to describe a member of the U.S. Senate, but what's more appalling is Kirk's blithe assignation of a short-hand for "whore" to describe women. Why is the term "ho" accepted verbiage in the media? Is it because it rhymes? So the term "chick flick" and the phrase "bros before hos" are OK because they rhyme? It's unlikely a newspaper would quote someone as saying, "chicks before *icks."