Sam Wyly’s wife, Cheryl, wipes his coat as the pair walk into court in Manhattan on May 6, 2014. Associated Press

In the good ole days before Texas businessman Samuel Wyly filed for bankruptcy during an expensive securities-fraud fight, Mr. Wyly could call it like he saw it on the state of entrepreneurship and other topics in the books he wrote.

These days, the ex-billionaire-on-a-budget has to think creatively about how to get his latest publication, “The Immigrant Spirit: How Newcomers Enrich America,” into print.

Mr. Wyly had nearly finished his book about the achievements of immigrants when he filed for bankruptcy in October, hit with a $198.1 million judgment for securities fraud involving secret trading through offshore accounts. He still needed about $15,000 to finish the manuscript, publish it and start selling it.

Shortly after the filing, U.S. Bankruptcy Court Judge Barbara Houser scrutinized Mr. Wyly’s request to spend tens of thousands of dollars on his writing pastime.

Lawyers for the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission also had criticized the spending request, especially because Mr. Wyly said he couldn’t afford to pay the damages against him for civil fraud involving secret trading through offshore accounts that netted millions of dollars in profits, according to court papers. Mr. Wyly filed for chapter 11 protection on Oct. 19 after SEC lawyers tried to restrict his financial maneuvering.

So out of Mr. Wyly’s bankruptcy budget went the cost of his two personal writing assistants. And publishing “The Immigrant Spirit” will have to be done on the cheap.

Earlier this week, Mr. Wyly’s lawyers asked Judge Houser to sign off on his latest publication strategy. Under that strategy, Mr. Wyly is proposing to transfer the book’s copyright to a new nonprofit, then look for publishing grants from charities like New York-based Fractured Atlas, which helps authors raise money, his lawyers said.

“Immigration into the United States of America, although not well understood, has become ever more prominently a topic of public debate,” his lawyers said in court papers.

Mr. Wyly’s earlier books include his 2008 memoir titled “1,000 Dollars & An Idea: Entrepreneur to Billionaire” (Amazon sales ranking: 1,635,929) and “Texas Got It Right,” written with his son Andrew (Amazon sales ranking: 503,409). He’s got two more in progress, including one tentatively titled “Soul of an Entrepreneur.”

His lawyers said that 850,000 copies of Mr. Wyly’s books are in print, and many have been “gifted” to high school teachers and college professors.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @KatyStech