The frustration has faded, if at least temporarily. Peyton Manning, jovial after a two-day respite from the Broncos’ offensive struggles against the Baltimore Ravens, has moved on from Week 1.

Done, he says. A boisterous Arrowhead Stadium is on his mind now.

“The NFL really wanted to challenge us this year, with Baltimore in Week 1 and the Kansas City Chiefs at their place four days later,” he said Tuesday. “It’s a tough place to play, a tough team to play, and just a couple days to get ready.”

The first challenge resulted in four sacks and nine quarterback hurries that were enough to put Manning’s name on the Broncos’ injury report with a back issue. He practiced Monday and Tuesday, but deflected questions about his health.

“You know my thoughts on the injury report. I think the media should have to an injury report as well,” he said, joking. “I’d like to create it myself.”

Manning’s tone has changed, the saltiness from Sunday all but gone. But concern about the Broncos’ offense has only grown.

Baltimore’s defense exposed the holes in the Manning-Gary Kubiak-meshed offense that became evident in the preseason. Manning was held to 175 yards on 24-of-40 passing attempts, zero touchdowns and one interception that was returned for a touchdown.

After the game, Manning gave himself a grade of “fair.” National opinion seemed to skew lower.

“We have to keep reminding ourselves around here that we did win the game, that we are 1-0,” Manning said. “And thank goodness. I can’t imagine what it would have been like had we lost the game.”

Against the Chiefs, the challenge will be as daunting. Last season, Kansas City held opponents to 330.5 yards per game (seventh fewest in the league) and recorded 46 sacks (fifth most), 22 of them from edge rusher Justin Houston.

In six career games at Kansas City’s Arrowhead Stadium, Manning has a 59.9 completion percentage and has averaged 302.2 yards and 2.8 touchdowns per game. History, as it has been many times, is on Manning’s side. The Broncos’ schedule, however, is not.

“I’m sure, offensively, I speak for a lot of guys that we certainly want to play better,” Manning said. “Thursday couldn’t come soon enough to have another opportunity.”

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickijhabvala