Metro drivers get motivated to work out

Photo: Melissa Phillip, Staff Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Tanya Allen, left, benefits manager at the union for Metro bus drivers and maintenance workers, launched a wellness program that offers rewards for getting healthy. With her, second from left to right, are Loretta Sancho, a Metro bus operator, Paula Smith, a Kelsey-Seybold wellness supervisor, and Shantay Phoenix, a Kelsey-Seybold wellness LVN.Tanya Allen, left, benefits manager at the union for Metro bus drivers and maintenance workers, launched a wellness program that offers rewards for getting healthy. With her, second from left to right, are Loretta Sancho, a Metro bus operator, Paula Smith, a Kelsey-Seybold wellness supervisor, and Shantay Phoenix, a Kelsey-Seybold wellness LVN. less Tanya Allen, left, benefits manager at the union for Metro bus drivers and maintenance workers, launched a wellness program that offers rewards for getting healthy. With her, second from left to right, are ... more Photo: Melissa Phillip, Staff Metro drivers get motivated to work out 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Houston Metro buses might be in motion all day, but their drivers do nothing but sit.

After 17 years driving a bus, Loretta Sancho found that her weight had steadily crept up. Clearly, 42 hours a week at the helm of a Houston Metro rig had gone straight to her hips.

She's now in her employer's wellness program, which encourages walking 30 minutes, eight times a month and rewards her with a monthly $25 gift card.

So far, Sancho has lost 15 pounds and gained $150. By the time she reaches her weight-loss goal of 50 pounds, she should have a few extra bucks to put towards her dream reward: a cruise and a bikini.

Sancho's motivation and extra income come from "Move Metro Move," a wellness initiative launched by Tanya Allen, benefits manager at the Transport Workers Union/Metropolitan Transit Authority Health & Welfare Trust, the union that represents Houston Metro bus drivers and maintenance workers.

"It started with a few people," Allen said. "Now it's taking off like wildfire."

Move Metro Move is open to employees, their spouses and eligible dependents at all eight Houston Metro operations' campuses. To get started in the program, participants undergo a health assessment and screening that includes blood pressure, blood sugar and cholesterol levels. For that, they receive a $25 gift card. Additional gift cards are awarded for preventive screenings, such as mammograms and colonoscopies.

After the initial assessment, participants get their move on. A walking program is available at each campus three days a week. To help set it up, a representative from the American Heart Association posted distance markers and established safe walking areas. During all activities, a Kelsey-Seybold Clinic nurse was on hand.

Basically, participants have nothing to lose but weight and plenty to gain in terms of health and wealth - and they do it all in a group setting with support from people they see every day at work.

Technology can help

If you want to manage exercise on your own, consider mobile games and apps that inspire healthier habits by rewarding good behavior, creating a sense of competition or just injecting some fun into what otherwise might be considered a chore.

Houstonian Dan Robinson uses the GymPact app, which has 26,000 users a week.

On Sunday nights, the 31-year-old enters his pact: how many times he'll exercise and how much he's willing to pay per missed workout. For him, it's the minimum of $5. Robinson is a runner, so he uses GymPact's "RunKeeper" program, but for gym rats, GymPact has a database of 40,000 gyms. If your gym isn't on there, it's simple to add. For those who prefer to sweat it out at home, GymPact Anywhere allows for that, too.

If Robinson misses a workout, his $5 goes into a communal pot. If he fulfills his weekly pact, he receives a payout from the pot based on how many other people didn't fulfill theirs.

It's kind of like reverse motivation, perhaps, but it works. Robinson, whose wife recently had a baby, was tempted to skip a run one day, but he laced up his sneakers and hit the road.

"Five bucks to miss that run wasn't going to kill me," Robinson said. "But the idea behind it was enough to push me out the door."

There are other mobile games and video games designed to encourage better habits, from more nutritious food to exercise goals. United Healthcare designed its own smartphone app so their clients can "gamify" getting in shape.

Virtual reality

Recently, researchers have studied the use of avatars to inspire healthy behavioral changes. In 2011, University of Southern California researchers published a paper pointing to the untapped potential of virtual reality to influence health conditions such as obesity and diabetes.

In a study published last month, scientists at George Washington University found that watching avatars engage in healthy activity helped a group of 128 overweight women lose weight.

They each created a virtual version of themselves and then watched those avatars exercise on a treadmill or shop for healthy foods at the grocery store. The idea was that by watching their avatar model good behavior - and seeing the benefits or consequences of those decisions - the participants would be inspired to follow suit.

Several studies have shown that offering cash for improved health works, but a recent study by the Mayo Clinic examined more people for a longer period of time. One hundred clinic employees and dependents ages 18-63 with a body mass index of more than 30 - considered "obese" by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - participated in the yearlong study. Weighed monthly, each person's goal was to lose 4 pounds a month.

Participants who met their goals received $20 per month; those who did not were fined the same amount.

Meanwhile, the Annals of Internal Medicine published an article stating that the use of incentive-based programs for weight loss is growing due to a provision in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act that allows employers to use a greater portion of insurance premiums for the cause.

Allen said she was able to receive a wellness budget from the Metro workers' union insurance carrier.

"Then I had the teeth to do something," Allen said. "Then the question was, can I do it the way I want it? Can I create my own plan?"

Yes and yes. Move Metro Move is a hit, she said, with about 400 employees on board.

But another part of the program was healthy eating. Allen said walkers were given fresh fruit, not only for fuel to move but to encourage a healthy diet.

Food logs

Healthy eating also is on the plate at Methodist Hospital System. Earlier this month, more than 150 employees finished a wellness challenge in which they kept a daily food log with goals. After logging at least 20 entries, they earned $20.

Amanda Meadows, clinical nutrition specialist for Methodist Weight Management Center, called it a "totally legitimate" way to motivate folks.

Sports psychologist Robert Andrews said using money as motivation has been a successful model for years.

"They've been doing it in professional sports for a long time," said Andrews, founder and director of the Institute of Sports Psychology in Houston. "You perform, you get a bigger contract. You don't perform, you get cut, you go to a different team for less money."

Of course, most of us aren't professional athletes, but the bottom line is the same.

"I think the biggest problem staying motivated is that people try to do it individually," Andrews said. "When you have to be accountable to somebody else, you're less likely to say, 'I think I'll sleep in today' or 'I'm going to that party after work instead of the gym.' "

Kristen V. Brown contributed to this story.