BOCA RATON, FL (BocaNewsNow.com) — A major protest against Hobby Lobby in West Boca Raton is set for Wednesday afternoon.

Hobby Lobby is the Oklahoma-based national chain that successfully won the right to opt-out of the Obamacare mandate of providing insurance-covered birth control to employees. Hobby Lobby is in the process of opening a new store at the intersection of 441 and Palmetto Park Road.

The protest, by “Women are Watching Florida” is outlined in a press release below.

Access to birth control is critical for women’s basic preventive health care, for our ability to plan our families, and for expanding economic opportunities. But the Supreme Court’s recent Hobby Lobby decision puts birth control access in jeopardy for many working women. “It’s unbelievable that in 2014, we’re still fighting about whether women should have access to birth control. The decision to take birth control is between a woman and her doctor, not her boss,” said Laura Goodhue, Campaign Manager for the Florida Planned Parenthood PAC’s Women Are Watching campaign. “It’s not the role of bosses of private, for-profit businesses to make decisions about women’s health care for their employees based solely on their own personal religious beliefs.” “As a mother and a grandmother of young women, I cannot believe we are turning back the clock on women’s health care,” said Boca Raton resident Jan Wexler who called for the rally. “These are rights I fought for in the 1950s! I cannot wait to go to the polls this November to show politicians our health does matter! Protestors will rally against the opening of a new Hobby Lobby store to send this message to Hobby Lobby and the 2014 candidates for office: Women’s health care is not a political bargaining chip. Women are watching this November. And they will make their voices heard! Who: Planned Parenthood PAC volunteers and Boca Raton residents. What: Rally against the Supreme Court’s recent Hobby Lobby decision and store opening. When: Wednesday October 1, 2014, 4:30pm – 6pm. Where: New Hobby Lobby store at 21759 State Road 7, Boca Raton 33428. Why: To send the message that women should have the right to make their own medical decisions in consultation with their doctor, not their boss.

----------------

BocaNewsNow.com is the leading site for news and information based in Boca Raton, Florida. We have surpassed three million page views.



We remind readers that an arrest is an accusation. Guilt or innocence is determined in a court of law. Please email us at news(at)bocanewsnow.com if the facts of a news story involving you have changed. This is not a mugshot website. While under no obligation to do so, we will effort to update arrest reports when provided with official information by the arrestee.



Note that ip addresses are logged and may be shared with law enforcement in unique situations.



For advertising information or to submit news tips, please email news(at)BocaNewsNow.com. BocaNewsNow(TM) is a Trademark of MetroDesk Media, LLC. The name may not be used without written permission.