Ring in the old! Here’s a happy birthday shout-out to Racines (650 Sherman St., 303-595-0418.)

The popular spot that originated on Bannock Street in the Golden Triangle has served up everything from power breakfasts to family dinners for 30 years, and by all appearances has long been something of an ATM machine for owners David Racine and Lee Goodfriend.

So the duo is giving back. A 30th anniversary celebration starts Dec. 27 — the date they opened in 1983 — and runs through January.

And get these giveaways: Top prize, a trip for two to Paris to dine in Gallic splendor at Boullion Racine. Second prize: A trip for two to Racine, Wis., to eat in a restaurant of the winner’s choice. (Bratwurst ahoy!) Finally, customers can post stories and photos on the Racines website — racinesrestaurant.com — and the restaurant will give away dinner for two once a month for a year to the winner.

Can anyone say “Smokin’ Gouda sandwich”?

Black Pearl restaurant has a new chef: Samir Mohammad, who has worn the top toque in several Mile High kitchens.

Mohammad’s latest stop was at Lala’s Wine Bar + Pizzeria(410 E. Seventh Ave., 303-861-9463). Before that he was at The Village Cork (1300 S. Pearl St., 303-282-8399) not far from his new digs.

Regulars should expect some menu tweaking, if not outright revamping.

Mohammad hails from Taos and did a stint at that town’s now-closed but much-loved Joseph’s Table. He starts at Black Pearl (1529 S. Pearl St., 303-777-0500) on New Year’s Day — as good a time to start a new gig as any. He replaces current exec chef Mitch Mayers, who is taking his knife kit to a new restaurant in Seattle.

This might not be great news for cows and pigs, but it is for two-legged carnivores: Western Daughters Butcher Shoppe (3326 Tejon St., 303-477-6328) recently opened in Denver’s LoHi neighborhood. The 720-square-foot shop is owned and run by the soon-to-be-husband-and-wife team of Kate Kavanaugh and Josh Curtiss. The two opened the shop after training in New York under butchers from Fleisher’s Grass-fed and Organic Meats.

That aesthetic is driving their shop. The meat, all raised within 250 miles of Denver, is free of hormones and antibiotics.

“Everything we do is antibiotic- and hormone- free, and we do pasture-raised and grass-fed as much as possible,” Curtiss said. “We really like to focus on the Front Range and local ranchers and farmers. We don’t feel that trucking things over the mountains is sustainable.”

Home cooks will be happy to know that, along with beef, pork, lamb and seasonal game meats, the shop will carry items such as stock, marrow butter and deli meats. Kavanaugh and Curtiss also plan to host seasonal events, classes, lectures, farm visits, butcher demonstrations and community dinners.

Whew. All that and a wedding to plan, too.

Finally, goodbye to Skoops. The family-owned sandwich and ice-cream shop at 1209 E. Ninth Ave. in Capitol Hill closed its doors Dec. 23. Owners Tim Hamann and Eddie Horn threw a goodbye party that evening for regulars. Follow their next moves on the Skoops Ice Cream and More Facebook page.

“We are sad that our time at this location has come to an end,” Hamann said in a news release. “Our customers have truly become our friends. We strove to build a unique and friendly shop, and we like to believe that our devoted clientele proves that we achieved that.”

William Porter: 303-954-1877, wporter@denverpost.com or twitter.com/williamporterdp