A decade ago, when she was starting to transition genders, the artist known as Our Lady J steeled herself as she called endocrinologists, seeking one who would prescribe hormones. “I couldn’t find a doctor,” said the classical pianist and singer, who is currently a writer for the television series “Transparent.” “I was treated like a freak.”

Since then, the medical community in the United States has resoundingly concluded that transgender care — which includes hormone replacement therapy, counseling and surgical procedures — is medically necessary and should be covered by insurance.

Federal health officials say insurers and medical providers that discriminate against transgender individuals by denying transition-related care are violating the law. And a recent study by Johns Hopkins University found that providing transgender-related care is cost-effective in the long run because it generally reduces the likelihood of depression, anxiety and other conditions that take a toll on well-being and productivity. Moreover, the cost of this coverage for insurers would be negligible.

Photo

Yet transgender Americans continue to face significant barriers to affordable medical care because of exclusions in health insurance policies and a scarcity of specialized providers.

When Our Lady J learned this fall that the Writers Guild of America health plan, which provides an insurance plan for writers in Hollywood, does not cover transition-related care, she was distraught. It reminded her of a darker time in her life, when she was suicidal and struggled with substance abuse, largely as a result of being unable to afford the medical care she needed.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

First, she wondered if the exclusion was an oversight, but then she learned that someone had challenged it this year and was turned down. “Having to battle for insurance and having to battle with doctors is overwhelming,” Our Lady J said. “Taking care of your health as a trans person can feel like a full-time job.”

Your Stories Hear from a diverse group of transgender voices, and add your own. Share Your Story

Insurance coverage is only part of the problem. Even as more people gain coverage, many struggle to find doctors, especially surgeons, because medical providers have had little incentive to specialize in a field that the insurance industry has historically shunned.

For decades, transition-related care was a fringe medical specialty. There was no consensus among doctors about the wisdom and safety of helping people transform their bodies. Over time, as more people transitioned, researchers recognized that people who got treatment were more likely to lead healthy, productive lives.

The American Medical Association, the largest group of doctors in the country, published a landmark resolution in 2008 that said barriers to transition-related care needed to be eliminated, citing “an established body of medical research that demonstrates the effectiveness and medical necessity” of transition-related care. Every other prominent medical association in the country has echoed that assessment. But a corresponding shift in public policy has begun to take root only over the past couple of years.

Past Transgender Today Editorials

In 2014, an Army veteran successfully appealed Medicare’s policy of refusing to pay for sex reassignment surgery. Federal health officials who reviewed her complaint concluded that such exclusions were “no longer reasonable,” in light of the growing body of medical research. The ruling changed Medicare policy and was a turning point in the fight for transgender equality, because private insurance providers and state officials often adopt Medicare coverage standards.

State officials in at least 12 states — including New York — and the District of Columbia have taken steps in recent years to bar insurance companies from excluding transgender care in policies.

The Department of Health and Human Services issued a proposed rule on the issue this summer, saying policies that categorically exclude gender transition care are discriminatory under the Affordable Care Act. Michael Silverman, the executive director of the Transgender Legal Defense and Education Fund, which advocates for transgender patients, said this could mark a transformational moment.

Sign up for email updates Tell me when the next installments of “Transgender Today” are available.

“But we will still see a period of time when entrenched attitudes and misconceptions continue to prevail,” he said. “Many people still don’t think of this as medically necessary care, so they reflexively deny claims because that’s what they’ve always done.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Even in states that have prohibited insurance companies from denying transition care, discriminatory policies and practices are common. (The New York Times Company’s health insurance plans retain an exclusion for gender reassignment surgery; because they are self-funded, they are not required to follow New York State policy.) The Writers Guild health fund in California, which is also self-funded, is not subject to the 2013 state policy that banned transgender care exclusions in insurance policies.

While a growing number of employers have phased out exclusions voluntarily, it often takes an individual willing to challenge the policy. Our Lady J has asked executives at the Writers Guild plan, which is expected to vote on proposed changes to its health plan on Wednesday, to do away with the exclusion. The guild should heed her call.

The collective toll these exclusions take on the transgender community, and American society, is sobering. Researchers have found that transgender people who are unable to transition medically are more likely to suffer from depression, more prone to self-destructive behavior and less likely to be employed.

“When you are living in a body you don’t identify with, it’s easy not to take care of that body,” Our Lady J said. “I am healthier because of what I have done with my transition. I am a more productive person. I am a better citizen.”