By Hannah Poturalski

Staff Writer

Hundreds of thousands of Ohioans are awaiting the fate of their applications for health coverage under the state’s expansion of Medicaid.

The expansion began Wednesday for individuals, ages 19-64, or families whose incomes are 138 percent of the federal poverty line or less — $15,856 for an individual or $32,499 for a family of four. Prior to the expansion, single men without dependent children were not eligible unless they were blind, chronically disabled and unable to work, or over the age of 65.

More than 275,000 Ohioans are now eligible for Medicaid after the age and disability requirements have been removed, as well as the need to be responsible for a dependent minor.

An estimated 17,000 Butler County residents are now eligible for Medicaid, said Jerome Kearns, director of Butler County Job and Family Services. He said the county office has approved 126 cases under the new rules.

Celia Carmichael, 59, of Middletown, said she’s waiting to find out whether or not she’s been approved after being without any medical coverage for the past four years. Carmichael said she has delayed visits to her doctors by up to 12 months.

“I need a mammogram and a good check up,” Carmichael said. “Nothing’s going right for me.”

Carmichael, who is jobless right now, said she’s been searching for steady employment. She previously worked six years as a security guard at AK Steel but could never afford the health insurance available to her.

Carmichael said after applying for an insurance plan through the federal marketplace, she was told she would need to pay $475 a month with a $4,000 deductible.

“I have no money, no income. How could I pay for that?” Carmichael said. “I can’t find a job; I’m having a terrible time.”

Since Oct. 1, the state has received about 17,000 applications for Medicaid through the new website, benefits.ohio.gov, said Sam Rossi, spokesman for Ohio’s Department of Medicaid. More than 50,000 unique visits have been made to the website.

Rossi said the applications are both from those 275,000 newly eligible, as well as from a pool of 231,000 residents who were previously eligible and just now applying after the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act mandated health coverage in 2014.

Rossi said an additional 25,000 Medicaid applications were submitted by Ohio residents through the online federal marketplace, healthcare.gov, but were never forwarded to the state benefits office due to website malfunctions. He said anyone that submitted an application through the federal website is encouraged to reapply at benefits.ohio.gov.

Jennifer and Jon Turner, of Hamilton, said their family of four submitted an online application for Medicaid on Dec. 9. They are still waiting for confirmation on whether they are eligible and being approved.

“Every day since then we have been checking our mailbox and answering machine waiting for a determination,” Jennifer Turner said. “… We were relying on having our coverage back on Jan. 1.”

Jennifer Turner said her family had been on a temporary Transitional Medicaid program that expired at the end of October. Since then, the family has had to cutback and watch all their spending in order to afford the prescriptions needed for three members of the family.

At the nonprofit Community Behavioral Health in Hamilton and Middletown, case managers have been helping new and existing clients with the Medicaid application process, said Laura Sheehan, vice president of Community Behavioral Health.

“There’s definitely a lack of knowledge among some people and confusion with how they’re eligible and what they can get,” Sheehan said. “This will be tremendous for our community. People will be able to get care they couldn’t previously because they couldn’t pay for it.”

Sheehan said after the expansion, Community Behavioral Health reassigned a traditional case manager to take on the Medicaid-specific needs of clients. She said a second Medicaid case manager may be added this month to keep up with demand.

“Some people were lined up waiting for the application date because they know what the changes mean for them,” Sheehan said. “They’re very excited to have access … and a door has opened for them.”

There are more than 2.4 million Ohioans currently on Medicaid, Rossi said. Health coverage under the joint state-federal insurance program can include hospital and emergency room, pregnancy, prescriptions, preventive health, alcohol and drug addiction, dental and mental health.