The skyrocketing costs of prescription drugs in America under the last three presidents has a lot to do with the work of one of Louisiana's more colorful politicians-cum-lobbyists, according to a new book excerpted on Bill Moyers' website.

Billy Tauzin, a Democrat-turned-Republican congressman from Lafourche Parish who spent 25 years in the House before signing on as president and CEO of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America in 2005, had been central to undermining any cost-control proposals on drugs for years, authors Wendell Potter and Nick Penniman write in an excerpt of their book "Nation On the Take: How Big Money Corrupts Our Democracy and What We Can Do About It."

Tauzin and an army of lobbyists hired by "Big Pharma" made sure that nothing in President Barack Obama's signature Affordable Care Act would curb profits for major drug companies, Potter and Penniman write. For instance, Tauzin was influential in killing attempts to allow the reimportation of pharmaceuticals at lower prices or to let Medicare negotiate with drug companies for lower prices — both unsuccessful Clinton-era proposals that resurfaced in 2006.

While Tauzin is cast as the arch villain, Republicans, Democrats and presidents George W. Bush and Obama are all targets in the piece.

The authors overarching concern seems to be that the rising cost of drugs will put treatment out of reach for all but the wealthiest and that the United States is light years behind the rest of the world when it comes to putting reins on what drug companies can charge.

They also express healthy skepticism at Big Pharma's arguments that price controls will curb research and development by pointing out that a large portion of R & D is done through taxpayer-funded programs at colleges and universities.

The heart of the problem is politics, they write, pointing out that within three years of Bush signing into law Medicare drug benefit legislation that left a gaping hole in Part D coverage "at least 15 members of Congress, congressional staffers and administration officials who had played a role in the bill's passage had left office and joined the pharmaceutical industry."

Tauzin was one of them.

Read the excerpt here.