St. Nick's sack is full of laughs at Longmont Museum fest

Emily Meyers, 4, of Longmont, high-fives ballerina Leah Baylin, of the Boulder Ballet, after Longmont Museum's First Holiday Festival at the Stewart Auditorium on Saturday. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Santa Claus cracked jokes at the Longmont Museum on Saturday afternoon, taking a break from his official duties.

Why is it that Santa can find every house in every town in every country on the planet but he often can't find his glasses? It's because the elves like to hide his specs.

Does Santa ever shave? No, because if he did, no one would recognize him.

How does Santa keep the North Pole humming along? All of the electricity is made from reindeer manure, of course.

And about those reindeer — they like special reindeer food, but they don't like carrots, because eating carrots gives them gas, Santa said.

Mr. Claus was getting ready for his big performance as master of ceremonies at Santa's First Annual Longmont Museum Holiday Festival — sold out this year and sure to become a holiday tradition. Acts on the playbill included the Boulder Klezmer Consort and the Longmont Symphony Orchestra, Boulder Ballet dancers and a jazz trio in the lobby.

At local events just this holiday season alone, Santa said he has been grilled by a group of 9-year-old girls and has had numerous heart-to-heart conversations with other children, some of whom come back again and again to see him. He has about 20 public events in Longmont annually, including an appearance in the Longmont Lights Holiday Parade last week.

Advertisement

"It's fun, and it's very addictive," said Santa, also known as John Chilson of Longmont. "I know everything (Santa), just ask me."

This Santa has $3 million in performance liability insurance and special Colorado license plates on his red car that proclaim "N POLE," just in case you happen to see him around town.

While Santa went over his lines Saturday, members of the Boulder Klezmer Consort tuned up on the stage at the Stewart Auditorium. Clarinet player Joe Lukasic characterized the group's sound as "Jewish party music from the Old World." The group started off with a mournful tune, then switched to music that included threads of popular Christmas carols.

"It's like country music, but from other countries," said James Hoskins, who plays cello for the group.

Saturday's holiday variety show was the brainchild of auditorium manager David Ortolano and others involved with the new, 250-seat performance space. The auditorium opened in June as a culmination of a fundraising effort for a $4.45 million expansion.

Since opening, the new auditorium has hosted thousands of residents for events related to the Day of the Dead and the Boulder Bach Festival, among others.

Beth Potter: 303-473-1422, potterb@coloradohometownweekly.com