Click to enlarge When the 114th United States Congress officially convenes in January a new Dingell will be in the 12th District seat for the House of Representatives.



Following a landslide victory in the Nov. 4 election Congresswoman-elect Debbie Dingell will take the seat vacated by her husband U.S. Rep John Dingell (D-Dearborn). She will be the first woman to ever elected to directly succeed her retiring husband in Congress. Other spouses have succeeded their husbands via appointment or special election after their death, but not via retirement.



During a trip to Washington D.C. for freshmen orientation, Dingell took time to answer ten questions posed by Digital First Media.



Digital First Media: It has to be a daunting task to take over, not only for a beloved member of the House, but also for your own husband. With this unique takeover, do you think it will make your transition harder or easier than most freshman legislators? Debbie Dingell: The transition that is underway – my transition to the 114th Congress and John’s transition from the Congress – is obviously bittersweet. John is leaving a mark on the House of Representatives that can never be replaced by anyone, including me. But John is at peace with his decision to leave the House. Like many married couples when one of you retires it affects the other. But we have great respect for one another and John has been nothing but encouraging as I begin my transition to the Congress.



DFM: Following up on the theme of taking over for Congressman Dingell, you presumably already know a large portion of the incumbent Representatives that you’ll be working with do you think that will impact your ability to pass legislation?



Dingell: Being a member of Congress involves many things beyond just getting legislation passed. Listening to your constituents, helping with casework, and solving problems are also important parts of the job. I think one of the most important things a member of Congress can do is develop relationships with their colleagues to build trust and respect. It gives you a solid foundation to address and handle many things. The experience I bring, of understanding the legislative process, the needs of the district and strong bipartisan relationships in both the House and Senate is an asset. My focus will be to work hard for the people of the 12th District and to work with the entire Michigan delegation for the people in this state. That is one reason I have called for a Michigan agenda for sometime.



DFM: What are the key things you hope to get done in your first six months in office? Your first term?



Dingell: Working for the 12th District and the state of Michigan is going to be my priority. I know that among those of us in the state’s congressional delegation there are shared values on many issues that are important to our constituents – issues such as job creation, protecting the Great Lakes, making education affordable and accessible, fixing our roads and infrastructure, among others. The five new members of the delegation know that our strength comes in working together. We have already discussed a number of ways to do that and have agreed to study and learn about many issues together as well as to visit each other's districts. It is critically important that all of us work together for our state..



DFM: You won the election by a wide margin, but how will you work to please constituents that didn’t vote for you? Continued... 1

2

3

See Full Story

Dingell: We live in the strongest democracy in the world. Part of what makes this a great democracy is the electoral process where people express their opinions, celebrate their differences and then make a decision on who they want to represent them. Once that process ends as it did on November 4, we come together to get things done. I was elected to represent all of the people of the 12th District and that is what I am going to do. Whether someone voted for me or not, I am going to Washington to represent everyone. My door is open for everyone. I learn much from those who disagree with me, and that is what is beautiful about this country.



DFM: What do you see as the obstacles to having portions of multiple counties in your district? I would imagine that they are all very different types of communities, which would make it hard to represent them all with every decision made.



Dingell: There is great geographic diversity in the 12thCongressional District and that is what makes it strong and interesting. I have spent the better part of my professional life working in and around the 12th District, including the last nine months when I attended hundreds of events and talked with thousands of people. What I had reaffirmed in that process is the more we are different, the more we are alike. The issues people care about are very similar. They want a good paying job, a safe place to live and call home, quality health care, and they want their children and grandchildren to have a quality, affordable education.



DFM: You’ve held elected office before, though obviously not this high, what do you see as being different working in the federal government as opposed to locally?



Dingell: Whenever you are elected to office you play a specific role. As a governor for Wayne State University it was my responsibility to make decisions that would strengthen the university on behalf of the thousands of students who attend it. As a member of Congress, I will not only be making sure the voices of 12th District residents are heard when debating issues affecting the nation, but also helping those residents who need assistance in many different areas at the federal level.



DFM: You’ve started orientation for new Representatives, what are your thoughts on what it will be like to be a U.S. Representative come January?



Dingell: The new member orientation was very valuable. Not only did we learn the mechanics of running a congressional office but more importantly it provided the opportunity to begin getting to know our new colleagues and develop critical relationships. I met many wonderful people from very diverse backgrounds.....we share a love of our country and a desire to serve it.



DFM: Anytime a long-term Congressman leaves office, it has a huge impact on the home state. With both Rep. John Dingell and Sen. Carl Levin leaving this year, how will you work to combat a loss of political pull for Michigan?



Dingell: The impact that John Dingell and Carl Levin have had on Michigan as a result of their experience in Congress has been well-documented. In addition to losing their experience, Michigan is losing two other veteran members of Congress – Reps. David Camp, chair of the House Ways and Means Committee, and Mike Rogers, chair of the House Intelligence Committee. The loss of their collective seniority only serves to reinforce the need for Michigan’s new congressional delegation to work together on issues important to Michigan. It’s by working together that we can get things done.



DFM: What committees or other groups will you attempt to be assigned to when you take office? Continued... 1

2

3

See Full Story