By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

Gov. Rick Scott wants to cap what hospitals can bill patients to halt "unconscionable" prices, a move that industry leaders say won't promote affordable health care and may lead to further financial turmoil in the health care system.

Imposing price caps is a huge departure from Republican principles of limited government intrusion, they add.

"It seems very atypical of him," Keith Arnold, a lobbyist for the publicly-operated Lee Memorial Health System and other nonprofit medical entities, said. "It's on the verge of rate setting."

Bruce Rueben, president of the Florida Hospital Association, said it "certainly is not what you would call a conservatives' approach to health care policy."

The governor is proposing a "health care transparency bill" that if supported by the Legislature would require hospitals to post their entire list of charges for medical care to their websites so consumers can be better informed. Many hospitals already post prices for common procedures on their websites.

The FHA supports transparency about health care costs and is preparing to pitch its own plan for an "all claims' database," but the rest of Scott's proposal is questionable, Rueben said.

"It's all politics," he said. "There is very little policy in this bill that makes sense."

The FHA has not taken a formal position on Scott's proposal and will not until it gets backing in the Legislature, Rueben said.

Jackie Schutz, spokeswoman for the governor, said Scott wants hospitals to be transparent about prices, plain and simple.

“Gov. Scott looks forward to working with legislative leaders to pass this important bill that empowers patients,” she said. “Patients deserve and demand transparency in hospital pricing and the governor will continue fighting to change the current system no matter what reasons opponents have to keep things the way they are.”

Scott's plan calls for amending the Florida Patient's Bill of Rights to require hospitals to post gross and average amounts accepted for inpatient and outpatient care, to post their charity care policies and how discounts are calculated.

The bill also would require hospitals to post performance reports and the three most recent 990 forms filed annually to the IRS if they are nonprofit entities or to post 10-K forms that publicly-traded hospitals file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

The bill would create protection against "unconscionable prices" — which is defined as anything more than 15 percent of the average amount the hospital accepts as payment for a particular medical treatment, and would apply to both inpatient and outpatient care, and for medical emergencies.

Charges in excess of the average amount that a hospital accepts for a particular service would violate the law and trigger legal action by the State Attorney's Office or Department of Legal Affairs, according to the governor's plan.

Scott's proposal was posted last week to the website of his health care and hospital commission which he created in May to examine hospital finances.

The committee was formed after a bruising fight with hospitals over federal funding that helps hospitals with expenses for treating uninsured patients, called the low income pool, LIP.

The governor also opposes expanding Medicaid coverage to insure 800,000 low-income residents that is a state option under the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. The FHA supports Medicaid expansion, so has the Safety Net Hospital Alliance of Florida, a network of public, teaching and children's hospitals.

Arnold said the governor has targeted public hospitals which provide the bulk of charity care to needy patients while hospitals historically known for the most egregious charges are the for-profit hospitals.

The governor's target to hospitals is "110 percent" tied to hospitals' support of Medicaid expansion and helping the needy, he said.

"It is an unfortunate reality if you speak out and have an independent voice, Tallahassee has become more punitive in that regard," Arnold said. "The politics now seems to be treating the poor is sinful and wasteful, and because you have that as your mission, you will be punished for it."

Two weeks ago, Scott requested consumers report experiences of price gouging by hospitals to his commission. To date, the website has 100 consumer stories listed that have been redacted to exclude patient information and the names of hospitals involved.

The nine-member health care and hospital commission meets Tuesday, on the campus of Florida Gulf Coast University, the first time the group has convened in Southwest Florida. An agenda has not been published yet.

Tony Carvalho, president of the Safety Net Hospital Alliance, said the alliance supports price transparency, especially for uninsured patients, but the governor's idea of hospital price caps is flawed.

Three of every four patients in a hospital are covered by Medicaid or Medicare, and the government already sets what hospitals get reimbursed for treating these patients, or the patients are uninsured. The remaining patients have commercial plans and those rates are set under contracts.

"The government is significantly involved in setting prices and that is one of the problems with the system today," Carvalho said. "Price fixing is a mistake and is already done for three-fourths of patients."

He also raises the question of how the governor's plan would apply to foreigners who come to Florida and pay cash for medical services, and how the governor's plan would apply to address winter residents. Those patient markets and the commercially insured help hospitals deal with government reimbursement that don't cover costs.

"We must cost shift to someone," Carvalho said. "It is certainly something that has to be discussed."

Rueben, president of the FHA, said it's not clear what the financial impact would be to hospitals if the governor's plan is adopted. But if the goal is lowering health care costs, the clear path to that is by expanding Medicaid and using the money that Florida taxpayers have already spent to pay for the Affordable Care Act.

"Florida has spent billions to pay for it, hospitals took $11 billion in payment cuts to serve Medicare patients," he said, adding that taxes to medical devices and to health care plans are other ways Florida businesses and taxpayers are paying for the federal law, which requires the uninsured to buy coverage or pay a penalty.

Scott's proposal about unconscionable gouging is like putting a stick into the ribs of hospitals, he said.

"I don't even know what to call it," Rueben said. "It is more of a distraction to the real issue of trying to create more affordable health care."