Dr. Jill Biden plans on educating students full-time next fall amid rumors Vice President Biden is weighing an Oval Office bid.

Her teaching schedule leaves little room for a role in her husband’s potential presidential campaign in 2016, according to a Bloomberg report.

ADVERTISEMENT

The report said Jill Biden expects she will teach five English courses at Northern Virginia Community College’s Alexandria campus starting next week.

College spokeswoman Kathy Thompson added that Jill Biden is booked for three English I courses and two developmental English courses.

The Biden family traveled to Kiawah Island, S.C., last week amid mounting buzz that the vice president is considering a 2016 White House run. Joe Biden Joe BidenClinton urged to go liberal with vice presidential pick Biden will host cancer research summit in DC Reid throws wrench into Clinton vice presidential picks MORE’s entrance into next year’s race would upset the battle for the Democratic presidential nomination given his record of public service.

Former secretary of State Hillary Clinton is widely considered the favorite for the party’s coronation but recent developments are exposing vulnerabilities in her candidacy.

At issue is Clinton’s use of a private email server during her tenure at the State Department. Voters are becoming increasingly concerned over her transparency and trustworthiness given the device may have curbed accountability of her actions there. Clinton’s support among potential supporters is now gradually eroding in multiple national polls.

Backers say Joe Biden’s entrance into the 2016 race would reenergize Democrats and give them a competitive primary season next year.

Rumors that the vice president began considering his third go at the White House started after his son Beau Biden’s death.

Beau Biden — who died earlier this summer following a struggle with brain cancer — reportedly nudged his father towards declaring his presidential candidacy.

Jill Biden has previously campaigned with her husband while still serving as an educator as well.