The Tulsa Economic Development Corporation is the most impactful economic development organization that you have (probably) never heard of.

With more than $50 million currently invested in the Tulsa small business community across businesses in fields ranging from heavy machinery to hospice, TEDC — a 501(c)3 organization — is putting its funding where it matters: in small businesses.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

The organization makes loans to small businesses just outside traditional bank lending guidelines. We aren’t a bank, we don’t take deposits and we don’t have branches. We just make loans to Tulsa-area entrepreneurs. We are all about economic development and job creation.

TEDC has been instrumental in retaining or creating 313 jobs during the past five years and is expected to grow that number by 24 percent over the next 12 months.

I have been on the board for many years and the reason I stay is simple: I believe in the mission of TEDC and am convinced that the work we do not only improves the lives of our clients but improves Tulsa as well. We receive our funding through private donations, partnerships with local banks, federal loans and grants, and fee income we generate through operations.

Our primary source of funding is through the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program, which are federal dollars administered by local municipalities, in our case the city of Tulsa. Many high-quality nonprofit organizations apply for this funding every year for programs that directly address social needs in the Tulsa community, and our tireless city council does a great job of making funding recommendations to the mayor.

These dollars are by definition a grant and are typically “one direction” in that they fund a program (a food bank, a building, quality child-care) and must be replenished next year. At TEDC, we take those grant dollars and put them into the community in the form of a loan. When that loan is paid back, we put the funds back into the community in the form of another loan. This allows us to use our funding over and over again.

Since the dollars are grant funding and not investment capital, (as a bank might have) we can loan to businesses that might not fit at a “traditional” bank. This is the type of funding that TEDC used to help finance the Save-A-Lot in partnership with Honor Capital LLC, Save-A-Lot and other community partners. Honor Capital is a veteran-owned and operated small business that has a mission to build community and create jobs by providing affordable, fresh food to underserved neighborhoods.

In this case, our CDBG-funded loan allowed us to be more flexible on underwriting and other loan terms than the store was able to secure with its current bank. Food deserts are a problem that affect thousands of members in a community, and TEDC felt very strongly about making this project happen. As a result we employed almost all of our 2015 allocation to make it happen. We are obviously excited about it.

In addition to our CDBG-funded loans, we have several other loan programs that allow us to assist small business owners in almost every aspect. We collaborate with the Small Business Administration to help businesses secure long-term funding for owner-occupied commercial real estate through SBA’s 504 Program. We also work with the SBA on micro lending and local banks using the SBA’s 7A program which is great for working capital and other needs.

We partnered with the George Kaiser Family Foundation and the Bank of Oklahoma to utilize New Market Tax Credits to construct the Matthews Warehouse project in the Brady District. We are, in fact, using many different programs to inject capital into Tulsa-area businesses and to help make entrepreneurs’ dreams a reality.