William David Binn, 84, and his 80-year-old wife, Edith, have a full schedule of activities that keeps them busy all day long.

But the Marine Park, Brooklyn, couple recently took some time out for an important task: reviewing their Medicare options during Medicare’s annual fall open enrollment period.

Edith, a retired bookkeeper, looked at the paperwork sent by their health insurance company.

She learned that their Medicare Advantage plan will go from charging zero in premiums to charging $29 a month, for each of them, in 2015.

After weighing the pros and the cons, the couple decided to stick with their plan and review it again next year.

“I can live with it for the year and get the feel of it,” Edith said.

The Binns have done their health insurance homework and are feeling good.

What about you?

The Dec. 7 deadline for open enrollment — the time of the year when Medicare beneficiaries can make unrestricted changes to their coverage — is almost here.

This is your chance to do things like shop for a new Part D drug plan, switch from Original Medicare to a Medicare Advantage plan or vice versa. The changes you make now will take effect Jan. 1.

Even if you are happy with the plan you have, it’s important to review your options.

Plans change every year and so does your health. You want to make sure the plan you choose for 2015 matches your needs and your pocketbook.

Getting focused during open enrollment is a good thing to do every year, but it’s especially important now.

The Affordable Care Act has brought changes to Medicare, including big funding cuts to Medicare Advantage plans.

As a result, you might see higher premiums or changes in your plan’s network.

There are positives, too.

Senior citizens should take a close look to see if their coverage meets their current needs and make a switch if it doesn’t. (Monkey Business Images Ltd/Getty Images)

As a result of the new health law, Medicare is providing financial incentives to Medicare Advantage plans that meet certain quality standards.

That means you might see some plans offering added wellness benefits, such as gym memberships.

“Health reform has brought notable changes to Medicare, from more preventive care benefits to changes in costs,” said Jennifer Cohen-Smith, regional vice president of UnitedHealthcare Medicare & Retirement in New York.

“Beneficiaries need to understand both the upside and the downside of those changes to best evaluate their options.”

The Daily News is here to help.

This second guide to Medicare (the first can be found by clicking here) will update you on Medicare news, provide a guide to choosing a Medigap plan, and tell you what to do if your Medicare claim is denied.

We’ll also point you to helpful resources.

By now, you should have received your Annual Notice of Change from your insurance provider.

It will tell you about any changes in your plan, such as increases in premiums and deductibles.

Plans “may have changed their (drug) formularies, or changed their network of providers,” said Jocelyne Watrous of the Center for Medicare Advocacy.

You can compare plans by checking out the Medicare Plan Finder at Medicare.gov/find-a-plan.

Plug in information about yourself, such as where you live and what drugs you are taking.

The plan finder will give you your options, the estimated costs and the plans’ ratings.

“You shouldn’t just assume if the plan was good for you this year, it will work for you next year,” Watrous said.

“This is your opportunity to evaluate the coverage you currently have and change it if it no longer meets your needs.”