Medicare, together with Medicaid, has fundamentally reshaped the American landscape by expanding access to lifesaving health care services, reducing poverty and advancing health equity. So it is appropriate that the new Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Equity Plan for Improving Quality in Medicare celebrates Medicare's 50th birthday by bringing these goals together in a road map for how Medicare can continue to improve its ability to provide high-quality health care for those with the greatest needs, including racial and ethnic minorities, people with disabilities, rural populations and LGBT individuals.

Before Medicare, growing older meant balancing on the knife's edge of poverty for millions of Americans. Among people older than 65, more than a third lived in poverty, and less than half had health insurance coverage, leaving them exposed to catastrophic health care costs. Since Medicare's inception, the number of older adults who are uninsured and who are living in poverty has plummeted: By 2014, more than 98 percent of people over age 65 had health insurance, the vast majority through Medicare, and the percentage of seniors living in poverty had dropped by more than two-thirds.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

Medicare provides coverage for everyone over age 65, regardless of factors such as income, health status or state of residence, and since 1972, it has also provided coverage for people with disabilities. Thanks to these universal design principles – as well as its role in racially desegregating the majority of American hospitals within a matter of months – Medicare has helped drive reductions in specific disparities affecting vulnerable populations, such as a decrease in cardiovascular disease mortality among African Americans and overall increases in life expectancy in communities of color.

But 30 years after the groundbreaking "Report of the Secretary's Task Force on Black and Minority Health," also known as the Heckler Report, assailed disparities as "an affront to both our ideals and the ongoing genius of American medicine," many disparities remain. The CMS Equity Plan notes that, within the Medicare population, racial and ethnic minorities, the LGBT population, rural communities and people with disabilities continue to experience disparities that include disproportionately high burdens of disease, worse quality of care and barriers to accessing care. These barriers include high care costs, insufficient accessibility of health care facilities and services for people with disabilities or limited English proficiency and a lack of health care providers with cultural and clinical competencies in working with diverse populations.



[READ: Beat Alzheimer's for the Gipper]

The plan's strategy for addressing these disparities is to leverage the capabilities of a range of health system stakeholders to pursue priorities such as collecting more robust, standardized data on factors historically linked with disparities, including race, ethnicity, primary language, disability, sex, sexual orientation and gender identity; identifying and disseminating promising approaches for reducing disparities; improving access to facilities and services for people with disabilities and limited English proficiency; and enhancing the ability of health care providers to work with underserved populations.

These priorities align with key provisions of the Affordable Care Act, such as the push for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to better understand the root causes of health and health care disparities by routinely collecting data on vulnerable populations, including the poorly understood disparities affecting the LGBT population.

A 2010 Institute of Medicine report identifies two key crosscutting dimensions of any strategy to improve health care quality: value and equity. The value aspect of the quality equation is a critical one: Reducing health disparities saves money. And as the nation's single largest source of health care dollars, Medicare's size gives it unparalleled leverage in efforts to make the U.S. health system deliver high-quality care and better health outcomes at lower costs.



[READ: Follow the Real Money]

But it is particularly vital that the new CMS plan focus on that other key dimension: equity. We cannot forget that reducing health disparities doesn't just save money – it saves lives. Pursuing better care quality by prioritizing equity among Medicare beneficiaries means more African-Americans will live long and healthy lives even after a heart attack. It means the first generation of openly LGBT elders won't suffer the mental anguish of being forced back into the closet as they age into long-term care settings, and that more women with disabilities will avoid breast cancer by getting regular mammograms in accessible facilities.