Editor, 235 S. Nevada Ave., CS, CO 80903 • email: letters@csindy.com

If your comments are mailed or emailed to us, we'll consider them for publication — unless you request otherwise.

Please include your name, city of residence and a daytime phone number for verification.

To ensure a diversity of topics and viewpoints in print, the Independent gives priority to letters that are 300 words or fewer. We reserve the right to shorten longer letters, and to edit all letters for clarity and factual accuracy. Please include your name and city of residence with any submission.

Still in the gutter

The Kent Lambert/Larry Liston brouhaha ("Nasty-gram in Liston-Joshi race," News, May 18) speaks to "gutter politics" rather than to the reason friends encouraged Larry to run again for District 16.

The lies and "spinning" of the letter made it appear Liston voted for the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare). Liston voted for Colorado's health care exchange, required by Obamacare if the state wished to remain independent of federal control. Coloradans did not put up with the nightmarish federal website. Liston approved a solution to a mandated problem. Similar misrepresentations show a false picture of Liston when he is, in fact, a hard-working, problem-solver always in contact with his constituents.

I collected petition signatures and spoke with roughly a thousand Republicans. Most were quick to sign, recognizing Liston from his work and previous visits to their doorsteps. Less than 10 knew Janak Joshi, and most knew him as a former physician from when he was allowed to practice medicine.

This year's legislative session couldn't even pass stuff that everyone agreed on, like primaries. Non-performers like Joshi promote stagnation. I appreciate that Liston takes the high road, talking about performance.

Joshi's latest mailer says, "From the Gazette's recent article regarding Rep. Joshi's leadership to help UCCS bring the new National Cybersecurity Intelligence Center to Colorado Springs..." I researched and found two Gazette articles, but neither mentioned Joshi nor his "leadership." So much for truth.

The mailer made a big deal that Joshi was the only candidate to vote against Obamacare. Flash! Colorado's Legislature did not get to vote on the federal Affordable Care Act.

— Tim Haley

Colorado Springs

Listen, then decide

At a recent meeting in the Patty Jewett neighborhood, I had my first experience with a City Councilor, Jill Gaebler. The issue was the street-narrowing proposal. This change, if implemented, will affect many, and the meeting was heavily attended by area residents in opposition. Tim Roberts, senior traffic engineer, led most of the presentation.

Gaebler set a controlling tone in the beginning by telling people to be "civil." There was an assumption that people would NOT be civil and it would be dishonorable to express anger. Gaebler stated that she doesn't appreciate people attacking CC students on a neighborhood social media site, assuming people in the audience were guilty. Her comment was controlling, demeaning and accusatory.

I found Gaebler unprepared, without basic knowledge to attempt answering even simple questions. Instead, she deferred to Roberts and admitted she wholeheartedly supports the proposal without first hearing what people had to say. Condescending, to say the least. She appeared unwilling to interact with people and ultimately abandoned the meeting when the going got tough. She walked out on people who had not spoken or were wanting a direct response from her.

If that was an example of representation by City Council, we as residents are in trouble. To Councilwoman Gaebler: We are taxpaying adults. We are your constituents. You are our public servant and represent all residents in your district. We are not all on board with this proposal. The street-narrowing project is a highly contentious issue. Listen first, engage second, decide last.

— Linda Knight

Colorado Springs

Backward politics

Oklahoma's legislature passed a bill to criminalize abortion procedures in the state, and might override its governor's veto. Anyone who performs an abortion — except to save the life of the mother — commits a felony and can receive up to three years in prison.

Pity women with problem pregnancies, since this law will discourage doctors from treating them, because if the fetus does not survive, he can be suspected of attempting abortion. In Chile, Nicaragua and El Salvador, doctors and women have been imprisoned for infanticide.

Oklahoma isn't the only restrictive state. In Iowa, a pregnant woman fell down a flight of stairs and was arrested for "attempted fetal homicide." In Louisiana, a woman went to the hospital with unexplained vaginal bleeding that turned out to be a miscarriage. She spent over a year in jail on second-degree murder charges.

This is happening to women all over America under radical anti-woman interpretations of fetal homicide laws intended to protect pregnant women from severe violence.

— Janet Brazill

Colorado Springs

Transit progress

After mounting a three-year email campaign, I want to thank the Indy for tipping the scales in favor of a grid-type bus system by printing the letter exposing the limitations of a "spokes on a wheel" bus system that only strains the hub in an expanding city.

Kudos to Mountain Metropolitan Transit for eliminating the need for six buses to come downtown. But now it's time to bite the bullet and buy the Kmart parking lot at Nevada Avenue and Fillmore Street. Many neighborhood mobility vans would connect.

This is the "deep" neighborhood penetration. No structures, just spray paint.

The stop by my house was eliminated. I now have to walk an additional block. My commute has been reduced from over an hour to 15 minutes. They come twice as often.

The beauty of the grid system is in scalability. You grow, Springs!

— Kenton Lloyd

Colorado Springs

Trump's troops

Now it can be told.

Leaks from Washington insiders have revealed Cabinet picks and major advisors for Donald "Geez, political dunces need presidential representation too!" Trump. For vice president? Michelle "Perpetual snit" Malkin, acing out Sarah "Mama Grizzly shoots moose from helicopters" Palin.

Ambassador to the United Nations is Bill "There is nobody I do not hate" O'Reilly. Attorney general will be Oliver "Pardon me!" North.

Secretary of state? Has to be Rush "I'm the new Don Rickles" Limbaugh.

Missing mysteriously from the Republican convention will be George W. "I'm a neat guy to have a beer with" Bush and Dick "Let's go hunting!" Cheney.

I can release this information without even the need for a Freedom of Information lawsuit, due to my many contacts in low-level offices. (Secretaries know everything.) Don't thank me ... thank them.

— Larimore Nicholl

Colorado Springs

Rest of the story

Just for information, I too was disturbed when I saw a whole block on a non-busy street where there was even an empty lot, ready to put on new curbs. I called the city and found that the Americans with Disabilities Act demands that cities do this.

I looked on the internet and it is the truth. They are forced to do it.

It seems a lot of your readers write about this.

— Colleene Johnson

Colorado Springs