Earl Ofari Hutchinson, a political analyst, is the author of "From King to Obama: Witness to a Turbulent History." He is on Twitter.

The crucial value of the Affordable Care Act can be seen in the range of organizations that filed briefs urging the Supreme Court not to scrap the health care tax subsidies that lower and middle income persons receive in the three dozen states with federally established insurance exchanges. About 6 million people would opt out or be pushed out of their health insurance plan without the subsidies, which the government established to ensure that those who earned too much to qualify for Medicaid, yet made too little to purchase a policy on their own, could get health coverage.

Advocates for children, women, hospitals and health centers, and the seriously ill have all urged the court not to scrap the subsidies.

A look at those who filed those briefs tells much about the danger to those individuals and to society as a whole.

Some represent people with life threatening health issues such as cancer, diabetes, heart disease, and HIV-AIDS, people who need health care insurance the most and are the likeliest to make frequent visits to doctors.

The National Women’s Law Center made the case that the Affordable Care Act gave many women access to comprehensive care that has frequently been out of reach in the past.

A large group of community health care centers also filed. They insisted that the subsidies made a huge difference in allowing them to provide care to thousands who needed health treatment. Many of these individuals did not qualify for treatment under the eligibility standard for Medicaid. But their incomes were still low enough that without the subsidies they might not be able to pay for their care.

Children’s advocates said that scrapping the subsidies would pose a dire threat to children by undermining the Children’s Health Insurance Program. This program provides insurance to legions of children from low income and moderate income families.

Rounding out the list are hospitals, and health insurance companies. They warned that eliminating the subsidies would destabilize the health care market, and severely restrict the ability of hospitals to provide care for low and moderate income persons.

The ultimate paradox is that many of the working class and middle income persons who would be hurt if the court scraps the subsidies are in red states. Many of these individuals fit the voter demographic that Republicans who oppose the A.C.A. bank on to win elections. So the court could damage the G.O.P.’s health too.





Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.