Re: “Don’t give up on marijuana edibles mandate,” March 28 editorial.

The Denver Post’s editorial board applauded lawmakers for upholding an added mandate that all edible marijuana products be specifically stamped or colored outside of the packaging.

Here’s what we should be upholding instead: the original law passed and increasingly supported by Coloradans across the state. Rather than dreaming up every conceivable way to color or restrict constitutionally legal edibles, let’s just do what Amendment 64 asked of us: to regulate these products like alcohol.

There has been no media or legislative outcry demanding that all alcohol be dyed or labeled green, red or any other color outside the bottle. And this is in spite of the fact that accidental alcohol consumption by both minors and adults is hundreds, arguably thousands, of times higher than that of cannabis.

Already, every recreational edible product is sealed in a childproof container, has a warning label, and provides specific, tested dosage information. The cannabis industry has willingly supported and complied with each of these steps as we work together for continued public education and safety.

We’ve lived with legal, adult-only products for a very long time in America. We are comfortable with a mature level of responsibility being placed on the consumers of all such products.

We ask media and lawmakers to please stop making marijuana the exception. It’s not what Coloradans asked for when they legalized marijuana, and it’s certainly not what Colorado needs for a safe, sustainable future.

At the same time that politicians in Denver continue to call for an over-regulated new cannabis market that only bolsters black-market activity, local public polls show an increasing majority of approval of legal marijuana. Let’s listen to and trust the people of Colorado instead of our own echo chamber.

Tyler Henson is president of the Colorado Cannabis Chamber of Commerce.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.