An attack ad targeting western Pennsylvania U.S. Congressman Keith Rothfus, R-12th District, comes from a so-called "super PAC" but its funding actually comes from one person.



Federal Election Commission records show that the "Our Voices Matter" political action committee filed its statement of organization just seven weeks ago. All of the PAC's $100,000 comes from one person: Dr. Patrick Kane, a UPMC oncologist. Virtually all of his donation went for the anti-rothfus ad. $12,500 went to the firm of Bronstein & Weaver of Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, which created the spot. $83,000 went to Buying Time, LLC of Washington, D.C., which purchased the media placement of the message. Pittsburgh's Action News 4 reporter Bob Mayo spoke by phone with Kane, who confirmed his donation but declined to talk on camera about his political spending for the ad.



The ad attacks Rothfus as a winking "con man," targeting three of his votes. Below is a Pittsburgh's Action News 4 Truth Check.



Ad: "Con man Keith voted against the Violence Against Women Act, then applauded its passage."



Truth Check: True. Rothfus did vote against the final version of the Violence Against Women Act. He questioned authority it gave to native american tribal courts. It also extended benefits to same-sex victims of domestic abuse. Rothfus voted for an earlier version of the Violence Against Women Act, and did applaud its intent.



Ad: "Con man Keith even claimed to support veterans, but voted against funding for veterans hospitals."



Truth Check: Misleading. Rothfus did vote against a bill that included funds for veterans hospitals, but it was part of a Hurricane Sandy disaster relief bill. Critics of the relief bill called for budget cuts to make up for its costs.



Ad: "Now, con man Keith says he wants to protect us from ebola but he proposed to cut CDC funding."



Truth Check: Misleading. Rothfus voted for repeal of the Affordable Care Act. Some Centers for Disease Control funding was part of the act's Prevention and Public Health Fund. Rothfus called for cutting that Public Health Fund, labeling it a "slush fund."



The Rothfus campaign says that, in separate votes, Rothfus voted for funding for veterans hospitals and for the CDC.