MONTREAL —

Following Saturday’s morning skate at the Bell Centre, coach Patrick Roy began his news conference in French. It lasted about 10 minutes.

In English, Roy briefly answered five or six questions and then he was on his way back to the Avalanche’s hotel.

Downtown Montreal feels like France. The language begins with French. The architecture feels like Paris. And on Saturday — a day after the terrorist attacks in Paris — the mood was somber. Roy was delicate.

“Quite honestly, I heard about it this morning,” Roy said of the attacks. “But I don’t think I’m in position to make any comment. I haven’t read about it. It would be inappropriate for me to comment.”

In a tribute to the victims in France, the Canadiens, the franchise, had three national anthems to begin the game — Canadian, American and French.

Easy solution. The NHL is digging deep for ideas to increase scoring. The goalie pads must shrink or the nets must get bigger. Roy — perhaps the greatest goalie of all time — has stuck with one solution since he began answering the question last week: Shave the iron.

NHL nets are built around a 2 3/8-inch galvanized steel frame. Making them thinner from the inside out would create more net to shoot at.

“If every time you hit the crossbar or post, and it goes in — there’s like three or five times it happens (every game),” Roy said Saturday.

If trimming the material makes the goal too light, a stretchable tethering mechanism could be applied to the bottom of the post and inside its moorings. The game could use tethered goals regardless.

False report. Despite leading a segment in TSN’s “Insider Trading” last week, Avalanche general manager Joe Sakic said he is not looking to move forward Matt Duchene, 24, a Canadian Olympian who was the third overall pick in the 2009 NHL draft.

“Matt has been a great player for this franchise. Just because his name is out there — and I don’t know who starts this stuff — but this is a reality of our business,” Sakic said Saturday. “It’s not a big deal. It’s not something players should worry.”

Sakic had a talk with Duchene.

“I have told him, ‘You can’t worry about this,’ ” Sakic said. “At the end of the day for a player, is it a bad thing? No, it means people are talking about you.”

Quiet the crowd. Winning has a way of putting a halt to trade rumors. Continuing to win on this franchise-long, seven-game road trip would do just that.

“If we come out of this trip with a really good record, there’s less pressure to think about things like that,” Sakic said. “Rumors happen to teams that are struggling and probably not doing what they’re expected to do. There were rumors about me during my career. You can’t worry about them. They’re just rumors.

“Are there conversations? There are conversation about every single player on every single team. That’s the reality. But it doesn’t necessarily mean you want to do something.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers @denverpost.com or @mikechambers

Spotlight on …

Tyler Bozak, C, Maple Leafs

When: The Avalanche visits Toronto on Tuesday at the Air Canada Centre. After Saturday’s game at Montreal, Colorado has two full days to prepare for the Maple Leafs, who hosted the Canucks on Saturday and visit the Rangers on Sunday.

What’s up: The rebuilding Maple Leafs entered Saturday with points in their previous four games, including going 2-0 on the road against the Central Division last week. They won 3-2 at Dallas before edging Nashville 2-1 in a shootout. Bozak is Toronto’s top center.

Background: From Regina, Sasketchewan, Bozak joined the University of Denver as a 21-year-old freshman in 2007. He scored 18 goals and ultimately had 26-of-30 NHL teams trying to sign him as a free agent before he settled on Toronto after his injury-plagued sophomore season limited him to 19 games (eight goals, 23 points).

Chambers’ take: Bozak, who produced a career-high 23 goals last season, maintains a home in Denver and remains close with his former college teammates and his alma mater. He undoubtedly wouldn’t mind taking his talents to Colorado and living there full time, and the no-trade clause attached to his $4.2 million annual contract will allow him to choose his next stop.