Governor Robert Bentley is running for his second term. (Photo: AP file )

Gov. Robert Bentley and Democratic gubernatorial nominee Parker Griffith agree on more issues than they probably care to admit.

Both men say they would prioritize job creation over the next four years. Both also say they will stress education, particularly increased aid to the state’s well-regarded but limited pre-kindergarten program. Both men also can be critical of the Alabama Legislature.

But where they disagree, the disagreements are fundamental. Bentley has vociferously opposed expansion of Medicaid; Griffith has made the issue the centerpiece of his campaign. Griffith criticizes Bentley’s performance on jobs, while Bentley expresses deep doubts over Griffith’s assertions about Medicaid expansion and job creation.

There is also a difference in style. Asked to name three things emphasized on the campaign trail, Griffith stresses issues: jobs, Medicaid and an education lottery.

“We’ve become the Mexico of America,” Griffith said in a recent interview. “As long as we do not emphasize education and the health of our citizens, we will continue to be the dumping ground for low-wage, poor-paying jobs.”

Bentley, meanwhile, talks about his leadership style, saying he believes he has proven to be a trustworthy chief executive.

“We can pick a number of things, the promises that we made and we can go down a list of those, like job creation and organization structure for jobs,” the governor said in a recent interview. “I think we have fulfilled those promises. We’re not where we want to be, but we have fulfilled those promises we have made.”

Jobs

Job creation has been a focus of virtually every gubernatorial campaign since the 1970s. Bentley made employment the central part of his 2010 campaign for governor, and his ads highlight the state’s performance in creating jobs. Griffith, in turn, cites manufacturing plants closing and suggests recruiting incentives have been wasted.

The statistics paint a more mixed picture than either candidate does. The unemployment rate in the state fell from 8.9 percent in January, 2011 to 6.6 percent in September. Manufacturing has added about 20,000 jobs in the state since September 2011, and the professional sector has seen growth as well.

However, Alabama’s unemployment is not above the national average, and the state’s workforce has shrunk by 83,000 workers during the governor’s term. After manufacturing, the sector creating the highest number of new jobs in Alabama has been leisure and hospitality, where wages tend to be low. The construction industry — arguably the worst hit by the recession — has also struggled to add workers throughout Bentley’s time in office.

The governor takes a more measured tone on the job situation in person than in his campaign ads, noting the jobs created and tens of thousands of future jobs that may be coming to Alabama, but stressing more his efforts to create a more educated workforce to bring a better quality of employment to the state.

“All I can do until our national economy turns around is put in place an organizational structure (and) create a number of skilled workers,” Bentley said last week. “We’re working on that. Eventually this economy is going to turn around, and when it does, Alabama is really poised to take off.”

In particular, the governor cites millions of dollars put into workforce training, and notes that the opening of Golden Dragon Copper Tubing in Wilcox County — one of the poorest counties in the nation — has helped that county go from a Great Depression-level 23 percent unemployment rate in 2009 to an improved — if still miserable — 13.7 percent today.

“We’re just getting everything ready, and if I’m here another four years, we’ll see the results of it,” he said.

Griffith suggested the state’s citizens were not getting promised returns for incentives extended to firms, pointing to projects such as Remington Outdoor Co., which announced plans to build a plant in Huntsville in February. The company will receive tens of millions of dollars in direct aid and tax abatements. Remington officials have said the average salary at the plant will hover around $20 an hour, though jobs posted at the plant by the Alabama Industrial Development training website listed positions paying up to $15.50 an hour. A Remington spokesperson told The Decatur Daily in August that the average salary includes professionals, such as engineers and managers.

“With Remington, hundreds of millions of dollars in future earnings for the state, we gave those away in incentives,” Griffith said. “It’s the same with Golden Dragon Copper Tubing. If Alabama is the second largest producer of automobiles in the United States, why is Alabama broke?”

Both Bentley and Griffith say they want to move the state toward attracting more high-technology companies. Bentley points to the Accelerate Alabama plan, with its emphasis on research and development; Griffith said he would use the proceeds from an education lottery to improve funding for higher education. Bentley, while not an advocate of a lottery, said he would not oppose a statewide vote on the issue.

On income, the news is equally mixed. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the median household income in the state rose 3 percent — to $42,849 — from 2012 to 2013, and the median hourly wage in the state also rose year-to-year, from $14.40 to $14.61 (about $30,388 annually), an increase of about 1.5 percent.

However, the state’s median household income is about $10,000 lower than the nation’s as a whole, and its median hourly wage lags behind the nation’s $16.87 (about $35,089 annually). There are also notable income gaps in the state; black households made just 59 percent of what white households did in 2013, while Alabama women made 76 cents for every dollar a man made.

Griffith says the state’s lower wages are a problem compared to the nation. He said he would work to establish a minimum wage in the state and index it to inflation, though he declined to quote a figure. Bentley says it’s not a problem if the cost of living in the state is less than elsewhere.

“You have to look to see how much it costs to live in Alabama,” he said. “The taxes are lower, so many things are lower in the state of Alabama compared to other parts of the country.”

Both candidates said they believe additional access to education would bring the state to parity on income.

Medicaid

For Griffith, Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act is a necessity. For Bentley, it’s an impossibility.

Medicaid in Alabama is virtually impossible for most childless adults to access. Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government would have extended the program to anyone making 138 percent of the poverty line — $16,104 for an individual; $32,913 for a family of four. However, in 2012 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled states could not be compelled to expand the program.

Griffith, citing a 2012 UAB study on the issue, estimated that the expansion of Medicaid would bring $1 billion in new tax revenues, tens of thousands of jobs and cover about 300,000 Alabamians. The candidate says the expansion would not only improve health outcomes in the state, but make Alabama more attractive to companies seeking to locate here.

“We can’t be in the top five for strokes and diabetes and have an employer come here,” he said. “We’re not extending Medicaid to cover these working Alabamians who are working for $7 or $8 an hour who cannot afford insurance. The Googles of the world, the Microsofts of the world, they would prefer a different environment to locate in.”

In opposing expansion Bentley has cited his own opposition to the Affordable Care Act and his concerns about the expenses. The federal government would pay the full price of the expansion through 2017, and a gradually declining share afterwards, though never less than 90 percent.

However, Bentley and other Republican lawmakers argue that even a 10 percent share on the cost is too much for the state’s heavily burdened General Fund. More than a third of the General Fund pays for the state’s Medicaid program.

“I’m not planning on expanding Medicaid,” Bentley said. “Unfortunately, Medicaid is expanding on its own, and the cost of Medicaid is expanding. Medicaid is really the albatross we have around our necks in this state.”

Despite the barriers to entrance, the program covers about 20 percent of the state. Asked if the poverty in the state was driving the growth, Bentley suggested people were being actively recruited to sign up for Medicaid.

“Something is increasing the number of Medicaid patients,” he said. “And one of the things is signing people up, registering them to vote, telling people they’re eligible for Medicaid.”

Griffith argues the expansion would ultimately generate enough new tax revenue to pay for the state’s share. In terms of getting Medicaid cost under control, Bentley points to work being led by State Health Officer Don Williamson to establish regional care organizations are the state; Alabama is still waiting for a waiver from the federal government to allow the program to proceed.

General Fund

Medicaid’s cost growth is one of many challenges facing the state’s General Fund budget, which pays for most noneducation funding in the state. Next year’s General Fund, according to the Legislative Fiscal Office, faces a deficit of at least $200 million, a number that could easily grow.

With Bentley and majority Republicans consistently ruling out new taxes to shore up the budget, lawmakers are looking at cutting government still further — the state employee workforce has shrunk 11 percent in four years — and looking at closing the gap by eliminating outdated tax breaks.

Other options could include reducing the percentage of revenues earmarked for specific purposes, or possible budget consolidation. However, Bentley said consolidation seemed least likely. “I want to fight fights we can win,” he said.

Griffith said he supported moving some growth revenues into the General Fund, though he said he needed to study the situation further.

Both candidates said they would also be open to a gaming compact with the Poarch Band of Creek Indians to help alleviate the burden in the fund. It is not clear how much a compact would be worth to the state, but Bentley said it could be part of a broader solution to the budget deficit.

Bentley has consistently led Griffith in fundraising. Through Thursday, Bentley had raised $7.4 million and spent about $6.7 million; Griffith, whose funding has come almost entirely from personal loans and the Alabama Education Association, has raised $1.2 million and spent about $1.1 million.

Robert Bentley

AGE: 71

OCCUPATION: Dermatologist

PARTY:

Republican

FAMILY: Wife, Dianne; four children, seven grandchildren.

OFFICES HELD, OFFICES SOUGHT:

Republican nominee for Alabama Senate, 1998; Alabama House of Representatives, 2002-10; Governor of Alabama, 2011-present.

Parker Griffith

AGE: 72

OCCUPATION: Oncologist

PARTY:

Democratic

FAMILY:

Wife, Virginia; five children, 12 grandchildren.

OFFICES HELD, OFFICES SOUGHT: Candidate for Mayor of Huntsville, 2004; Alabama State Senate, 2006-09; U.S. House of Representatives, 2009-11.

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1wV2iQN