KISSIMMEE, Fla. — Houston Astros mascot Orbit danced and entertained in the sun on Sunday afternoon. To most, a mid-March spring training game at Osceola County Stadium was another grind in the monotony of spring training. For Max Scherzer, it was a chance to pretend spring was over.

Scherzer worked his off-speed pitches in counts normally saved for the regular season. Like fellow starter Jordan Zimmermann days earlier, Scherzer took advantage of playing an American League team the Nationals will not face during the regular season.

“This is a chance to see where you’re at,” Scherzer said. “For me, I went out there with the mentality of I’m going to give them everything I would during the regular season. Plus, I kind of know these guys a little bit from pitching in the American League. I was really focused on the results today to try to amp up a little bit, and started preparing for the season even more so than just going out there and working on things.”

The results were good. Scherzer threw a spring-high four innings and 60 pitches. He allowed a hit and a walk. He also struck out four batters.

Scherzer said he made a slight adjustment on his curveball that was effective. He threw his slider for strikes, threw three off-speed pitches in full counts, and was “real happy” overall.

Not many regulars made the trip west for the game against the Astros. Catcher Wilson Ramos was one. He and Scherzer are trying to rapidly become acclimated with each other. Scherzer will also work with Jose Lobaton during the spring, but is focused on becoming coordinated with Ramos.

Between innings they discuss strategy. Following a swing and miss, what do they want to do next? In a certain count, is that a spot for a slider? Ramos explains what he sees and Scherzer tells his new catcher what he feels is his strength in that situation.

“It’s just a conversation you just got to keep having over, over and over,” Scherzer said. “We got on our signs we’ll have during the year. Again, we’re just working on things that are going to happen throughout the course of the regular season.”

Scherzer said he is not selective about who his catcher is. However, he wants to be prepared for the differences in how various catchers work with him.

“That’s why it’s really important to get on the same page with Willy as fast as possible,” Scherzer said.

Adding Scherzer in the offseason put the Nationals in a spot with multiple options to be the Opening Day starter. Manager Matt Williams said the team has three off days near Opening Day to work with and can realign their rotation because of the wiggle room. The Nationals are off April 2, before playing April 3 and April 4. Another off day comes April 5. The opener is April 6, followed by another off day.

Scherzer laughed when asked if he thinks about being the Opening Day starter.

“No,” Scherzer said. “I think everybody on this staff could make a case they could be an Opening Day starter. That’s the beauty of playing here in Washington. It’s going to be fun, whoever gets it.”