BEAVER CREEK — Because he had never been on a World Cup podium, it came as a shock when Andrew Weibrecht claimed a bronze medal in super-G at the 2010 Vancouver Olympics and shared the podium with silver medalist Bode Miller, his superstar teammate.

Weibrecht still hadn’t been in the top three of a World Cup race when he captured his second Olympic medal four years later in Sochi, claiming silver in super-G and bumping Miller to bronze.

The 29-year-old from Lake Placid, N.Y., kept one trend alive Saturday while ending another, claiming his first World Cup podium in his 117th start and sharing it with another superstar teammate, this time Ted Ligety.

In a snowstorm that made conditions challenging, four-time World Cup overall winner Marcel Hirscher of Austria, who excels in slalom and giant slalom, claimed his first World Cup super-G win. Ligety was second, 0.33 of a second behind, and Weibrecht was third (0.36).

Ligety has 51 World Cup podiums and 25 wins to go along with seven world championships medals and two Olympic gold medals. That Weibrecht’s only podiums came at the Olympics before Saturday was one of the great paradoxes of U.S. ski racing.

“Oh my God, I get that question so much,” Weibrecht said during the race while waiting to see if his podium position would hold up. “I had two fifth-place finishes last year, which I was super-psyched about. Just to get that monkey off my back, where I don’t have to field that question anymore, would be unbelievable.”

U.S. head men’s coach Sasha Rearick has been with Weibrecht for 14 years, going back to when Weibrecht was racing the developmental Europa Cup and Rearick was the Europa Cup team’s conditioning coach.

“He’s gone (through) the ups and downs, the valleys and the peaks of the mountains,” Rearick said. “Fortunately for U.S. skiing, those peaks were at the Olympics. So (Saturday) means a lot. It’s a big relief to finally see him step on that podium.”

Ligety is the reigning Olympic champion in giant slalom and will be favored in Sunday’s GS, having won five of the last six World Cup GS races here (plus a world championships gold medal here last February) and winning five World Cup GS titles. Saturday marked his second World Cup podium in super-G, but he was happy for Weibrecht, too.

“I like to joke that he’s the fastest guy in all four events for 20 seconds,” Ligety said. “Even in slalom sometimes, he’s ridiculously fast. It’s no surprise that he gets on the podium. I guess it’s more of a surprise that it hasn’t happened more often. It was really cool to share a podium with him.”

That it came here, the home of men’s World Cup skiing in the U.S. since 1997, made it that much more special. Weibrecht made his World Cup debut here in 2006. He had an unforgettable downhill run here in 2007 when he was the 53rd-ranked man in the race and finished 10thwith a hair-raising run in a snowstorm. That was his best finish in downhill until he finished fifth here Friday.

“I would have taken it anywhere, but to have the first podium here in Beaver Creek is unbelievable,” Weibrecht said. “I had my first World Cup points here (2007), got my first top-10 here, and now I got my first podium here. It’s a pretty special place for me.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer