Washington Times columnist Drew Johnson took to twitter soon after the National Enquirer story broke about Ted Cruz being accused of having at least 5 mistresses. The below tweet went mega viral in a very short period of time.

Drew Johnson ‏@Drews_Views Mar 24 Berlin, Germany

COMING CLEAN: From what I know, at least 2 of the women named as Cruz mistresses by the National Enquirer are accurate

#TRUMP #CRUZ #TCOT

After the Washington Times quickly disassociated from him "for saying a scandal may be true", Johnson seemed to still be a class act. He tweeted that he respected them and had enjoyed working with them. He did not understand though why they would do this via Twitter instead of a phone call or even an email.

However, now there are attempts to smear and discredit him, claiming they have not had a relationship with him in over a year which he soon replied to providing proof of being paid just last month.

Drew Johnson ‏@Drews_Views 10h10 hours ago

The @WashTimes says they haven't had a relationship with me in over a year, but they still pay me for my columns: (Photo attached at link below, tweet of a record of last check deposited. See: https://twitter.com/Drews_Views)

Drew Johnson had always described himself as a government waste expert, watchdog and defender of liberty. With this sudden turn of events in his life, Johnson has just announced that he will be launching his own website focused on, "Exposing hypocrisy, abuse of power & bad behavior by politicians & others w/power". He will be bringing all his experience and talents to his own new platform soon.

Good for him! And we will be following his future endeavor.

It appears so far that Ted Cruz is the only one of many that has come through his own new scandal unscathed. The basic knowledge of a Cruz sex scandal brewing had been out there for months. Only an expert actor and career politician like Cruz could pull-off blaming everyone else to the point that hardly anyone is even focusing on him and making him answer the tough questions. Donald Trump has been more smeared for Cruz's scandal than Ted Cruz has. There are plenty of stories surfacing that it was much more likely Marco Rubio allies that may have originally been behind the story and not Donald Trump.

Regardless, it is absolutely ridiculous to be distracted with playing "shoot the messenger" instead of holding Ted Cruz responsible for his own adulterous sex scandal.

What do you think? Comments welcome below.