Republicans contend that the Affordable Care Act is a failure because many of the plans sold on the online health exchanges limit a consumer’s choice of doctors and hospitals. Many plans do, indeed, limit choice — deliberately so, to keep premiums down. But a vast majority of consumers can almost always buy a plan with a broad array of doctors, hospitals and other providers if they are willing to pay more for the policies.

The issue is one of priorities: Is it more important to keep premiums low or to have access to a broad array of doctors to choose from? A poll in February showed that many people, especially the previously uninsured, think lower cost is more important.

There is no clear definition of what constitutes a “narrow network,” the term used in public and political discourse, but there are protections built into the Affordable Care Act and federal regulations that require all networks to have enough doctors of various types to ensure that services can be provided “without unreasonable delay.”

Most plans probably have the experts needed, but there are concerns that in the hectic rollout of the health exchanges the primary emphasis has been put on enrolling people, not on making sure that all networks were adequate.

Any shortcomings that have emerged can be addressed with better public education and regulatory fixes.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Some consumers have been surprised to find that their own doctor may accept the insurance company they are using but not the particular plan they have chosen from that insurer’s offerings. Or that a new doctor they wanted to see, though listed as taking their plan’s insurance, was not accepting new patients because the practice was already full.

These problems can be solved by requiring more accurate and up-to-date information about doctors in the plan, preferably posted on the government’s website, not just on insurance company websites.

Some consumers may discover after the fact that a doctor who treated them in an emergency — a hospital anesthesiologist, for example — is not covered by their plan. Regulators in other states might well emulate New York’s pioneering law requiring that patients be told when an out-of-network doctor will be treating them, and if they are not informed, they would not have to pay more than their usual co-pays. In that case, the insurer and the provider would fight to see who absorbs the cost.

The technique of using limited networks to control costs has been around for years. It became especially useful with the passage of health care reform, which eliminated or made illegal several other cost-control tactics, such as refusing to insure people with pre-existing conditions.

These and other reforms left insurers to compete on the basis of cost and the scope of the networks. To attract cost-conscious consumers, many plans have formed narrow networks of providers who agreed to accept low negotiated prices or who had a track record for delivering care at low cost. But those are hardly the only plans available.

One industry survey found that 90 percent of the individuals using the exchanges had access to a broad network plan, with no difference in quality between the broad and narrow plans. Another industry analysis found that narrow network plans had premiums 5 percent to 20 percent lower than broader plans. State and federal regulators need to monitor how well the plans are performing and if they fail to serve the needs of their customers.