Before conservatives line up to support Donald Trump they should check his record, cautions FreedomWorks CEO Adam Brandon.

FreedomWorks is an influential conservative organization that has successfully mobilized activists to support small-government candidates and causes.

"Let's take him [Trump] seriously for a second: He has said he is for socialized medicine, single-payer healthcare," Brandon told the Washington Examiner. "I know for the last several years FreedomWorks activists have fought tirelessly against Obamacare, and Obamacare looks like a free market solution compared to what Donald Trump has said in the past he would like to see in our healthcare system. So to me that's almost like a, just a no-go."

"As a movement we would look silly if we spent all this time, treasure, energy fighting Obamacare and then we decided to nominate someone who's basically going to let the federal government take the entire system over."

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

Brandon also expressed concerns about Trump's past support for various big government proposals, including tax increases, but is not worried about Trump spoiling the party just yet.

"If I was running for office right now and I was leading the Republican field, based on a lot of history, this is not the time [to lead the polls]," he said. "We're not even in the beginning of the first quarter, I don't even know if the game's even started yet to be honest."

FreedomWorks has no plans to endorse any particular presidential candidate, but when things do heat up it will work to help shape the debate, Brandon said. He wants to make sure the GOP nominee puts forward a "very robust [and] detailed economic agenda."