Joey Hishon centered one of the Avalanche’s most opportunistic lines Sunday.

Hishon and European-born wingers Borna Rendulic and Dennis Everberg didn’t score until late in the third period at Magness Arena — and their team lost — but for evaluation purposes, the three 23-year-olds came up aces in the annual Burgundy-White intrasquad scrimmage.

“They had a good day. So did a lot of guys,” Avs coach Patrick Roy said. “We mention many times how excited we are about the depth, and here it is. It’s nice to see.”

Based on contracts, Hishon, Rendulic and Everberg will probably begin the season in the American Hockey League, playing for the San Antonio Rampage. If they stick together, they’ll undoubtedly make up San Antonio’s top line.

“No matter where any of us end up, either here or down in San Antonio, they’re going to be great teams in both cities,” said Hishon, the Avs’ 2010 first-round draft pick who has battled injuries and a lack of size in becoming an NHL regular. “This is the most competitive camp I’ve been to. We’ve got a lot of depth at every position. It’s definitely very exciting moving forward. The future is very bright.”

PHOTOS: Colorado Avalanche burgundy and white scrimmage at DU

Colorado’s depth is indeed impressive, unlike how it was stocked via the draft in the previous five years.

The team scoured the European leagues to sign Everberg from Sweden and Rendulic from Croatia before last season, and Norwegian Andreas Martinsen, 25, in May. Martinsen, 6-foot-3 and 220 pounds, played with center Matt Duchene and right wing Jarome Iginla on Sunday. But like Everberg and Rendulic, Martinsen will require some North American seasoning and probably end up in San Antonio.

Everberg and Rendulic were pushed along last season. Because of injuries and a lack of depth, Rendulic played 11 NHL games before fracturing his leg, and Everberg saw action in 55 Avs games between multiple injury stints.

This season, they will be far better prepared to contribute when called upon.

“We get each other on the ice,” said Rendulic, who is donning a full face mask since taking a puck to the mouth and losing or dislodging teeth in training camp Saturday. “Hishon in the middle between two guys playing a little European style — he’s good with the puck, and you just have to find the open spot and he’ll give it to you.

“It was a good game, I think. And I think we can only get better.”

Hishon’s future is somewhat up in the air. His size — listed at 5-foot-10 and 170 pounds — is a detriment as a third- or fourth-line NHL center. But he’s a solid backup plan if Duchene or the Avs’ other top center, newcomer Carl Soderberg, is injured. Hishon signed a one-year, two-way contract this summer and will again be an unrestricted free agent next year.

The other impressive lines Sunday were newcomer Mikhail Grigorenko between Alex Tanguay and Nathan MacKinnon, and Soderberg and his wingers Gabe Landeskog and rookie Mikko Rantanen.

Also, former Wisconsin Badgers Jack Skille and Ben Street played the wings flanking 19-year-old Julien Nantel, and all three picked up a point on Skille’s goal that gave White a 3-0 lead, on its way to a 3-1 victory.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@ denverpost.com or @mikechambers