Photo by: Provided A sample member ID card for a Health Alliance Connect MMAI client.

Have a health-related question? Submit it here and veteran reporter Deb Pressey will chase down an answer.

This week ...

Q: Can you please explain in more detail who is going to lose coverage when Health Alliance Medical Plans withdraws from the Medicare-Medicaid Alignment Initiative at the end of the year?

A: This news seems to be causing a lot of concern, judging from the number of inquiries that have arrived not only here but at Champaign County Health Care Consumers. With Medicare enrollment under way and Obamacare enrollment coming up, clearly it can be a confusing time for people who are covered by Health Alliance and who are also in either the state Medicaid system or covered by Medicare or both.

But the vast majority of Health Alliance’s members will not be affected by the company pulling out of the state’s Medicare-Medicaid Alignment Initiative, also called the MMAI.

Sinead Rice Madigan, Health Alliance’s executive director of Medicaid and government relations, said this was a business decision on the company’s part. Health Alliance has about 6,000 members in its MMAI plan in 15 Central Illinois counties (Champaign, Christian, DeWitt, Ford, Knox, Logan, Macon, McLean, Menard, Peoria, Piatt, Sangamon, Stark, Tazewell and Vermilion) and will be notifying those individual customers by mail this month.

Meanwhile, here are some points to help further differentiate Health Alliance’s MMAI coverage:

1. The MMAI program coordinates benefits only for a subset of people who are covered by BOTH federal Medicare and state Medicaid programs. (Medicare is for people 65 and older and certain younger people with disabilities. Medicaid helps pay for health care for very low-income people.)

To be enrolled in the MMAI program, the monthly income limit for one person is $981, with maximum countable assets of $2,000. For a couple, the monthly income limit is $1,328, with maximum countable assets of $3,000, according to Health Care Consumers.

2. The MMAI is a fairly new program. The Health Alliance MMAI plan, which has been one of two choices for MMAI clients in Central Illinois, has been up and running only since March 2014, according to Madigan.

3. If you’re on a Health Alliance Medicare supplement or Medicare advantage plan, you’re not affected by this.

4. If you’re in one of two Health Alliance Connect/Medicaid only plans, you’re also unaffected by this. One is the integrated care program, with member cards that include the letters “ICP-SPD” and the other is the Family Health Plan-Affordable-Care Act, with member cards that include the letters “FHP-ACA.”

Again, check your Health Alliance ID card if you’re in doubt! It should have Health Alliance Connect and the letters “MMAI” in the upper left hand corner if you are in the MMAI program.

If you are among those that are being affected: If you want to keep MMAI coverage, you can contact Illinois Client Enrollment Services at 1-877-912-8880 by Dec. 31, and you may choose to enroll in the other MMAI plan, Molina Healthcare.Or you can choose to enroll in a Medicare advantage plan. If you do nothing, you will automatically be placed back on traditional fee-for-service Medicaid, original Medicare, and a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan.

Take a look at the covered providers, services and your out-of-pocket costs with both options and choose carefully. Health Care Consumers Executive Director Claudia Lennhoff warned many enrollees going back to traditional Medicare and Medicaid could face more paperwork and higher costs.