KERNERSVILLE, N.C. (WNCN) – North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory took his campaign for re-election on the road Wednesday, hosting his first 2016 campaign event at a Kernersville printing company.

McCrory, speaking to the crowd, said state government has become more efficient and has grown jobs.

The event was held at Salem One, a North Carolina-based company.

McCrory emphasized the positives from his three-year tenure so far and said his administration has done what it said it would do.

“We became more efficient, we prioritized, we solved problems,” he said.

He said the state has paid down debts to the federal government and has spent wisely.

“We started taking fiscal responsibility seriously,” he said.

He also said he has emphasized helping military members in North Carolina who have completed their service.

“We wanted to help them get jobs and show them respect,” he said.

Overall, he said, his efforts have been successful.

“I came to Raleigh as an outsider,” he said. “And at that point in time, North Carolina had lost much of its competitive edge. Businesses were closing their doors. Businesses just like this were either barely holding on or closing their doors and our taxes just kept going up and up and up.”

McCrory praised the work of his team overall.

“The results show this – nobody has ever done it better than this administration and has the success rate in the history of North Carolina,” he said. “And the results speak for themselves.”

McCrory said he planned to win re-election despite going up against what he called “shadowy left-wing groups” from outside North Carolina who had a “radical agenda.”

He also said he had faced resistance to his agenda from the media. Media outlets have complained that the McCrory administration has been slow to respond to information requests, and administration officials have groaned about a blizzard of public information requests. On Twitter Wednesday, McCrory specificed the Raleigh News & Observer when he said anyone donating $5 to his campaign would get a bumper sticker opposing the newspaper.

Donate $5 to my campaign & get your own “I don’t believe the @newsobserver” bumper sticker! https://t.co/dBBiKHr1YN pic.twitter.com/7mQqbgWHh1 — Pat McCrory (@PatMcCroryNC) December 2, 2015

Salem One CEO Phil Kelley Jr. said the company has grown from 12 employees to 130 and he praised McCrory for being business-friendly.

“We are thrilled Gov. McCrory has chosen our facility to announce his campaign for governor in 2016,” he said.

On Tuesday, his campaign committee rolled out a video highlighting themes he wants to emphasize from his first three years in office.

RELATED: McCrory announces reelection bid on Twitter

McCrory, in the video, said there’s still more work to do to improve North Carolina’s economy and state government. McCrory was Charlotte’s mayor for 14 years until 2009. He first ran for governor in 2008, losing to Democrat Beverly Perdue. He won four years later, defeating Walter Dalton.

Two Democrats – Attorney General Roy Cooper and Durham lawyer Ken Spaulding – want to unseat McCrory and already have announced their candidacies.

McCrory spoke to a friendly crowd. Lynette Rinkler, a Cornelius resident, said, “The strides he’s made with the economy are phenomenal.

“The Dems need to focus on what they’re going to do for the people of North Carolina as opposed to something that may or may not have happened with Pat.”