As an English-educated Scot with a taste for well-cut suits and tables at some of London’s most upscale clubs, Noble has a background as a largely self-taught aviation engineer that puts him on the gentleman’s side of the mix of well-heeled adventurers and gritty garage men who have chased the record.

Photo

British commentators have compared Noble to the polar explorer Robert Falcon Scott and the Everest mountaineer George Leigh Mallory, who flew the flag for Britain — and died for it — during unsuccessful record-breaking bids of their own when Britain was an imperial power, and eager to demonstrate it.

For all that, the Bloodhound team has bowed to contemporary values by declaring its undertaking to be primarily motivated by a desire to inspire a new generation of British engineers. The approach helped engineers secure the government’s backing — crucial in acquiring the state-of-the-art combat jet engines indispensable to the project — after the daunting risks brought an initial point-blank refusal.

Science classes at more than 5,000 British secondary schools are now linked into the project via the Bloodhound website, BloodhoundSSC.co.uk, which furnishes what the project’s principals say is up-to-the-minute technical data that can be channeled into classroom projects. One school has a built a miniature version of Bloodhound and propelled it across the schoolyard at 240 m.p.h.

Noble no longer travels that fast. Since setting his record two decades ago, he has handed the driving responsibilities to a Royal Air Force fighter pilot, Andy Green, an Oxford-educated mathematician and wing commander who flew combat missions in northern Iraq before the American-led invasion in 2003.

Photo

Green, 51, holds the current speed record, 763 m.p.h., making him the only man to exceed the speed of sound on land. He set the mark aboard Noble’s second jet-powered vehicle, Thrust SSC, in 1997. Now he has teamed with Noble to raise the record by 250 m.p.h., which would be by far the biggest single jump in the record’s history.

Green will make the bid without an ejector seat, or much else in the way of inbuilt survivability should Bloodhound crash; the project engineers have decided, in effect, that a catastrophic failure at 1,000 m.p.h. would be inescapably fatal.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Instead, they have decided that Green’s safety will be assured, as far as it can be, by the rigorous design of Bloodhound and the thousands of hours spent on computer simulations to prevent the vehicle from going airborne — the greatest fear of all aspiring record-breakers — or veering from the arrow-straight path it must follow.

“Fundamentally, we’ve solved the safety problems of supersonic speed on land,” Green said, referring to his 1997 success. For this project, he said, engineers used supercomputers “1,000 times more powerful” than the ones used by Thrust SSC in 1997, which subsequent computer analysis showed to have come within a hairbreadth of going airborne on its record run.

Photo

“We’ve managed the airflow around Bloodhound so it doesn’t push the car offline, it doesn’t tear the surface of the desert and it doesn’t tilt upwards,” Green said.

Still, he acknowledged, “Not everything works in the real world exactly as you expect it to from computer simulations.” That, he said, was one of the lessons emphasized by Neil Armstrong, the first person to walk on the moon, when he visited the Bloodhound team a year before he died in 2012.

The Bloodhound team aims to achieve the 1,000-m.p.h. target at the Hakskeen Pan, a vast, dried-up lake bed in the Kalahari desert in South Africa’s Northern Cape province. Hundreds of villagers recruited by the local government are already well advanced in readying the stretch of desert floor earmarked for the attempt, 12 miles long and nearly 600 yards wide, by removing more than 6,000 tons of surface stones.

The team has scheduled the vehicle’s first rolling tests for an airfield in England in the spring of 2015. That will be followed by a series of runs at carefully ascending speeds on the Hakskeen Pan in August 2015. Finally, after Bloodhound has been fine-tuned back in England, an assault on the 1,000-m.p.h. mark is planned for August or September 2016.

Photo

To some of Bloodhound’s critics, building a car to travel 1,000 m.p.h — faster than a bullet fired from a .357 revolver — seems ultimately pointless in an era when manned spacecraft have achieved 24,000 m.p.h. But Bloodhound is aiming to accomplish something that project leaders say is more difficult than a space launch.

The seven-ton vehicle, 44 feet long and 6 feet wide, will be powered by three engines: a Rolls-Royce jet engine developed for the Typhoon, the R.A.F.’s current front-line fighter; an adapted version of an American-made Nammo rocket engine located beneath the jet; and a V8 Formula One engine that will act as the rocket’s fuel pump. On the record run, the jet and rocket engines are expected to generate 21 tons of thrust, more than six times the power of all the Formula One cars that line up for Grand Prix races.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

At the height of the record attempt, Bloodhound is expected to cover nearly 1,500 feet, or about the length of five football fields, per second. No aircraft flying lower than 500 feet — a level at which shock waves generated by supersonic speeds resonate off the ground, causing massive challenges for stability — has gone that fast; the record for low-level manned flight is 988 m.p.h., set in the 1970s by a civilian, Darryl Greenameyer, piloting an American-built F-104 Starfighter.

On top of that, it will take almost five miles to bring Bloodhound to a halt with airbrakes, parachutes and, at under 200 m.p.h., inboard brakes on its cast-aluminum wheels, and only after it has passed through the “measured mile” that record-breakers are required to cover. Under rules set by the Paris-based governing body for motorsports, the Fédération Internationale de l’Automobile, record-breakers must complete two legs — outbound, then back over the course in the opposite direction — within 60 minutes.

Like many who have challenged the land speed record, Noble has traveled a lonely and at times forlorn path since beginning the project in 2008. At times, the bid has survived month to month, through financing shortfalls and unexpected technical problems. Deadlines for the record attempt have repeatedly passed.

Now, though he still has millions of dollars to raise, Noble is confident that his team of 60 designers, engineers and support staff members working in a chilly commercial warehouse at Avonmouth, just south of Bristol, will meet the 2016 deadline.

But he is wary enough, and experienced enough, to deliver a sobering note of caution.

“Andy Green wants to live a long time,” Noble said of his pilot. “He wants to live long enough to sail his boat into harbor at a steady five knots. We’re going to do everything we can to make sure that he does.”