Photo

PANAJI, India — Rescuers using backhoes and shovels searched for survivors on Sunday under a huge pile of broken concrete after a residential building under construction collapsed in southern India, killing at least 15 workers.

The authorities said they suspected that dozens more might be trapped under the rubble, but they were still trying to determine how many workers were at the site when the five-story structure crumpled Saturday afternoon in the state of Goa. Witnesses reported seeing at least 40 workers.

Soldiers and firefighters listened for movement or cries from the wreckage as they worked overnight to clear the debris, said a state official, Venancio Furtado.

At least 10 people were pulled out alive overnight, but the chance of finding survivors was dwindling, Mr. Furtado said. By Sunday afternoon, the death toll had reached 15, according to the state government.

Goa’s chief minister, Manohar Parrikar, said he ordered a review of the construction project, after seeing cracks that developed in an adjacent apartment building constructed by the same company, Bharat Developers and Realtors, based in Mumbai.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The design is faulty, which is why the tragedy happened,” Mr. Parrikar said.

The police have begun an investigation of the building company and city officials who approved the construction on a patch of marshland in Canacona, about 44 miles from the state capital, Panaji. But they have been unable to track down the construction manager and building contractor.

“Without the contractor, it is impossible for us to know how many laborers were on the shift,” said a state official, Ajit Panchwadkar, who was supervising the rescue effort on Sunday.

Many of the workers had come from other, poorer states, including Jharkhand, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, in search of jobs in India’s thriving construction business. One worker who was not at the scene when the building collapsed said he earned about 300 rupees, or $4.80, for a day’s work, according to the news agency Press Trust of India.

Building collapses are common in India, as lax regulations and the demand for housing often encourage builders to cut corners by using substandard materials or adding unauthorized extra floors.