CODY, Wyo. (AP) - Cowboys and cowgirls looking to improve their skills often spend a summer or two at the Cody Nite Rodeo.

This year that group included several Australians. A handful were in Cody most of the summer, but more started showing up later in the season, trying to qualify for the finals.

“It’s a great opportunity for young fellas to get good,” said Jesse Spencer, a 22-year-old bull rider from Queensland who grew up around the sport.

“My dad rode a little bit and when I was 16, me and my little brother wanted to try it,” he said. “We got on a steer and it started from there.”

He fell in love with the sport and has been competing for six years. This is his first time in the U.S.

“It’s a good deal getting to ride every night, so I wanted to come over here.”

He’s spent most of his time in Cody but did go to the Jackson rodeo a few weekends.

“We drove through Yellowstone and it was nice to see the animals,” he said.

Steve Tapp, 28, heard about the Nite Rodeo from an older cowboy who came through last season.

“I’m still learning and it’s good place to get a lot of rides under your belt,” he said.

Originally from Brisbane, he spent the last five years in the Outback and competed in a bush rodeo riding bulls.

“First it was an adrenaline thing and now it’s a challenge to get it right,” Tapp said. “I’ve been learning a lot of what not to do and getting my technique right.”

It’s his first time in the U.S. and he’s enjoying his time in Cody.

“It’s not bad and the locals are good people,” he said. “After the finals, I might go to Oklahoma for a month before I go back home.”

Tim McArthur, 26, and his brother Jack, 20, came over from Queensland.

“We grew up with rodeo but this is full on,” Tim said. “You’re going every night, not like Australia.”

Both said they expect their summer experience will make them better bull riders.

“It’s good for us to experience different things,” Jack McArthur said. “Everyone we’ve met has been very helpful.”

In early August, more Aussies began arriving almost every day. They heard about the great opportunities the Nite Rodeo has to offer and decided to check it out for themselves.

Among them was Chris Williams, 31, of Eastern South Wales. He competed at rodeos in West Texas and around the Midwest before coming to Cody.

“I’ve been going through the state doing PRCA rodeos,” he said.

Williams started his rodeo career on bulls but began riding broncs when he was 25.

“Once I did it I thought that’s the way to go,” he said.

He plans to stay in the U.S. and compete until the end of October.

“Then I’ll fly home for winter,” he said. “I have the Australian NFR at the end of January and I plan to come back next summer.

Williams has been traveling with Tyrell Smith, 23, a saddle bronc and bull rider. From Western Australia, he grew up around the sport, as his mom and dad both did rodeos.

In his few nights in Cody this year he’d done well in the saddle bronc competition.

“I got second and first on my first two days,” he said. “I’m loving it here.”

Robert Dawson, 22, of Queensland heard about the rodeo and arrived in early August.

“In Australia rodeos are weeks apart, which is why I came here,” he said.

Dawson grew up on a ranch and competed in bull riding for several years before switching to saddle broncs.

Bareback rider Strawbs Jones, 20, of Queensland competed in the Calgary Stampede before coming to Cody.

“The Calgary Stampede was the experience of a lifetime even though I got bucked off,” he said. “I heard about Cody through a mate and decided to come down for the month.”

He’s still perfecting his technique after taking up bareback riding last year.

“I always said I’d give it a go and I did last year,” he said. “I thought it was better than bulls and I fell in love.”

___

Information from: The Cody Enterprise, http://www.codyenterprise.com