The 17th annual Lawn, Garden, Home & Recreation Expo was held this weekend at the Central Wisconsin Convention and Expo Center. Nathan Vine/Stevens Point Journal Media

Buy Photo Lee Koeller, owner of Koeller Builds Plus, speaks with an attendee during the 17th annual Lawn, Garden, Home & Recreation Expo on Saturday at the Central Wisconsin Convention and Expo Center on Rothschild. (Photo: Nathan Vine/Stevens Point Journal Media)Buy Photo

Lee Koeller said that had he known how busy the spring season would be for his business, he may not have have taken part in the Lawn, Garden, Home and Recreation Show at all.

As it was Koeller, owner of Koeller Builds Plus of Kronenwetter, is one of more than 80 vendors taking part in the event, now in its 17th year, this weekend at the Central Wisconsin Convention & Expo Center.

More than 20,000 people turned out for the expo in 2014, and on Saturday the event was filling with people shortly after its 10 a.m. start. Representatives from several businesses at the expo said they have noticed an increase in customers looking to spend money on projects or products this year. They attributed to uptick to people being farther removed from the end of the Great Recession and from the implementation of Affordable Care Act, along with warmer temperatures in March than the previous year.

Koeller, who has been in business since 1980, said he already has as many home remodeling or addition jobs as he had all of last year. Koeller said one of the most popular projects people are having done are new bathrooms, particularly high-end ones that include features like heated floors and can run up to $20,000.

"Jobs like roofing, siding and maintenance are going to be something you see every year, but people seem to be finally ready to get some of those other projects done they have been putting off," Koeller said.

Mike Bronsteatter, owner of ShamRock Lawn Care of Merrill, is taking part in his first expo and was pleased with the number of people who attended. He added that he expects to see a lot of yard maintenance work this year.

"It's nicer earlier in the year, so people are thinking about it," Bronsteatter said. "I think there will be a lot of grass repair, landscaping, and some irrigation systems."

Lisa Rouse, who handles marketing for Greeneway RV Sales & Service of Wisconsin Rapids, said spending is also extending to areas of leisure. A display of various RVs by the business drew many attendees on Saturday.

Rouse said campers can run from around $17,000 to $20,000, and some of the most popular right now are destination trailers, which allow people to set up at a mobile campground. Rouse said that a popular amenity people are choosing to add when buying an RV is an outside kitchen, which typically adds an extra $400 to $500 to the cost of the RV.

"You can get where you are going then just open it up and you have a sink and a fridge right there. People who don't get one seem to go back," Rouse said. "Campgrounds are doing a great job of having activities to offer families that bring them in, and people seem like they are more interested in buying now, which we're excited about."

If you go

What: 17th annual Lawn, Garden, Home & Recreation Expo

Where: Central Wisconsin Convention and Expo Center, 10101 Market St., Rothschild

When: 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. on Sunday

Cost: Free

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1CkwsQo