Brutus, a 1 year-old Rottweiler, rolls over on his back to play and get a treat from his foster mom, Laura Aquilina, on Aug. 5 at their Loveland home. As a young puppy Brutus suffered from frostbite and a breeder cut off his paws. He is getting prosthetic paws through a fundraiser, Better Paws for Brutus. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

When Laura Aquilina plays with the 14-month-old foster Rottweiler staying with her, he's not like the typical puppy, preferring to play on his back instead of jumping and running around.

Brutus, who weighs 72 pounds, trots his paws in the air, all four missing their toes and one wrapped in bandages from an infection, but he doesn't know any differently. His breeder cut off part of his paws after he got frostbite as a young puppy, and Aquilina and her husband, Rick Jaruzel, are fostering him while he gets prosthetics, the second dog worldwide to undergo such a procedure on all four limbs.

"I think he's compensated really well," said Aquilina, who fosters senior dogs and dogs with medical cases with her husband. "This is how he gets his play on."

Aquilina took Brutus in as a foster in mid-June after learning about his plight from Better Paws for Brutus, a fundraiser in Canon City that aims to generate $10,000 for the cost of his prosthetics surgery at OrthoPets in Denver and his first year of treatment. So far, they have raised $7,005.

Laura Ornelas and Kim Abels, both of Canon City and volunteers with various animal rescue groups, started the fundraiser after learning about Brutus's missing paws. They started a GoFundMe account at gofundme.com/betterpawsforbrutus to raise the cost of the prosthetic limbs, and a social media page at Facebook.com/betterpawsforbrutus to tell his story.

Advertisement

"It's amazing he's just still so loving," Ornelas said. "He still trusts humans after everything we've done to him."

When Brutus was a few weeks old, a breeder from the Canon City area was selling him with his litter, saying he'd gotten frostbite after she left him out in the cold and that she performed the amputation on her own, Ornelas said. A woman and her daughter offered to purchase Brutus but did not have enough money, so they left a business card with the breeder, who called a couple days later, saying they could have him for free.

Brutus, a 1 year-old Rottweiler, holds his bone Aug. 5 at his Loveland foster home. As a young puppy Brutus suffered from frostbite and a breeder cut off his paws. He is getting prosthetic paws through a fundraiser, Better Paws for Brutus. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The woman and her daughter kept Brutus for a year, but put an ad in the paper when caring for him became "overwhelming," Ornelas said, adding that they never took him to a veterinarian, which she and Abels did to get his vaccinations and neuter surgery.

Ornelas and Abels learned about OrthoPets, which developed four prosthetic limbs for a dog named Naki'o, and searched for a rescue to take in Brutus and to cover the costs, but couldn't find a willing group.

They brought Brutus in for his first appointment at OrthoPets in June, but first he needed revision surgery on his left rear paw, which he had done at Blue Sky Animal Clinic in Loveland on July 22. He needed to have bone fragments and the remaining two toes removed to allow the prosthetic to be fitted correctly to his limb without causing pressure soars.

"He's a really sweet dog," Ornelas said. "He deserves better than to be in pain."

The next phase of Brutus's treatment will be getting castings and molds of his paws to create the prosthetic limbs and then fitting them onto his legs. The molds will be made after he recovers from the surgery on his rear paw in two to three weeks, Ornelas said.

Once he has his new paws, Brutus will undergo rehabilitation to learn how to walk on four false feet, Aquilina said.

As it is now, he can walk for short periods and does better on soft surfaces, such as carpeting, Aquilina said.

"He's very much still a puppy," she said. "He wants to be an active dog. ... It's sad to see a puppy wanting to do puppy things that isn't able to."

Within two days of taking him in, Aquilina said Brutus was following her from room to room as much as he could.

"He bonds very quickly with people," Aquilina said. "He has such a happy, go-lucky demeanor," she said.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.