New Jersey Herald file photo - Sussex County Freeholder Director Phil Crabb, shown here at a meeting earlier this year, has praised the work of Sarah Balzano.

Posted: Jul. 21, 2015 10:56 pm Updated: Jul. 24, 2015 11:14 pm

By ERIC OBERNAUER

eobernauer@njherald.com

NEWTON -- After floating and then distancing themselves two weeks ago from a proposal to have the county's transitional care coordinator succeed former Human Services Administrator Stephen Gruchacz on an acting basis, county officials now appear set to make the appointment a permanent one instead.

A resolution on tonight's agenda, if approved, will make Sarah Balzano -- who began working as a nurse at The Homestead nursing home in 2010 and later assumed leadership of the county's transitional care program -- the head of the county's Department of Human Services at a starting salary of $102,506.

Gruchacz, in an email Tuesday, indicated that since he became county administrator July 1, Balzano has been filling his former position on an acting basis at that salary -- the lowest on the county's currently approved pay range for the position, which extends up to $156,863.

But despite having known about the impending vacancy since June 10, when they voted 3-2 to promote Gruchacz to the position of county administrator, the Board of Chosen Freeholders never advertised the vacancy and never held interviews with any other candidates -- either in the county or outside it.

Board of Freeholders Director Phil Crabb, in an email Tuesday, touted Balzano's stewardship of the transitional care program, which was established under the Department of Human Services in 2012 with seed money from Newton Medical Center.

The program, by providing support services to elderly patients after they are discharged from the hospital, aims to reduce readmission rates for Medicare recipients in accordance with incentives provided to hospitals under the Affordable Care Act.

Balzano, 41, indicated on her résumé that she previously was responsible for the "rebranding" of The Homestead, which was sold by the county the same year the transitional care program was established.

Her résumé indicates she has been working in nursing since 2008 and that, since earning her bachelor's degree this past February, she has been accepted into a public administration certificate program offered through Rutgers University.

Crabb, in his email, praised Balzano as having "excelled in any capacity we have engaged her in" and that under her leadership, "the Transitional Care program here in Sussex County and its success in lowering patient re-admissions by an order of magnitude has been recognized nationally as the model of excellence."

He added: "Her promotion breaks the ‘glass ceiling' here at the County."

Freeholder George Graham, however, suggested Tuesday that by not affording others an equal opportunity to apply for the position, residents and employees who had invested years of service to the county were being shortchanged.

"There's no excuse for that job not to be posted," Graham said. "We're not paying minor amounts of money here. We're paying over one hundred thousand dollars."

Graham, while emphasizing he was not in any way disparaging Balzano's accomplishments, noted that two other longtime division heads -- Senior Services Director Lorraine Hentz and Social Services/Transit Director Carol Novrit -- both hold master's degrees along with many years of experience. Hentz and Novrit respectively earned $83,620 and $118,196 last year, according to public records.

Still, Graham said, "there are other people who should also be afforded the opportunity to move up. To not offer them that opportunity demeans the dedication, education, and the investment in their careers that these two women and others have made."

Crabb, in his email, touted the fact that Balzano, of Andover Township, is also a resident of Sussex County, which he said "facilitates further her ability to grasp the substantive requirements of her office, arguably the most complicated in county government."

Gruchacz, the county's previous human services director, is a resident of Bedminster in Somerset County. Upon naming him county administrator last month, the freeholder board voted to waive the county's residency requirement for his position.

Initially, on July 8, Crabb had indicated a resolution to create a new position of "confidential assistant" with a salary range between $92,976 and $142,279 was intended so Balzano could easily succeed to the position of acting human services director. However, in keeping with Gruchacz' authority as administrator, Balzano had already been appointed acting director of human services as of July 1.

Crabb later said he misspoke when explaining the reason for the resolution.

Gruchacz, for his part, had nonetheless said the resolution would afford him the flexibility to assign an individual to perform whatever work was necessary within the county without regard to Civil Service job specifications.

Balzano declined to comment for this story.

Eric Obernauer can also be contacted on Twitter: @EricObernNJH or by phone at 973-383-1213.