It’s 'shift day' and National Cybersecurity Awareness Month

With help from Joseph Marks, David Perera and Alex Byers

EMV IS HERE-M-V! — “Shift day” has finally arrived. As of today, the financial liability for any fraud involving credit and debit cards with old school magnetic strips will fall on the party that hasn’t updated to the “chip” technology championed by the EMV (Europay, MasterCard and Visa) coalition — whether that’s the provider that issued the card or the merchant where the customer swiped the card. Prior to the transition, the liability cost was borne by the card provider. The chips inside EMV cards send a unique verification code each time they’re used, whereas magnetic strip cards send the same code each time. That means with EMV cards, hackers can’t create phony versions of cards by stealing their codes from point of sale machines at retail stores and restaurants.

Story Continued Below

Card providers have been sending new chip cards to customers across the U.S. as transition day approaches. According to data provided by Visa, as of Sept. 15, 151.8 million Visa chip cards had been issued in the U.S. and more than 314,000 merchants have set up chip-equipped payment terminals. Both numbers have surged in the past year, Visa said. According to a MasterCard statement, 40 percent of all U.S. MasterCard-branded cards are now chip-enabled. There was a 446 percent increase in MasterCard chip transitions between August 2014 and August 2015, the company said. More background, including the debate about alternative card options that might be more secure: http://nyti.ms/1iYMqv5

IT’S ALSO NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY AWARENESS MONTH — President Barack Obama kicked things off with a presidential proclamation that highlighted his executive order to promote information sharing between government and industry, as well as the implementation of the National Cybersecurity Framework. “We now live in an era of the Internet — our children will never know a world without it,” Obama’s proclamation reads. “Our financial systems, our power grid, and our health systems run on it, and though widely helpful, this reliance reminds us of our need to remain aware, alert, and attentive on this new frontier. By working together to prevent and disrupt threats to our digital infrastructure, America can continue pioneering new discoveries and expanding the boundaries of humanity’s reach.”

HAPPY THURSDAY and welcome to Morning Cybersecurity! This switcheroo from an Edward Snowden to an “Edward Scissorhands” discussion on HLN is outstanding: http://usat.ly/1L4nzjI. Did they expect something different from a guy with the Twitter handle @fart? Send your thoughts, feedback and especially your tips to tstarks@politico.com and follow @timstarks, @POLITICOPro and @MorningCybersec. Full team info is below.

TODAY: NUNES, SCHIFF AND PAINTER TAKE THE STAGE — House Intelligence Chairman Devin Nunes and ranking member Adam Schiff will share the stage at 9 a.m. today at The Washington Post’s Cybersecurity Summit. Shortly after, State Department Cyber Coordinator Chris Painter will take questions at a forum on “The Future of America’s Cyber Strategy” hosted by the Christian Science Monitor’s Passcode. Expect some tough questions at both events on the White House’s recent no-economic-hacking agreement with China. Nunes and Schiff were both lukewarm about the deal when it was announced Friday, saying they’ll wait to see if China complies. Deputy Defense Secretary Robert Work defended the deal at a House Armed Services Committee hearing Wednesday, calling it a “confidence building measure” and evidence that cyber deterrence is working. More here: http://politico.pro/1MGGZui

PASSWORDS CLOSER TO OBSOLESCENCE — An Obama administration effort to usher in a post-password Internet is set to cross a major milestone on Oct. 20, when the Identity Ecosystem Steering Group publicly releases a long-awaited foundational framework. The idea is for companies selling alternate ways for computers users to digitally identify themselves to take up the framework as a means of ensuring industry-wide interoperability, as well as the security and privacy of users. Online firms that embrace it will self-certify their offerings and can display a trust mark showing their adherence. The steering group was set up by the National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace, a NIST-managed effort that’s been protected by administration officials and congressional allies from House Republican appropriators’ annual attempts to defund it. More from the NSTIC blog: http://bit.ly/1FIplGG

ADMINISTRATION WATCHING CHINA DEAL’S ‘WIGGLE ROOM’ — Plenty of observers have pointed to the squishy verbiage in the deal the Obama administration struck with China on cyber economic espionage last week; but administration officials “know there’s wiggle room in the language and they’ll be watching it closely,” a cyber expert told the House Foreign Affairs Committee on Wednesday. Jim Lewis from the Center for Strategic and International Studies said administration officials had told him just that. Lewis also said his contacts told him that there was a debate within the administration about how or whether to punish China over the Office of Personnel Management breach. White House officials settled on the threat of sanctions as the “middle course,” and that threat made clear to China that “we were mad about this,” Lewis said.

CHINESE SPOKESPERSON SIDESTEPS QUESTION ON NEW OPM STORY — A spokesperson for China’s Foreign Ministry didn’t directly answer a question Wednesday about a Washington Post report that the CIA pulled personnel from Beijing after the big Office of Personnel Management breach. “The Chinese government firmly opposes and cracks down on all forms of hacking activities in accordance with the law,” said Hong Lei, who shifted the focus to the U.S.-China agreement. From the Foreign Ministry website: http://bit.ly/1iMkTvU The Post story: http://wapo.st/1iJEugs

** A message from Northrop Grumman: Today’s enemy threats have taken on forms like never before. That’s why our full-spectrum cyber capabilities enable our military to tackle challenges at the push of a button. See how at http://bit.ly/1IM0OAJ **

BIDEN, JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER TALK CYBER — Vice President Joe Biden met with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on Wednesday to discuss “cyber issues,” among other topics, according to the White House. Japan and the United States in April struck a series of agreements that included cyber cooperation and a commitment to voluntary cyber norms. Both countries can claim to be victims of organized, state-sponsored attacks by China. And Japan’s National Police Agency last month said that targeted cyberattacks in their country had increased sevenfold in the first half of 2015 compared to last year. http://bit.ly/1KMDQs5 Background on the U.S.-Japan agreements: http://politico.pro/1OHg7NJ

HILLARY’S EMAIL INSECURITY PROBLEMS (MAYBE) DEEPEN — Yet more of the Hillary Clinton private server emails have been slapped with the “classified” label, POLITICO’s Josh Gerstein and Nick Gass report. The same cache revealed that she received spearphishing emails from Russia relying on a speeding ticket hoax. The latter is barely smoke, let alone fire; if there’s evidence that she clicked on them, that’s a different matter. “All these emails show is that, like millions of other Americans, she received spam,” said campaign spokesman Nick Merrill. http://politi.co/1KRkOyF And a story on emails from one of her advisers on cyber predictions: http://politico.pro/1JEupHh

DoD IG: MOST CYBER RECOMMENDATIONS UNRESOLVED — Over the course of a one-year period ending July 31, the Defense Department resolved 93 pre-existing cyber recommendations contained in unclassified DoD and Government Accountability Office audits. The bad news is that department management left 136 unresolved, according to a DoD inspector general summary out Wednesday. “Reports issued during the reporting period most frequently cited cybersecurity weaknesses in the categories of risk management, identity and access management, and contingency planning,” according to the summary. The full report was labeled “For Official Use Only” and not released publicly. http://bit.ly/1RgytUf

CYBERCRIME BILL READY FOR THE HOUSE FLOOR — Two panels, House Judiciary and House Homeland Security, signed off Wednesday on legislation that formally authorizes the National Computer Forensics Institute, a Secret Service/Alabama Office of Prosecution Services-run facility that trains state and local officials to go after cybercrime. “The Strengthening State and Local Cyber Crime Fighting Act of 2015 is a much-needed bill that will help law enforcement fight back against increasingly sophisticated cybercrimes,” said its sponsor, Rep. John Ratcliffe. Ratcliffe and Judiciary Chairman Bob Goodlatte called on the House to take up the bill on the floor. The Homeland Security panel approved legislation sponsored by Rep. Cedric Richmond requiring the Department of Homeland Security to develop a cybersecurity strategy. Ratcliffe’s bill: http://1.usa.gov/1O8ynzA Richmond’s bill: http://1.usa.gov/1RgCQid

ENCRYPTION PROGRAM BUGS ARE NARROW — Windows users of the TrueCrypt full-disk encryption program have a problem, since two newly discovered bugs allow attackers to gain elevated access privileges. Google security engineer James Forshaw announced his discovery of the flaws earlier this week, and they’ve already been patched in VeraCrypt, a version of TrueCrypt. But the bugs don’t affect the security of TrueCrypt encryption itself, said John Hopkins University cryptologist Matthew Green in an interview with Motherboard. "Instead, the bug poses a problem for the system it is being run on," Motherboard notes. Green led a code audit of TrueCrypt that earlier this year found no evidence of deliberate backdoors in the code. TrueCrypt’s anonymous developers suddenly abandoned upkeep of the project in May 2014, despite its popularity. More from Motherboard: http://bit.ly/1Gi5Uj0

DOT WARNS COPYRIGHT OFFICE THAT DMCA EXEMPTION FOR CARS POSES CYBER RISKS — The Department of Transportation has warned the Copyright Office against green-lighting an exemption to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act that allows consumers to tinker with the software that runs their cars. DOT said in a Sept. 9 letter that “modifying motor vehicle software can create safety and cybersecurity risks.” Our friends at Morning Technology have more on another letter on the same subject from the Environmental Protection Agency, and how the letters are annoying copyright reform activists. Here’s the DOT letter: http://1.usa.gov/1RgJLYG

QUICK BYTES

— Google starts encrypting Internet connections to Blogspot by adding https support: http://bit.ly/1YP6rEo

— Jeb Bush “is a cyber-weenie,” proclaims conservative hacker Robert Graham. Errata Security blog: http://bit.ly/1M2e5Sg

— Frank Cilluffo and Joseph Clark contemplate how much cyber changes conflict. Lawfare: http://bit.ly/1GiRsHq

That’s all for today. Poor Edward Snowden. Can’t even hold Winona Ryder when she asks. http://bit.ly/1LQcfbs

Stay in touch with the whole team: Joseph Marks (JMarks@politico.com, @Joseph_Marks_); David Perera (dperera@politico.com, @daveperera); and Tim Starks (tstarks@politico.com, @timstarks).

** A message from Northrop Grumman: To meet today’s most advanced enemy threats, our military needs to be able to eliminate them — without putting troops in harm’s way. That’s why we’re the leader in full-spectrum cyber. Learn more at http://bit.ly/1IM0OAJ **

** A message from Palo Alto Networks: Palo Alto Networks Next-Generation Security Platform, in combination with select technology and delivery partners, supports all three of the Continuous Diagnostics Mitigation (CDM) phases and enables agencies to achieve the security objectives of the program by:

- Providing natively integrated capabilities in the Palo Alto Networks Next-Generation Security Platform that identify, prevent, and report on key cybersecurity threats.

- Integrating with key CDM technologies for security automation and improved detection and correlation.

- Working closely with approved system integrators who are authorized to sell CDM program components and systems.

Palo Alto Networks provides an easy to use, cost-effective management environment that enables agencies to meet CDM requirements without compromising simplicity or mission requirements. Today, and moving forward into the future, Palo Alto Networks serves the cybersecurity needs of the U.S. civilian agencies and other government entities. To learn more, download the CDM white paper here: http://go.paloaltonetworks.com/dcbbcdm **