Lost in Peyton Manning’s “Gags to Riches” story, overshadowed by the velcro paws of the defensive backs, the Broncos made an eye-opening change on special teams. Again.

Emmanuel Sanders, knee deep in a career season as a receiver with 89 catches and 1,261 yards, shared punt-return duties with Wes Welker on Sunday. Sanders hasn’t held the job since a cameo with the Pittsburgh Steelers in 2013. He returned one punt for 11 yards last week and is prepared for expanded duty, if necessary, against the Cincinnati Bengals on Monday night.

“I am getting more and more comfortable. This week obviously we have a left-footed punter (Kevin Huber), so I am doing a lot of work on the Jugs machine because the ball spins differently,” said Sanders, whose Broncos are expected to bring in a left-footer as well for practice. “I am willing to do whatever it takes. It’s a tough task. But I feel like I am up to it.”

Sanders might be the fastest player on the Broncos. He brings a game-changing dynamic, but his goals as a returner are modest.

“My approach is to get a first down. As along as I get 10 yards for the offense, then literally it’s like I am catching a screen,” Sanders said.

Linebacker options. Brandon Marshall said his injured right foot feels better than expected.

That’s encouraging for the playoffs but still doesn’t mean Marshall will play either of the next two games. In his absence, the Broncos will lean heavily on rookies at weakside linebacker. Corey Nelson and Todd Davis, capable cover guys, are in the mix along with Lamin Barrow.

“Todd came in right away and learned the defense. He’s a smart guy,” Marshall said. “Corey and Lamin have been here since the spring. I have a lot of confidence in all of them. I know they will get it done.”

Prime time, at last. Safety T.J. Ward signed with the Broncos to win. And to play in prime time. He never had that opportunity during his four years with the Cleveland Browns.

“This is my first Monday night game. Yeah, it is a big deal,” Ward said.

Thompson limited. Running back Juwan Thompson did not participate in Thursday’s practice because of hip and knee injuries. He has missed time because of the knee. Paul Cornick (turf toe) remains sidelined.

Left tackle Ryan Clady, who missed most of the San Diego Chargers’ game with a quadriceps injury, practiced on a limited basis along with Manning (thigh), Will Montgomery (knee), Ronnie Hillman (foot), Jacob Tamme (rib cage) and Kayvon Webster (shoulder).

BRONCOS MAILBAG: Pose a question for Mike Klis

Footnote. The Broncos added tight end Dominique Jones to the active roster after he cleared waivers. He was waived earlier in the week because the Broncos put in a waiver claim on Indianapolis Colts offensive tackle Andrew McDonald. Denver needed a spot, but McDonald was awarded to the Browns because they have a worse record. The Broncos also signed offensive lineman DeMarcus Love to their practice squad.