REUTERS In The Arena The Republican Answer to Obamacare

It’s been a rough two months for the White House since HealthCare.gov went live on Oct 1. In the weeks that followed, it soon became clear that the problem was not just one of technical incompetence leading to a shoddy website, but of bad policy. Millions of Americans began receiving notices that they couldn’t keep their current health plan, their premium costs would be going up, or both. In the face of this disaster, the White House has pivoted to a new line, which can be summed up as, “Well, yes, Obamacare’s rollout has been deeply flawed and the impact it has had on Americans wasn’t exactly as advertised, but the Republicans have no alternative proposals for how to fix things and just want to return to the status quo.”

President Obama has been leading the charge in spreading this new Democratic talking point, chiding congressional Republicans in a Dec. 3 speech, claiming, “they sure haven’t presented an alternative.” White House Press Secretary Jay Carney has also done a good job of sticking to the new script, recently stating, “the absence of an alternative put forward by House Republicans is not an alternative at all. The Republican alternative is repeal and replace — with what?” Liberal pundit Jonathan Chait joined in, mocking the GOP in a blog post: “I would posit that conservative health-care policies do not exist in any real form.”

Story Continued Below

The problem with this new accusation from President Obama and his surrogates is that it is completely, utterly and verifiably false.

In fact, congressional Republicans have introduced a number of bills that lay out the GOP alternative to Obamacare. These aren’t just talking points, but real, substantive reforms that have been put into legislative language.

Rep. Tom Price (R-Ga.), a physician by trade, introduced House Resolution 2300, the Empowering Patients First Act, in June 2013, following previous iterations in 2009 and 2011.

Price’s bill entails the full repeal of Obamacare, permission of insurance sales across state lines, medical malpractice reform, tax deductions for health care expenses and a host of other laudable reforms that will reduce costs, increase access to care and allow consumers to buy the plans that are best for them.

It’s important to move away from employer-based health care system, and Price’s bill achieves this goal by providing portability, allowing coverage to be tied to an individual, not an employer, so that if workers change or lose their job, they can keep their insurance.

The Price bill also establishes individual and small-employer associations, allowing individuals, families and small businesses to pool risk so that they can achieve the same economies of scale and negotiating leverage currently enjoyed only by large corporations and labor unions.

Price’s alternative isn’t just good health care policy, it’s good fiscal policy. Douglas Holtz-Eakin, a former Congressional Budget Office director, estimates that aside from doing away with the 20 new and higher taxes imposed by Obamacare, Price’s bill saves $2.34 trillion in federal taxpayers dollars over the next decade. Those are significant savings, even though it might not seem so to a White House willing to shell out $600 million on a website that doesn’t even work.

Grover Norquist is president of Americans for Tax reform (ATR).