LITTLE ROCK — A bill containing funding for Arkansas Works, Gov. Asa Hutchinson’s plan for continuing and modifying the state’s Medicaid expansion program, cleared the House with one vote to spare Thursday and was later signed into law by the governor.

The House approved Senate Bill 121, a bill to fund Arkansas Works and other Medicaid programs for the coming fiscal year, in a 76-13 vote a day after the Senate approved it in a 27-12 vote. Like most appropriation bills, the measure needed a three-fourths majority vote in each chamber to pass, or 75 votes in the House and 27 in the Senate.

Veto strategy

Before signing the bill, Hutchinson used his line-item veto power to veto a provision that would have required the program to end Dec. 31 of this year.

The provision was added to the bill as part of a strategy to overcome Senate opposition after the measure stalled in that chamber last week because of opposition from 10 Republican senators. Opponents were encouraged to vote for the amended bill despite a promised line-item veto, and enough went along to allow the bill to pass.

After issuing the veto and signing the bill privately, Hutchinson told reporters, “My goals have been to have stability in Arkansas’ health care system. I believe we accomplished that agenda. My goal was to make sure we had an outcome that could be supported by broad coalitions, including Democrats and Republicans. That goal was accomplished.”

The veto strategy has been criticized by some opponents and supporters of Arkansas Works. Hutchinson said he had “invested some political capital” in the effort and said he would work to explain to Arkansans what happened.

“I plan on going out and meeting with constituents, I plan on having town hall meetings as needed, I’m happy to explain what we’ve done here. I think in the end the people of Arkansas will say we did something good,” he said.

House Minority Leader Michael John Gray, D-Augusta, said, “Was it our favorite route? No. But at the end of the day, the end goal is the same.”

Override attempt planned

Sen. Alan Clark, R-Lonsdale, said Thursday he would to seek an override of the veto, which would require a simple majority vote in each chamber. An override attempt is unlikely to succeed, given the majorities by which the bill passed, but Clark said he intended to try anyway.

“You don’t know until you charge up that hill,” he said.

The earliest Clark could move for an override is Tuesday, the next day the Senate meets.

House debate

During debate on the House floor, Rep. Kim Hendren, R-Gravette, brother-in law of the governor and father of Sen. Jim Hendren, also R-Gravette, who sponsored the bill’s sunset provision, objected to the veto strategy.

“We’re doing the right thing in the wrong way,” he said.

Rep. Nate Bell, I-Mena, said he had been inclined to vote to fund Arkansas Works but would not because of the veto strategy.

“The three-fourths vote threshold that we have in Arkansas helps with something. You know what it helps with? Minorities can’t get squashed,” he said.

The Legislature approved Arkansas Works as a policy measure with simple majority votes in each chamber during a special session earlier this month. Among the House members who did not support Arkansas Works during the special session but voted for the Medicaid funding bill Thursday was Rep. Laurie Rushing, R-Hot Springs,

“Those of us that voted no and were opposed to Arkansas Works, we have accomplished what we asked for,” she said on the House floor. “(The bill) allows Arkansas Works to expire on December 31, 2016. Yes, we all know that the governor has stated he would use his line-item veto, but he is willing to make that burden upon himself.”

Conservative group Americans for Prosperity released a statement Thursday repeating a warning it issued Wednesday that it would consider all “yes” votes as votes to support “Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion.” Some supporters of Arkansas Works mentioned the group’s warnings in their comments on the House floor.

“I give a rip about AFP’s emails,” said Rep. Kim Hammer, R-Benton. “I don’t even read them from those folks. I suggest that maybe you would consider that too.”

Roll call of ‘no,’ ‘present’ votes

The 13 House members who voted against the bill were Reps. Bob Ballinger, R-Hindsville; Donnie Copeland, R-Little Rock; Gary Deffenbaugh, R-Van Buren; Mickey Gates, R-Hot Springs; Justin Gonzales, R-Okolona; Justin Harris, R-West Fork, Kim Hendren; Robin Lundstrum, R-Springdale; Josh Miller, R-Heber Springs; John Payton, R-Wilburn; Marcus Richmond, R-Harvey; Nelda Speaks, R-Mountain Home; and Dan Sullivan, R-Jonesboro.

Voting “present,” which allows a member not to vote for a bill without voting “no,” were Bell; Mary Bentley, R-Perryville; Bruce Cozart, R-Hot Springs; Jim Dotson, R-Bentonville; Charlotte Douglas, R-Alma; Grant Hodges, R-Rogers,; Lane Jean, R-Magnolia; David Meeks, R-Conway; Stephen Meeks, R-Greenbrier; and Richard Womack, R-Arkadelphia.

Rep. Karilyn Brown, R-Sherwood, voted “present” but later submitted a letter to the House saying she had intended to vote for the bill.

Successor to private option

Arkansas Works is Hutchinson’s plan for replacing the program known as the private option, which since 2013 has provided government-subsidized private health insurance to more than 267,000 low-income Arkansans. The program was created as an alternative to the expansion of Medicaid rolls envisioned in the federal Affordable Care Act.

The governor’s plan adds several features, including:

—Referral to voluntary work training for unemployed recipients.

—Incentives for small businesses to offer their employees insurance plans.

—Incentives for recipients to make regular wellness visits to a doctor.

—A requirement that recipients who earn more than 100 percent of the federal poverty level pay premiums of up to 2 percent of their income.

—Elimination of 90-day coverage retroactivity.

—A requirement that the program end automatically if the federal government ever decides to change the match rates set in the Affordable Care Act. The federal government’s share of the cost of the program is 100 percent now but will drop gradually to 90 percent over the next five years.

Consultants hired by the Legislature have said ending Medicaid expansion would have a negative impact on the state budget of more than $100 million in the fiscal year that begins July 1 and $757 million over the next five years, as well as threatening the survival of rural hospitals. Opponents of Medicaid expansion have said they believe the program and the Affordable Care Act ultimately will prove unsustainable.

General Appropriation Act

The Senate voted 33-0 to approve and send to the governor the General Appropriation Act, a $1.3 million appropriation for expenses of the Legislature and the judicial branch. Hutchinson signed the bill into law before signing the Medicaid bill because the state constitution requires that the bill be the first one passed in a legislative session.

Lawmakers usually do not wait until the second week of a session to pass the General Appropriation Act, but the House did not approve the bill until Wednesday. House Democrats initially blocked the bill to encourage an end to the impasse over Arkansas Works in the Senate.

Committee action

The Joint Budget Committee endorsed House Bill 1128, a $208,795 appropriation for the state Board of Chiropractic Examiners, after adopting an amendment by Rep. Jim Dotson, R-Bentonville, that Dotson said would make the certification and licensing procedures for chiropractors in Arkansas consistent with most other states and eliminate a redundant exam.

State Budget Administrator Duncan Baird spoke against the amendment, saying it is not budget-related and therefore should require a two-thirds majority vote in each chamber to be introduced in the fiscal session.

The bill goes to the House.