New Jerseyans were looking for bargains and lots of choices when they shopped for 2014 health insurance plans on the HealthCare.gov online exchange. Now, health insurers are gearing up to meet those consumer demands when open enrollment begins Nov. 15 for 2015, the second year Americans will buy government-subsidized health plans under the Affordable Care Act.

The three health insurers who vied for customers on HealthCare.gov this year — Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, AmeriHealth New Jersey and Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey — will face new competition in 2015 from UnitedHealthcare, which will begin selling health plans to New Jerseyans at HealthCare.gov this fall.

In the exchange’s kickoff year of 2014, most New Jerseyans chose either Horizon or AmeriHealth, both well-known brands across the state. In third place was HRINJ, a cooperative insurance company launched this year with loans authorized by the ACA.

AmeriHealth said it has 130,000 individual members today, up from 10,000 at the end of 2013, with the majority coming in via HealthCare.gov. Horizon, the state’s largest health insurer, said it still has the largest market share in the individual market, with approximately 140,000 members as of Aug. 15, 2014. And HRINJ said the new company signed up about 4,000 members in its first year.

These figures are the total individual enrollment for the insurers, and they include people who bought coverage on HealthCare.gov, as well as on the state’s traditional individual health insurance market. The figures show a significant increase in the number of New Jerseyans with individual coverage: According to the state Department of Banking and Insurance ,145,095 New Jerseyans had individual coverage at the end of 2013. Experts said the increase includes previously uninsured New Jerseyans who now have coverage, as well as those who previously were covered on their employer's plan and are now buying their own individual policies.

Experts said that, while there wasn’t extreme variation in the premiums from the three insurers, it turned out that even small price differences matter to consumers when they shop for health insurance. Under the ACA, most Americans had to either get coverage in 2014 or pay a fine under the law’s so-called “individual mandate.”

Joel Cantor, director of the Rutgers Center for State Health Policy, said market share movement in the individual market “suggests increased competition in the New Jersey individual health insurance market, which bodes well for the future.”

All three insurers sell policies both on HealthCare.gov and on the traditional individual and small group health insurance market. But customers had to buy plans at HealthCare.gov to receive the federal subsidies — which in some cases made a huge difference in the cost of their coverage.

Among this year’s three insurers, AmeriHealth offers the widest choice of plans. Consumers looking for a lower premium can choose a plan tied to AmeriHealth’s “local value” network, which requires members to use a narrow network of New Jersey doctors and hospitals, representing about 70 percent of the insurer’s more expansive regional network.

Mike Munoz, senior vice president, sales and marketing, for AmeriHealth NJ, said the company “gained substantial market share in the individual health care market in New Jersey by offering competitively priced products and engaging residents of our state directly.”

Munoz added, “All of our plans are designed to create varying price points to meet the needs of consumers in the state.”

David Oscar, a health insurance broker with Altigro, said AmeriHealth had an edge in 2014 because it was the only insurer on the exchange offering plans with out-of-network benefits. And that was key for husband-and-wife businesses without employees, or two-partner firms without employees, which under the ACA could no longer buy a small group policy but had to buy coverage in the individual market.

Oscar said for some clients who wanted to use New York doctors, an AmeriHealth policy with an out-of-network benefit was the only option. He said he is hoping that in 2015, more insurers offer out-of-network plans.

Horizon spokesman Tom Vincz said that, while the company’s market share declined slightly, “We anticipated some decline in the first year of the exchange due to competitors who used extremely aggressive pricing to introduce their brand to consumers.” Vincz said some consumers may not have been aware that lower-priced plans also gave them a smaller network of doctors and hospitals.

Horizon’s exchange health plans require customers to use health providers within New Jersey; they don’t offer an “out of network” option. However, Vincz said Horizon’s Advantage plans have New Jersey’s largest network of hospitals and doctors and “provide our members with quality patient care and also work with us to keep premiums affordable for everyone. For those reasons, our plans only have in-network coverage.”

In 2015, Horizon will add several new plans, but Vincz said the company “is committed to keeping the purchasing process simple for consumers and not overwhelming them with too many plan choices or complex products,” Horizon is by far the state’s largest health insurer, with more than 3.7 million members.

“We are the oldest and largest health insurance company in New Jersey,” Vincz said. “The people of New Jersey have come to trust Horizon for the peace of mind we provide with large networks of doctors and hospitals and quality service. We know New Jersey. We live here.”

HRINJ partnered with QualCare, offering its members access to QualCare’s large New Jersey network of doctors and hospitals, covering “every corner of the state.” Jim Martin, chief executive of HRINJ, said his premiums were slightly higher than those of his competitors, but the company offered a significant value through its large network.

Martin said he was surprised by how price-sensitive consumers were, and that they were willing to forgo a larger network to get a lower price.

Martin said the company has filed its proposed 2015 health plans with government insurance regulators and “we have submitted plans that have lower prices than those we offered this year.” He said in 2015 the company plans to address consumer demand for out-of-network coverage, and is proposing some narrow-network plans with lower premiums.

Martin said the company is looking at offering plans to be marketed in a certain geographic region of the state, and be associated with a particular hospital and physician group. This type of narrow network would result in a more affordable health plan. Martin said that, given the affiliation with a well-known hospital and physician group, “the chamber of commerce would be very comfortable espousing it to their small group members.”

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Princeton once again nation's best college, according to U.S. News rankings

No sign of New Jersey race on new Formula One calendar

$141M residential tower planned for Jersey City waterfront; developer seeking tax abatement