Members of the SEIU 1199 union and local politicians picket a nursing home in New Milford, N.J. Jennifer Brown/Associated Press

The giant and politically influential Service Employees International Union’s endorsement of Hillary Clinton Tuesday gives the Democratic front-runner her 13th nod from a national labor union, underscoring the growing strength of her campaign.

Mrs. Clinton’s chief Democratic rival Bernie Sanders has received just two endorsements from national labor unions, reflecting the challenge ahead for the Vermont senator who’s also trailing Mrs. Clinton in polls.

With SEIU’s backing, Mrs. Clinton has secured support from many of the nation’s largest labor unions, including the National Education Association and the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees. The unions that have endorsed Mrs. Clinton collectively represent well over half of the nation’s 14.6 million union members in 2014.

SEIU, which has nearly two million members, said it chose to support Mrs. Clinton because she’s a leader who’ll fight to raise wages and stand up for working people. The union also said she values the kind of care work that many SEIU members do daily, including the work of home-care aides who’ve been fighting for higher minimum pay.

“SEIU members and working families across America are part of a growing movement to build a better future for their families, and Hillary Clinton will support and stand with them,” the union’s President Mary Kay Henry said in a statement Tuesday.

SEIU said it spent months gauging its members’ support of the candidates, including through polls and tele-town hall meetings. Mrs. Clinton consistently received more than 72% of members’ support, an SEIU spokesman said.

That wasn’t enough to stop a backlash on social media Tuesday from disgruntled SEIU members who back Mr. Sanders. Members of a group called SEIU for Bernie had been voicing concern for weeks that an endorsement of Mrs. Clinton could undermine the Fight for $15 campaign. The SEIU-funded wage campaign began with New York fast-food workers and has evolved into a nationwide push for a $15 federal minimum wage. The campaign is also trying to use the wage issue to build a bloc of like-minded voters for the 2016 elections.

Mr. Sanders backs a $15 federal minimum wage while Mrs. Clinton has said she supports a federal minimum of $12. When asked last week whether that would affect SEIU’s endorsement process, the union’s president Ms. Henry suggested there’s room for improvement. “For us, it’s about driving the movement alongside of the candidates,” she said in an interview.

For its part, the Sanders campaign sought to downplay the union endorsements for Mrs. Clinton, focusing instead on the support it has received from rank-and-file union members.

“We are gratified that hundreds of thousands of workers are part of the growing grassroots movement supporting Bernie’s campaign to help working families by raising the minimum wage, providing health care for all and making college affordable,” said Michael Briggs, a spokesman for Mr. Sanders’s campaign.