Topics: anti-poverty efforts, balanced budget amendment, Capital gains taxes, corporate tax, Defense spending, Estate Tax, Grover Norquist, Marco Rubio, Tax cuts, Tax reform, Taxes, Elections News, Politics News

For the third time in his political career, Marco Rubio has made a solemn pledge to Grover Norquist that he will never, ever raise taxes. Norquist’s anti-tax increase pledge has been a staple of Republican politics for a long time now, and Rubio happily signed it as a state legislator in Florida, again as a U.S. senator, and now once more as a candidate for the presidency. There was no actual reason for Rubio to genuflect before D.C.’s most prominent anti-tax zealot again, but he clearly wants to draw a bright line between himself and another Florida Republican in the 2016 mix, Jeb Bush, who has refused to sign Norquist’s pledge. Rubio, unlike Jeb, isn’t afraid to lend his name to this gimmicky stunt as many times as is necessary.

The practical realities of governing make Norquist’s pledge virtually impossible to adhere to, and Rubio has violated the pledge and its principles a number of times in the past, but let’s take him at his word and presume that President Marco Rubio will not raise a single red cent in taxes. That’s going to cause some problems for the rest of the Rubio agenda.

Let’s start with Rubio’s own tax plan, which will have to be tweaked a bit since it raises taxes on some lower- and middle-income families. Once he irons out those kinks, what he’ll be left with is a plan that eliminates all manner of taxes on rich people (capital gains, estate taxes, etc.) and throws some new tax credits at the middle class, the combined effect of which will be to rip an unprecedentedly large hole in the federal budget. Rubio would like to pretend that the shortfalls will be made up for by the rapid economic growth generated by the tax cuts, but there is no reason to believe that would happen.

That’s a problem in and of itself, but it also butts up hard against Rubio’s other disastrous economic policy proposal: a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution. Balanced budget amendments are a bad idea on their own, but Rubio’s talking about mandatory budget balancing while also reducing federal revenues by roughly $4 trillion over a decade. That’s going to require some deep and painful spending cuts.

And that brings us to yet another problem. Rubio wants to cut taxes and balance the budget but also drastically increase defense spending and maintain current levels of anti-poverty spending. This, as the Washington Post’s Matt O’Brien observed, leaves Rubio at odds with basic mathematics: