By Valerie Strauss, The Washington Post

There seems to be a never-ending stream of research reports about attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, or ADHD — the most commonly diagnosed neuro-behavioral disorder in U.S. children — and how it affects young people.

The latest is a study from the prestigious Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, which found that girls with childhood ADHD were “at a two-fold risk” of becoming obese compared with girls without the condition. Another recent report found increasing reports of ADHD among Hispanics, especially girls.

Yet while ADHD is a popular subject for the research community, many teachers and parents still do not understand the condition and all the ways it affects young people at home and in school.

What exactly is ADHD? It is a brain-based medical disorder that affects the behavior of people across age, gender, intelligence and socio-economic lines. Kids with ADHD may daydream a lot, talk too much, fidget, frequently forget and lose things, display impulsivity and risk-taking behavior and have trouble making transitions.

I talked with Ned Hallowell, one of the country’s foremost experts, about what parents and teachers need to know — but too often don’t understand — about how ADHD affects young people.

Hallowell is a child and adult psychiatrist, and was a member of the faculty of the Harvard Medical School from 1983 to 2004 until he began working full-time on his clinical practice, lectures and writing. Here are his insights:

“In fact, what we call ADD (a terrible term, as it is not a deficit of attention but rather a wandering of attention, and it is not a disorder in my opinion but rather a trait; if you manage it properly it can turn you into a phenomenal success, but if you don’t it can ruin your life, which makes it unique and fascinating) is really a type of mind, genetically transmitted, and composed of a wide array of complex and often contradictory tendencies.

“For example, the signature symptom, attention, may either occur in abundance or wander off. People with ADD can super-focus when they are really interested, as in playing video games, an instrument, a sport, or studying a subject they love; or they can wander off, when they lose interest, when the book is boring, the teacher is boring, Grandma is boring, or the car ride is too long. This inconsistency of attention can lead to inconsistent performance and underachievement in school (or, for adults, at work).

“Too often, teachers and parents (and bosses) jump to what I call “the moral diagnosis,” and ascribe the underachievement to lack of effort or laziness, which leads to lectures, punishments, and a gradual infection of the spirit with the viruses of shame and diminished sense of self. In fact, the correct diagnosis is of a brain difference, not a brain deficit, and certainly not a moral failing.

“On the positive side, which people rarely discuss, people with ADD are the people who founded this country. They tend to be visionaries, dreamers, explorers, inventors (Edison was a classic), path-finders, discoverers, entrepreneurs (almost all entrepreneurs have ADD), creative types, original thinkers, paradigm breakers, trend-setters, free thinkers, as well as being big-hearted, trusting, generous, and fun.”