A jail-house video obtained by The Colorado Independent shows a Denver Sheriff’s deputy who was suspended this week cold-cocking and kicking an inmate at the jail.

Deputy Thomas Ford, a 6½-year sheriff’s department veteran, is under investigation for inappropriate force against a detainee during the booking process Sunday evening at the downtown jail, Sheriff Gary Wilson said.

The video shows a deputy working at a copy machine as the inmate sits in a chair nearby. The two appear to exchange words, and the deputy walks toward the inmate, who gets up from the chair.

The deputy then punches him in the face and kicks him when he hits the ground.

A security camera recorded the incident. “When I viewed the video, I was very disturbed by the actions of one of our officers,” Wilson said Wednesday. “I was disturbed by the inappropriate use of force.”

Ford was also implicated in a 2011 choking attack on another inmate that has led to a federal lawsuit.

VIDEO: Security camera video from Denver jail

A second deputy, William Lewis, a 12-year department veteran, also has been placed on investigative leave for writing an inaccurate report related to the incident, Wilson said.

Both deputies are on paid leave during the investigation.

It’s the latest in a string of embarrassments for the department in which deputies have been accused of using inappropriate force, colluding with inmates and even helping an inmate escape.

A federal judge recently urged federal authorities to investigate practices of the Denver police and sheriff’s departments in another abuse case.

In that 2011 case, former inmate Jamal Hunter is suing the city over alleged abuse by deputies and his claims that deputies overlooked abuse by fellow inmates. Ford has not been named in the lawsuit.

However, a video that is part of the case shows Deputy Edward Keller grabbing Hunter’s neck and shoving him onto a bunk inside his cell. Ford is seen holding down Hunter.

“The present criminal investigation into Deputy Ford is the predictable consequence of the broken disciplinary system of the Denver Sheriff’s Department,” said Qusair Mohamedbhai, an attorney who represents Hunter in the lawsuit. “Failure to discipline officers for using excessive force on inmates creates a culture where unlawful force is condoned and tolerated.

“The rampant excessive force by Denver’s law enforcement is not due to alcohol or stress, but rather leadership that is unable or unwilling to address the root cause of the problem.”

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee