Topics: 9/11, Editor's Picks, isis, Islam, Muslims, Paris, September 11, syria refugees, News

On Sept. 14, 2001, 800 million Europeans in 43 countries observed three minutes of silence for the victims of 9/11. From Europe and around the world came pleas that the U.S. not squander this global goodwill. I recall the words of my brother John, a French-American Medieval scholar and co-author of “Europe and Islam: Fifteen Centuries of History,” who wrote then from France: “This massive unity of public opinion and political will provides the United States with a tremendous opportunity and risk: the chance to capitalize on this good will and the danger of taking action that will splinter the forces that stand with us now.”

Of course, we blew it, instead pursuing a foolhardy war under false pretense and prompting a 14-year ongoing nightmare: half a million Iraqi civilians dead, by one estimate, a deep and abiding rage against America and its occupation, and a mighty vacuum in the wake of Saddam Hussein that prompted the rise of ISIS and the biggest global refugee crisis since World War II.

Now, the fury has exploded, again: 129 people dead in Paris at the hands of a twisted ideology forged in a cauldron of rage, disenfranchisement, perverse religious interpretation and cool military calculation. And again, the West is faced with a choice: lash out in vengeance, stigmatize certain immigrants, and seal off the borders, or devise a more measured response in keeping with values that for centuries have led refugees to Western shores.

Clearly ISIS prefers a Western response grounded in vengeance and xenophobia. In early 2015, an article in Dabiq, the ISIS magazine, described an apocalyptic war between good and evil. The article celebrated the Charlie Hebdo massacre and “the blessed operations of September 11th,” endorsing a “call to Muslims everywhere … to carry out attacks against the crusaders wherever they may be found, with money and weapons so as to call to jihād … to further bring division to the world …” This emerging world is “divided into two camps,” the article proclaimed, quoting Osama bin Laden’s ironic endorsement of the words of George W. Bush: “Bush spoke the truth when he said, ‘Either you are with us or you are with the terrorists.’ Meaning, either you are with the crusade or you are with Islam.”

“The greater the hostility toward Muslims in Europe and the deeper the West becomes involved in military action in the Middle East, the closer ISIS comes to its goal of creating and managing chaos,” write Scott Atran and Nafees Hamid in “The War ISIS wants,” an article in the New York Review of Books. Indeed the ISIS vision is already playing out across devastated landscapes in Iraq and Syria, in flotillas of rubber dinghies in the Mediterranean, and in the streams of refugees moving north into the heart of Europe. Now, as anti-Muslim and anti-immigrant sentiment builds, hard-right nativists in Europe and America are operating precisely as ISIS hoped they would.

The Dabiq article foresaw increasing repression against Muslims in the West, which could eventually lead to a Muslim repatriation “to the Islamic State…thereby escap[ing] persecution of the crusader government and citizens.” What ISIS calls the “grayzone” – the Western landscape where Muslims can seek safety and live peaceably with their secular neighbors – is “on the brink of extinction.” Thus do the Islamic State and the empowered global right – from France’s National Front to Austria’s Freedom Party to the Republican Congress and presidential candidates in the U.S. – forge common cause. President Obama mocked Republicans this week, saying they were afraid of “widows and orphans,” and adding, “We are not well served when, in response to a terrorist attack, we descend into fear and panic.” The remarks prompted Donald Trump to label Obama a threat to the nation, and Ted Cruz to challenge the president to “insult me to my face.” The next day, by a landslide the House voted to drastically tighten screening for Syrian refugees, even though it already takes 18 to 24 months to process them — hardly a procedure terrorists would submit to.

“American politicians just don’t have a basic understanding of the threat that we face,” Shadi Hamid, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution’s Center for Middle East Policy, told Al Monitor. ISIS, he said, “wants to provoke a clash of civilizations. That’s the intent. So when we use similar language, we’re falling into their trap.”

In recent days, amid François Hollande’s pledge of a “merciless war” and GOP-led efforts to ban Syrian refugees (unless they are Christian), a small chorus of dissenting voices has urged calm. “An event like this cannot shake the foundations of society unless we let it,” Harvard professor of international relations Stephen Walt argues in Foreign Policy. “If the Islamic State can get France and other countries to crack down on their Muslim citizens and also get the West to reoccupy large swaths of the Middle East, then its false narrative about the West’s deep and intrinsic antipathy to Islam will gain more credence, as will its carefully cultivated image as the staunchest defender of Islam today.”

Walt, while taking pains to underscore that he is “most certainly not defending, excusing, or rationalizing” terrorism, nevertheless declares: “At the same time, to pretend that American and European actions have nothing whatsoever to do with this problem is to bury one’s head in the sand and ignore the obvious.” He adds:

Decades of misguided U.S. and European policies have left many people in the Arab and Islamic world deeply angry at and resentful toward the West. Those policies include the West’s cozy coddling of various Arab dictators, its blind support for Israel’s brutal policies toward the Palestinians, and its own willingness to wage air campaigns, employ sanctions, or invade Middle Eastern countries whenever it thinks doing so suits its short-term interest.

In the days after 9/11 in America, when fear gripped the nation and mainstream news anchors began to wear American flag lapel pins during their broadcasts, such sentiments – from Susan Sontag in the New Yorker and Bill Maher on “Politically Incorrect” – were viciously attacked. In France in 2015, according to close observers, there is a similar resistance to look within. Most if not all of the Paris attackers, after all, were not refugees fleeing Syria, but the European-born sons and grandsons of Arab and North African migrants to France and Belgium.(Which makes suspending the entry of Syrian refugees to the U.S. all the more senseless.) In France, their homes are in the banlieues, the marginalized, neglected suburbs (sometimes called “zones of banishment”) at the edge of Paris, and other like communities.

Just after the attacks, a friend of mine, an American-born businessman based for two decades between Asia and France who worked and was educated in Paris (and who requested anonymity because of his business dealings), wrote a letter to a Paris-based friend. The attackers, my friend wrote,