Rep. Mike Coffman of Aurora said Saturday he supports women’s healthcare, but not abortion practices that “fly in the face of human decency,” and that’s why he joined other House Republicans to vote for a budget bill Friday that defunds Planned Parenthood for one year.

The same legislation, HR 3762, also is aimed at providing stopgap funding to keep federal agencies operating in the fiscal year that begins next Thursday. And in the latest vote aimed at unraveling Obamacare, the Restoring Americans’ Healthcare Freedom Reconciliation Act would end the requirement for all Americans to obtain health insurance, as well as for employers to provide it.

“I strongly support funding traditional women’s health services, like broad access to birth control and contraception especially to poor and underserved communities, through community health centers and other medical partnerships that act and operate in good faith every day,” Coffman said in a statement to The Denver Post on

Saturday.

“Many longtime supporters of Planned Parenthood are not only shocked by what’s been revealed, but also by Planned Parenthood’s arrogant response. Until they clean up their act, we should fund critical women’s services through the many other community health partners that operate across my district, the state and all across this country in a way that doesn’t fly in the face of human decency.”

Though the budget bill needs only a simple majority of 51 votes in the Senate, where there are 54 Republicans, it has a tough to road ahead. Some conservatives — including presidential candidates Sens. Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio — want an all-out repeal of Obamacare, while a handful of moderates oppose defunding Planned Parenthood. Colorado Rep. Ken Buck of

Regardless, the bill would face a certain veto if it made it to the president’s desk.

Coffman’s Democratic opponent in next year’s race in Congressional District 6, state Sen. Morgan Carroll of Aurora, was quick to criticize him for the latest Planned Parenthood vote, an issue Democrats appear eager to use against him in the campaign.

“It is appalling to see people playing political games with women’s lives, bodies and personal freedoms,” Carroll said in a statement Friday evening.

Coffman’s campaign said the bill he supported Friday helps to “ensure that women who receive non-abortion services from Planned Parenthood can continue to receive those health care services elsewhere. The measure increases by $235 million (to $3.8 billion) the amounts provided under existing law to community health centers for both FY 2016 and FY 2017.”

Coffman cited undercover videos released earlier last summer by the anti-abortion group Center for Medical Progress that allegedly showed Planned Parenthood executives — including Dr. Savita Gindeas, Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains’ vice president and medical director — suggesting an illegal sale of of fetal tissue for medical research.

Planned Parenthood vehemently denied the allegations and said the videos were edited to be misleading. Nonetheless, the videos set off a backlash from anti-abortion Republicans in Washington, including Coffman, as well as in a handful of state legislatures.

At the same time, Coffman has touted his support for pregnant women in the workplace, co-sponsoring the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act.

After he voted for the Defund Planned Parenthood Act in September, he said the videos, however, “shock the conscience.”

“Imposing a one-year moratorium on Planned Parenthood funding will give Congress and the American people time to investigate and evaluate the serious allegations made,” he said then. “I am pleased to see that Colorado’s federally qualified health clinics will receive funding to ensure women’s access to health care.”

Democrats have criticized Coffman’s votes to take funding from Planned Parenthood after he used the organization’s logo and past support for him in a campaign ad last year.

ProgressNow Colorado, the state’s largest liberal advocacy group, called on him to apologize.

“Just a year ago, Mike Coffman was so desperate to run away his right-wing image that he misleadingly used Planned Parenthood’s logo in a campaign ad,” said executive director Amy Runyon Harms said on Sept. 18. “Today, Coffman proved that his claims that he stands with women and their families were nothing more than a smokescreen to protect his political career.”