Two Jacksonville-area hospitals are being penalized after a federal program determined that their patients receive high rates of preventable injuries during their stays.

UF Health Jacksonville and Memorial Hospital Jacksonville will have their Medicare payments docked by 1 percent through September, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS. The reductions could cost them between $349,000 and more than $1 million.

The penalties come from an Affordable Care Act program that uses financial incentives to encourage hospitals to improve care. The program examined two types of infections often contracted by patients: bloodstream infections from tubes inserted into veins to deliver fluids and urinary tract infections from catheters. It also factored in other injuries, including broken hips, pressure ulcers and ruptures of surgical wounds.

Ed Fraser Memorial Hospital in Macclenny will also be fined because it didn’t submit some of the data used to determine the penalties, CEO Dennis Markos said in a letter to the Times-Union.

At UF Health Jacksonville, patients received a higher rate of accidental cuts and tears than the national average, according to CMS data collected between July 2011 and June 2013.

Memorial Hospital had an above-average rate for serious blood clots that formed after surgery. The two hospitals performed at the national average for several other types of complications.

UF Health Jacksonville and Memorial Hospital both performed below national standards for rates of urinary tract infections from catheters, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention collected between October 2012 and September 2013. UF Health Jacksonville met the national standard for bloodstream infections. Memorial was above the standard.

“We do not believe the measures accurately reflect the overall service our organization provides,” UF Health Jacksonville spokesman Daniel Leveton said in a statement sent via email after declining a request for an interview. He said the hospital recently tried to make “timely reviews of all infections” and has improved its protocols for catheter use, which has led to a drop in infections.

In a previous Times-Union article about rates of infections at local hospitals, Leveton said UF Health Jacksonville is at a disadvantage in medical studies because it serves patients with less access to care. UF Health Jacksonville is a teaching hospital that is one of the state’s largest Medicaid providers, according to its website.

In response to a request for an interview, representatives of Memorial Hospital pointed to a statement the hospital issued for the Times-Union article about infection rates. In that statement, the hospital said it was working to improve its performance on the infection rates. Officials didn’t specify what improvements were involved.

FINANCIAL IMPACT

The penalties could tear a hefty chunk out of the three hospitals’ revenues.

UF Health Jacksonville collected $145 million in Medicare payments in fiscal year 2014, Leveton said. That means a 1 percent decrease in Medicare payments could cost the hospital around $1.45 million.

Memorial Hospital declined to give information about the financial impact of its penalty.

A CMS database of Medicare charges, which includes information only for some medical procedures, indicates that Memorial Hospital collected at least $34.9 million in Medicare payments in fiscal year 2012. A 1 percent penalty, then, could take away about $349,000 in revenue.

In 2012, Medicare payments represented about 16 percent of Ed Fraser’s net revenue from patients, which totaled $23.4 million, according to the hospital’s nonprofit filings. Judging by those numbers, a 1 percent penalty would deprive the hospital of about $37,000 in revenue.

Ed Fraser decided not to report the patient injury data to CMS because the hospital’s rates of patient injuries are so low that “we would be reporting zeros,” said Markos, the CEO. “Since we have no meaningful data we do not take the expense to report at all.”

The hospital plans to start submitting the data in 2015, he said.

Nationwide, 22 percent of hospitals evaluated by CMS are facing reduced Medicare payments.

In Florida, 31 of the 166 hospitals evaluated are being penalized, or 18.7 percent. For other states, the rates ranged from zero for Hawaii and Vermont to 50 percent for Utah and 45.2 percent for Connecticut.

The penalties are falling especially hard on academic hospitals like UF Health, with about half of teaching hospitals penalized.

They also tend to hit hospitals that serve poorer patients, according to Kaiser Health News, a nonprofit that analyzes the health care industry.

NATIONAL EFFORT

In recent years, rates of injuries that patients receive in hospitals — often referred to as “hospital-acquired conditions” — have been in decline, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Since 2010, the national rate of hospital-acquired conditions declined 17 percent, from 145 to 121 patients per thousand discharged from hospitals, according to a report from the department. That reduction prevented about 50,000 deaths and created $12 billion in cost savings for the American health system, the report said.

The fines are part of a larger effort by the federal government to bring down health costs with financial incentives. In October, eight local hospitals were fined by Medicare because the federal government determined that too many of their patients were returning for more treatment within a month of release, according to CMS.

That included Memorial Hospital Jacksonville, which received a 0.81 percent reduction in Medicare payments, and UF Health Jacksonville, with a 0.48 percent reduction. St. Vincent’s Medical Center Southside received the largest fine locally, with a 2.86 percent reduction. The maximum possible reduction was 3 percent.

Nationwide, 2,614 out of 3,383 hospitals, or 77.2 percent, were fined for their readmissions rates. In Florida, 88.6 percent of hospitals were fined.

Richard Webner: (904) 359-4370