By Bonnie Watson Coleman

It's easy to assume that offering additional fair housing opportunities solves one, simple problem: providing homes for individuals who struggle to cover rent.

But these opportunities provide much more than that. Many of our nation's greatest public policy challenges are systemic in nature, and providing access to affordable housing, balanced across every community, rather than in underserved urban cores, addresses those challenges at their roots.

We can solve violence and crime with employment opportunities — and putting affordable homes in communities with convenient access to jobs gives every New Jerseyan that chance.

Urban centers struggle with poverty and lack the resources to adequately serve the needs of their residents. Putting affordable housing in every community balances the responsibility, which means urban resources can be used more efficiently.

Actions at the federal and state levels have prepared New Jersey to achieve two important goals:

Ensuring our State Constitution's fair housing promise is finally met for millions of New Jersey families. Placing our state ahead of the curve on housing once more.

Last year's New Jersey Supreme Court decision removing the state-operated Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) from the process of deciding on where and when to build affordable homes in our communities sent a clear message to municipalities across our state.

Hundreds of towns and cities have now begun to prepare housing plans in response, ending the delays that have harmed tens of thousands of working families, people with disabilities and seniors struggling to pay their rents each month.

Over the course of our history, fair housing policies have been integral in making our state more inclusive. The Mount Laurel Doctrine, requiring every municipality to provide fair housing opportunities, not only helped to shelter our most vulnerable, but also brought down housing costs for middle class families. Since 1980, we've built more than 65,000 homes for struggling New Jerseyans, seniors, and people with disabilities.

Those same policies have also played a vital role in economic growth, transforming vacant office parks and strip malls into thriving new neighborhoods and offering jobs in the process.

RELATED: Critics baffled by Christie's vow to fix affordable housing

And with change at the federal level, renewed focus and action on affordable housing will make New Jersey the role model for other states to follow.

The federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) recently issued new guidance on provisions of the Fair Housing Act, which was passed alongside many other anti-discrimination measures during the Civil Rights movement almost 50 years ago. HUD will now take steps to make sure that funds for several of its most important urban redevelopment and housing programs — including funding for public housing agencies and for the Community Development Block Grant program — are used in ways that promote integrated communities and increase access to housing for working families.

The very same goals are set by our own Mount Laurel Doctrine.

During my time as Majority Leader in the state Assembly, I led the fight to finally abolish Regional Contribution Agreements (RCA) with then-Speaker Joe Roberts. For far too long, RCA's allowed wealthy towns to pay other municipalities to meet their fair housing requirements by rehabilitating existing housing.

Getting rid of these agreements required every community to provide affordable housing opportunities, instead of concentrating these homes in already impoverished areas and sending them even deeper into the spiral of poverty. With the passage of A-500, which abolished RCA's, we finally addressed the patterns that made New Jersey metropolitan areas even more segregated than places like Atlanta and Birmingham.

But the fight doesn't end there.

Ensuring access to affordable housing in vibrant communities, with strong schools and employment opportunities, addresses many other problems at their root. Persistent issues like truancy, crime, and economic instability are greatly reduced when you build diverse mixed-income communities. And ensuring balance in where we place affordable homes brings diversity to every community — a source of strength that no one should undervalue.

Bonnie Watson Coleman is a Democrat representing New Jersey's 12th District in Congress.

Follow NJ.com Opinion on Twitter @NJ_Opinion. Find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.