President Obama is wise to Republican tactics which was why he preemptively destroyed their lies and misinformation about his clean energy plan during his speech today.

During his speech announcing his clean power plant plan, President Obama said:



There will be critics of what we’re trying to do. There will be cynics who say it can not be done. Long before the details of this clean energy plan were even decided, the special interests and their allies in Congress were already mobilizing to oppose it with everything they got.

They will claim that this plan will cost you money. Even though this plan the analysis shows long-term will save the average American eighty-five dollars a month on their energy bills.

They’ll claim that we need to slash our investments in clean energy. It’s a waste of money. Even though, they are happy to spend billions of dollars a year in subsidizing oil companies.

They’ll claim this plan will kill jobs. Even though our transition to a cleaner energy economy has the solar industry to just name one example creating jobs ten times faster than the rest of the economy.

They’ll claim this plan is a war on coal to scare up votes. Even as they ignore my plan to actually invest in revitalizing coal country and supporting healthcare and retirement for coal miners and their families and retraining those workers for better-paying jobs and healthier jobs.

Communities across America have been losing coal jobs for decades. I want to work with Congress to help them, not to use them as a political football.

Partisan press releases aren’t going to help those families.

Even more cynical, we’ve got critics of this plan who actually claiming that this will harm minority and low-income communities. Even though climate change hurts those Americans the most, who are the most vulnerable.

Today an African-American child is more than twice as likely to be hospitalized from asthma. A Latino child is forty percent more likely to die from asthma.

So if you care about low-income minority communities start protecting the air that they breathe and stop trying to rob them of their healthcare.



President Obama isn’t waiting for Republicans and their Koch masters to get their attack machine into high gear. The criticisms that are certain to come to the surface have been floating around conservative media for months. The Koch brothers have been using their vast organizational network to spread misinformation, and right-wing blogs and websites have quickly jumped on board.

The reality is that Republicans are opposed to clean air and human beings having a healthy environment to live in. Obama was correct. There is no “war on coal.” Coal jobs have been declining for decades due in large part to the rise of the natural gas industry.

The tactics that Republicans and their allies are utilizing should seem familiar because this is the same strategy that they have used in their attempts to destroy Obamacare. Republicans want to scare people away from a plan that will help them through a barrage of lies and misinformation.

President Obama is ready to beat them at their own game by derailing the misinformation express before it has a chance to get rolling.