Buy Photo Yvonne Sweeten of Henderson speaks to Rules and Bylaws Committee Chairman Jordan Ross at the Nevada Republican Party state convention on Sunday. Sweeten was discussing an amendment that would remove elected officials as automatic members of the state central committee. (Photo: Seth A. Richardson/RGJ)Buy Photo

3:19 p.m. update:

Convention-goers were forced to use paper ballots instead of the much faster electronic voting since the hardware was unavailable. Instead of waiting for the ballots to be counted, the party will take them and tabulate the results later.

With the votes finally in, the convention was officially adjourned.

2:11 p.m. update:

The body passed its platform as it was presented to them without debate. Unlike the Washoe County Republican Party platform, the state platform left out many of the socially conservative planks that upset some younger voters.

There was a motion to turn the seven-page platform into a single page that was defeated resoundingly by the body.

Here are a few planks from the platform:

Abolishing the Internal Revenue Service

Eliminating minimum wage and prevailing wage laws

Opposing common core, supporting student-loan privatization

Implementing voter-ID laws

Supporting Yucca Mountain

Making English the official language

Defunding President Barack Obama’s health care plan.

Follow along live as RGJ political reporter Seth A. Richardson covers the event on Twitter and through updates at RGJ.com.

12:17 p.m. update:

The convention passed a resolution denouncing lawmakers who voted in favor of the Commerce Tax, including Republican Gov. Brian Sandoval.

The Commerce Tax has been contentious since the governor ushered it through the 2015 Legislature as a way to fund education in the state. It overwhelmingly passed the Legislature, including with Republican support.

The resolution passed Sunday initially only honored those who voted against the plan, but an amendment included the denunciation of lawmakers who supported the measure.

The governor is not in attendance at the state convention.

12:10 p.m. update:

The delegation passed several resolutions that would support the repeal of Obamacare, oppose a mandatory gun background-checks ballot initiative this November, support voter-ID laws and call on the executive branch to investigate “recent hostile actions by federal law enforcement officials against Nevada residents.”

The body is now discussing two resolutions, one honoring lawmakers who voted against the Commerce Tax and another supporting state control of public lands.

11:56 a.m. update:

Republicans debated a rule that would remove elected officials as automatic members of the state central committee that ultimately failed.

Elected officials are automatically members of the state central committee. The change would have removed that rule, essentially kicking out elected officials from the group. They would still be able to run as regular members of the committee.

Chairman Michael McDonald rebuked the rule, saying there are lawmakers who actively avoid the party, but the ones who do the “heavy lifting” – raising money, serving in the Legislature and the like – deserve to be rewarded for their service.

The motion ultimately failed despite operatives from Donald Trump’s campaign holding up a sign that said “Yes,” indicating how they wanted their members to vote.

10:17 a.m. update:

The Republican Party released its endorsement recommendations for state Senate and Assembly races. The list is not final and must be approved by the convention.

The list of endorsements for Northern Nevada races includes Jennifer Terhune over Jill Tolles, Kime King and Clint Jamison for Assembly District 25 in southwest Reno; Lisa Krasner over Jason Guinasso in Assembly District 26 in south Reno; and Chris Forbush and Sam England over Al Kramer and incumbent Assemblyman P.K. O’Neill in Carson City.

The committee also recommended endorsing Eugene Hoover over Heidi Gansert in Senate District 15 in south Reno.

The convention will not endorse in congressional races.

Original post:

Sunday marks day two of the Nevada Republican Party's state convention. The body selected 27 delegates yesterday amid a fairly low-key event. To read yesterday's recap, click here.

Beginning at 9 a.m. today, the party will decide on a platform, pass referendums, elect state central committee members and endorse for the June 14 primary.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/27oYcDm