A high-ranking Republican said Wednesday that New York Sen. Chuck Schumer, who could take over as the Senate's top Democrat in less than two years, may be someone GOP lawmakers could work with.Schumer could replace Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid when the Nevada lawmaker retires at the end of his current term.During an appearance on MSNBC's "Morning Joe," Sen. John Thune. R-S.D., hinted that Republicans might be able to work well with Schumer."I've had a good experience working with Chuck Schumer. I think he's a guy who likes to get things done, he likes to make deals," said Thune, the No. 3 Republican in the Senate."And whether or not that changes when he becomes the leader remains to be seen. But I think he's a guy we can do business with. And so I have hopes."Thune said getting things done on Capitol Hill in both of the Republican-controlled chambers needs to be a two-party effort."You have to have cooperation from Democrats to get anything done," he said. "The American people want results."During the last few years of Reid's time as Senate Majority Leader, it was often difficult to get anything done in Congress because Republicans clashed with Reid's style. The GOP responded with filibusters, while Reid pushed aside bills that passed in the Republican-controlled House under Speaker John Boehner. Schumer is already receiving support from several high-ranking Democrats, and he has noticeably increased his presence in Washington since Reid announced his plans to retire last week. Schumer made news in November when he said Democrats were wrong in passing the Affordable Care Act in 2010."Unfortunately, Democrats blew the opportunity the American people gave them" in electing Obama and a Democratic Congress in 2008 amid a recession, Schumer said. "We took their mandate and put all our focus on the wrong problem — health care reform."The plight of uninsured Americans and the hardships created by unfair insurance company practices certainly needed to be addressed. But it wasn't the change we were hired to make."