Severe weather continues to move from the mountains through the Front Range on Monday night, prompting severe weather and flood warnings across the state.

A storm capable of producing heavy rain and small hail moved through the Denver area about 10 p.m., the National Weather Service in Boulder said. Downtown Denver was briefly blanketed in a thick downpour.

The southbound storm could move into northern El Paso County around midnight, dropping “locally heavy rain and some hail,” according to the service’s Pueblo office.

Northern Colorado is taking the brunt of the weather system. Flooding is being reported in Loveland and Fort Collins as a series of severe thunderstorms moves through northern Colorado.

A flash flood warning was issued for the High Park burn scar about 8 p.m. Monday. The service in Boulder said that flooding will occur in Larimer City with heavy rain.

The service reported standing mud and water on roads surrounding the burn scar.

Storms were expected to be especially fierce in the Colorado Springs area, where emergency responders were preparing for significant flooding.

While damage wasn’t on par with last summer’s floods in Manitou Springs, which caused millions in damage, The Gazette of Colorado Springs reported minor flooding in Green Mountain Falls and Cascade west of the city. Lower floors of some homes in those areas filled with muddy water, according to The Gazette.

A thunderstorm system in the area prompted the closure of U.S. 24 from Manitou Springs to Cascade around 1:30 p.m. The road was reopened about an hour later but was closed again before reopening at about 3:15 p.m. Closures caused heavy traffic.

Another storm also pounded the area about 5 p.m., prompting a flood warning.

Fountain Creek was flowing fast and high through Manitou Springs, but unlike in last summer’s deadly floods did not significantly overflow its banks.

About 9 p.m., the weather service in Pueblo said that there is still a chance that more thunderstorms could develop over the Waldo Canyon scar Monday night.

A tornado briefly touched down northeast of Lamar, according to the Colorado State Patrol. The patrol said the tornado caused no damage.

Severe weather could continue Tuesday as another round of thunderstorms could pass through the Front Range, said David Barjenbruch.

“They will be hitting this variety,” he said of Tuesday’s storms as compared to Monday’s.

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jesseapaul