Akinwumi Adesina, the former Nigerian Agriculture Minister, took over this week as president of the African Development Bank. In an exclusive interview with WSJ Frontiers, Adesina said his top priorities would be energy (“my number one priority will be to power Africa, and to light up Africa”), inequality (“we have to achieve shared prosperity”) agriculture (“we could unlock new income for literally hundreds of millions of people”), youth unemployment (“Africa’s heartland is bleeding”) and developing the continent’s financial infrastructure (“it’s not just about making a few more loans.”)

Akinwumi Adesina. European Pressphoto Agency

Adesina also promised to use the bank’s balance sheet to create “risk guarantees that will enable the private sector to deploy capital,” and to help African countries cope with the impact of the China’s slowing growth and the decline in global commodities prices.

Zambia is one of those countries. Its copper miners are struggling against a range of headwinds that have conspired to create the most difficult operating environment for a decade, writes the Journal’s Nicholas Bariyo. Some complain that policy missteps from Zambia’s government have dramatically increased the industry’s vulnerability to the commodities rout and slowing Chinese demand. Whatever the reason, the impact is onerous: Up to 60% of the country’s nearly 30,000 contract miners have been put on notice for possible layoffs, according to James Chansa, president of the National Union of Miners and Allied Workers.

Argentina‘s fortunes appear to be changing. The WSJ’s Taos Turner writes that its economy is improving and is less likely to slip into recession within the next six months, according to a new study by Torcuato Di Tella University. The study keeps track of 10 indicators, including industrial production and monthly economic output. Seven of the indicators rose in July.

The country also enjoyed a breakthrough in its dispute with creditors owed billions. A U.S. court ruled this week that creditors can’t seize the assets of its central bank, Julie Wernau writes. The decision marks a key reversal of a district-court ruling that would have opened the sovereign nation’s reserves to hedge funds who sought to declare Banco Central de la Republica Argentina (BCRA) an “alter ego” of the South American nation.

As Myanmar’s parliament goes on recess ahead of the upcoming general elections, crucial laws related to the economy are still stuck in limbo, writes Shibani Mahtani.

Yangon harbor, Myanmar iStock

There is now very little chance that key new laws that Myanmar investors and financial institutions have been waiting for—including a new investment law, companies act and the banks and financial institutions law—will be passed before a new government is formed early next year. One analyst summed up the problem: “What is missing in the current government’s approach to economic reform is commitment and follow through.”

Iran is about to prove whether it can follow through on recent efforts to rejoin the global economy as the country’s parliament decides whether to accept the landmark nuclear agreement forged with world powers in July, Jay Solomon writes. President Hassan Rouhani and his negotiators—relative moderates within the ruling establishment—have publicly fought against allowing the Iranian parliament, or Majlis, to hold a vote on the deal because of concerns that lawmakers could impose legal barriers to its implementation. But top leaders made clear the Majlis would play a central role.

While the political maneuvering continues, businesses in the Gulf region are positioning themselves to capitalize on the anticipated lifting of sanctions on Iran, Rory Jones and Nicolas Parasie report. Such developments could begin to shift the region’s center of economic gravity from Saudi Arabia, the world’s biggest oil producer, to Iran, home to an educated and burgeoning middle class, they note.

Saudi Arabia’s King Salman was in Washington this week to emphasize the importance of the kingdom’s ties to the U.S. At a forum timed to coincide with the visit, the governor of Saudi Arabia’s General Investment Authority, Abdullatif Al-Othman, announced a package of measures aimed at increasing his country’s attractiveness as an investment destination.

The measures include simplifying investment applications, improving access to talent and streamlining visa processing for entrepreneurs and small businesses.

Morgan Stanley says lower oil prices and a failure to adjust their currencies rapidly enough have taken a toll on growth in Kazakhstan and Nigeria, the Journal’s Chiara Albanese writes. The IMF, in a report after a visit to the country by its Middle East and Central Asia director, identified a few more problems that the country is facing, including the slowdown in Russia and China, its excessive reliance on oil and the spillover effects of global volatility.

The result? “Economic growth has decelerated sharply and financial conditions have tightened,” the report says. Not entirely surprisingly, Kazakhstan’s “growth outlook has weakened.” The IMF’s prescription for returning the economy to health includes “decisive implementation of bold structural reforms” in key areas such as the rule of law and financial intermediation, as well as improvements to the business climate and diversification of the economy.

The past year has been tough for frontier-market investors but Gustavo Galindo, senior portfolio manager of the Russell Frontier Markets Equity Fund, says promising investment opportunities are appearing. “Some managers are now finding fresh opportunities in these riskier markets,” Galindo says. “This hasn’t yet translated into significant capital flows, but we think that long-term investors in this space have good chances to benefit over time.”

Russell also this week published a handy guide for investors considering putting money to work in frontier markets.

Key Stories from the WSJ

From Piles of Trash Sprout Demands for Change in Lebanon

Scandals Upend Guatemala’s Presidential Election

Venezuela Says China to Provide $5 Billion Oil Loan

Venezuela Causes Upheaval on Colombian Border

Congolese Militia Leader Bosco Ntaganda Goes on Trial

Eni Reports Huge Natural-Gas Discovery off Egyptian Coast

Around the Web

Bangladesh Expands Use of Solar Power to Irrigation

Bangladesh Plans Twin 600MW Coal Plants To Ease Power Shortage

Taiwan and Vietnam to Discuss Investment Agreement

IMF Approves Second Disbursement to Ghana

Kenya Study Shows How Cellphone Use Could Predict Epidemics

Kenya Top in Affordable Financial Services

Africa Stocks Lead Frontier Market Loser List as Bears Take Hold

Indigenous Activists Shut Down Parts of Ecuador Over Land And Water Rights

Sign up here to have This Week on the Frontiers delivered to your inbox.