Veronica Roach’s casket is brought down the steps after the service in Long Branch. Many dressed in white. (Photo: Unheard Voices Magazine )

Family and friends this week remembered the lives of murder victims Joan Colbert and her foster daughter, Veronica Roach, 10, during a service at the Second Baptist Church.

Colbert and Roach were found dead in their Lippincott Avenue home Aug. 1.

On Thursday, the Monmouth County Prosecutor’s Office announced that Colbert’s cousin, Brian Farmer, had been arrested and charged with their murders. He said the murders happened during a confrontation in which Colbert found Farmer taking pornographic pictures of the girl.

The Going Home Service, which celebrated the life stories of Colbert and Roach, was held Tuesday morning at the church. Their two caskets were placed at the front of the congregation, each with a simple spray of pink and purple flowers on top.

Colbert was known in the neighborhood as a friendly and cheerful person who cared for neighborhood children. She had raised Roach since she was an infant.

Jasmine Roach said she gave birth to Veronica at age 17 and turned to Colbert to raise the child.

“I was young at the time,” Roach said. “I needed help.”

Roach already had given birth to another daughter at age 16. The mother of five said Veronica and Colbert frequently visited Roach’s other children and extended family.

Veronica’s grandfather, Albert Williams, said Colbert was “like the Mother Teresa of the neighborhood.”

Roach was the daughter of Charley Bracey and Jasmine Roach. She attended Long Branch Public School and loved to play, dance and most of all be around her friends and family, according to her obituary.

Roach is survived by her parents; three sisters, Makyia, Egypt and Azzura; two brothers, Ernton and Ahmine, and many aunts, uncles and cousins, according to the obituary.

Colbert was the daughter of the late Milton, Sr. and Mildred Colbert. Joan attended the Long Branch Public School and graduated in 1970. She worked and loved everyone who came in contact with her and was an active member in the community, according to her obituary.

Colbert is survived by one daughter, Markeya Butcher, three grandsons, Andre, Jaylen and Brandyn Jackson; her brothers and sisters, Irving, Milton, Ernie, George, John, Freddy, Jean, Evelyn, Betty Ann, Marilyn and Lorraine and many nieces, nephews and cousins.

The deaths are the second double homicide in Long Branch in a little more than a year. A couple was stabbed to death on Sairs Avenue on March 25, 2013. That crime remains unsolved.

Stephanie Loder: 732-456-2159

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1ow3wAy