In February, 1984, early in the election year, the columnist Meg Greenfield noted the Democratic Party’s reputation as “the kind of gang that can’t shoot straight mainly because it’s unwilling to shoot at all, even in self-defense.” Greenfield was referring to foreign policy, specifically, but the caricature fit the fractious Party as a whole. Three decades later, the Democrats’ aim is far from perfect, but nobody really doubts that it’s the Republican Party, today, that can’t shoot straight, unless it’s shooting itself straight in the foot. Donald Trump’s serial triumphs, the flat-footedness of the “Never Trump” forces, and the hope, openly expressed by otherwise sober-minded adults, for a brokered bloodletting at the Republican National Convention, in July—it has all come to look like an elaborate, if unwitting, act of self-sabotage. The Republicans’ refusal to consider an Obama nominee to the Supreme Court, too, has the feel of a trap that the G.O.P. set and sprung for itself. As soon as they started it, some Republicans appeared to regret the timing, which followed the news of Antonin Scalia’s death as a foot on a gas pedal follows a green light. Even the instigators—the majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and the rest of the Senate leadership—have seemed eager to change the subject to something less contentious, like a bipartisan bill to address drug abuse. Within days, opinion polls suggested that the G.O.P. had miscalculated badly: according to the Pew Research Center, only thirty-eight per cent of Americans support the blockade.

On February 25th, Senator Harry Reid and other Democrats stood on the Supreme Court steps and scolded Republicans: “Do your job.” (There is, of course, a hashtag.) Politico is calling this a “shame campaign,” though it might, more accurately, be described as a “Schadenfreude campaign”: Democrats are having fun with this. At Reid’s prompting, the White House said that it might nominate Governor Brian Sandoval, of Nevada, a Republican, to fill Scalia’s seat, and Democrats like Nancy Pelosi claimed to be open to the possibility, plainly to make Republicans say no to one of their own. (They obliged. So did Sandoval, who withdrew his name from consideration.) Obama is now, according to reports, considering Jane Kelly, an Iowa judge on the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, whom Charles Grassley, the Iowa Republican who chairs the Senate Judiciary Committee, once warmly praised. And last week the President summoned Grassley, McConnell, Reid, and Patrick Leahy to the Oval Office for a meeting about the Court. The discussion was brief, and the Republicans left the West Wing without speaking to reporters. Democrats, with cheerful indignation, went back to pressing the issue. “If any of us needed a reminder of just how important it is to take back the United States Senate and hold onto the White House just look at the Supreme Court,” Hillary Clinton said.

It couldn’t be clearer that Republicans are risking a backlash. Swing-state senators may be feeling it already, according to polls. In Ohio, where Rob Portman is up for reëlection, and in Pennsylvania, where Pat Toomey will likely face a tough fight, three out of four voters disapprove of Senate Republicans’ reflexive opposition to any Obama nominee. Why, then, is McConnell refusing to back down? Why is his Party touting the Court issue in fund-raising e-mails? Is this just sheer cussedness—or, maybe, a show of deference to conservative interest groups that rely, for their victories, more on unelected judges than on Congress? Or is it possible that, appearances aside, the Majority Leader has a strategy here? He has always been more of a survivor than a grand strategist, but, either way, McConnell seems to be the most confident man in an otherwise uncertain caucus, and now looks calm in his conviction that the Court fight won’t hurt Republicans as much as most observers think—and that it might even help them. He may be proven right.

First, let’s put to rest suggestions that McConnell will buckle, open his mind to a judicial moderate, or cut some kind of deal with the White House. This underrates McConnell’s resolve (and overstates his capacity for embarrassment). He is almost certain to succeed in blocking Obama’s selection, whoever he or she turns out to be, and regardless of what happens in the Presidential campaign. McConnell is not banking on the election of a Republican President. (Not one he can stand, at any rate. He has made clear his loathing of both Trump and Ted Cruz.) And if obstructing Obama kicks the can to a Hillary Clinton Administration, so be it: McConnell would not be playing this game of constitutional chicken if he thought a Clinton nominee would be measurably worse than one by Obama—that is, assuming Obama himself is not Clinton’s choice. (“What a great idea,” Clinton said in January, though the President has shrugged it off.)

There is no question that McConnell would regard a liberal Supreme Court majority as an affront to the Constitution and a mortal risk to the Republic; this is now the conservative catechism. But this Court fight, for McConnell, is ultimately less about who controls the Court or the White House than who controls the Senate. McConnell, presumably, prefers it to be himself and not Harry Reid. By moving hastily to block Obama, McConnell might have sacrificed the Senate—if moderates align with Democrats and knock off Portman and others like him. Historically, though, Democrats have had a hard time sustaining interest in, or animus toward, the judiciary. The Court was a non-issue during the 2004 election, the first that followed Bush v. Gore; in 2012, two years after Citizens United v. F.E.C. helped usher in an era of (more) colossal corporate spending in politics, Democrats barely mentioned the Court. So McConnell is betting, not unreasonably, that the battle over Scalia’s seat will do little for Democrats in the handful of states that will determine control of the Senate. It might even prove a fail-safe in the event of a Clinton Presidency. McConnell has told colleagues that this prospect only strengthens the case for a Republican Senate—as a check on a liberal President. That pitch has the potential to unite Republicans at a time when they aren’t united on much of anything else. It could also give anti-Trump conservatives a reason to vote in November.

So the battle has begun. Groups like Americans United for Life and the National Rifle Association have lined up behind McConnell; the Judicial Crisis Network, a combatant in all manner of court fights, is already running ads against Democrats. And the Republican base, far more than the public as a whole, supports the Senate’s intransigence: Pew puts Republicans’ approval at sixty-six per cent. Among conservative Republicans, it is five points higher still. That will increase in the months ahead, as the post-Scalia Court fails to deliver the results that Republicans had expected this term. In case after case, it will become more and more apparent that the Court’s conservatives no longer have the votes to curb public-sector unions, for example, or to weaken the “contraceptive mandate” in the Affordable Care Act. Just last week, the Court refused to block an E.P.A. limit on emissions from coal-fired power plants—one more sign that a Scalia-free Supreme Court will, as Ted Cruz predicts, mandate “unlimited abortion on demand” and yield U.S. sovereignty to the United Nations. If Trump is a loser, then only the Senate, it follows, can save the country. Or, at least, only the Senate can save the Senate. And that—in an otherwise dispiriting year—might just be enough for Mitch McConnell.