Melanie Martin, a surgical nurse in San Diego, said she and her husband cut every corner they could think of to save up enough money to pay for conceiving a child through the technique known as in vitro fertilization.

Like most insurance plans, theirs didn’t cover the procedure, so they sold one of their cars and she took extra shifts at work. They put part of the cost on credit cards and bought the drugs through an online pharmacy with lower prices. Their first two cycles were unsuccessful, so they took a break to pay off more than $40,000 in debt they had accumulated from the treatment, and began saving for a third cycle.

Ms. Martin became pregnant in May 2013, and the couple expect their child shortly.

They are living in a one-bedroom apartment, with the nursery in the dining room. She and her husband most likely would have tried again if the third cycle had not been successful, she said, but she advises others to think carefully about how much debt they take on in their quest for a baby. “Even though we went through all the treatment to get our family,” she said, “at the end of the day you’re right back with the rest of the world and have to provide for that family.”

Thirty-five years after the first “test tube” baby was born, in vitro fertilization is the most common assisted reproductive technology used to treat infertility. More than 61,000 babies were born as a result of I.V.F. and related techniques performed in 2011, according to the Centers for Disease Control.

Yet just a small proportion of women who suffer from infertility use the procedure. Its cost remains daunting for many who need it to conceive, and despite the hopes of some, President Obama’s health care law, the Affordable Care Act, will have little if any effect on the price tag.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

I.V.F. involves the removal of eggs, which are fertilized with sperm in a lab and then transferred back to the woman’s uterus. The overall cost of a single cycle using a woman’s own eggs often ranges from $14,000 to $16,000, said G. David Adamson, a fertility specialist and a past president of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine. The basic cost of a cycle is typically $9,000 to $10,000, and drugs commonly add another $5,000; another option, the injection of sperm into an egg, adds another $1,000 to $2,000.

“Cost is a problem,” Dr. Adamson acknowledged — not because I.V.F. itself is necessarily more expensive than other highly technical medical procedures, he said, but because most insurance policies don’t cover it. That means most couples must pay out of pocket. A woman may require more than one cycle to become pregnant, so the bill can quickly mushroom.

Barbara Collura, president of Resolve, a consumer advocacy group, said concerns about financing treatment compounded the stress couples were already experiencing when confronting infertility. While you might save for several years to buy a house, waiting that long isn’t always an option with I.V.F. because fertility decreases with age. Forty percent of I.V.F. cycles in women under 35 who use their own eggs result in live births, but that percentage drops to 12 percent for women aged 41 to 42, according to 2011 data from the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technologies.

Photo

“Time is of the essence,” Ms. Collura said.

Since long-term saving may be out, that leaves other options typically used for covering unplanned expenses, like dipping into savings, cutting back on other spending or borrowing the money — whether from relatives or by maxing out credit cards or taking out a home equity loan. Diverting funds temporarily from your 401(k) account may help raise your current cash flow for treatments, but that may ultimately mean you’ll have to work longer before retiring.

Most reproductive clinics now offer special financing packages, like discounts for multiple I.V.F. cycles paid upfront, or options to have part of the fee refunded if you don’t become pregnant. But making sense of the options can be confusing.

Univfy, a company that sells I.V.F. prediction tests, has recently introduced a free online “I.V.F. cost calculator” that uses your probability of becoming pregnant to help you compare the cost of different financing options. (A woman’s personal chances of having a baby using I.V.F. depend on a number of factors, including her age, diagnosis and levels of certain reproductive hormones.) The tool allows you to enter key details along with pricing offered by your clinic — or multiple clinics — and creates a chart so you can compare options. “It helps the patient be a more savvy health consumer,” said Mylene Yao, Univfy’s chief executive. (The site does not retain your personal information, she said.)

Dr. Adamson said that because so many variables affected an individual’s prognosis, the tool was “not, by itself, sufficient to make that decision.” He recommends that patients who use the tool print out their results and discuss them with their physician.

Here are some additional questions to consider:

■ How much money should I spend on I.V.F.?

Often, Ms. Collura said, couples determine an amount they are willing or able to spend initially, and then pause treatment to reassess if they should continue. They may choose to pursue adoption if they can’t conceive, so they may not want to spend all their funds on I.V.F. “It’s a personal decision,” she said. After their early 40s, few women can conceive using their own eggs so they may have to consider using donor eggs, which significantly increases the cost.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

■ Do some states require insurance coverage of infertility treatment?

Fifteen states have laws requiring some level of infertility coverage, but details vary widely; just eight require coverage of I.V.F., while some explicitly exclude it. (A list of the states and their respective laws is available on Resolve’s website.)

Ms. Collura said Resolve was monitoring any potential impact the Affordable Care Act might have on existing state mandates.

■ What if my insurance doesn’t cover I.V.F.?

Particularly if you work for a large employer, Dr. Adamson said, it’s worth checking with your human resources department to see if an alternative health plan might offer better infertility coverage at a higher premium. Also, Resolve’s website lists nonprofit groups that may offer financial assistance or grants.

Yet, just a small proportion of women who suffer from infertility use the procedure.