From left, House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R., Wis.), Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R., Utah), and President Barack Obama. Associated Press

House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch, and President Barack Obama all say that corporate tax reform is doable in 2015. But to be realistic, it has to be done in the next five or six months–before the 2016 elections make it too difficult.

That is why “Getting to Yes on Tax Reform” was a timely Senate Finance Committee hearing this month, with former committee chairman Bob Packwood and former senator Bill Bradley, two architects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, as star witnesses. Typical hearings analyze policy rather than the politics needed to make laws.

There are two challenges: What would corporate tax reform look like in 2015? And how can it be done with so little time to spare?

The policy challenge is threefold: At 35%, the U.S. corporate tax is the highest among members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The U.S. ranks second, behind France, with the highest tax on capital investments. The United States taxes “worldwide” income, with some adjustments, whereas our competitors tax profits only in their own country.

The president wants a competitive but “fair” cut to the corporate tax rate, to 28%. Republicans want it to be 25%. Mr. Obama wants a one-time 14% tax on existing U.S. profits earned and held abroad to finance domestic infrastructure investment. The GOP doesn’t want more spending, but there is some support for attention to domestic infrastructure. Mr. Obama wants a new 19% tax on foreign earnings in the future. That’s troublesome for Republicans, because the president’s proposal “pays for” lower corporate taxes by closing loopholes. There is considerable disagreement between Republicans and the president on what constitutes a “corporate loophole.” The GOP is adamant that “pass-throughs,” or businesses not in corporate form, also get relief.

Both sides agree on the importance of a revenue-neutral package. Even with the short time frame, there is probably enough common ground for compromise.

A congressional tax writer told me three decades ago that “the business community is always balkanized on tax reform.” That’s still true, which is why there are myriad ad hoc coalitions–RATE, LIFT, and ACT among them—all wanting lower tax rates but with different views on “pay fors,” “pass-throughs,” effective tax rates, what constitutes a loophole, and what international tax reform should look like. There will always be corporate winners and losers in tax reform. Those who stand to lose will probably do more to kill any legislation than winners will do to get it enacted.

In 1986, a legendary pitcher of beer at a pub near the Capitol revived tax reform. Today, the president and Republicans in Congress need to swallow that proverbial pitcher and accept being joined at the hip for a short period.

First, they have to try to pass corporate tax reform under “reconciliation,” a legislative procedure–generally used for budget issues–to get around parliamentary and super-majority hindrances. President Obama used reconciliation to get the Affordable Care Act through. President George W. Bush used reconciliation to accomplish the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts. Opponents of both cried foul, but just as it was then, the procedure is necessary today for the president and a majority in Congress to work their will in the current political climate.

Second, Republicans and the president have to be flexible on dynamic scoring, which takes into account possible economic impact and revenue from tax reform. Use of dynamic scoring has been a GOP priority. In the annual Economic Report of the President, released last week, the White House uses dynamic scoring to support Mr. Obama’s tax proposals.

Finally, voters need to be on board. Corporate tax reform is far from a priority for the average worker struggling to make ends meet. Those people need to be convinced that corporate tax reform would mean jobs and is not just another tax break for Washington insiders, big business, and the 1%. To rally the American people and get the job done, bipartisanship needs to be resurrected as it was for the 1986 tax reform and the Ryan-Murray budget deal–even if it is just for a brief period.

Mark Bloomfield is president and CEO of the American Council for Capital Formation. He is on Twitter: @MrCapitalGains.

ALSO IN THINK TANK:

What the Demise of Obama’s 529 Plan Says About Tax Reform

Paul Ryan and Tax Reform

Could the Debacle Over Tax Extenders Kick-Start Tax Reform?