A sentinel chicken in Delaware has tested positive for the mosquito-borne West Nile virus, state environmental officials announced.

Environmental officials in Delaware have reported the state’s first case of West Nile virus detected in a group of sentinel chickens that is monitored for mosquito-borne diseases.

The virus-positive chicken was sampled Aug. 25 at a monitoring station along the Delaware River in Southeast Wilmington, according to a news release from the state Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control.

The DNREC Mosquito Control Section will increase monitoring activities in the area and take appropriate mosquito control actions, according to the release.

Mosquito Control operates 20 monitoring stations with humanely kept caged chickens as part of a statewide disease surveillance system, environmental officials said.

The chickens that are bitten by mosquitoes carrying West Nile virus or eastern equine encephalitis – both of which can affect humans and horses – develop antibodies that enable the animals to survive.

Their blood is tested every two weeks for the presence of those antibodies, which indicates exposure to the viruses.

Though two West Nile virus-positive wild crows were found in the state in August, West Nile has not been found in any humans or horses in Delaware so far this year, officials said.

“So far in 2014, mosquito populations and occurrence of mosquito-borne illnesses have been a bit below normal, probably due to a relatively cool and dry summer,” said Dr. William Meredith, Mosquito Control Section administrator, in a statement.

Delaware’s numbers are relatively on par with West Nile virus statistics nationwide, with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this year reporting 297 human cases and 12 deaths.

That’s down from 2003, the worst year on record for West Nile virus, in which 9,862 human cases and 264 deaths were reported nationwide. That year, Delaware saw 17 confirmed human cases and two fatalities, plus six equine cases, officials said.

The states of New Jersey and Pennsylvania have each reported two human West Nile virus cases this year. Maryland reported its first human case last week.

Residents are urged to take commonsense precautions against mosquito bites, including wearing long-sleeved shirts and pants when outdoors in mosquito prone areas, applying insect repellent containing between 10 and 30 percent DEET, and avoiding mosquito-infested areas during dusk and dawn.

Residents are also reminded to reduce mosquito breeding by draining or removing items that collect water, such as discarded buckets or swimming pools, uncovered trash cans and stagnant birdbaths.

“The possibility of mosquito-borne disease transmissions won’t subside until cooler autumn temperatures set in, usually in mid-October and sometimes even later,” Meredith said.

Contact Alex Wigglesworth at 215-854-2305 or awigglesworth@philly.com. Follow @phila_lex on Twitter.

Contact the Breaking News Desk at 215-854-2443; BreakingNewsDesk@philly.com. Follow @phillynews on Twitter.