Insurance prices on the healthcare.gov website show that insurance prices on the federal government's marketplace will be higher in 2015; now a New York-based personal finance company has made it easier to see.

Valuepenguin.com has produced a free, interactive map showing the change in subsidies, providers and premiums for "silver" insurance plans on the exchange for every county in the United States.

"There have been significant changes in rates across the country," said Divya Sangam, a spokeswoman for the company. "Healthcare.gov can be a little confusing."

In Alabama, the average cost of a silver plan is higher in every county except for Mobile and Limestone. The average subsidy under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, also is up by an equivalent amount in most of those counties. The map allows users to review prices and subsidies available at various income levels and ages.

For instance, a 40-year-old in Jefferson County earning $30,500 a year can expect to pay an average of $258.16 for a silver plan, up $6.39 from last year. The government subsidy of $56.23 is also higher, by $8.03.

A 55-year-ol at the same income level will pay $461.61, an increase of $11.15. Again, the subsidy also is higher - $253.29 vs. $240.50.

The price is the same for a Jefferson County resident earning $40,095, but the subsidy available is lower than the person making $30,500 because the income is higher.

Experts have suggested that the best way to avoid paying higher premiums in 2015 is to shop for a better deal. For the first time, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama will have competition in every county.

If people who obtained health insurance under the Affordable Care Act exchange this year do not do anything, their plans will automatically renew.

"But you are not necessarily paying the same rate," Sangam said.

She said there are other ways rates can change. For example, a smoker who bought insurance last year and then quit can save up to 33 percent in 2015 by updating that key piece of information.

"You could save thousands of dollars on health insurance if you quit smoking," she said. "These things are not very well explained."

Health care expect also caution consumers to consider deductibles, not just premiums. A premium is the monthly price people pay to have the insurance, while the deductible is the amount of money they have to pay before the coverage kicks in. The lower the premium, the higher the deductible.

Go here to see the interactive map.