Illinois residents who enroll in Obamacare on the whole will pay higher premiums than last year for the most popular plans, but they'll have many more options to choose from, according to 2015 plan information released Friday.

Premiums for the lowest-cost options in the most popular group of plans will rise 2.6 percent on average statewide, although rates for those so-called silver plans will vary widely, from a decrease of 5 percent to an increase of 12 percent, the Illinois Department of Insurance announced Friday.

Rates for the lowest-cost plans, called bronze, will increase 11 percent on average.

While Illinois did not release the average increase for all plans, premiums increased 4 to 6 percent among states that have submitted rate information, according to recent studies by PwC Health Research Institute and McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform.

"Illinois may be even a little more competitive than the nation as a whole," Ceci Connolly, PwC's managing director, said of Illinois' rate changes.

The number of health plans offered in Illinois under the Affordable Care Act more than doubled to 410 plans, from 165 this year. Three new insurers are entering the market next year: IlliniCare Health Plan, Time Insurance and UnitedHealthcare of the Midwest.

When open enrollment begins Nov. 15, Illinois consumers should compare all of the plans available in their area because they might find a similar plan with a lower rate hike or possibly a lower premium, Illinois insurance officials said.

(Chicago Tribune Graphics)

"The competitive environment benefits consumers, and I think the information that we presented today bears that out," said Jennifer Koehler, executive director of Get Covered Illinois, which runs the exchange in Illinois.

In many areas, the lowest-cost plan is being offered by a different insurer than last year, Koehler said.

Consumers re-enrolling for the second year also should update their income information to ensure they receive subsidies if eligible, state officials said. In the first year, 77 percent of the consumers who signed up for coverage in Illinois, or 168,000 people, received financial assistance based on their income. The average person received a monthly premium subsidy of $202, leaving his or her share at $114, according to a federal report.

However, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed on Friday to hear a legal challenge that, if successful, would deprive millions of Americans, including Illinois residents, of tax credit subsidies to help them afford health insurance coverage.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois, the state's largest insurer, had among the lowest premiums in every plan category, which helped it corral 92 percent of the market in the first year of the public exchanges. However, for the coming year Blue Cross was beaten on price — at least on average — more often. For example, it had the cheapest silver plan in 88 counties this year, a number that will drop to 20 counties next year, according to the state.

Startup insurer Land of Lincoln Health will enter its second year on the public exchanges after a slow start. Though the company had a goal of 75,000 enrollees, the health insurer signed up only about 4,000 this year. The company has revamped plans and lowered premiums by 20 to 30 percent across the state, after reviewing "what price point people gravitated to in previous years," Land of Lincoln President Jason Montrie said.

IlliniCare Health is new to the marketplace this year, and will be offering HMO plans in Cook County to a very specific target market — low-income consumers no longer eligible to be covered by Medicaid. Partnered with the Sinai Health System on Chicago's West Side, and Swedish Covenant Hospital on the North Side, the plans were created to follow the so-called "churn" population, whose increased income qualifies them for private insurance.

Previously, IlliniCare Health worked exclusively with the Illinois Medicaid population. The company is part of St. Louis-based Centene, which offers Medicaid plans across the country through contracts with 17 states.

"We wanted to focus on those neighborhoods in the city that sometimes get left behind," said Lindsey Artola, spokeswoman for IlliniCare Health. "I think a lot of plans are focused more on the higher-income, healthier populations, and our sweet spot has always been the most vulnerable, so that's what we're targeting our marketplace product to as well."

Lake County residents are likely to see higher premium increases on average than those in other Chicago-area counties, including Cook, according to state data. Lake County rate increases are in the 5 to 10 percent range for the lowest-cost silver plans, while Cook, DuPage and Will counties can expect increases of zero to 5 percent, according to a map released by the insurance department.

Plans on the health care marketplace range from bronze for the least expensive premiums through silver, gold and platinum, which has the highest premiums. However, bronze plans generally have the highest out-of-pocket costs for deductibles, copays and coinsurance, while platinum plans have the lowest out-of-pocket costs.

During last year's enrollment, 56 percent of Illinois residents who bought plans on the exchange picked a silver plan, 29 percent picked a bronze plan, 15 percent picked gold and 1 percent picked platinum.

Those with household incomes up to $46,680 for a person and $95,400 for a family of four are eligible for subsidies.

According to examples supplied by the Illinois insurance department, in 2015 a single 30-year-old in Chicago or Peoria with a household income of $23,000 could be eligible for a subsidy of $72 per month in Chicago or $88 in Peoria. That could bring his or her monthly cost to $119 per month in both cities on the second-lowest-cost silver plan, compared with $121 per month this year.

A couple from Chicago or Peoria, both age 55, with household income of $40,000 could be eligible for a subsidy of $479 in Chicago and $540 in Peoria. That could bring their costs for the second-lowest silver plan to about $273 per month in 2015 versus about $276 this year.

Consumers must select a plan by Dec. 15 to avoid being automatically re-enrolled in the same plan and to ensure coverage Jan. 1. Open enrollment ends Feb. 15.

More information is available at the Get Covered Illinois website, http://www.GetCoveredIllinois.gov or by phone at 866-311-1119.