Rep. Curt Clawson, F-Fla., stands outside the U.S. Capitol in Washington. (Photo: LEDYARD KING/THE NEWS-PRESS WASHINGTON BUREAU)

WASHINGTON – Curt Clawson has never fit neatly into the mold of a Capitol Hill Republican, and he proved it again on Thursday.

Within the space of hour that morning, the Bonita Springs Republican voted for a Republican spending bill that would prevent President Barack Obama from closing the Guantanamo Bay detention center, and for a Democratic measure to restrict the display of the Confederate flag at veterans’ cemeteries.

Such apparent contradictions are typical of Clawson, 56, who announced this week that he'll retire from the House after his term expires in January. He’s been able to follow his own playbook largely because he was rich enough to fund his own campaign (he spent $3.4 million) and never intended to make a career out of Congress.

“Congressman Clawson was one of the few politicians that does what he says and says what he does,” said Taylor Budowich, executive director of the California-based Tea Party Express, which tapped Clawson last year to give the tea party's response to Obama’s State of the Union address. “His departure is not only a loss for his constituents, but it's a loss for conservative voters across the country that looked to him for principled solutions and leadership."

Clawson is a member of the ultra-conservative Freedom Caucus that demands hard-line fiscal accountability and helped topple John Boehner as House speaker. But he’s also championed causes dear to African Americans — with an enthusiasm that's even surprised advocates -— and legislation to protect the Everglades.

"We didn’t buy the notion that you couldn’t be a conservationist to the core and still be conservative,” said Clawson, who also fought efforts to open up oil drilling in the Eastern Gulf of Mexico. “We think you can be conservative and supported by the red base and still be for conservation because it’s the right thing for the ecology, the right thing for the animals, and the right thing for the economy.”

With more than seven months left in his term, Clawson is focused on passing two bills. One would set aside $800 million to expedite repairs to the Herbert Hoover Dike surrounding Lake Okeechobee. The other would authorize $500 million for the Interior Department to buy land near Lake Okeechobee to restore the natural flow of water south and away from communities on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts.

Getting either measure signed into law would represent a stunning victory for a junior member of the House on his way out the door, especially considering that Congress typically accomplishes very little during election years.

But Clawson doesn’t seem fazed by expectations, or by the notion that staunch conservatives don't care about the environment. It was the pollution befouling Southwest Florida shores – and his father’s insistence that he do something about it – that prompted Clawson to run for the House in the first place.

Eric Eikenberg, chief executive officer of the Everglades Foundation, recalled being impressed with Clawson's devotion to the environment during a briefing shortly after his election in 2014.

“Having been around members of Congress for a number of years, I figured it would be a 20-minute meeting, maybe 30 minutes max," Eikenberg said. "And after close to four hours, I knew he was serious about the challenges that his community faces as well as the need to implement Everglades restoration. He was not somebody that just talked. He dug into issues and wanted to find common ground.”

Once he arrived in the House, Clawson's millionaire status allowed him to set his own agenda without feeling beholden to special-interest groups. He also resisted pressure to do constant fundraising for the party, something GOP leaders expect of rank-and-file lawmakers. That stance cost him the seat he had hoped to get on the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee.

“I don’t think (much of) our current business model and our governance model within the Republican Party of top-down, driven by seniority, how you vote, and how much money you (raise),” he said. “I don’t accept that business model and I was going to do everything I can to change that so the grass roots gets heard more.”

On several occasions, Clawson voted against leadership-backed bills on important policy issues. He opposed a massive government spending bill, for example, because it kept the Affordable Care Act intact, financed the administration’s strategy in Syria and spent what Clawson felt was too much money. He also voted no on a highway funding bill because he felt it was financed using gimmicks; and on a tax bill, because it could have made illegal immigrants eligible for tax credits.

He also occasionally veered left.

Twice last summer, he was the only House Republican to vote with Democrats to remove items featuring the Confederate battle flag from public display on the House side of the Capitol.

That earned Clawson the respect of Rep. Bennie Thompson, a Democrat from Mississippi who led the charge on the issue.

“I’ve kind of been around over 20 years and that’s the kind of issue that sets a member apart from any group they belong to,’’ Thompson said, referring to Clawson’s affiliation with the Freedom Caucus. “I think a lot of what he will be known for is the fact that he didn’t allow party or anything else to prevent him from voting what he thought was correct.”

The issue was a personal one for Clawson, whose office wall features a photo of him with Democratic Rep. John Lewis of Georgia, an icon of the civil rights movement.

A former Purdue University basketball player, Clawson once was married to a black woman. He said he can still remember fellow basketball players recoiling at the site of the Confederate flag, and his long discussions about the issue with family members.

There have been missteps, some of them not unusual for someone who never held public office before coming to Congress.

Shortly after arriving in the House, Clawson got caught at a hearing mistakenly identifying two senior administration officials of South Asian descent as representatives of the Indian government. After video of the exchange went viral, he apologized and called the incident an “air ball,” an example of the sports metaphors the former college athlete uses.

Clawson doesn’t seem particularly sad to be leaving Congress, although he clearly regrets that his father's declining health is the reason. He said he probably wouldn't have stayed in office more than another term anyway.

“The idea of citizen legislators that come without ambition and (put) the country and their constituents first is what a lot of the Founding Fathers really did envision,” he said. “And if we had more folks up here on a temporary basis, going to battle for their constituents and then going home as opposed to building a career, I think we’d have a better democracy.”

Contributing: Deborah Barfield Berry, USA TODAY

Twitter: @ledgeking

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/27KGjPD