Valentine Cortez, 48, of Fremont, talks to Certified Enrollment specialist Alex Parada while signing up for Covered California at the Fremont Library in Fremont, Calif., on Saturday, Feb. 14, 2015. Cortez was able to sign up for a more less expensive medical plan under Covered California and will pay $50 less a month than his employee offered insurance. (JOSE CARLOS FAJARDO)

SAN JOSE -- Proving once again that annoying little sisters have their place in life, San Jose residents Juanita Valencia and Gloria Lopez on Saturday finally signed up for health insurance -- well before Sunday's official midnight deadline to enroll in a 2015 plan.

But it took relentless prodding by their younger sibling, Lupe Serrano, a 56-year-old housekeeper at Regional Medical Center of San Jose, to get them to an enrollment event at Our Lady of Guadalupe Parish.

"I call her a little firecracker,'' said Valencia, 60, a temporary worker at a medical device manufacturer. "She likes to tell us to do things, and she told me I had to do this. She's looking after her big sisters.''

Certified Enrollment Counselor Isela Martinez, left, helps Juanita Valencia, 60 of San Jose, right, sign up for healthcare coverage at the Obamacare open enrollment sign-up event sponsored by SEIU-United Healthcare Workers West at Our Lady of Guadalupe Church in San Jose, Calif., on Saturday, Feb. 14, 2015. (LiPo Ching)

Valencia, who hasn't had health insurance in eight years, qualified for a federally subsidized Kaiser Permanente plan offered through Covered California, the state's health insurance exchange.

She called her new plan, which will cost her just $1 a month, "great ... because now I have insurance in case anything happens.''

Lopez, her 63-year-old sister, qualified for Medi-Cal, which under the Affordable Care Act now covers low-income adults without children. Medi-Cal enrollment is year-round.

"It makes a lot of sense,'' said the recently retired Lopez, who was relieved to have the coverage, especially after a blood pressure issue sent her last year to the emergency room at Santa Clara Valley Medical Center.

Advertisement

Doctors kept her in the hospital overnight. Lopez said she was billed about $3,000 but was able to negotiate a much lower price.

Saturday's event at Our Lady of Guadalupe was sponsored by the Service Employees International Union.

Like others attending enrollment events around the Bay Area and the state this weekend, Valencia had waited until the last minute to sign up.

Certified Enrollment Counselors, from background left to right, Isela Martinez, Gabe Reeder-Ferreira and Ana Arreola help people sign up for healthcare coverage at the Obamacare open enrollment sign-up event sponsored by SEIU-United Healthcare Workers West at Our Lady of Guadalupe Church in San Jose, Calif., on Saturday, Feb. 14, 2015. (LiPo Ching)

As they have repeatedly done in the past, Covered California officials have extended the deadline several more days. The extension will apply to anyone who starts an online enrollment or makes an appointment by 11:59 p.m. Sunday.

People will then have until Friday to finish the process with a certified insurance agent or certified enrollment counselor, an insurance company representative, county eligibility worker or Covered California call center operator, exchange spokeswoman Angie Blanchette said Saturday.

Over at the Fremont Library -- where dozens of people were signing up for Covered California plans -- construction worker Valentine Cortez, 48, was able to sign up for a Kaiser plan costing $248.

"I need it because I have diabetes, and now that I have it I won't get fined," said Cortez, whose children are enrolled in Medi-Cal.

Consumers who can afford to buy insurance but choose not to will face a financial penalty when they do their taxes. And the penalties are increasing substantially for tax year 2015.

In tax year 2014, the penalty was $95, or 1 percent of modified adjusted gross income -- whichever is higher. That's increasing in tax year 2015 to $325, or 2 percent of income.

Staff photographer Jose Carlos Fajardo contributed to this report. Contact Tracy Seipel at 408-920-5343. Follow her at Twitter.com/taseipel.