Topics: Music, record collecting, The Beatles, Vinyl, Entertainment News

The other day I threw out my first Beatles album — which is akin to throwing out one of the only photos of a dead relative, a perfectly good organic burrito or a $20 bill. Beatles albums have been discarded before, but mostly by crazies and Klansmen back in early March ’66, when dubiously contextualized quotes from John claimed that “Christianity will vanish and shrink…” and that “We’re (The Beatles) more popular than Jesus now.” That was 49 years ago, three years before I was born.

On Friday, I turned 46. And instead of taking some kind of inventory (I’m saving that for 50), I began to think about my relationship with the Beatles, who were still together when I was born (take that, Y and Z Generations!). And my relationship to them, unlike that with just about everyone else in my life after nearly half a century (friends, family, women, pets, the government, R.E.M.) is more or less the same: pure love. I am the human equivalent of Ringo’s peace fingers, and have been since I first began playing with the LPs that my mother and father gave me to play with because I was an early-depressed child. Some of those wonderful objects had posters, and lyrics, and these four beautiful men with sparkling eyes on their covers. Others had dyed vinyl, red and blue.

They were much better than TV. John Lennon was still alive. So was George. It was Camelot in suburbia, with perfect pop music coming out of faux wood-grain speakers and later, an 8-track player made of white plastic and shaped like a diver’s helmet. But that’s when things began to turn. I could no longer stay on the floor in the den with the turntable; I had to gather around the weird-ass 8 track. It’s like that scene in “2001” when the vegan apes live peacefully with the tapirs until the monolith appears and that one ape realizes he can use tools — cut to lots of dead tapirs. And war.

I should say that throwing out, say, the “Yellow Submarine” soundtrack might be one thing, but the LP that I binned was “Revolver.” And I did it because it was the wrong “Revolver”! There is a “Revolver” that exists in my head — the mono “Revolver,” the music that changed everything, even Don Draper. This wasn’t it. I bought this version on eBay and soon realized it was mixed, or remixed, all wrong. George Harrison’s cough at the beginning of “Taxman,” and the background vocals chiding “Uh, uh, Mr. Wilson… Uh uh, Mr. Heath,” were buried in the mix.

You can remix Lou Reed or Pavement all you want and I’m good, but the Beatles I am orthodox about. How did I end up with this screwy “Revolver,” and could there be people who actually prefer it? Should I have found one of them? Placed it back on eBay and lied about its merits in my sales description? My need to always have every Beatles album from “Please Please Me” to “Let It Be” at my fingertips 24 hours a day no matter where I am superseded the horrible sight of that Klaus Voorman cover going into the trash with the chicken bones and the pizza boxes, but it had to happen, or I risked losing my tether to the first time I heard “For No One” and “Tomorrow Never Knows.”

To paraphrase Supertramp, which I like to do as much as possible, the question of what, exactly, is a perfect and complete personal Beatles collection runs too deep for such a simple mind. Since the start of their recording career, the LPs, and later the cassettes and other updated media, have been released by Parlophone in the U.K. and Capitol in America. Not that I realized this at 10 years old. I just bought what was on sale in hopes that I would one day have everything, and kept doing so almost reflexively as the U.K. versions became easier to acquire, which is basically akin to shoving a 10-bob note up your nose. “Beatles for Sale,” for example, was called “Beatles ’65″ in my collection and it had “She’s a Woman” on it (one of Paul’s grooviest early songs). There was an album called “Hey Jude,” which was not the only way you could get “Hey Jude,” not that I would know that before buying it. I thought it was a Beatles album I’d missed, but most of those songs were already on the blue album. Did Parlophone and Capitol count on people like me to be stupid, anxious, Pavlovian?

I drew certain lines. I didn’t buy the interview albums, although I was tempted. There was an album called simply “Rock and Roll Music,” which had songs from the White Album (aka “The Beatles”), but I bought it because I didn’t own a copy of “I’m Down,” and as with “She’s a Woman,” I needed it. There was an album called “Love Songs” with a shit-brown cover that was easy to dismiss, but I welcomed it into my collection and pretended it was a catch, even though it for some reason considered “She’s Leaving Home” a love song — seriously.

When I got my first car, I made sure I had every Beatles album on cassette, because you can’t play “Magical Mystery Tour” on vinyl in an ’87 Toyota Tercel as you speed down Sunrise Highway. When I went off to college, CDs had just come out. The first CD I bought was “Diamond Life” by Sade, and the next dozen were Beatles albums. Soon my 8-tracks and cassettes and LPs went… wherever. I got into drugs (like the Beatles did, man!) and went a bit slack in keeping everything neat and organized (it was the ‘90s). I chopped out a lot of drugs off the jewel box of “Rubber Soul,” with that swirly lensed shot of the lads, but even as addicted as I was by the ‘90s, if you told me I had to choose between my scorched CD or, well, drugs, I would have chosen “Rubber Soul.” I even liked “Run for Your Life,” which John purportedly hated, even though he wrote the fucking thing (I suppose I’ve written things I’ve hated, too… ).

But do enough hard drugs and cold turkey will get you on the run. You will end up selling a lot of shit so you can keep doing drugs — you don’t need to be Maxwell Edison to figure that one out. I moved to Hollywood after college to try to write movies as good as “Caveman” and “Give My Regards to Broad Street.” I did more drugs. I sold my car for $500 and had nowhere to play the cassettes I managed to keep track of (“Revovler!”). I sold my CDs and my CD player. And the reason I knew that I was truly lost was that for the first time in a quarter of a century, if I woke up in the middle of the night and needed, actually needed for my sanity and wellness, to hear “Flying” or “Wild Honey Pie,” or regular “Honey Pie,” I was shit out of luck. You couldn’t call up a radio station and request it like you could have in the ‘70s. You couldn’t ask your roommate to play it for you on his upright bass and sing it (in his Georgian accent). You went through withdrawal.