"Life is all about taking risks," said a retired friend before he stepped onto his grandson's skateboard. Later, when I visited him in the hospital, I encouraged him to stick with gardening and to plant a serviceberry when his hip healed.

Why plant serviceberry? Because spring is coming and serviceberry is every bit as gorgeous as dogwood, the so-called prince of spring. Plus, serviceberry fruit is super delicious and, unlike skateboarding, planting a serviceberry will rarely cause one to break a hip.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

I will concede, however, that planting a serviceberry lacks the entertainment value of watching an old friend attempt to ride a skateboard. Clearly, those of us past adolescence should stay off of skateboards.

Arguably, serviceberry may be the most underutilized small flowering tree in Tulsa-area landscapes.

Consider its many attributes. In April its beautiful gray branches are smothered with small, sweet-scented white flowers. In late May clusters of bright red berries begin turning dark blue, and by early June the berries, about the size of blueberries, are ready to eat. Trust me on this: Serviceberries truly are delicious, better than cherries in my opinion. And a serviceberry pie is as good as it gets.

Serviceberry's appeal goes well beyond sweet berries and luscious pies. For instance, its size and shape are ideal for many urban landscape situations. It's a graceful upright grower, only 12 to 15 feet tall, a size perfectly suited for an entry garden or for tight areas around a sunny deck or patio. And here's another neat quality: Autumn foliage is a rich scarlet red. One can rarely have too much red foliage in a fall landscape.

Serviceberry has one additional selling point for those of us who prefer not to use pesticides. Unlike most plums, peaches and apples, serviceberry never needs pesticide sprays to keep fruit from becoming wormy. Serviceberry is native to parts of eastern Oklahoma, Arkansas and Missouri. Apparently this wild Ozark charmer has learned to cope with the insect and disease challenges of this part of the country.

Serviceberry belongs to the genus Amelanchier, which includes several wild species. Plant breeders have crossed native species to produce excellent hybrids such as Autumn Brilliance, a real favorite of mine.

I planted it in the Linnaeus Teaching Garden in Woodward Park eight years ago. You can see from the photo taken last spring, it has performed beautifully. Stop by the teaching garden in early June and sample a handful of sweet berries. You, too, will sing the praises of this delightful ornamental and edible plant.

Bottom line: There is no risk in planting serviceberry. You may want to stay off your kid's skateboard, however.