SHARE Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

Enrollment in health plans sold on the marketplace set up through the Affordable Care Act totaled 207,349 in Wisconsin as of Feb. 22, with 89% of the people qualifying for a tax credit to help offset the cost, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services said Tuesday.

The total was slightly higher than the estimate of 205,839 people in the state, including 52,115 in Milwaukee, released last month.

Roughly 130,000 people in Wisconsin bought health plans sold on the marketplace in the first open-enrollment period. And several health insurers in the state have said they have been pleased with the growth in the market in the second enrollment period, which ended Feb. 15.

Wisconsin residents received an average tax credit of $315 a month, according to the Department of Health and Human Services. Half of the 184,541 people eligible for the tax credits paid $100 or less a month for coverage.

Under the law, known as Obamacare, the tax credits are available for families with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty threshold — $95,400 for a family of four — who are not eligible for affordable health insurance through an employer.

The department also said:

■ 53,760, or 26%, of the people who signed up for coverage or were automatically re-enrolled in Wisconsin were 18 to 34 years of age.

■ 91,234 of the people in the state who enrolled in plans were new to the marketplace.

"There is strong demand for the product," Kevin Griffis, acting assistant secretary for public affairs, said during a teleconference.

A large percentage of consumers actively shopped for health plans: 40,303 people in Wisconsin switched to a different plan than they had in 2014.

"That sends an important signal to insurers," Griffis said. "If you want to win business, it's critical to compete on price."

One of the goals of the marketplaces is to make it easier for people to compare health plans. The hope is that insurers will pressure hospitals, doctors and other providers into slowing the rise in health care spending.

The ultimate test, Griffis said, is how much the marketplace plans and tax credits lower the number of people without health insurance.

The figures released Tuesday did not include an estimate of the number of people who previously were uninsured. They also included people who had signed up for a health plan but had yet to pay the first month's premium for coverage to begin.

Starting Sunday, a special enrollment period will begin in states, including Wisconsin, where the marketplace is run by the federal government. The special enrollment period is available to people who will have to pay a penalty for not having health insurance last year but were unaware of the requirement.

People can visit HealthCare.gov to learn more. They also can find local help with enrolling at Localhelp.healthcare.gov or call (800) 318-2596.

People who don't have health insurance this year will face a penalty of $325 or 2% of income above the tax filing threshold of $10,150 for an individual and $20,300 for a married couple filing jointly. The penalty for last year was $95 or 1% of income.