Jack Moomaw was called on to find lost hikers and to remove bodies of those that had perished in the mountains. He wrote about these adventures in "Recollections of a Rocky Mountain Ranger." ( Jack and Lulabeth Melton collection )

Growing up under strict supervision, Jack Moomaw ran away from home at the age of 13 and after a few years, joined the U.S. Navy.

Later, he and his new bride homesteaded on the arid, rattlesnake invested slope of Rabbit Mountain near Lyons. This area is now part of Boulder County Open Space.

After the opening of Rocky Mountain National Park in 1915, Moomaw started working as a guide. He hauled equipment and supplies for organizations such as the Colorado Mountain Club.

Along came World War I and with it, an increased demand for tungsten used to harden steel. Moomaw and his wife moved closer to the tungsten mines in Boulder County where he could find work.

Rocky Mountain National Park Ranger Jack Moomaw is shown in his later years. (Jack and Lulabeth Melton collection)

After the war ended, Moomaw took a seasonal job in Rocky Mountain National Park as a trail foreman in Wild Basin. A new trail, cut in 1921, provided a southern approach to Longs Peak. The following year, Moomaw made the first January ascent of the peak.

Moomaw's hard work prompted Superintendent Roger Toll to offer Moomaw a job as a full-time park ranger. With his new responsibility, Moomaw and his wife moved to a cabin near the Fall River entrance.

Now a ranger, Moomaw was involved in the construction of many trails.

He is most noted for the installation of two cables on the face of Long Peak. This was the most difficult section of this particular route up the mountain.

Advertisement

During the summer of 1925, Moomaw and two others used a single jack and hammer to drill the holes for placing the eyelets into the granite. Next, the cables were hauled up the trail by packhorses to the edge of the Boulder Field. The cables were uncoiled and a line of rangers, walking a few feet apart, carried the outstretched pair of cables over their shoulders to the base of the climb. The cables were threaded through the eyelets and secured with clamps.

Also known for his paintings, Moomaw's work was once displayed at the prestigious Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City. (Jack and Lulabeth Melton collection)

This greatly reduced the difficulty of this route and improved safety, but in 1973, the cables were removed because they were an unnatural part of the mountain.

Moomaw was an artifact hunter. Unfortunately for modern archaeologists, he removed many significant items such as projectile points and scrapers. Once their location is lost, interpretation of their significance is difficult.

The late James Benedict, a contemporary archaeologist, wrote, "Unlike other members of the ranger staff, Moomaw rarely contributed his finds to the Park Museum, and the projectile points are thought to have been sold at auction following his death."

However, Moomaw was the first ranger to have identified the game drive walls on Flattop Mountain and Trail Ridge Road. He not only photographed them, but brought a compass and tape line to take measurements. He speculated as to their use including that of a system for concentrating game by Paleo-Indian hunters.

As a ranger, Moomaw was called on to find lost hikers and to remove bodies of those that had perished in the mountains. He wrote about these adventures in "Recollections of a Rocky Mountain Ranger," a book that was put back in print with an excellent introduction by Jack R. and Lulabeth Melton.

Moomaw was among those that brought the frozen body of Agnes Vaille down from the face of Longs Peak. He also was among those that recovered the body of R.B. Key from near Chasm Lake.

Moomaw knew many of the park's pioneers such as Squeaky Bob Wheeler on the park's west side. Wheeler ran a resort near the present-day Colorado River trail head.

Moomaw was tickled by a story that Wheeler told of how he made a reluctant wife sleep between blankets in his primitive hotel. As the wife and her husband were leaving, the husband slipped Wheeler a $10 bill saying that Wheeler was the only person to force his wife to do something she did not want to do.

Another local character was Bill Currence, an old-time miner with cabins near the Fall River Road and a mine on the steep south-facing slope of Mount Chapin. Moomaw described Currence as no more eccentric than others living in Estes Park.

Moomaw was a painter and his landscapes are soft and realistic. At one time, his work was shown at the prestigious Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City. He also wrote poetry and short stores. In 1919 under a pen name, four poetry books were published.

Ranger Moomaw retired from the Park Service in 1945 after over two decades of service. A heart attack cut his colorful career short. He went on to take up a variety of hobbies, including lapidary work.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.