An artist’s rendering shows a proposed new arena for the Milwaukee Bucks. (Photo: Populous, HNTB Corporation and Eppstein Uhen Architects via AP)

The Milwaukee Bucks want state residents to help finance a new arena.

The proposal for the $500 million sports and entertainment complex in downtown Milwaukee calls for $250 million from current and former team owners and $250 million from the public.

Of the public's portion, $80 million would come from state residents over 20 years and the rest would come from Milwaukee's city and county governments and the Wisconsin Center District.

While we don't want to see the Bucks leave Wisconsin, we do have some concerns with the state's portion of the funding.

Namely, we would like to see additional avenues explored in whittling down the public's portion.

When former Green Bay Packers president Bob Harlan started talking about how to finance the $295 million Lambeau Field renovation in 1999 and 2000, legislators opposed the idea of state aid. Even a 0.1 percent statewide sales tax got no traction for a team that we believe has more statewide appeal than the Bucks.

Assistance from neighboring counties was a non-starter. For example, Outagamie County was cool to the idea of a room tax even though the visiting NFL teams stay in Appleton and fans stay in hotels and motels in the Fox Cities.

Brown County was forced to go it alone, enacting a 0.5 percent county sales tax and charging season-ticket holders a user fee. The state agreed to chip in $9.1 million for parking lot, storm sewer drainage work. That works out to 3 percent of the total project. The Bucks are seeking statewide help to pay for about 16 percent of the total costs.

When the Milwaukee Brewers built Miller Park, a 0.1 percent sales tax from Milwaukee, Racine, Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington counties was set up to provide $290 million for the $400 million ballpark. The Milwaukee Business Journal reported last year that the tax might not end until 2020, while the Brown County tax is slated to end Sept. 30.

The Brewers also received state aid — $36 million in infrastructure costs.

Now the Bucks are looking for $80 million over 20 years, or $4 million a year. The Bucks are under a deadline to complete a new arena by 2017 or else the NBA will buy the team and move it to another state.

Revenue Secretary Richard Chandler told Press-Gazette Media last month that the state's $80 million contribution will generate $299 million in income taxes over 20 years. If the Bucks left, the state would lose that money as well as $120 million for the Bradley Center over the next 10 years, for a total of $419 million.

To be clear, we'd rather see the Bucks stay rather than leave, but we'd like to see the owners consider options to reduce the state's commitment, such as a ticket surcharge and selling the name rights as well as more of a financial commitment from Milwaukee County and neighboring counties.

Attendance at home Bucks games topped 600,000 last season. A $2 surcharge, for example, would have brought in $1.2 million. If the owners dislike that, they could look at a one-time seat user fee for season-ticket holders. The Packers charged $2,000 per seat to help pay for Lambeau renovations.

From our vantage point, it's difficult to justify $80 million in statewide help when Brown County was forced to go it alone in the Lambeau renovation.

The Legislature correctly pulled this item from the two-year budget so it could be debated on its own merits. Now let's see some revenue alternatives pursued to reduce the state's share.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1IS7UmD