Story updated at 3:41pm Friday, October 9, 2015



SYRACUSE - Dozens of people were laid off at the Syracuse based POMCO Group Friday, sources confirm. The exact number has not been confirmed by the benefits administrator company - although it does say approximately 50 reductions were made.

Sources indicate the job cuts were a result of the recent news that regulatory authorities are shutting down Health Republic Insurance of New York, based in Manhattan. Health Republic was ordered by regulators to stop writing new insurance policies because the company is expected to become financially insolvent.

The thousands of Central New Yorkers Health Republic enrolled in Affordable Care Act health plans was largely responsible for recent job growth at POMCO on James Street in Syracuse.

POMCO's website says it is of the nation's largest third-party administrators offering fully customized solutions for benefits administration, risk management, and business process outsourcing needs. The company has offices in Syracuse, NY; Fresno, CA; Westchester, NY; Buffalo, NY; Rochester, NY; Albany, NY; Binghamton, NY; Watertown, NY; NYC; and El Segundo, CA.

Here is a statement from POMCO:

In January 2014, POMCO established a separate business unit to provide member services, claims administration, and other back-office services under a contract with Health Republic. The team servicing the Health Republic account increased rapidly to more than 125 employees as the health insurance plan that was originally designed for 30,000 members grew to more than 215,000.

On September 25, The New York State Department of Financial Services (NYDFS), the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), and the New York State of Health (NYSOH) health plan marketplace announced that per Anthony J. Albanese, acting superintendent of financial services, that "given Health Republic's financial situation, commencing an orderly wind down process before the upcoming open enrollment period is the best course of action to protect consumers."

Since this announcement, we have been reviewing the impact of this development on our Health Republic business unit on a daily basis. As part of that process, and to accommodate the changes required in the Health Republic business unit, we have had to make approximately 50 reductions in staff.

While we anticipate that we will remain under contract to service its members over the next six months as Health Republic decommissions operations for its health insurance plans on the New York Health Benefit Exchange, we do expect further changes in staffing and other areas within the Health Republic business unit.

Story updated at 3:41pm Friday, October 9