WASHINGTON, Dec. 4 (UPI) -- Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., is accusing Sen. Marco Rubio R-Fla., of being weak on national security after Rubio voted down Rand's proposal to limit visas for migrants from "high-risk" countries.

Paul took to Twitter on Friday to blast Rubio, accusing the Florida Senator of preferring "broken systems" and "leaving us less safe."

The SECURE bill was proposed by Rand on Thursday as an amendment to the Affordable Care Act repeal bill, The Hill reported. Ten Republicans, including the Kentucky Senator and his fellow presidential hopeful Sen. Ted Cruz voted for the amendment. Rubio was among those who voted against it.

Paul has often found himself at odds with the more hawkish Rubio. In line with his track record of opposing U.S. "nation-building," Paul has often criticized Rubio's stances on the war in Syria and the unrest in Libya.

Yesterday I introduced my SECURE bill as an amendment in the Senate, to protect our borders and resources. Marco Rubio voted no — Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) December 4, 2015 During his Gang of 8 bill, I proposed the toughest border security/refugee-visa reform measures in my Trust but Verify Amendment. — Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) December 4, 2015 Marco Rubio voted against my border security and refugee/visa reform measures then too, leaving us less safe. — Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) December 4, 2015

Time magazine published an op-ed by Paul earlier this week in which he aligned Rubio with Hillary Clinton.

"The Clinton/Rubio foreign policy advocated for direct force to enact regime change in Libya and Syria," Paul wrote. "Their only difference of opinion was in the degree of direct force necessary."

The two Senators have butted heads before, most notably on the debate stage last month. During the Fox Business GOP debate, Paul targeted Rubio's tax plan, telling the audience it wasn't "very conservative." Paul went on to criticize Rubio's plans for military spending.

"I know the world is a safer and better place when America is the strongest military power in the world," Rubio responded.

"How is it conservative to add a trillion dollars in military expenditures?" Paul shot back. "You cannot be a conservative if you're going to keep promoting new programs that you're not going to pay for."