Buy Photo At RE/MAX Preferred Professionals, Patrick Kelly, left, Alex Redelico, Jerry Sodano, Diane Schilke, Mark Heflin, Roseanne Aragona, Mark Kot, Christina Duncan. Missing COE winners are Sandra O’Keefe and Johanna Weisman all won the NJAR 2014 Circle of Excellence award at various levels. (Photo: ELAINE ESTERMAN/STAFF PHOTO)Buy Photo

Elizabeth Jo Brechka, broker/owner of RE/MAX Preferred Professionals of Hillsborough and Bridgewater, and Robert M. Brechka, broker/manager of RE/Max Preferred Professionals of Hillsborough, are have announced the company’s NJAR Circle of Excellence Award Winners for 2014.

According to both, these agents had an outstanding year and were very successful in their respective market places. Real Estate activity was extremely consistent throughout the entire year, as reflected in the market share enjoyed by both branches of the company. Historically low interest rates and competitive pricing made buying a home a reality for so many clients.

Diane Schilke and Mark Hefli, were recipients of the prestigious 2014 NJAR Circle of Excellence Gold Level, while Patrick Kelly, Mark Kot, Rosanne Aragona, Sandra O’Keefe and Christina Duncan were awarded the 2014 NJAR Circle of Excellence Silver Level. Duncan also achieved the NJAR Distinguished Sales Club Award, signifying she has been a member of the Circle of Excellence for at least 10 years.

Those receiving the 2014 NJAR Circle of Excellence Bronze Level were Alexander Redelico, Johanna Wiseman and Jerome Sodano.

Elizabeth Jo Brechka said, “All of these agents are consistently top producers within the company with many years of experience behind them. They have managed to adapt to market conditions throughout the years in order to best serve their buyers and sellers. Their professionalism and work ethic is very apparent in the relationships they form with clients, past and present. We are very proud of these men and women and all the agents who are part of RE/MAX Preferred Professionals. We are looking forward to another great year. Congratulations to all.”

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1EFC1c0