Advertisement - story continues below

Unlike the polar ice cap, the Alinsky Coalition appears to be breaking up. When Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi appear on the verge of stroke, incapable of pronunciation, it can’t be good for the Jackass Party. When Hillary distances herself, and Democrats run from ObamaCare, it’s obvious there’s not much hail for the chief. The radicalized Democrat Party seems to be imploding and exploding at the same time, fearing a loss of the Senate in November.

Just what is the Alinsky Coalition? Well, the short answer is it’s the modern Democrat Party, a collection of political groups embracing far left ideologies, employing these tactics to destroy traditional Americanism—-outright lies, revisionist history, ridicule, federal domination of education and media, propaganda, infiltration, pretend patriotism, atheism, the installation of a new form of fascism-communism combining collectivism and corporate/government coordination. It is clear the Democrat Party has been dominated by the Far Left for many years, culminating in the election of Barack Obama, a serious disciple of Alinsky and a radical Marxist-Leninist who was devoted to the destruction of capitalism and the fundamental transformation of America. Armed with a compliant mass media and billions upon billions of dollars, the Alinsky Coalition has managed to centralize power and move America rapidly toward totalitarianism. Here is the basic list of political groups comprising the Alinsky Coalition:

labor unions

radicals in universities and graduate schools (starting in the 60s)

black, Hispanic liberation movements

communists, socialists

starry-eyed youth

homosexual groups

women’s liberation groups

pro-abortionists

atheists, anarchists

These groups share a focus: to attack traditional American values using their main weapon, ridicule. Anyone who opposes them is immediately and consistently demonized in one of several ways:

Advertisement – story continues below

Homophobe!

Sexist!

Racist!

Imperialist!

Capitalist Pig!

So what evidence do we have that the Alinsky Coalition is beginning the break apart?

Exhibit A: Black Pastor Coalition files brief in support of Traditional Marriage

It is becoming very difficult to convince all the associated Alinsky groups that it is simply a matter of ‘us against them’ when the majority of black people support traditional marriage, rejecting the idea that marriage should be redefined by the whim of a secular minority. Will they start calling traditional blacks ‘homophobes?’ They already have, just as they’ve attacked conservative black leaders as ‘Uncle Toms.’

Advertisement – story continues below

The first black president promotes homosexuality. He cannot avoid the blowback from the black majority. Thus, the Alinsky Coalition splits, one segment attacking another. Homosexuals, angry with traditionalists in the black community, attack them, even as some blacks accuse homosexuals of being racists.

Hispanics—generally traditionalists when it comes to family matters—are not huge allies in the push for same sex marriage–or abortion. More splits and splintering.

Exhibit B: Abortion and Black Genocide

The founder of Planned Parenthood, part of the Alinsky Coalition, was an actual racist. In 1922 Margaret Sanger wrote:

Advertisement – story continues below

“We don’t want the word to go out that we want to exterminate the Negro population . . . “

(Source: Woman, Morality, and Birth Control. New York: New York Publishing Company, 1922. Page 12.)

Obama–the most prolific and radical pro-abortion president–and his political party are destroying black babies at such a rate as to render blacks the only declining population in America. Some say that at present abortion rates, blacks could face extinction in America in only a few decades. As this reality comes into focus for more and more people, the Alinsky Coalition breaks apart in more ways, even faster.

It is no secret young voters are increasingly opposed to abortion. They know life in the womb is human, and human beings have unalienable rights. They know abortion is murder. They know abortion is a very profitable business. Young people standing opposed to the abortion industry and its allies promises more fracturing of the Alinsky Coalition.

Exhibit C: Unions increasingly oppose Obama on trade, Keystone, and ObamaCare

Union membership is way down. Union influence is way down. Employment is way down. Naturally, if you prevent employment opportunities, discourage investment with regulation, and make healthcare expensive, as Obama has doneon every front, then the backlash from union members is loud and continuous–and will influence elections.

Exhibit D: War on Women

This latest Alinsky gimmick to skewer conservatives was a dud. Polling indicates women don’t like the contraception mandate in ObamaCare, and they aren’t real comfortable with public funding of abortion. Broken promises, i.e. lies concerning an ability to retain favored physicians and health plans, made women distrustful. Moreover, women recognize hypocrisy when they hear Obama whine about comparable pay at the same time White House salaries favor men. Furthermore, women care about national security a lot. Can anyone tell us women feel more secure after 5 years of surrender, retreat, and defeat? A nuclear Iran feeding a nuclear North Korea in coordination with China and Russia in support of Jihad does not paint a picture of increased security. Eventually, women will also see same sex marriage as a threat, not only to traditional marriage but also to the health of the nuclear family–another target of the Alinsky Coalition. The real war on women is being waged by the Left; and women are realizing it in greater numbers, especially when they see the research about the devastating effects of abortion, not to mention the connections between pornography, prostitution, abortion, and trafficking. All this and we haven’t even mentioned the terrible results for women given the impact of Obamanomics. Unemployment among women has skyrocketed under Obama. For women, neglect is as bad as abuse; and they suspect this president of both. When Obama supports Sharia, women see a president supporting the abuse of women by his silence.

Exhibit E: Crony Capitalism = Fascism/Communism

Obama has been very clear: he wants to ‘spread the wealth.’ That means government steals from one citizen to give to another; and in the process, government gets control of everyone. ObamaCare and Cap ‘n Trade are primarily floated to redistribute wealth.

People generally resist being robbed. Increasingly, they see a president in bed with corporations and Wall Street, as he talks the talk of the populist. Another point for hypocrisy. Then he insults business people, saying they ‘didn’t build that.’ Moving on, he gives corporations bailouts, takes enormous corporation campaign contributions, and rails against such bailouts and contributions, insisting he cares about the little guys. He throws them the ObamaCare bone, which turns out to be another epic failure; so, the rich get richer, the poor stay poor, and the middle class crumbles. Good job, Barack. Everything is worse for everyone, except for you and the elites. Meanwhile, liberty constricts behind government overreach; and the feds buy bullets and tanks and threaten God-given rights in the name of maintaining order. Far Left folk love socialism and Birkenstocks. They didn’t bargain for exploitive elitism trending totalitarian.

Exhibit F: Indefinite Detention

This is where the ACLU meets Ted Cruz, both accusing the president of violating the very heart of due process, the rule of law, and constitutional protections. Based only on suspicion, a citizen can be arrested, detained without charge, and held indefinitely. Even the far left is aghast, including Rachel Maddow. More splintering of the sacred Alinsky Coalition.

Exhibit G: A War President & failed foreign policy

He left Iraq too early after opposing that war. Now the country is a mess; and remarkably, just recently, he gave a speech in Europe defending the legality of American intervention. Talk about being all over the map, as this Leftist points out.

Obama is failing in Afghanistan. He fails in the face of Russian aggression. He fails to confront North Korea and Iran. He can’t even get the Japanese to agree on trade. The far left is livid over his use of drones and his inability to build alliances. Many decry his efforts to overthrow Qaddafi in Libya, resulting in massive violence and chaos. The least that can be said is that Obama is an enormous force for destabilization, no matter where he goes. Did I mention 100,000+ civilian casualties in Syria due in part to American weakness? Many on the Left see Obama as a warlord, willing to kill Americans with drones and to topple sovereign governments without any authority. The Coalition splits accordingly.

Exhibit H: Free speech, freedom of religion, freedom of conscience, and surveillance

People on both sides of the spectrum stand amazed at Obama’s casual allowance for trashing the Bill of Rights. Radical homosexuals attack private citizens for upholding traditional marriage. They enlist human rights commissions to prosecute traditionalists, who are penalized with fines for speaking their minds. Businesses are shut down by the tyranny of extra-judicial activism designed to destroy anyone holding to traditional marriage. Same-sex marriage activists drive people from their jobs. They issue death threats. And all the while, Obama remains silently supportive. He passes healthcare laws that force people of faith to violate conscience and ignores their right to protest and resist. He uses his DOJ to persecute anti-abortion activists. He endorses hate crimes, which in reality impose unconstitutional limits on free speech. Then, there’s the surveillance controversy, as this Leftist writer points out.

Exhibit I: Occupy Wall Street vs. the Tea Party

The Tea Party started with a straightforward proposal: lower taxes, balance the budget, reduce government spending, and limit government. These were and are common sense, traditional values espoused by conservatives all the way back to the founding era. The Tea Party has been very effective in educating people about our first principles, values, and ideas that have been wildly successful when applied earnestly. The Tea Party has also been effective in urging Republicans to start acting like Republicans. And the Tea Party has shown that the Alinsky Coalition is driven mostly by thugs with graduate degrees whose policies fail over and over. In this regard, Occupy Wall Street helped the Tea Party a great deal. The contrast is stark and instructive: OWS people clearly displayed their depravity as the Tea Party consistently showed its goodness. All these dynamics instructed Americans to reject the politics of division and destruction so clearly practiced by the Alinsky Coalition.

Conclusion

Of course, one could go on about the scandals involving the EPA, IRS, ATF, VA, NSA, and Benghazi, pointing out the wide-ranging and continuous patterns of incompetence, bad management, horrible decision making, lack of leadership, malfeasance, lies, cover up, more lies, and criminality. Prominent Democrat Senators are revealed as participating in the IRS scandal, one that increasingly indicates direct White House involvement in the use of the IRS to muzzle and punish political opponents. Democrats with a conscience are increasingly embarrassed and humiliated by this lawless president.

Was there ever a more repugnant reality than seeing Obama provide weapons to terrorists in Egypt and Syria? According to many experts, this alone is treason of the worst kind. Perhaps like no other president in history, Obama has lost the support of people across the spectrum, earning disrespect and distrust in the process. He is almost singlehandedly responsible for the demise of the Alinsky Coalition. Certainly, given the heightened racial tension in the country, he has set the civil rights movement back 50 years. To prove the point, consider his silence as black leaders goad people to suspicion and violence–and his remarks concerning the situations involving Professor Henry Louis Gates and Trayvon Martin, in addition to his many references to racism motivating the opposition.

People do not like being lied to, they don’t like being manipulated and spied upon, they do not like being robbed, and they despise government domination acting in the destruction of liberty and opportunity. These are the kinds of things that transcend partisanship; and these are the hallmarks of the Obama administration, one driven by the corrupt machine known as the Alinsky Coalition.

He who engages politics by ridicule, lawlessness, condemnation, divisive rhetoric, demonization, name-calling, and fear-mongering will face political oblivion, eventually. Such behavior turns friends to foes, and the world gets very small indeed at that point. Severe damage caused by this president across the board will last for years, getting much worse before it gets better; and that will seriously impair Democrat prospects for a very long time pointing to the end of the Alinsky Coalition, a good outcome for America.

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.