Beach erosion is visible Thursday during low tide on Folly Beach. Folly and Isle of Palms seek federal help to fix eroded beaches.

Folly Beach and Isle of Palms want federal help to fix battered beaches in the wake of the unusually high tides and storms of October.

Folly Mayor Tim Goodwin made an urgent appeal for assistance in a letter to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

Isle of Palms applied to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for beach restoration funding, said Mayor Dick Cronin.

Both mayors said they worry that their beaches cannot protect property from another storm like the one associated with Hurricane Joaquin early last month.

Because of the storm, Folly lost an estimated 25 percent of the $30 million corps beach-restoration project completed 18 months ago, Goodwin said in his letter to the Army Corps of Engineers.

Cronin said IOP is awaiting the results of a post-storm beach survey it commissioned from Coastal Science and Engineering.

“The contour of the beach throughout the island changed dramatically and a lot of primary dunes have been lost,” he said.

The lost sand appears to have moved into the surf, he said.

IOP has yet to hear from FEMA, he said.

The Corps, in response to Goodwin’s letter, has ordered a new beach survey of Folly that is a first step toward a decision on whether the federal government will fund a new but smaller renourishment project than the one completed last year, officials said.

The Corps will collect new beach-condition data using a four-wheeler outfitted with survey equipment. The process takes a day or two, said spokeswoman Glenn Jeffries.

“It runs up and down the beach and gets the measurements that we need,” she said.

The resulting information is analyzed to see if the situation at Folly meets criteria for additional federal renourishment funding in the near term. A similar situation happened in 2005 and 2007 and the corps was able to respond and replace beach that was lost to storms, officials said.

The Folly renourishment project worked as designed during the storms of October, and without it there would have been more property loss, Jeffries said.

The corps also is taking a look at shoreline lost at Myrtle Beach in October to see if it qualifies for more federal funding. Like Folly, Myrtle Beach partnered with the corps on a recent erosion fix.

Pounding surf generated when Hurricane Joaquin passed far offshore destroyed the protective berm at the back of the beach on Folly for 5 miles of shoreline, Goodwin said.

“It is critical that the material be replaced,” he said in his letter to the corps.

He also noted that half of the dune-stabilizing vegetation planted during the last Corps project was lost in the early October storm. And the storm stripped away sand covering hundreds of limestone rocks that have reappeared on the beach. The rock material was mixed in with sea-bottom sand that a Corps contractor dredged and pumped ashore to protect the shoreline as part of the $30 million Folly project. A beach rock cleanup was completed but the storm negated its effects because it washed away sand and exposed new rocks. The result is a “100 percent loss” of rock-picking efforts, Goodwin said.

Folly gets millions of dollars in federal help replenishing its beaches because of the recognized effect of the Charleston Harbor jetties which block the southerly flow of beach-replenishing sand. Folly contributed a $5 million match for the $30 million project.

Folly has an agreement with corps for mostly federally-funded beach renourishment about every seven years. If a new, smaller project is approved for the near term, the federal government would cover the entire cost, officials said.

Folly consultant and coastal scientist Nicole Elko has determined that about 25 percent of the corps project that pumped 1.5 million cubic yards onto the beach was lost in early October. The city hopes that the beach renourishment will last another five years, she said.

“It’s unlikely that they can withstand another storm like this without (property) damage,” Elko said.

In late September, unusually high tides known as king tides caused erosion. The combination of the tides and the subsequent Joaquin-related storm was a “double whammy,” Elko said.

Her survey of conditions at Folly happened not long after Joaquin passed offshore. The effect on the beach when the king tides returned in late October has not been documented.

“The beach is probably in worse condition now,” she said.