Topics: Claire McCaskill, Congress, Criminal Justice, Editor's Picks, Ferguson, Gun Owners of America, Hank Johnson, laws, Police, police demilitarization, Rand Paul, sentencing reform, Politics News

Last Wednesday night may have marked a shift in U.S. policymaking attitudes. As the police in Ferguson, Missouri, just straight-up started arresting and tear-gassing and pointing their snipers and death tanks at everyone, all while wearing unnecessary and some might say counterintuitive tuff guy jungle-camo outfits, the nation seemed to collectively realize that this was insane. Why are suburban police departments armed to duel with Megatron in situations where they’re supposed to be “keeping the peace”?

It, of course, wasn’t the first instance of the growing trend of police militarization — wherein local police departments are outfitted with hand-me-down goodies procured by the Defense Department, allowing the friendly local constable to warp into an expensive murder-robot sent on a mission to exterminate the scourge of jaywalkers. But the scene in Ferguson caught the public’s eye to such an extent that politicians and officials — the president, the attorney general, the speaker of the House, the Senate majority leader, Missouri politicians, and de facto libertarian leaders felt compelled to weigh in.

“At a time when we must seek to rebuild trust between law enforcement and the local community,” Eric Holder said, “I am deeply concerned that the deployment of military equipment and vehicles sends a conflicting message.” “We need to demilitarize this situation,” Missouri Sen. Claire McCaskill weighed in, noting that “this kind of response by the police has become the problem instead of the solution.” And Sen. Rand Paul, the libertarian-leaning 2016 hopeful, wrote an Op-Ed about how “we must demilitarize the police,” a risk that could loosen the soil on the right’s traditionally rigid law-and-order posture.

Rep. Hank Johnson, a Georgia Democrat, has been working on a bill to demilitarize the police for some time, his office said, and is now rushing the process to have the proposal ready for when Congress reconvenes in September. The bill would limit the Pentagon program that funnels this sleek, deadly gear down to the local police departments and SWAT teams that use them to terrorize people in order to protect the peace.

Johnson criticized the Pentagon’s ‘1033’ program, which offers surplus military equipment to state and local law enforcement, including M16 rifles and mine-resistant ambush protected vehicles (MRAP). He noted in the last several months those vehicles have been given to cities in Texas, Idaho, Indiana, Minnesota, New York, South Carolina, Tennessee, Arizona, Illinois and Alabama. “This trend is not only sweeping America’s small cities, it’s hitting American college campuses as well. Ohio State University recently acquired an MRAP,” he said. “Apparently, college kids are getting too rowdy.” Johnson said his bill would limit the type of equipment that could be transferred and would make sure states track all equipment received.