'Live Fearless' registers on Grammar Police radar

I considered this more as grounds for earplugs than a Grammar Police opening until I got an email from one of my regular correspondents and fellow Mark Trail fans — marking her as a person of impeccable taste — who wrote the following:

The company's new slogan is "Live Fearless," and a little girl says that at the end of the commercial.

My wife has taken to snapping at the TV every time the Capital Blue Cross ad appears.

"The new Capital Blue Cross advertising campaign is driving me crazy!

"Their slogan is 'Live Fearless.' Am I the only person who thinks it should be 'Live Fearlessly?"

Well, no. And she was delighted when I told her my wife also is infuriated by the slogan.

I thought about contacting Blue Cross Blue Shield to see if other people are complaining, but it occurred to me that in light of the Obamacare rollout, the timing might be poor for whimsical issues.

Besides, I did a Google search for "live fearless" and "grammar" and struggled to find anything about it. I finally came across one comment on YouTube.com under a Kansas City version of the ad where the first person wrote, "Grammatically incorrect ... should be 'live﻿ fearlessly.' "

The next commenter wrote, "Who cares?"

Blue Cross could have avoided any appearance of a grammar problem by making its slogan "Be Fearless" instead, but hey, what do I know about the advertising business? Bad grammar might make an ad stand out, which I guess is what they're going for. Write memorable.

Speaking of TV, consider this reader complaint:

"It is Monday, Sept. 30, and I am watching 'Wheel of Fortune.' According to the show it is Teacher's Week. What a shame; only one teacher can play! The correct title should be Teachers' (plural possessive) Week. It is a shame that none of the teachers playing the game caught the error.

"This is similar to a new center in Whitehall. At the intersection of Route 22 and MacArthur Road, across MacArthur Road from Perkins, is the Whitehall Visitor's Center. Once again, only one visitor can avail themselves of the center. The apostrophe is misplaced again. But what can you expect? In 1972, the Whitehall teachers went on strike. One of the picket signs read 'Teacher's On Strike.' Another stated 'Teacher's Care.' Don't believe me? Go visit the Whitehall Township Public Library and ask for the 1973 yearbook. Look on page 19."

I took his/her word for it, but I would make a distinction between people who don't know plurals from possessives — extremely bad for any teacher — and confusion about whether to use a plural or singular possessive in certain ambiguous circumstances.

I agree that the teacher's and the visitor's are wrong, but I suppose "Wheel of Fortune" and Whitehall could argue, albeit unconvincingly, that they were referring to these people as individuals rather than collectively.

The same issue cropped up in a photo that a reader sent me and I used on my blog. It was a No Smoking sign in a hotel. In all caps, it said, "For our guest's convenience, this has been designated as a non-smoking room." The reader who sent it remarked, "I guess the hotel has only one guest."