Topics: bruce rauner, Chicago Tribune, Economics, Illinois, Labor, labor economics, Labor unions, Republicans, Richard Florida, Rick Snyder, Right-to-work, Scott Walker, taft-hartley, U.S. Economy, Unions, Business News, News, Politics News

These are trying times for the American labor movement. Employer backlash; the 1947 Taft-Hartley Act, which restricted union activities and allowed states to pass “right-to-work” laws; and deindustrialization have led to a decades-long decline in union membership, a harsh reality underscored by Bureau of Labor Statistics figures released last week. The BLS reported that the union membership rate among wage and salary earners dipped to 11.1 percent in 2014, down from 11.3 percent in 2013. Those figures compare with a union membership rate of 20.1 percent in 1983, and they represent a drastic fall from unions’ 1954 peak, when nearly 35 percent of wage and salary earners claimed union membership.

In recent years, Republicans governors have done their part to further erode union power; Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker infamously stripped public employees of collective bargaining rights, signing a measure that sparked an unsuccessful recall campaign in 2012. Since Walker signed the union restrictions, known as Act 10, public employee union membership has plunged in the state. In nearby Michigan, long a fortress of labor strength, Republican Gov. Rick Snyder signed legislation making the Rust Belt state a right-to-work one, meaning that workers wouldn’t have to pay union dues even with union officials negotiating for higher wages and benefits on their behalf. Though supporters couched their arguments in terms of free choice, the real intent of right to work laws is to gut trade unions, whose bargaining clout is inevitably reduced once workers opt to freeload and, as a result, union funds dry up. Last year — the first full year Snyder’s right-to-work law took effect — union membership in Michigan plummeted 7.6 percent; right-to-work advocates cheered the news.

This is the context in which Bruce Rauner, the new Republican governor of Illinois (unionization rate: 15.1 percent), is looking to wage war on his own state’s unions, with a particular focus on public sector employees.

Ahead of his State of the State address next week, Rauner is railing against unions as inimical to the state’s business competitiveness, the Chicago Tribune reports. Appearing at a central Illinois community college on Monday, the governor threw his support behind efforts to curb union power.

“The states that are really growing don’t force the unionization into their economy,” Rauner said. “People can choose whether they join a union or not. I believe that’s the right thing.”

Rauner added that he isn’t advocating a right-to-work law for Illinois — at any rate, such a measure would be dead on arrival in the heavily Democratic state legislature — but he endorsed allowing local voters to “decide for themselves” whether to establish “right-to-work zones.”