Multiple Chronic Conditions This conference provides an opportunity for all health care disciplines and the public to learn about the massive health care changes generated by ACA affecting the delivery and reimbursement of health care services in the U.S, says Dr. Kim Kuebler.

The Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center is sponsoring the 2nd National Health Policy and Clinical Practice Conference March 31 to April 2, 2016 at the Westin Savannah Harbor Golf & Spa Resort. This conference will provide interdisciplinary health care professionals and the general public with the opportunity to review, identify and discuss pertinent changes that are impacting and influencing American health care as a result of the Affordable Care Act.

This conference has partnered with the US Department of Health and Human Services, Agency for Health Research and Quality to provide a FREE Train the Trainer Program on SHARED Decision Making, for all health care disciplines for 8 continuing education credits.

This conference provides interdisciplinary attendees with discussion on how health policy interfaces with clinical practice and to address the Tsunami of change in the approaching Value vs. Volume reimbursement structure and eventual population based payment system.

The number of Americans who have two or more chronic conditions is the largest, fastest growing and most costly US patient population Health Policy Experts from Washington, DC and Clinical Experts will provide attendees with valuable knowledge and tools on how to prepare for the massive health care changes that will transform the U.S. health care system.

The US Department of Health and Human Services, Secretary Burwell announced earlier this year that by the end of 2018, fee-for- service is expected to be dramatically reduced by more than 80% in provider and setting reimbursement.

“This conference provides an opportunity for all health care disciplines and the public to become informed on the massive health care changes generated by the sixth year of the Affordable Care Act affecting the delivery and reimbursement of health care services in the U.S. as we transition into a value vs. volume and eventual population based health care system,” says Dr. Kim Kuebler, Director of Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center.

About Multiple Chronic Conditions: Multiple Chronic Conditions Resource Center is an interdisciplinary source for clinical practice updates, guidelines, blogs, and courses used to support best practices in the care and management of America's largest patient population - those with two or more chronic conditions. The Center is recognized by the US Department of Health and Human Services as a clinical resource for interdisciplinary health care professional's providing care for patients with Multiple Chronic Conditions. The Resource Center is a key resource for educators and students for current evidence based practice recommendations and relevant information to support optimal patient-centered outcomes for those best practices for managing patients living with symptomatic chronic conditions. The Center provides easily accessible practice guidelines, current best practice updates, e-books, webinars and more content.

To register for the conference, please visit MultipleChronicConditions.org or Click Here for the Registration URL. Participants will obtain 8.5 continuing education contact hours for attending the conference. Early bird registration, before February 1, 2016, is $289 for medical professionals and $195 for the general public.