Harrison Street Real Estate Capital, a Chicago-based private equity firm, hasn’t exactly been a household name in the Twin Cities market.

But, in recent months, Harrison Street has established a significant local presence, investing nearly $96 million in health care real estate in the Twin Cities.

As Finance & Commerce reported in April, an affiliate of Harrison Street paid $58 million for two buildings totaling 198,000 square feet on Allina Health’s WestHealth campus, at 2855 Campus Drive in Plymouth. In July, Harrison Street announced its $37.8 million purchase of the Minnesota Valley Surgery Center at 1000 140th St. W. in Burnsville.

The deals are an indicator of the continuing interest in health care real estate, a category generally considered one of the most stable and relatively low-risk sectors for long-term investment in commercial real estate.

Still, the likely prospect of sweeping changes to the U.S. health care system, brought by the Affordable Care Act, has introduced a degree of uncertainty among stakeholders. Uncertainty is anathema to investors, regardless of the sector. But local health care real estate experts still expect continuing investment activity and repositioning in the Twin Cities health care market.

“In the capital community, in the last few years, there has been a huge appetite for health care investments” like the recent Harrison State deals, said Stephen H. Brown, executive director of Cushman & Wakefield/ NorthMarq’s Healthcare Real Estate Advisory Group. He expects that to continue, with a sizeable amount of capital in search of health care facility investments.

National data show the growth of investment in health care real estate of all types, including the rapidly expanding senior-care sector, according to Todd Perman, executive managing director for Global Healthcare Services at Newmark Grubb Knight Frank.

The health care real estate category has grown steadily from less than $1 billion in transactions in 2002 to an estimated $5.7 billion in 2012, he said. “It’s still a developing category.”

For some time, the Twin Cities health care market has been on the leading edge of national trends, which makes the area attractive to investors, Brown noted.

Brown said investors are especially keen to acquire ambulatory care facilities that are affiliated with and owned by health care systems — more so than medical office buildings owned by private practices. The latter don’t always possess the high credit ratings and low cost of capital enjoyed by health systems, Brown said.

One real estate investment trust from outside the area with significant health care holdings in Minnesota is Minot, N.D.-based Investors Real Estate Trust, which has 30 health care properties here. Chuck Greenberg, the REIT’s Minneapolis-based senior vice president of commercial assets, was reluctant to speculate on the effects of health care reform for investment stakeholders.

“It’s early in the game, so it will take a while to know what the impact of reform is going to be,” Greenberg said. “But our health care portfolio has been one of our strongest performers, and we have no reason to think that won’t continue.”

Meanwhile, Twin Cities area health care systems are continuing to invest in new, ambulatory care facilities. The shift from inpatient to outpatient care has been going on for decades, but health care reform has accelerated it. “A lot of larger systems are positioning themselves for anticipated health care reform by moving anything that can be placed into an ambulatory care setting,” Brown said.

“Two reasons are: the high cost of hospital space and the value placed on it, and the desire to put health care closer to patients. Some groups have done better jobs at that than others, but clearly, that is one of the things that has driven a lot of activity in the last couple of years,” he said.

As reform continues to reshape health care delivery, Brown expects to see more mergers between systems and consolidations within health care systems. As time goes on, some facilities will become obsolete or no longer needed, which should lead to more acquisitions by real estate investors, Brown said.

With the drive for more cost-effective care, one way health systems have been preparing is selling health care facilities that they continue to occupy as leasing tenants. It’s often a more cost-effective real estate strategy than owning. Harrison Street’s Burnsville acquisition, for example, was a sale-leaseback deal.

Compared with other metro areas around the country, the Twin Cities health care market “is ahead of the curve in monetizing those assets,” said Michael Sharpe, a principal with the Minneapolis-based Davis Group, which has been one of the state’s most active health care real estate developers. “Health care systems don’t like to be landlords; it’s not a natural relationship.”

Rather than owning bricks and mortar, “most health systems would rather deploy their cash closer to the patients,” investing in assets used in patient care, such as medical equipment and electronic medical record systems, Sharpe said.