Photo

Ben Carson, the only Republican to have once threatened the lead of Donald J. Trump in national polls, said on Wednesday that he saw no path forward and would skip a debate on Thursday in his hometown, Detroit, signaling an end to his candidacy after paltry performances in the nominating contests.

Mr. Carson stopped short of suspending his campaign and said he would provide more details on Friday, but after his dismal showing on Super Tuesday, his campaign is effectively over.

A retired pediatric brain surgeon, Mr. Carson long held Republicans’ favor with an uplifting biography and a quiet manner that belied his strafing critiques of President Obama and liberalism, which delighted grass-roots conservatives.

But in the end, Mr. Carson withered under mocking insults hurled at him by Mr. Trump, especially in Iowa, and he suffered from voters’ desire for a candidate projecting strength at a time of anxiety over terrorism.

After a disappointing showing in the Iowa caucuses, Mr. Carson never seemed to regain his footing. On Super Tuesday, his hopes for a strong performance in the South faltered as he ran a distant fourth or fifth in every state.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I do not see a political path forward in light of last evening’s Super Tuesday primary results,” Mr. Carson said in a statement. “However, this grass-roots movement on behalf of ‘We the People’ will continue.”

Even in a fiercely anti-establishment year, Mr. Carson’s months of popularity and prodigious support from small donors — the $20 million he raised last summer led all candidates — stunned political experts.

“Dr. Carson’s favorability ratings have never changed,” Armstrong Williams, a close adviser, said just before the Iowa caucuses last month, in which Mr. Carson finished fourth. “But after Paris and San Bernardino, his supporters made a different decision. They wanted a war president. Dr. Carson did not have the rhetoric or the competitiveness on the debate stage to say the explosive things, to say, ‘Let’s keep all the Muslims out.’ ”

Born into poverty and raised by a single mother with a third-grade education, Mr. Carson remade himself from a wayward teenager into a scholar, winning admission to Yale. By 33, he led a major department at Johns Hopkins Hospital. He burst onto the political scene in 2013 by criticizing the Affordable Care Act at the National Prayer Breakfast, a video watched over and over by delighted conservatives.

In contrast to his mild manner, Mr. Carson had a penchant for broad-brush, divisive utterances about race, sex and religion. He diagnosed America as suffering from an excess of “political correctness.” He compared the United States to Nazi Germany, declared that men’s behavior in prison indicated that homosexuality was a choice, and said the Affordable Care Act was the worst thing since slavery.

Ultimately, it was questions about Mr. Carson’s grasp of foreign policy that eroded voters’ and donors’ confidence. During a debate, he falsely said that Chinese forces were operating in Syria. Advisers, including Mr. Williams, were quoted in a New York Times article as saying Mr. Carson was struggling to get up to speed on national security.

His campaign was riven by internal conflict, with Mr. Williams, an old friend with no official role, often advising and steering without the political operatives hired to run things. In December, Mr. Carson’s campaign manager, Barry Bennett, and communications director, Doug Watts, quit as disagreements with Mr. Williams burst into public view.

After Iowa, Mr. Carson barely campaigned in New Hampshire. He became fixated on a false story spread by Senator Ted Cruz’s campaign the night of the Iowa caucuses that he was dropping out. He finished a dismal eighth in New Hampshire and sixth in South Carolina. In the 11 contests this week, he won only three of nearly 600 delegates.

Unlike candidates forced to drop out when money dried up, Mr. Carson was still receiving donations from supporters. “Gratefully, my campaign decisions are not constrained by finances, rather by what is in the best interests of the American people,” he said in his statement. By not declaring definitively that he is suspending or ending his campaign, he can continue to raise money. Whatever comes next, he will retain his national celebrity and a potentially lucrative list of donors.