Topics: $20, 10, Alexander Hamilton, American History, Andrew Jackson, Editor's Picks, Eleanor Roosevelt, harriet tubman, Rosa Parks, News

The Treasury Department is poised to honor a woman on the $10 bill. If we project the popular vote, the escaped-slave-turned-abolitionist Harriet Tubman is a likely face for the new ten; First Lady and larger-than-life social liberal Eleanor Roosevelt is also a candidate. But how can a choice be made between the poorest of the poor and a highly visible blueblood?

On the merits, both women are worthy of national honors. Tubman’s personal story is extraordinary: spiritually strong despite being physically and mentally abused, and having witnessed some of the worse cruelties of the nineteenth-century American institution of slavery, this tiny, uneducated woman took fate into her own hands when she repeatedly returned south to rescue scores of slaves. She masterfully eluded fugitive-slave catchers through the decade of the 1850s, and conducted spy missions for the Union during the Civil War.

Eleanor Roosevelt was more than the wife of the one and only four-term president. She was charismatic and committed, ahead of her time as a champion of racial equality and social justice. Not content to be the dutiful domestic lieutenant to a political man, she served as the crippled president’s “legs,” criss-crossing the country and giving rousing speeches. Whether sitting in muddy camps alongside aggrieved World War I veterans and protesting with them the Republican administration’s cruel indifference to the ex-soldiers’ financial plight, or fighting racism by resigning from the snooty Daughters of the American Revolution and staging African-American singer Marian Anderson’s Lincoln Memorial concert, Eleanor Roosevelt took the lead in deepening President Roosevelt’s, and the nation’s, social conscience. After her husband’s death, she pursued an uncompromising human rights agenda in the United Nations.

The other name being bandied about would be the “youngest,” Rosa Parks, the only candidate born in the twentieth century. A civil rights icon, her act of civil disobedience in 1955, disputing an Alabama law that obliged her to surrender her seat on the bus to a white person, made her a living legend. She died in 2005.

Whether it is Harriet or Eleanor or Rosa who graces the ten, the loser in the new equation is the first secretary of the treasury, Alexander Hamilton. Despite his reconfiguration as a hip-hop star in a Broadway musical bearing his name, Hamilton doesn’t belong to our world. The historical Hamilton, a bastard son from the Caribbean island of Nevis who rose to prominence as General Washington’s aide during the Revolutionary War, was an artful social climber who married into one of the wealthiest landed families of New York State. While cunning, egotistical and self-righteous, no one doubted his intellect. He turned his back on the grunts who gave up their agricultural livelihood to fight for the country’s independence, embracing instead the interests of a moneyed elite whose patience and support for a financially strapped federal government was required to prop up a deeply indebted regime. That was the choice he made.

Oddly, then, Hamilton, the darling of modern fiscal conservatives for taking risks and marshaling the power of private capital, was a proponent of a bigger, more intrusive, and consolidated government; Hamilton’s political opponents wanted government to be more inclusive, to better represent the voiceless. For those capable of appreciating irony, featuring Hamilton’s image on currency has served as a reminder that the American republic has never really privileged democratic impulses—that’s what changes when a Harriet Tubman or an Eleanor Roosevelt gets the nod.