Buy Photo Mark Haywood, seated left, and Darnicea Allbright wait to sign up for health insurance under Kentucky’s health exchange at the Madison Avenue Christian Church in Covington. Neither has ever had health insurance. (Photo: The Enquirer/Liz Dufour)Buy Photo

What will Kentucky's next governor do to health care?

That question has caused anxiety among many in Northern Kentucky and the rest of the state. The changes, however, don't worry medical providers in Northern Kentucky.

Many believe that whatever Governor-elect Matt Bevin decides, it won't leave the poor without coverage but might mean they will have to pay premiums and co-pays.

Bevin hasn't released his plans for how he will change the state's health care system. He's pledged to reduce the number of people on Medicaid and dismantle the state's health care exchange, kynect.

Bevin's told The Enquirer after getting elected, "It is my intent not to enroll people at the current expanded level. We will not enroll new people."

He's said he would seek a waiver from the federal government to construct his own Medicaid program.

Chris Goddard, chief executive officer of the nonprofit HealthPoint Family Care, tried to reassure the 23,000 Medicaid patients his clinics see across the region.

"For our patients' sake, whether they're eligible for Medicaid or uninsured, we will continue to care for them," Goddard said. "It is something we can absorb. I can't foresee a disruption in service."

Goddard, like other health care providers, can only speculate on what might happen. No one with St. Elizabeth Health Care, the largest health care provider in Northern Kentucky, was available for an interview, but chief executive officer Garren Colvin said in a statement he would support a waiver program Bevin has proposed. Colvin said he hopes the program would lessen the burden on the state while providing coverage for Kentucky.

"Governor-elect Bevin is taking a measured approach to the options around Medicaid expansion," Colvin said in the statement. "We are hopeful that the approach will consider the impact on current Medicaid enrollees. It's wise for Kentucky to look ahead to the budget challenges when federal funding decreases."

'Medicaid is not luxury'

The uncertainty has caused concerns to linger among those who have signed up for Medicaid after the state expanded it in 2013 under the Affordable Care Act.

Kelly Sells didn't know how much longer she could afford health insurance for her and her two daughters, now ages 17 and 19 before she became eligible for Medicaid in 2013.

Sells, 49, of Newport, became one of 23,000 in Northern Kentucky who enrolled in Medicaid after the expansion.

She worked for a non-profit Northern Kentucky Community Action Commission until September. She's now studying to join the U.S. Foreign Service.

She's afraid of losing her coverage.

"Medicaid is not luxury insurance," Sells said. "If you get sick, it is nice not to lose everything you have."

More than 400,000 people statewide have enrolled through kynect in either Medicaid or a qualified health plan since Kentucky expanded Medicaid coverage and set up the exchange. Kentucky's implementation of the Affordable Care Act and health care exchange garnered current Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear rave reviews from across the country, including an invite by President Barack Obama to his State of the Union in 2014.

In 2014, Kentucky saw the largest drop in the country of the uninsured, 5.8 percentage points, to 8.5 percent, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.

Beshear and others have cautioned Bevin not to undo that.

Rev. Chinna Simon, pastor of Madison Avenue Christian Church in Covington, hears the fears about the uncertain future from many in the community. The church has held events over the past two years to sign people up for health care.

"There's a lot of anxiety," Simon said. "They don't know what's going to happen. What does this really mean? Who's going to provide health care? Some think it means they'll be put out to pasture."

Medicaid recipients may have to pay premiums

Bevin and others in the health care industry have tried to allay these fears.

Bevin has said he wants everyone to have "skin in the game."

His reforms might mean Medicaid patients will have to pay premiums. Bevin won't likely lower the income threshold for Medicaid and kick people off if he follows the example of other states.

Bevin has heralded Indiana's system as the best model in the country. Like Indiana, Bevin said he will apply for a 1115 waiver from the federal government so he can deviate from normal Medicaid restrictions and set up Kentucky's own program.

Five states have Medicaid systems under a federal waiver. The federal government has not allowed states seeking waivers to lower the income threshold for Medicaid from 138 percent below the federal poverty line, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Instead, some, like Indiana, have made people on Medicaid either pay premiums or co-pays, depending on income level.

Increasing costs on the poor does keep some from seeking medical care, said Robin Rudowitz, associate director of the Kaiser's Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.

"There is a large body of evidence that when you impose premiums and cost-sharing on low income people, it does impose a barrier to enrolling in coverage and access to care," Rudowitz said.

Robin Conrad, 29, of Newport, works at a medical company inputting insurance and said she would struggle if she had to pay for Medicaid for her and her two children, ages 9 and 4.

"Medical treatment is really expensive," Conrad said. "If it wasn't for Medicaid, we couldn't get our prescriptions filled when we need to."

Whatever Bevin decides to do will take time. The federal government has a lengthy approval process, Rudowitz said. In the meantime, medical providers are approaching the future with cautious optimism.

"I've not experienced anyone overly concerned about it," said Owen Nichols, president of NorthKey, which provides mental health and substance abuse treatment throughout Northern Kentucky. "It's a lengthy process to go through."

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1Hdi5nf