SPOTSWOOD, NJ - A recent ordinance by the Spotswood Borough Council has generated controversy and debate within the town as well as nearby Helmetta.

On Jan. 6, the borough council introduced an ordinance to disband the current Emergency Medical Services Department and hire a private company. A public hearing will be held on Jan. 20 at 7 p.m. at the Spotswood Municipal Complex on Summerhill Road to discuss the issue. An official vote to disband Spotswood’s EMS Department is scheduled to take place following the hearing, which is open to all residents.

Upon hearing news of the impending vote, former Helmetta council member Yvette Bruno began an online petition on Change.org to help convince Borough Council members to vote to keep the current EMS services intact. The petition will be presented at the public hearing portion of the Jan. 20 borough council meeting. Helmetta shares EMS services with Spotswood. The petition has 303 supporters as of Jan. 11 as well as several comments from past and present residents.

Sign Up for E-News

Over the weekend, Borough Council President Curtis Stollen released a letter to residents on the town’s website to address people’s concerns over the impending vote.

“I would like to take a moment to address the residents concerns due to false information and fears being spread regarding the termination of Spotswood EMS Department,” Stollen wrote in the letter. “I want to state emphatically that the health safety and welfare of our residents are our utmost priority.”

Stollen went on to discuss the council’s main reason for privatizing the EMS service, which points toward the passage of the federal government’s Affordable Care Act.

“The ACA has been a double edged sword. It has changed healthcare reimbursements that ultimately resulted in less payments for EMS services thus reducing our revenue,” Stollen explained. “It has also mandated health care be provided to our employees that work over 29 hours per week. In addition, we have been trying to maintain service with employees being paid between $10.00 and $13.00 an hour. This was making hiring of qualified individuals increasingly difficult. With our current EMS model becoming unworkable it was time to do a full review of the system.”





In October of 2015, the council requested bids from private bidders and received two; one from Robert Wood and another from MONOC.

Currently, the Spotswood EMS employs a director and 24 emergency medical technicians. Four of the 24 EMT’s also serve as supervisors.

According to Stollen’s letter, a private emergency medical service would provide Spotswood and Helmetta with a complete staff of trained and certified emergency medical technicians that would be available to residents at all times without any interruption in service.

On the opposite side of the issue is Spotswood Mayor Nicholas Poliseno. In his own letter on the borough’s website Poliseno outlined the two options available regarding EMS service as well as stating his feelings about the impending vote.

“I have asked multiple times for this to be placed on the ballot for a public vote,” Poliseno wrote in the conclusion of his letter. “With an issue as vital of disbanding our Spotswood EMS should be put on a ballot with the options above and allow you our residents we serve to have your say and vote on keeping Spotswood EMS or disbanding Spotswood EMS and hiring a private company to provide EMS for you.”

The two options Poliseno outlines in his letter include accepting the bid from Robert Wood Johnson and privatize the EMS or to keep the services within the borough with modifications.

Residents can read both Stollen’s and Poliseno’s letters in their entirety on the community’s website. As mayor, Poliseno will not be casting a vote on the impending ordinance to disband the current emergency medical services and hire a private company on January 20. Only borough council members will vote on the controversial issue.

The Spotswood Borough Council consists of Stollen, Margaret Drozd, Theodore Ricci, Edward Seely and Leo Servis.