A group seeking to stop the development of a natural gas pipeline across 17 New Hampshire communities said Friday it had collected more than 1,000 signatures.The online group, NHPipelineAwareness.org, said it will deliver its petition to Gov. Maggie Hassan and the state's four-member delegation to Congress, asking them to "postpone the imminent decision regarding the building of the natural gas pipeline."..Newly elected state Sen. Kevin Avard, R-Nashua, said in a press release issued by the group that he supported the petition because he felt the proposed pipeline needed more time to address questions from affected communities..."We need to know how this is going to benefit New Hampshire while strictly respecting property rights," Avard said in a statement. "Because without property rights our freedom is academic."Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co., a subsidiary of Kinder Morgan, has labeled as its "preferred" route 80.03 miles of new natural gas pipeline in the Granite State. The proposed route starts in northern Massachusetts, enters the Granite State in Winchester, crosses the southwestern tier of the state and continues through 17 communities, including Milford, Merrimack, Londonderry, Litchfield and Pelham...It's an alternative route for a pipeline the company proposed to build in northern Massachusetts. The company faced opposition from residents and legislators for that plan and has since moved its preferred path to New Hampshire...Of the 80 miles of proposed pipeline, 72.21 miles of the 36-inch pipe would be in existing Public Service of New Hampshire rights-of-way, following the path of power lines. The rest would need to be acquired by the company...U.S. Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., plans to hold a town meeting in Richmond on Monday, where the topic of the pipeline is likely to come up. Ayotte, along with U.S. Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H., and U.S. Rep. Ann McLane Kuster, D-N.H., sent letters to Kinder Morgan and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission asking that the company address local concerns about the proposed pipeline..."While Senator Ayotte fully understands the need for increased natural gas infrastructure in the Northeast to meet growing demand, she firmly believes impacted residents must be given ample opportunity to voice their concerns as the proposed project undergoes federal and state reviews, and has urged Kinder Morgan and regulators to work with and address the concerns of affected communities as the permitting process moves forward," said Liz Johnson, Ayotte's communications director...tbuckland@unionleader.com..