Given Obama's light resume and see-no-flaws cheerleading by an adoring media, Obama's fall was inevitable. If absolute power corrupts absolutely, absolute adoration comes close.

In practically anointing Obama, our "watchdog" media ignored a thin resume full of red flags. So in four years, Obama shoots from unknown state lawmaker, with little private sector and no executive experience, to president -- all in a nanosecond by political standards.

Look at Obama's rise. By his own admission, he is an indifferent student who somehow finds himself at Harvard Law. Co-members elect Obama president of the prestigious Harvard Law Review publication, where, oddly, he publishes nothing, at least not under his name.

He becomes a Chicago "community organizer," whose achievements appear to be holding lots of meetings and yelling at government to do more. He may have helped get asbestos removed from a lower-class housing complex. Or he may or may not have had a hand in it being removed after Obama left town for law school. Hard to say.

The Obama rise continues.

Former fugitive and still unrepentant domestic-terrorist-turned-government-paid-professor Bill Ayers co-writes a proposal to the Annenberg Foundation. It brings a $49.2 million education award to "improve" Chicago public schools. Just three years out of law school, Obama is asked to chair the newly formed Chicago Annenberg Challenge board. Money spent includes hundreds of thousands of dollars given in grants to Ayers' Cross City Campaign for Urban School Reform and Chicago School Reform Collaborative projects.

By their own admission, the Annenberg project group failed.

Obama runs for state senator, and somehow manages to kick off his other principal rivals over their alleged signature-gathering violations. He serves as an indifferent state lawmaker, voting "present" numerous times.

Obama runs for U.S. Senate. Rivals seem to suddenly drop out after formerly private confidential information about them become public. Luck or manipulation -- either way, the rise continues.

Immediately after getting elected to the Senate, Obama runs for president.

As candidate, he survives scandals -- or rather, would-be scandals -- that would have torpedoed the chances of a typical pol. Tony Rezko, Bill Ayers and the Rev. Jeremiah Wright -- are all overlooked or minimized in importance by our Obama-for-president media

Elected, Obama pursues -- and succeeds in signing into law -- a left-wing agenda more ambitious than any in modern history. His record: $1 trillion "stimulus"; $150 billion spent, per "60 Minutes," on "green tech" with nothing to show for it; higher taxes on "the rich"; Dodd-Frank, the financial regulations bill that does nothing to address the cause of the Wall Street/housing meltdown; an EPA unleashed on coal; and the creation of a brand-new entitlement program -- Obamacare.

To pass Obamacare, Obama made a number of broken promises including, but not limited to: "If you like your doctor, you will be able to keep your doctor"; Obamacare will "bend down" the "cost curve"; Obamacare will save the "typical family ... $2,500 a year"; and Obamacare will reduce the deficit over the next 10 years -- a projection the Congressional Budget Office says it can no longer stand by.

Obama's supporters, like former President Jimmy Carter, blame Obama opposition on "a belief among many white people, not just in the South but around the country, that African-Americans are not qualified to lead this great country." Actors James Earl Jones, Morgan Freeman and Samuel L. Jackson publicly call the tea party, an important part of the GOP base, "racist."

So Obama's post-election narrative becomes: "It isn't the leftist agenda that triggers GOP opposition. Nor is it Obama's growth-retarding policies that have produced the worst recovery since the Great Depression. No, what drives Republican opposition? Racism!

How does that translate into presidential action?

Leftist pundits like CNN's Roland Martin urged Obama to "go gangsta" and make "recess" appointments. Now, Congress said it was not "in recess" and thus the President could not make any "recess" appointments. Obama did anyway. Why not take extra, possibly illegal, measures to achieve results? Why not use expansive executive orders, ignore deadlines and unilaterally waive statutory requirements? After all, we're dealing with racists here!

But in a stunning 9-0 decision, the Supreme Court said Obama overreached in making the recess appointments. Congress, said the court, not the President, determines its rules. Congress, said the court, not Obama, decides when it is in recess.

House Republicans say they intend to sue Obama, arguing abuse of separation of powers. Respected left-wing legal scholar, Jonathan Turley, who twice voted for Obama, encourages a lawsuit. "What's emerging," Turley said, "is an imperial presidency. ... Barack Obama is really the president Richard Nixon always wanted to be."

Obama, encouraged by supporters, went "gangsta" -- on America. Now what?