Alabama has signed up 10 percent of Alabamians who are eligible for a plan on the exchange through the Affordable Care Act, according to numbers released by the federal government Wednesday.

The nation and Alabama showed a surge in enrollments from October to November, mostly credited to getting the glitch-plagued healthcare.gov website functioning.



Alabama enrolled 2,824 in November compared to 624 in October, for a total of 3,448 or about 10 percent of the 34,015 determined to be eligible for the individual and family policies offered through the exchange. More than 25,000 applications have been submitted. The deadline for enrollment is the end of March.

Today we caught up with Lauren Banks, director of Policy and Advocacy at AIDS Alabama. The nonprofit is the only AIDS Service Organization (ASO) in the nation to receive a statewide navigator grant.

AIDS Alabama, through its program Enroll Alabama, received $522,000 and has 10 paid navigators and more than 100 volunteer navigators around the state to help people enroll.



What are you/navigators seeing out there as you work to inform people about their health care choices under the Affordable Care Act?

People are overwhelmingly grateful. So many individuals have been denied insurance due to pre-existing conditions and are thankful that they can now get insurance. Others are paying extremely high premiums right now but with the ACA their premiums will only be a fraction of the current cost.

How have you approached the process as a recipient of ACA navigator funds? What's the strategy?

We are conducting a statewide strategy to enroll people. We have offices in Huntsville, Anniston, Birmingham, Montgomery, Selma, Auburn, and Mobile. Our team presents at churches, health fairs, civic groups...you name it and we will be there. We then schedule appointments with individuals to assist them in the application process. They can come to our office or we will meet them at a library or even go to their home. We are having an enrollment blitz on Dec. 23rd (the last day to sign up for coverage that begins Jan. 1). From 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. on the 23rd, we will be enrolling people at the AIDS Alabama office.



What has been the experience with the healthcare.gov website. Is it truly working now?

I can't say enough how much better healthcare.gov is. We are now able to quickly enroll people through the website without any snags. If you haven't been on it lately, go back and see. There is more window-shopping of plans and the enrollment system is seamless.

Are you seeing a significant population of people who are too poor for subsidies and thus a health plan is out of reach because of Alabama's decision not to expand Medicaid coverage?

Yes. About a third of the people who call us or approach us are in the "medicaid gap." Approximately 232,000 Alabamians would benefit from Medicaid expansion. And to break down what that means: currently a single person must make no more than $111/month to qualify for Medicaid. You basically must have no income and also dependent children or a disability to get on Medicaid. If Medicaid expanded in Alabama, that would change the threshold to $1,321/month (pre-taxes) for people to get coverage. That's significant. Our Navigator efforts have opened our eyes up to the dire need for medicaid expansion. We hope the governor will change his decision very soon.

Where are the uninsured getting their health care now? And who are the uninsured based on what you are seeing out there?

Great question. A lot of the opposition to the ACA has come from people saying they don't want to pay for other people's health care. Well, right now and for some time, we have been paying for people's health care. Individuals who don't health insurance typically don't go to the doctor until it becomes an emergency situation. They go to hospitals' emergency rooms, who have a duty to treat individuals, and those hospitals have to foot the bill. Those costs often trickle to other consumers, meaning the overall cost of healthcare is going up. So yes, the uninsured either don't go to the doctor and when they do, it is a free, charity-based clinic or a hospital emergency room.