Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share The quiet community of LaGrange, Ky. is transformed as Ironman triathletes pedal their way through town.

Buy Photo James Burke of Whitefish Bay, WI won the Louisville Ironman on Sunday with an overall time of 8:48:53. 10/11/15 (Photo: Marty Pearl/Special to The C-J)Buy Photo

James Burke, who lives near Milwaukee, won Sunday's Ironman competition in Louisville completing the triathlon in 8 hours and 45 minutes.

"The conditions were perfect," Burke said in an interview after winning the event. "The bike course was hilly and challenging, but the running course was great. The staff support was also great."

Burke, 37, who works in construction management, said he has been competing in Ironman events for about three years, and this was the first time he had entered the Louisville event.

The second-place finisher was Michael Jentges, 34, a firefighter from Germany, who crossed the finish line in downtown Louisville about 19 minutes behind Burke.

The top woman finisher was Christine Nichols, 37, of Kailua, Hawaii. Her time was a few seconds over 10 hours.

Karl Schmitt, president and CEO of the Louisville Sports Commission that helped organize the Ironman, said that 2,538 athletes started the event, jumping into the Ohio River around 7:30 a.m.

The two-mile swim was followed by a 110-mile bike ride into Oldham and Henry counties and a 26.2-mile marathon run.

Schmitt said relatively few athletes had to be taken to a medical receiving center during the event.

About 3,200 athletes registered for the Ironman, but Schmitt said typically fewer participants enter because of injuries, travel complications or other problems.

Officials gave clearance only on Friday for the swimming portion of the Ironman, after state health officials lifted an advisory related to a buildup of potentially toxic algae in the river. Schmitt said the swimmers on Sunday morning didn't encounter any adverse river conditions.

"There were no problems whatsoever," he said just after noon Sunday.

He termed the weather ideal for the event, with temperatures hovering in the upper 60s as of late morning. He said the water temperature in the Ohio River was 69 degrees, which was also ideal.

Reporter Sheldon S. Shafer can be reached at (502) 582-7089, or via email at sshafer@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1LpreZy