Comet landing

A historic attempt to land a spacecraft on a comet was set in motion Wednesday by scientists at the European Space Agency, despite a last-minute problem with the landing system. It was the climax of a decade-long mission to study a 2.5 mile wide lump of dust and ice known as 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. It marked the end of a 4 billion-mile journey that Rosetta and its sidekick craft, Philae, made together to reach the comet.

Cold blast

Denver's temperatures nosedived to 16 degrees yesterday. The previous record low of 19 degrees was hit in 1916. CBS News correspondent Barry Petersen reports on how more records could tumble as temperatures fall below zero in an area bracing for more miserable cold.

Lame ducks

The 113th Congress returns to Washington today to wrap up business in its lame-duck session. The Senate has few days left with a Democratic majority, time likely to be further abbreviated by a week off for Thanksgiving and two weeks off for Christmas. Here's what they'll be racing to finish, according to CBS News congressional correspondent Nancy Cordes and CBS Capitol Hill reporter John Nolen.

Dark Money

Transparency in government is being lost because of court decisions that have made campaign financing a free-for-all. Correspondent Cordes reports that the midterm elections this month were the most expensive in history, and $145 million came from anonymous donors. Thanks to a series of recent court decisions, certain nonprofit groups are no longer required to list names of donors. So no one knows who's buying what in Washington.

Awkward APEC

Whenever you have so many world leaders gathered together, CBS News correspondent Seth Doane observes, the sometimes strained relationships can play out in any number of ways and could be summed up as -- awkward!

No time for love

There are nearly 250-million single adults in China, and that's upset the traditional family-centered culture. Correspondent Doane reports that moms, dads -- even grandparents -- have become self-appointed matchmakers. Many say their kids were completely unaware that they were out spouse-hunting on their behalf.

China in the Comoros

Why is China, an economic powerhouse, so interested in a tiny, impoverished, politically unstable African nation? The Chinese are paving roads, building schools, mosques, government buildings, an airport, a center to facilitate tourism and even homes -- for politicians. Local TV and radio stations were designed and built by China, and four Chinese government-run television channels now pipe programming from Beijing directly into Comorans' homes.

Obamacare 2015

With the Affordable Care Act set to start enrollment for its second year on Saturday, some unpleasant surprises may be in store for some.

Genetic disorder to Ebola cure?

Chris Hempel has spent the last eight years fighting for the lives of her twin girls. Both have Niemann-Pick Type C, an incredibly rare hereditary disease. But one thing Hempel never imagined was that her family would end up in the middle of some of the most promising scientific research on Ebola.

Accused murderer's account

Joseph McStay, 40, vanished along with his wife, Summer, 43, and their two sons, Gianni, 4, and Joey, 3, from their Fallbrook, Calif. home in February 2010, launching what San Diego sheriff's investigators called their most extensive missing-persons search ever. Patrick McStay, Joseph's father, told "48 Hours"' Crimesider Monday that he had many phone conversations over the years with the man now accused of killing his son's family -- regarding his son's disappearance. Patrick McStay says the last time he spoke with Chase Merritt was in January or February of this year, when he called Merritt after reading in the media that Merritt was writing a book.

Eating armed

Several national chains, including Chipotle and Target, strongly discourage customers from bringing guns onto their premises, even if it's legal in the state. But a Louisiana restaurant is taking the opposite approach. CBS News correspondent Mark Strassmann reports on a grill where they're offering discounts to gun-toting customers.

Final service

In July of 2007, Lt. Justin Fitch was deployed -- and depressed -- in northern Iraq. Fitch got counseling, recovered, and served a second deployment in Iraq. But in May of 2012, he was diagnosed with terminal colon cancer. Correspondent Strassmann reports on how Fitch plans to spend whatever time he has left helping other soldiers.

Brand on Brand

Watch the actor, comedian and author open up like never before in the latest installment of the "CBS This Morning" Emmy-nominated series, "Note to Self." Brand offers advice to his younger self on surviving the drugs that nearly destroyed him, and the perks and pitfalls of fame.

Top News

World

Obama: U.S. - China climate change accord "historic"

Obama, China's president unveil flurry of accords

Disappointing news on drug war in Afghanistan

India rushes to help women amid medical scandal

Politics

Republicans win Senate race in Alaska

Which global figure gave the most to the Obamas?

U.S.

Arrest in slaying of vet as he left homecoming party

Remains of Ice Age infants uncovered in Alaska

Carol Ann Susi, voice of Mrs. Wolowitz on "The Big Bang Theory," dies

MoneyWatch

Americans rekindle their love of big cars

Can doubling down on food stamps boost nutrition?

Health

Playing video games may make you smarter

Plea for more healthcare workers to treat Ebola in Africa

Nurses strike to protest Ebola preparedness