The Netflix/City drama's cast gave an Instagram shout-out from the Toronto set

As Thanksgiving nears, iCarly star Jennette McCurdy and the cast of the Netflix survivalist thriller Between gave an Instagram shout-out on Sunday to St. Jude Children's Hospital.

Joining McCurdy on the Toronto set were Brooke Palsson, Ryan Allen and Justin Kelly, among the latest additions to the Canadian original drama to also air on City and Shomi in Canada. McCurdy is a celebrity spokesperson and fundraiser for St. Jude, which treats kids battling cancer and other deadly diseases.

Also joining the St. Jude cheering squad were fellow castmembers Krystal Nausbaum, Shailyn P. Dixon, Jim Watson, Kyle Mac, Jordan Todosey and Shailene Garnett. "After reading the scripts for months, it's great to see the characters literally come to life through all the incredibly talented cast," McCurdy said on Sunday in a statement.

Read more Jennette McCurdy Stars as Former Child Actress in First Post-'Sam & Cat' Project

"We are so excited to finally share the cast of Between. It is thrilling to watch these brilliant performers come together and bring our world to life," said series executive producer David Cormican after the ensemble cast for the Canadian drama had their coming-out party via Instagram.

Between, now shooting in Toronto, was created by writer-director Michael McGowan. The series will launch in all Netflix territories and a year later on Netflix Canada after debuting on the Canadian SVOD Shomi.

Read more Q&A: Director Michael McGowan

Between is produced by Don Carmody Television and McGowan's Mulmur Feed Co., in association with Elevation Pictures Corp. The series portrays a town under siege from a mysterious disease that has wiped out everybody except young people aged 21 years and under.

The Canadian drama, developed at City before Netflix jumped on board, explores the power vacuum that accompanies a government quarantine around the town that leaves mostly high schoolers to fend for themselves.

McGowan is executive producing, along with Don Carmody, Cormican and Naveen Prasad. Jon Cassar (24, The Kennedys) is directing the first two episodes.