This is the story of a pastor, a redhead and an elf.

So, we often wonder — what actually happens when we donate to charity? For instance, Saturday from 7 a.m. until noon is the Jessica Ghawi giveSPORTS Equipment Drive, where people can donate new and gently used sports equipment at the Pepsi Center (Camry Lot North). It was the dream of Jessi — a friend, a spunky redhead and an aspiring sports journalist — to bring sports into the lives of the underprivileged.

She then lost her life in the Aurora theater shootings.

Only after, did her dream come true.

And so, at last summer’s equipment drive, you might have dropped off, say, a basketball. Here’s what happened next:

Last Christmas, a 5-year-old boy named Demarco came sprinting toward Latoshia Jackson and exclaimed: “Mom, there’s an elf outside!”

That night, like so many others, Jackson was deeply depressed. In April of 2013, she had moved her seven children from Memphis, Tenn., to Denver. Really, they escaped.

“The gangs were trying to initiate my daughter and son,” Jackson said. “They didn’t join, and (the gangs) went in, full force. I was asleep, and I was in a complicated pregnancy and I woke up to my daughter being dragged out of the house so a bunch of these girls could jump her. And we had a drive-by shooting right next to us. I couldn’t take it anymore. …

“If it wasn’t for my children, honestly I think I would’ve given up a long time ago. My children are my life. Going through some of the things I’ve been through, and knowing they’re counting on me, it gives me more of a reason to strive.”

Within the first month in Denver, the family didn’t have any legitimate housing options. They were homeless, bouncing from shelters to basements to projects, a single mother and seven children.

On Christmas, pastor Bryan Sederwall of the Denver Dream Center had gathered a group to deliver presents in the projects. There was a Santa. Elves, too. Little Demarco found his mother, and the serendipitous Santa came into the Jacksons’ lives.

“Corn tortilla shells with sour cream was basically their Christmas meal,” Sederwall said.

Pastor B, as they call Sederwall, gave the Jacksons his phone number. Said he could help. Neither knew what would happen next.

“They’ve really become my family,” Jackson said of Pastor B and his group from Denver Dream Center.

Now, this isn’t some cheery, everything’s-fine-now story. Not yet, anyway. Jackson remains unemployed, and the family was homeless until last week, when they were finally approved for Section 8 housing.

The kids had slept on floors. The kids weren’t able to really be kids. Pastor B provided some support, mentoring and counseling along the way. Also, of course, faith.

And Denver Dream Center is partnered with A Precious Child, which puts on the giveSPORTS Equipment Drive. So that basketball? Pastor B gave it to Demarco.

“Basketball is what they love to do,” Jackson said of her sons. “It’s kind of therapeutic to them. We’ve been through a lot since we’ve been here. We’ve lost a lot. For them to have something that I know for a fact couldn’t afford, it was just a huge blessing for the donations — it might be something small for some people, but it’s something huge.”

One basketball. It gave these kids this rare emotion called happiness. It gave them an outlet. It gave them normalcy.

“They go to different rec centers to play,” Pastor B said, “and they just sort of come alive. … You see these kids smile.”

I’m sure Jessi is looking down and smiling, too.

Benjamin Hochman: bhochman@denverpost.com or twitter.com/hochman