Shoppers wait to be evacuated from The Mall in Columbia in Columbia, Md., on Jan. 25. Three people, including the gunman, died in the incident. (Photo: Evan Vucci, AP) Story Highlights Many high-profile shootings have occurred in public places since Oct. 1

Locations range from college campuses to a middle school, a movie theater, a N.J. shopping mall and one of the nation's busiest airports

Four such shootings have occurred in the last week, the latest Saturday at a mall in Columbia, Md.

In addition to Saturday's shooting at a mall in Columbia, Md., a USA TODAY review of media accounts reveals multiple other high-profile shootings in public places since Oct. 1:

Jan. 24, Orangeburg, S.C. Brandon Robinson, a member of South Carolina State University's football team, was shot and killed outside a dormitory. Police charged Justin Singleton, 19, with murder.

Jan. 21, West Lafayette, Ind. Purdue University student Cody Cousins is accused of shooting and stabbing to death fellow student Andrew Boldt in a classroom occupied by several people in the school's Electrical Engineering Building. Cousins surrendered to police without incident.

Jan. 20. Chester, Pa. A Widener University student was shot while sitting in his car outside the university's athletic center. The student was reported in critical condition, and police were looking for a suspect.

MALL SHOOTING: Police identify Maryland shooter

Jan. 14, Roswell, N.M. A seventh-grade boy is accused of firing a 20-gauge shotgun three times in a crowded middle school gymnasium, wounding fellow students, Kendal Sanders and Nathaniel Tavarez. The 12-year-old boy was charged with three counts of aggravated battery with a deadly weapon.

Jan. 13, Wesley Chapel, Fla. Retired police captain Curtis Reeves was charged with shooting and killing a man during an argument over phone texting inside a movie theater.

Dec. 13, Centennial, Colo. Arapahoe High School student Karl Pierson shot fellow student Claire Davis outside a school library before killing himself. Davis died eight days later in a hospital.

Dec. 4, Des Moines. Police said Steven Vogel fired about 100 shots at houses and passing cars during a 20-minute shooting spree at his home. One motorist suffered a minor gunshot wound, and Vogel died from a gunshot wound after a shootout with police.

Nov. 4, Paramus, N.J. A gunman dressed in black and wearing a black helmet fired a rifle at least six times in Westfield Garden State Plaza Mall. The suspect, Richard Shoop, was found dead in the mall with a self-inflicted gunshot wound. No injuries to mall patrons were reported.

Nov. 1, Los Angeles. Transportation Security Administration employee Gerardo Hernandez was killed and several others were injured during a shooting at Los Angeles International Airport's Terminal 3. The suspect, Paul Ciancia, has pleaded not guilty to 11 charges, including murder.

Oct. 21, Sparks, Nev. Seventh-grader Jose Reyes shot to death math teacher Michael Landsberry and wounded two students with a handgun outside Sparks Middle School before committing suicide.

Oct. 15, Austin. Adrian Alvarez, 16, pulled out a handgun in the courtyard of Lanier High School and killed himself.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eqfNw2