For the third straight year, the Meadowlands Racetrack has lifted its strict horse-only policy and opened its track to other animals from the wild kingdom. In between traditional harness races this Saturday, there will be camel and ostrich races to entertain fans. (Sorry, you can’t bet on them.)

Camel racing has a long history and is popular in other parts of the world, including the Middle East, but it’s not commonly seen in the United States. The gregarious ungulates can actually reach speeds of around 40 miles per hour, which is comparable to a racehorse.

Finding the right camels for the job is a little trickier. The four camels racing Saturday were brought in, along with several ostriches, from Hedrick’s Exotic Animal Farm in Nickerson, Kan., and were hand-picked for the race.

“We have about 70 camels and we can pick and choose the ones that do this type of stuff,” animal handler Monte McClurg said as he stood next to Snickers (the camel’s “barn name” – he will race under a different name, one that likely includes a camel pun).

“This is his third year at the Meadowlands,” said Mr. McClurg, “so he’s pretty good at it.”

He said Snickers should be considered a favorite in Saturday’s race. “Snickers is a very honest camel, very loving, very eager to please,” Mr. McClurg said. “If he was a human, I’d be proud to have him as a son.”

Another challenge is the camel’s hump — which makes the jockey’s position a little awkward. The rider must lean way to the back of his custom-made camel saddle and reach over the mound for balance.

And the camels may not run in the right direction – a video of last year’s camel race shows that at least three of the camels paused or turned around before the finish, to shrieks and laughter from the crowd.

Ostrich races are still more unpredictable. Ostriches, which themselves can reach speeds of about 40 miles per hour, have brains about as big as the end of a human thumb, according to handler A.J. Augusto. This means they are not the easiest animals to train.

“It’s all about repetition and stuff like that,” he said. “The more they do it, the more they know what they’re doing.”

Like the camels, the flightless birds have been known to turn around and run in the opposite direction of the race.

For the Meadowlands event, ostriches will be pulling “Ben-Hur”-esque chariots and riders as they race – the jockey rides in a special contraption harnessed to the birds, which means speeds on this track of about 25 miles per hour, Mr. Augusto said.

He believes the birds are competitive – if you have two ostriches racing side by side, you can feel the chariot speed up, he said.

“If you look at them in the wild, they run out in the wild,” Mr. Augusto said. “We have some that enjoy running and some that, if they don’t, we leave them at the house.”