Melissa Benjamin has labored for 16 years as a home health aide for various employers.

What she has never been paid, despite her field of work, is a dollar of health insurance by any of them.

For most of those years, she turned to Medicaid to cover her medical costs. At $10 an hour, “I make so little that I can’t afford a premium,” she said.

“I got lucky when I got married,” she said. Her husband has coverage.

Benjamin showed up in blue scrubs with her 5-year-old daughter Aspen on Tuesday to support legislation that would impose fees on large employers that pay low wages and provide no health insurance. The money would go into a fund to support the state’s growing Medicaid costs.

The legislation would apply to companies with 250 or more workers who earn less than $12 an hour.

It might also make Colorado unique. According to supporters, no other state has a similar law in effect.

The news conference, held at the Capitol, featured legislators, workers and a small business owner who contend that large companies gain a competitive edge by letting governments cover the medical expenses of their employees.

“Unfortunately, too many people working for large companies have to get onto government assistance through Medicaid,” said Democratic Rep. Crisanta Duran of Denver, the House majority leader. “The rest of us are picking up the tab.”

The news conference raised questions about the number of companies affected, how they would be identified and notified and how to count employees in companies with variable wages.

Republicans voiced skepticism.

“I have not seen an official version of the bill, but from a draft it is not clear how this bill actually helps entry-level employees, and from what I heard about the press conference, there are a lot more unanswered questions about what the bill does,” said House Minority Leader Brian DelGrosso, a Loveland Republican.

Dan Pilcher, executive vice president of the Colorado Association of Commerce and Industry, said its members are studying the bill and are taking no immediate position.

The bill would charge applicable employers a fee ranging from 25 cents to a dollar for each hour worked by employees under the $12 wage cap. A state board would set the actual assessment.

Supporters estimate that the fees, with federal matching funds, could generate $80 million to $130 million yearly toward medical care costs.

Medicaid enrollment has surged in Colorado following the state’s decision to raise income eligibility limits and allow unmarried adults to qualify, an option available to states under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Federal and state spending for Medicaid in Colorado totaled nearly $6 billion in fiscal 2014, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

One supporter, Rachelle Bainter, came to Tuesday’s news conference sporting her McDonald’s shirt with its golden arches and “I’m lovin’ it” slogan.

She said she suffers from chronic anemia and high blood pressure and depends on Medicare and Medicaid to pay her medical bills because she could not afford $954 a month in rent otherwise.

After 28 years at McDonald’s, she said, she has no health insurance and earns $8.65 an hour. McDonald’s offers health care plans but they have been widely criticized as being too costly for employees.

David Olinger: 303-954-1498, dolinger@denverpost.com or @dolingerdp