Dr. Richard Victor, president and CEO of the Workers’ Compensation Research Institute (WCRI) The ACA is a complex piece of legislation with a number of underappreciated effects on workers’ compensation. At this session, we will examine the evidence of some of these effects.

Dr. Richard Victor, president and CEO of the Workers’ Compensation Research Institute (WCRI), along with David A. North, president and CEO of Sedgwick, will discuss the impact of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) on the workers’ compensation system at the 70th Annual Workers' Compensation Educational Conference (August 23 - 26, 2015) in Orlando, Florida.

“It is an honor to be joining so many distinguished individuals at such an important forum,” said Dr. Victor. “This is an important discussion. The ACA is a complex piece of legislation with a number of underappreciated effects on workers’ compensation. At this session, we will examine the evidence of some of these effects.”

The session will convene on Wednesday, August 26, 2015 at 9:00 a.m. Dr. Victor and Mr. North will speak about the most recent ACA updates as well as share their insights into the impact of the ACA on workers’ compensation. Apart from taking questions from the audience, they will also address the following questions:



Is workers’ compensation experiencing case/cost shifting from group health insurance to the workers’ compensation system?

How will accountable care organizations and value based reimbursements impact workers’ compensation?

“As always, the workers’ compensation community has relied on WCRI’s research and analyses to keep us informed and to provide context to the content. Since the ACA continues to dominate conversations across the nation and employers continue to be challenged with components of the law, we look forward to Dr. Victor and Mr. North’s timely discussion on this important topic,” says WCEC General Chairman James N. McConnaughhay.

About WCRI:

The Workers Compensation Research Institute (WCRI) is an independent, not-for-profit research organization based in Cambridge, MA. Founded in 1983, WCRI is recognized as a leader in providing high-quality, credible, and objective information about public policy issues involving workers' compensation systems. WCRI's diverse membership includes employers; insurers; governmental entities; managed care companies; health care providers; insurance regulators; state labor organizations; and state administrative agencies in the U.S., Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.