As a military veteran who served as a sniper in Iraq, I take very seriously how our Armed Forces are funded and if service members preparing to deploy have the proper equipment and training they need to do the job our democracy asks of them

When I discovered that certain decision makers were adding attachments to the NDAA that would threaten the parks and public lands that I visit and enjoy with my family, I was offended.

ADVERTISEMENT

I call the Rocky Mountains my home, and sage brush lands are a back drop of the iconic western landscape that I identify with. These are lands I fought for. Lands I hope to one day explore with my son and his children. Without their proper management and preservation these lands will be lost to future generations forever.

A group of members of Congress led by Rep. Rob Bishop Rob BishopNational ocean policy threatens new regulatory burdens House panel approves Puerto Rico debt relief Menendez opposing Puerto Rico debt bill MORE (R-Utah) are putting oil and gas interests ahead of our nation’s military men and women by attempting to fill the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) bill with amendments that would derail westerners’ years-long efforts to protect the greater sage-grouse—along with 350 other western species that depend on the same sage brush landscape. This group is attempting to use the NDAA – critical annual legislation for our military – as a vehicle for their misguided effort, despite having been advised by the Department of Defense that the management of the bird has not “resulted in unacceptable limits on our military readiness activities….we do not believe the listing decision — regardless of the outcome — will affect our mission activities to any great degree.” In other words, the sage-grouse has absolutely nothing to do with our national security. These members are simply putting special interests ahead of our nation’s military priorities.

Polling from this week shows that westerners throughout sage brush country– Republicans, Democrats, and Independents alike -overwhelmingly support keeping sage grouse conservation efforts on track. Despite that clear signal from the people they are in Washington to represent, some of our Representatives – including many with strong records in supporting national defense, who should and do know better – sent a letter to the leadership of the Armed Services Committees supporting the effort of Bishop and others. Fortunately, an even greater number of our Representatives responded by sending their own letter to the leadership of those Committees urging them not to play special interest politics with our military men and women by allowing the sage-grouse language into the final bill.

The Department of Defense has clearly stated that conserving habitat for the sage-grouse has no impact on military readiness, so like everything in Washington these days, this isn’t about a bird – or national defense - this is about politics.

This open disrespect for the U.S. Military is what has encouraged Vet Voice Foundation, a veterans organization of over 450,000 members, to send veteran advocates from a handful of western states to meet with members of the House and Senate Armed Service Committees and other key administration offices on this important issue.

It is critical they understand that a lot of hard work by professionals in the scientific community, state and local officials, landowners, ranchers, recreation and other groups, and our land management agencies have developed a series of science based plans to conserve our public lands and protect the greater sage-grouse.

We need leaders that will stop playing politics with the needs of our service members and listen to the advice of their own constituents – like me - who live and work in sage brush country, their state agencies, the Department of Defense, our science community and our military veterans.

Reppenhagen is a U.S Army veteran who served in Iraq and Kosovo as an Army cavalry sniper.