Recent events are conspiring to bolster the old joke: God tilted the world on its axis, and all the nuts rolled into California. Consider that the Berkeley city council plans to debate requiring cancer warnings on cell phones. The San Francisco Chronicle reports:

"Cell phones are a risk, and I believe the public has a right to information that's credible, readable and understandable about the device they're using," said Berkeley City Councilman Max Anderson, who's co-sponsoring the ordinance and has a background in public health. "I'm not intimidated by the cell phone industry. The legal department might be, but I'm not."

Sigh. As I have earlier reported:

The National Cancer Institute flatly states that "to date there is no evidence from studies of cells, animals, or humans that radiofrequency energy can cause cancer." A 2012 comprehensive review of studies in the journal Bioelctromagnetics found "no statistically significant increase in risk for adult brain or other head tumors from wireless phone use."

Next look for Berkeley to slap cancer warning labels on coffee since the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) classifies cell phones as being as likely to be carcinogenic as that caffeinated libation.

As scientifically clueless as the Berkeley city council is, its members appear to be the soul of probity when compared to the nonsense about "chemtrails" that is apparently being endorsed by the Shasta County Board of Supervisors. Those of you who are blissfully unaware of the chemtrails conspiracy can get up to speed with this article by the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. From the Redding Record Searchlight:

The Shasta County Board of Supervisors voted unanimously Tuesday afternoon to seek more information on “chemtrails” after nearly four hours of public comment on the issue. Supervisor Pam Giacomini put the item on the agenda, and a number of so-called chemtrail experts addressed the panel, followed by dozens of speakers who blamed a host of personal and environmental ills on airplane exhaust. Supervisor David Kehoe lauded Shasta County resident Dane Wigington’s efforts to put together the panel of speakers who addressed the board on the issue. ... Activists claim the government is targeting populations with airplane exhaust laden with heavy metals added secretly to planes at airports and military bases. This effort, which activists also call “geo-engineering,” pollutes the earth and waterways when those metals eventually make their way back to earth. ... Dozens of residents stepped up to the podium to address their concerns. They blamed a host of illnesses to “chemtrails,” including cancer, fibers growing out of their skin, general feelings of malaise, neurological problems and compromised immune systems. Others ticked off environmental damage, including insects disappearing from one woman’s property, trees dying, aquatic insects dying off in water contaminated by aluminum, drought, wildfires and holes in the ozone layer. Regardless of where you stand on the issue, supervisor Giacomini said it was an important discussion to have when brought up by so many of the people she represents.

Just amazing.