Topics: Asia, chores, Gender Inequality, GlobalPost, Housework, South Korea, Life News, News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

So, you think your husband is a domestic sloth, failing to pull his weight in household duties?

Take comfort from South Korean wives, who have it worse.

In fact, men in this severely overworked nation do the least housework of 29 developed countries surveyed, according to a study by the OECD club of advanced nations.

The organization found that Korean men spend an average of 45 minutes a day on what it calls “unpaid work” — activities like cooking, cleaning and house chores. That’s less than a third of the OECD men’s average of 141 minutes a day.

South Korea’s neighbors China and Japan also ranked near the bottom.

Breaking down the numbers, South Korean men spend just 21 minutes on chores and 10 minutes on child care each day. Travel and shopping accounted for the rest of the time.

Compare that to Danish men, who topped the list in terms of gender egalitarianism, spending just over three hours a day on housework and childcare, followed by Norwegian and Australian men. (Denmark, incidentally, has a birthrate so low that it’s taken to incentivizing people to have sex while on vacation.)

American men also fall short of the OECD average, spending 82 minutes a day on chores and 19 minutes on childcare. The average woman across OECD nations does 273 minutes of unpaid work every day.

But before you get riled up against male sloth, consider that South Korean men also work some of the longest paid hours in the OECD. Each day they spend 422 minutes in “paid work or study,” which includes the developed world’s hardest average commute: 74 minutes. The only groups clocking more time in paid work or study are Mexican men (468 minutes) and Japan’s long-suffering salary men (471 minutes).

The developed world paid work average is 325 minutes per day for men and 212 for women. That means Korean men clock about twice as much time in paid work as the average woman, and nearly 100 minutes more than the average man in OECD nations.

“I get home from work at midnight, and I’m so tired I can’t even figure out how to do the chores,” laments Yoon Jung Hyun, 50, a retired soldier who works two jobs every day as a bus driver and restaurant server. “My wife understands, and she works shorter hours and handles the housework. What else are we supposed to do in this situation?”