By Mitchell Miller and Larry Downs

"The power to tax is the power to destroy."

This famous quotation from the Supreme Court's 1819 landmark case, McCulloch vs. Maryland, could also pertain to the current state of medical practices in New Jersey. In 2014, the Journal of American Physicians and Surgeons published a survey that identified New Jersey as the worst state in the nation in which to operate a medical practice. There were multiple reasons for New Jersey's poor ranking, but oppressive state taxes on physicians and their practices were a primary factor.

The good news is that the N.J. Legislature and Gov. Chris Christie have an opportunity to improve the tax environment for physicians by reducing the tax on ambulatory care facilities (ACFs). The timing is perfect as the need for state-funded, hospital-based charity care declines.

There are approximately 1,200 ACFs in New Jersey, and they performed one million procedures during 2014. They are predominantly privately-owned centers that perform imaging examinations and same day surgical procedures, and have a longstanding record of delivering high quality, convenient and lower cost medical care.

It is equally important to understand that ACFs are a vital economic driver for our state. These facilities employ approximately 6,000 residents and pay more than $60 million per year in corporate and state taxes. Their annual total economic impact on New Jersey's economy is a staggering $2.6 billion.

In 2004, New Jersey imposed a tax on the gross revenues of ACFs. The tax was created to supplement the state's charity care fund that is used to reimburse hospitals for the treatment of non-insured and indigent patients. With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and the expansion of the Medicaid program, the number of charity care cases in New Jersey has substantially decreased.

The proposed state budget for fiscal year 2016, which begins on July 1, acknowledges that there are substantially more New Jersey residents with health insurance and equally fewer instances of hospital charity care cases. The proposed budget would reduce the state's charity care payment by $148 million (22 percent), without reducing the charity care tax on ACFs accordingly. If approved, ACFs would pay $53 million in taxes for charity care cases, effectively raising their proportionate share of charity care funding from 8 percent to more than 11 percent.

Several components of the state's proposal demand closer examination. First, consider that physicians who own and operate ACFs are often being made to literally pay twice. They are paying $53 million in taxes for charity care expenses and then are providing free medical care to charity care eligible patients within hospital settings.

Second, it is significant to note that hospitals do not pay this tax despite the fact that many hospitals own and operate ACFs that compete with tax-paying, privately-owned facilities. At a minimum, this creates a decidedly uneven playing field.

Finally, and as a further inequity, an individual ACF's tax burden is not based on profit, but on total revenue. This is a gross receipts tax the state has not implemented anywhere else within the health care sector. As a result of the effects of the tax, many centers have not, and in the future will not be able to fund purchases of state-of-the-art equipment or hire additional support staff. This is a worrisome trend, especially when one considers that many procedures, such as mammography, are performed in a non-hospital setting, which could eventually limit New Jersey residents' access to life-saving medical procedures.

ACF physicians are certainly willing to contribute their fair share of medical care to our neediest citizens and have been doing so for years. Our physicians provide quality, outpatient community care. All health care experts agree that we need to reduce inpatient stays, which are more costly than care received in the outpatient setting. Moreover, patients prefer outpatient medical treatment. Our physicians care about their patients and should not be forced to increase their costs because they have to pay taxes on their gross revenue. We believe the time has come to end physician funding of hospital-based, uncompensated care.

We call on the governor and the Legislature to reform, reduce and eventually eliminate the unjust ambulatory care facilities tax.

Mitchell Miller is a radiologist and president of the Radiological Society of New Jersey. Larry Downs is CEO of the Medical Society of New Jersey.

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @starledger. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.