Twenty-two days before the shooting at Marysville Pilchuck High School that left the shooter and two of his victims dead, the state office of education announced the Marysville School District as one of three school districts that will share a $10 million federal grant to be used for safety and mental health education.

“About one out of every six students in Washington have at least one emotional, behavioral or developmental condition,” the state office announced. “A federal grant recently awarded to the state will target those students, as well as any others, for help.”

The Marysville School District was chosen “based on need and their readiness to benefit from the grant.”

The grant, called Project AWARE, was awarded by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. It will fund a number of activities, including increasing awareness of mental health issues among youth and “providing training for school personnel and other adults to detect and respond to mental health issues in children and youth.”

“Making sure students are safe, and that we can get them mental help information and help if they need it, is extremely important – not just to education, but to our communities as well,” state Superintendent Randy Dorn said in the announcement.

RELATED: Tulalip, Marysville, Still Grasping at Answers for Shooting

RELATED: Community Mourns Second Shooting Victim; Won’t ‘Make This About Race’

Project AWARE is designed to bring together students, parents, educators, mental health providers, local law enforcement and juvenile justice agencies, as well as other community-based organizations, to talk about mental health promotion, school climate and violence prevention.

Several advocates who work with young people say peer counseling and peer mentoring must be part of the solution, because peers are usually the first to know when a fellow student is in crisis.

“I would love to see peer counseling or peer mentoring programs in every high school as well as peer counseling programs in Tribal communities,” said Tracy Rector, Choctaw, director of Longhouse Media, which trains Native teens in filmmaking.

“These have proven to work in mitigating violence, reducing suicide, helping individuals get the help they truly need and in teaching young people how to understand and communicate their feelings.”