The Cook County Health and Hospitals System is awarding six-month contract extensions worth $110 million to two vendors, as it races to handle the stampede of patients who have signed up for its new health care program.

Both companies, Schaumburg-based Catamaran Corp. and Pittsburgh-based Automated Health Systems Inc., have already been working for the public health system as it ramps up CountyCare, a new managed care program for Medicaid beneficiaries. The existing contracts were set to expire Dec. 31.

In the larger of the two transactions, the county has awarded a $78 million contract extension to Automated to manage contracts, operate a call center and pay medical claims. The company's initial, $7.8 million deal was inked in November 2012 and expanded to $26.3 million in May.

Meanwhile, Cook County Health has awarded a $32 million extension to Catamaran to provide administrative services, such as processing prescription drug claims. The company also would pay the claims, with reimbursement from the county. In February, Catamaran signed a $3 million contract, which was expanded to $26.8 million in November.

The new contracts expire June 30. As CountyCare makes the transition from demonstration project to full-fledged Medicaid managed care venture, it is looking to shift back-office responsibilities of the program to a single third-party administrator.

The health system is in negotiations with an administrator, but a contract isn't expected to be finalized until January or February, said Steven Glass, Cook County Health's executive director of managed care, who declined to identify the company.

The existing contracts were extended to avoid any disruptions in treatment for patients, he said.

“The last thing we want is for a member to have a gap in care because of our back-office transition,” he added.

The county health board approved both contract extensions at its Dec. 13 meeting.

MEDICAID HEAD START

The Affordable Care Act allows states to expand Medicaid eligibility to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, with the federal government covering the full cost of coverage for additional beneficiaries for the first three years, tapering to 90 percent by 2020.

The law also allowed for enrollment of the newly eligible early through the 1115 waiver program. The federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services granted the county health system's application for a waiver in November 2012.

Currently, CountyCare treats patients for a set amount of $629 per member per month, half of which is paid by the federal government. Come Jan. 1, the federal government will pay the entire monthly rate, from which the county aims to cover costs of medical care and drugs.

The program generated $132 million in fiscal 2013, which ended Nov. 30. County officials are estimating it will rake in $468.2 million in 2014, 49 percent of the $950.7 million in total revenue they hope to get from the health system.

Health system CEO Ramanathan Raju once predicted that the program would enroll 115,000 people by the end of 2013. Only 65,000 people have been enrolled to date, a Cook County Health spokeswoman said. About 21,000 applications are awaiting review by the state of Illinois, county officials said.

One of Automated Health's responsibilities is taking new CountyCare applications by phone and performing a cursory review before they are submitted to the state, according to its website.

For Catamaran, the county contract is just a small part of its effort to gear up for the full rollout of the health care law. The company has contracts with eight fee-for-service state Medicaid programs and “dozens” of Medicaid managed care plans across the country, CEO Mark Thierer said during an Oct. 31 conference call to discuss third-quarter earnings.

The company is also ready to capture more business via the public insurance exchanges through its pharmacy benefit management contracts with various Blue Cross & Blue Shield plans and with consumer-operated and -oriented plans, or co-ops.

“Strong positioning with co-ops, state Medicaid programs and health plans should also help the company gain share whenever the influx of new coverage relating to the Affordable Care Act (ACA) takes place,” wrote Amanda Murphy, a Chicago-based equity analyst for William Blair & Co., in a Nov. 21 research note.

Representatives of Catamaran and Automated did not return calls requesting comment.