Free flu shot clinics might be a thing of the past.

“This year there won’t be any grants on any vaccine,” Kay Jones, executive director of Schuylkill VISION, said Wednesday, adding that she was informed earlier this summer about the change.

In an email, she said that the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Disease discontinued funding July 1 for mini-grants and vaccines for the state Department of Health. The funding had previously gone toward the state department’s Division of Immunizations.

Although people with medical insurance or Medicare may be able to get the flu shot for little or no cost from their doctor, Jones said she is still concerned that some people will fall through the cracks and not receive the preventative vaccine.

“We’re concerned about people who will not have access, whether through finances or lack of insurance. We don’t know how big of an issue it’s going to be,” she said.

Last year, about 2,600 people received free flu shots through various clinics in the county. In 2011, Schuylkill VISION distributed the first flu shots. And Jones said that VISION is working to find organizations that can provide the vaccine again for the 2014 flu season.

“The immunization coalition will try to get some free vaccines, but we don’t know if we will be able to,” Jones said.

The coalition is comprised of those involved in public health in the county, which includes the local department of health and Diakon Community Services for Seniors.

Holli Senior, deputy press secretary with the state Department of Health, said Wednesday the department will no longer provide free flu shots.

“Due to the decrease in funding, the department is no longer in the position to provide free influenza vaccine to adults. The funding I am referencing is 317 funding, which is federal funding that was decreased by 54 percent for 2014. The 317 program has evolved over time to fill gaps and address priorities in our vaccine programs. As the Affordable Care Act is implemented, more individuals will have coverage for vaccines through both public and private insurance,” she said in an email.

According to www.cdc.gov, Section 317-funded vaccines are for people who “are under-insured or their parents cannot afford the out-of-pocket costs required to fully vaccinate their children.”

Kathy Leahy, program manager for the senior community centers managed by Diakon, also said Diakon was informed earlier this year is not receiving any flu vaccines. Attempts are being made to obtain vaccines elsewhere, she said.

A lot of seniors took advantage of the vaccines, Leahy said.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend getting the vaccine as soon as it is available. The vaccines available will contain the same strains as those found in the 2013-14 flu season, the CDC said. Those ages 6 months and older should get the vaccine, and people with certain medical conditions should contact their doctor about the vaccination. An estimated 154 to 160 million doses will be distributed for the current flu season. This year, the CDC recommended that children ages 2 to 8 receive the more effective nasal spray vaccine.

Justyn Fair, 32, of Pottsville, said he didn’t want to wait to get his flu shot, which he got Aug. 21 at Rite Aid, 10 Centre St., Pottsville. He said he gets a flu shot every year to “prevent me from getting the flu. I had it one time when I was younger, and it’s not something you want to have.” He was planning on getting vaccinated at his doctor’s office but decided earlier was better and asked to get the vaccine at Rite Aid when an employee told him his insurance would cover the cost.

“I didn’t even feel it,” he said of the needle.

Colleen Brennan, pharmacy manager at Rite Aid, said now is the time to get the flu shot to protect yourself, family and others before the flu season starts. It takes about two weeks for the shot to be effective.

“It’s important that everyone get the flu shot,” she said.

Earlier this month, the pharmacy started administering the vaccine, which most insurance companies pay for. Brennan said she has personally given 50 flu shots. No appointment is needed. High doses are available for seniors too, she said.

Some people think they get sick from getting the vaccine, but Brennan said this is a common misconception. More likely is they already have the flu and do not know it.

Some people do experience soreness in their arm, though, because “the needle is actually penetrating the muscle,” Brennan said.

Flu shots are available at most Rite Aid pharmacies from 8:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Monday through Friday and 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturday.