Transcript for Donald Trump on Nevada Caucuses Win

Mr. Trump, contemplation congratulations on your victory. The drudge report, want to show it to everyone. It says you are the nominee right now. Are they right? Well, I hope see. We certainly have an advantage, George. It was a great night. It was a great day and we were looking pretty good, I think, by any standard. You know, you're winning despite the fact you have taken many positions at odds with the republican party, supported democrats in the past, even more you're winning -- it's remarkable winning against a united front of elected officials. Want to show this chart from fivethirtyate. You have 0. Will it make it harder to unite the party. I have many endorsements but I don't go out and seek them. Now as of yesterday people were calling and a lot of people were calling and I'll have many endorsements but it's not something I want to work for to be honest with you because it's a waste of time. Endorsements mean very little. We have as you know, we have some excellent endorsements and something I'm very proud of but it's a lot of work. You know, they want me to go to certain area, have a big news conference, I would rather be with the people and rather work with the people and get the kind of Numbers we got yesterday use those Numbers are amazing. We won with every single group, every single group. Men, women, evangelicals, we won with all sorts of education, if you talk about education at the highest level to a lower level we won with everything, George. It was a pretty sweeping victory last night. You also heard Ted Cruz in that piece from Tom llamas. Marco Rubio making the same point with robin coming up that nobody knows what you would do, how you would actually accomplish your goals as president. They're saying you haven't laid out the details. Can you tell us right now what are the first three things you would do on day one in a trump white house? Well, the first thing I'd do is knock out some of the executive orders signed by our president. Especially the one on the border where people are allowed to come in and just pour into our country like Swiss cheese. I'll work out immediately to knock out obamacare and start taking care of our vets and military. You haven't said how you'll replace it. Our vets have been absolutely treated horribly and we're going to take care of our vets. That's been a very, very big part of my campaign, the vets. Making the point you haven't laid out specifically how you're going to achieve those goals. How you'll build the wall or replace obamacare. I've been specific in terms of the wall and in terms of obamacare, what I'm doing is very specific, whether we use health care savings accounts and that could happen because a lot of people are liking it a lot, obamacare is falling out under its own weight dead by 2017. People are not signing up for it. It's a disasters. The rates and premiums going up by 45%, 55%, 65% and we'll have it at a fraction of the cost and I'm very specific on it, George. I'm a very specific person, believe me. Finally, Mr. Trump, have you given any thought to who your vice president nominee might be if, indeed, you are the nominee and whether it would be an elected official or a more outside the box candidate. Well, I have gin't given thought. I think we'll do fantastic and amazing what you're looking at and some states where already I'm very close in Texas and, you know, you have a senator from Texas, I'm leading in -- this will be the following week but Florida is looking fantastically, Ohio is looking great. You look at the different Numbers and the different states, we joust got Numbers in on Georgia. Doing fantastically well, Arkansas, so we're looking very, very strong, I think, George and we look forward to it. It's going to be an interesting week. Working, many of the states and it's going to be an interesting week. We got to go. Can you give me one name? Of a vice president? Uh-huh. Too early, George. You'll be one of the first to know. Maybe not the first but you'll be one of the first to know. Mr. Trump, thanks for joining us this morning. Thank you very much.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.