State Rep. Tim Derickson of Hanover Township is The Enquirer editorial board’s pick for John Boehner’s former seat in Congress. (Photo: Provided)

The candidates to represent former House Speaker John Boehner’s district skew both right and politically inexperienced – even moreso than in the once-crowded GOP presidential field.

One Democrat, one Green Party candidate and 15 Republicans are competing for the rare open seat in the far-flung, largely rural 8th Congressional District. Only two of the 17 hold elected office, although many of them have strong backgrounds of other kinds – in business, the military and other public service.

The winner will fill an important seat at a tumultuous time. Boehner, a West Chester resident, quit in the face of increasing pressure from the House Freedom Caucus, a group of about three dozen ultra-conservative congressmen who seek to govern by brinkmanship. The caucus sees the threat of government shutdowns as a legitimate tool to get its way on issues such as the Affordable Care Act, Planned Parenthood – really, wherever they hold a position they can’t otherwise get past the Senate and/or President Obama.

This isn’t how democracy is supposed to work, and it’s vital to put a voice of reason in Congress – a leader who will be more interested in building coalitions than walls. Boehner was such a leader, and Southwest Ohio will feel his absence for years to come.

The Enquirer editorial board took a multilayered approach to evaluating the candidates for his replacement: We reviewed their written materials and responses to submitted questions. We co-hosted a candidate forum with several local chambers of commerce. Finally, we met with five – all Republicans – who appeared most promising: Ohio Sen. Bill Beagle, Ohio Rep. Tim Derickson and businessmen Warren Davidson, Jim Spurlino and Kevin White.

Military vs. legislative experience

Each was thoughtful in his positions and would bring unique experiences. At a time when our country is faced with so many foreign threats, Davidson and White have the benefit of military experience and the best understanding of the situation in the Middle East. Spurlino has demonstrated leadership in attacking important regional issues at the community level. Beagle and Derickson have legislative experience in Columbus and are highly attuned to the issues in Southwest Ohio.

But one candidate rose to the top of the GOP field – and, in fact, the entire field – as a leader who would put ego and talking points aside to end the logjam in Congress. That’s Derickson, the state representative from Butler County’s Hanover Township.

In the House, the 55-year-old has experienced life in the minority party as well as the majority party, and he has shown the ability to put partisan politics aside to advance his legislative agenda. Derickson has staked out a reputation as a someone who’s both principled and capable of looking at the big picture, not merely short-term political gain.

Legislating – whether in the Statehouse or in Congress – is not only about big speeches and controversial positions, it is about building relationships and digging into the details to move our region, state and country forward.

Derickson’s measured approach extends to some of the hot-button issues of our day:

•He’s the only one of the five candidates interviewed who seemed to grasp the complexity of the immigration issue. He believes we must secure the border to protect our national security while acknowledging that deporting 11 million people is rather unlikely.

•While opposing same-sex marriage, he acknowledges it’s now the law of the land and will be difficult to overturn.

•He believes President Obama has a constitutional responsibility to name a nominee for the Supreme Court vacancy and the Senate the responsibility to confirm or reject that person. In fact, he’d like to see Obama nominate a consensus candidate whom both parties could support.

“It would be a chance to put our country first – not ideology or gridlock,” he said.

That’s a truly refreshing position in this divided environment when too many candidates are slinging derogatory brickbats and failing to offer thoughtful solutions to our nation’s problems.

Derickson’s resume, which includes stints as a farmer, businessman and Hanover Township trustee, shows good breadth of experience. Hokey manure-shoveling ads aside, he has strong community roots in the 8th, which stretches from Butler County north to Mercer County and extends east just above Dayton to take in Miami and Clark counties.

Two strong runners-up for 8th

Two GOP political newcomers have shown promise in this race and could be strong public servants with a little seasoning:

•Davidson, 45, of Miami County, has an impressive background as an entrepreneur, West Point graduate and former Army Ranger. He’s well-spoken and knows what he’s talking about when he says the United States should confine its military challenge of ISIS to special forces, not ground troops.

However, Davidson has received endorsements and money from far-right conservative groups and individuals, including U.S. Rep. Jim Jordan of Urbana, chairman of the House Freedom Caucus. We are not yet convinced that Davidson has the independent streak needed to best represent the district.

•Spurlino, 52, a Washington Township resident and owner of Spurlino Materials in Middletown. He speaks passionately of his work with the nonprofit Every Child Succeeds, which helps babies get their best possible start in life.

The Spurlino who met with the editorial board doesn’t mesh, however, with the one who wrote that Ohio’s Medicaid expansion was “a sad decision by feckless leaders. It shackled able-bodied adults – by the hundreds of thousands – into poverty with poor quality health care.”

Both Davidson and Spurlino should consider running for county or Statehouse positions where they can develop their voices, sharpen their positions and show their ability to advance agendas.

A couple of additional notes:

•On the Democratic side of the ballot, Corey Foister, 25, of Fairfield lacks the experience needed to be seriously considered for the position.

•Candidates for the 8th District will be in the odd position of appearing twice on the March 15 ballot – once to be their party’s primary pick for the June special election to fill the remainder of Boehner’s term, and once to be on the November ballot to represent the district in the next Congress. Primary voters should obviously select the same candidate twice.

The sheer number of candidates makes this a difficult race for voters to learn about, but differences do emerge upon closer inspection. The editorial board encourages voters in this and all races to check out The Enquirer’s online voter guide at Cincinnati.com for more information about the candidates.

Editor's note: An earlier version of this editorial incorrectly characterized Tim Derickson's position on border security. The Enquirer regrets the error.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1oRP0VL