Topics: aca, Affordable Care Act, Bill Flores, Congress, Editor's Picks, House, king v. burwell, Matt Salmon, Obamacare, Ron Johnson, Senate, Supreme Court, News, Politics News

The Senate GOP does have a plan to “fix” the Affordable Care Act if the Supreme Court rules in favor of the plaintiffs in King v. Burwell. Would you be surprised to hear that it is a 100% political maneuver, and not backed by sound policy?

Republican senators, Politico reports, are “coalescing” around a proposal put forward by endangered Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson. It would temporarily extend the subsidies for plans purchased on federally facilitated exchanges if the Supreme Court invalidates them in its King decision. This would come at a big price: it “would also repeal Obamacare’s individual and employer mandates and insurance coverage requirements.” Johnson’s bill would essentially restore one core component of the Affordable Care Act while eliminating the others. It would upend the mechanisms for universality on which the economics of the law hinge, and it would weaken the quality of coverage available. And since the subsidies would only be extended until 2017, that gives Republicans another opportunity in two years: either to repeal the law entirely, if there’s a Republican president, or to extract more concessions, if the president is a Democrat.

But look at us being so whiny, trying to explain their obvious and cynical political strategy. Did we forget to take our chill pill this morning? It must be so. Because all Ron Johnson is trying to do with this bill is restore “a little bit of freedom” to the balance of the universe.

“In that moment of what could be political chaos, we’re offering such a reasonable proposal that solves a mess,” Johnson said. “It fixes a mess caused by a sloppily written law, unlawfully implemented. All we’re asking for is a little bit of freedom back, which would be, I think, pretty popular,” Johnson said. Even Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) is backing Johnson’s measure, along with the rest of the chamber’s GOP leaders.

The danger with Johnson’s plan is that some of these alterations, specifically the repeal of the individual mandate, will indeed be “pretty popular.” The Democrats who wrote the bill did not include in the individual mandate because they thought that it would be popular. They put it in there to ensure the balance of risk pools. Without the individual mandate, some young and healthy people convinced of their invincibility might not sign up for health insurance, spiraling up the costs for those who do need health insurance right now, such as those with pre-existing conditions. This explanation of the law’s mechanics, though, just isn’t as politically compelling on a gut level as the Republicans’ argument, which is that the individual mandate represents the greatest abrogation of freedom since slavery, or whatever is worse than slavery. Is anything worse than slavery? Yes: the tax penalty for those who do not carry health insurance.