From left: Stephanie Odenbach and Sharon Cook, both of Longmont, pose for a portrait Wednesday while holding donated toys for the Toys for Tots program next to a Christmas tree at Production Company Dance Centre in Longmont. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

A donation box for the Toys for Tots program is seen Wednesday at Production Company Dance Centre in Longmont. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Local toy collection spots Care 4 Colorado Toy Drive Donations accepted through Dec. 24. Visit http://denver.cbslocal.com/care-4-colorado-toy-drive/ for more information or to make a cash donation. Drop off new unwrapped toys at these local King Soopers stores: Firestone 6110 Firestone Blvd. Lafayette 135 480 N. Hwy. 287 Longmont 2255 N. Main St. 995 S. Hover St. 1611 Pace St. Kindness for Kids Donations accepted through Dec. 15. Visit kindness-for-kids.org for more information and to download an application form to shop the holiday open house at the Boulder County Fairgrounds, 9595 Nelson Rd., Longmont, from 8 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. Saturday, Dec. 20. Drop off unwrapped new toys (unwrapped gently used toys also accepted) at: LifeBridge Christian Church 10345 Ute Hwy. Longmont Note: To donate to the program, mail checks to: The Longmont Community Foundation (Kindness for Kids memo), 636 Coffman St., #203, Longmont, CO 80501 Toys for Tots Donations accepted through Dec. 16. Visit toysfortots.org for more information or to make a cash donation. Drop off unwrapped new toys at the following Longmont locations: AltaVita Hummingbirds Red Hat Society 800 S Fordham St. Great Western Bank 2100 Main St. Leenie's Cafe 800 S. Hover Rd., Unit 40 Perfection Auto Body 1135 Kimbark St. Production Company Dance Centre 1401 Ken Pratt Blvd., 1A

A fuzzy memory of opening a mysterious cardboard box on the kitchen table in late December brings the best of the holidays into focus for Sharon Cook.

She was 6 then, the week or so before Christmas 1971, and just two years into her new reality of living with three older sisters and a single Mom who became an Avon lady to make ends meet in Cupertino, Calif.

"Mom wanted to make the holiday special for us. The hard thing for her was making it special on a small budget. And it was hard for her to ask for help, but people knew she needed that," Cook, now a Longmont resident, said.

From the box, Cook and her sisters pulled a Christmas ham along with toys given by a family at the 100-member Foursquare Church they attended.

But other than the Lord of the Rings board game in that box — along with a Crissy doll she received later at age 9 — Cook, now 50, forgot all of the other toys that came her way from family or charity.

"What I do remember is the feeling of Christmas. It's a feeling you can't put your finger on. It's magical. It's almost surreal," she said.

Turns out that toys, however delightful, were but tokens of the real gift — the goodwill between people moved by holiday spirit, she said.

"It's the same thing with Toys for Tots (collections). Even though people may not know a family personally, they know there is a need there," she said. "And no matter how big or small, everyone can play a role in making it better for someone else."

Beyond your Christmas tree

Cook passed along her appreciation of enhancing the holiday experience beyond your Christmas tree to her daughter, Stephanie Odenbach.

"When kids would come over to play, she would try to give them her toys," Cook said. "She's always been that way."

During the first week of December, Odenbach picked up a Toys for Tots collection bin sponsored by the U.S. Marine Corps to place in the lobby of Production Company Dance Centre, the Longmont business she and her husband co-own at 1401 Ken Pratt Blvd., 1-A.

"From my own family, from hearing the stories from my mom, if there is any way that we can help out, then we're onboard," Odenbach, 29, said. "... We are in the business of kids, and we want to spread a little holiday cheer."

Even during widespread times of hardship, individuals and service groups collected toys — those fanciful tokens of their support.

The Longmont Museum and Cultural Center archives include photos of toy drives during the Great Depression. One black-and-white photo from December 1931 depicts Boy Scouts standing with then Fire Chief Vern Campbell by Longmont's fire station then located at Fourth Street and Coffman Avenue. The pile of toys before the them includes scooters, wagons, dollies and cribs.

Love in the building

Perhaps Boy Scouts then delivered toys door to door to families they knew would welcome their gift.

Now, given Longmont's mushrooming population, the largest locally run toy drive — Kindness for Kids sponsored by LifeBridge Christian Church — distributes toys via an open house at the Boulder County Fairgrounds on Dec. 20.

LifeBridge and more than 30 local businesses anticipate collecting approximately 3,000 unwrapped toys through Dec. 15. About 400 volunteers will then sort toys in gender and age specific categories and stock three other stations: knitted or crocheted hats, scarves and mittens; Kiwanis Club-made wooden toys; and gently used donated toys, Cindy Kidwell, a former program coordinator and current volunteer, said.

"The majority of people come in and there's just a sense of hope when they see this massive number of toys," she said.

But Kidwell, who has worked the event for 24 years, added that tables heavy laden with toys absolutely signifies something more precious.

"I've heard a lot of people talk about how they feel so much love in the building," she said. "May be that is why over the years we've seen needy families get back on their feet and return to volunteer."

That explains why Cook and her family find ways in an busy season to give back, too.

"Christmas is about love and giving. The toy is just something that projects that," she said. "... Christmas is about pretty lights. It's about decorations. It's about the pine smell, and it's about time shared. If you can't donate a toy, donate some of that."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or at 303-746-0942.