Florida Hospital and Orlando Health officials have teamed up for an Affordable Care Act educational campaign in hopes of persuading their uninsured patients get coverage at the federal health insurance marketplace.

The goal is to eventually shift the patient volume from the expensive emergency department to primary care offices where patients can receive appropriate, timely care.

"The access to coverage has been a significant issue in Florida and our community," said Dr. Regan Schwartz, chairman of the emergency department at Florida Hospital. "In the patients that we see, more than half are underinsured or uninsured."

Within the next month, the hospitals will send out letters to uninsured patients to let them know that they could qualify for federal financial aid in the marketplace. The letters direct patients to local navigators, who can answer question and help them with the sign-up process.

The hospitals' new campaign gets underway as the first open enrollment deadline approaches on Dec. 15.

On Tuesday, the Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell made a stop in Orlando to speak with some of the key players about enrollment efforts. She encouraged the public to visit healthcare.gov or localhelp.healthcare.gov to shop for a plan and sign up before the deadline.

People who qualify for health insurance in the marketplace but don't sign up will get penalized either $325 or 2 percent of their gross income, whichever is higher.

The penalties don't apply to close to 1 million people who fall in the state's Medicaid coverage gap and are without health insurance, because they earn too little to qualify for federal financial aid in the marketplace and too much to qualify for Medicaid.

Since last year, the number of uninsured has dropped from 22 percent to 19 percent in Central Florida.

The two hospital systems have identified nearly 150,000 uninsured patients in their databases and are currently finalizing the number of letters that will be mailed out. They will follow up with a community event at the end of January, targeting the newly insured.

"It will be a health-care basics conversation," said Jeff Hurst, senior vice president and senior financial officer at Florida Hospital.

There are more plans available in the marketplace this year, but the premiums have gone up, too. Anne Packham, the lead navigator in Central Florida, said that it's important for people who already have coverage to actively renew their plans instead of relying on auto-renewal.

"The important message is that if you have health care coverage through the marketplace, it's time to for you to review and make changes for 2015," said Steve Harr, executive vice president at Orlando Health.

To make an appointment with a navigator call 877-564-5031 or visit coveringcfl.net.

nmiller@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5158.