Published on Sep 25, 2013

Najwan Al Ani sits in her El Cajon apartment and flips through a tattered study guide for the first phase of the United States Medical Licensing Examination. She used the workbook to study for and pass the test in 2011, and now it's less a book and more a messy stack of pages saturated with highlighter ink.



But Al Ani keeps it as a souvenir to commemorate her first stop in a years-long and nearly $10,000 journey to practice medicine again.



The Iraqi refugee spent seven years as a primary care physician in Iraq and Jordan before gaining refugee status in the United States. Now in San Diego, she's starting at what seems like square one: applying for a medical residency.



Despite a call for more doctors and nurses to help providers keep pace with the Affordable Care Act, foreign-trained doctors must redo a significant portion of their training before becoming full-fledged doctors again in the United States. They have to pass three American licensing exams and compete for residency positions with fresh-faced medical school graduates -- a process that often takes six years or more.



Al Ani's experience treating shrapnel wounds and delivering babies in a war zone doesn't move her toward the front of the line.



"Sometimes we faced lack of electricity while we were working," Al Ani said of her two years working at a Baghdad hospital. "Especially for me, I faced a case of delivery without any electricity. I need just single flashlight to make this mom pass the delivery safely for her and her baby."



Al Ani says she and her colleagues worked under intense pressure during the early years of the Iraq War. Medicine and supplies were limited. The streets surrounding the hospital were so dangerous her chief resident was killed on the way to work.



Now in the U.S., she's confronting those experiences once more, translating them for cover letters and in mock interviews.



Read more at Speak City Heights,

http://www.speakcityheights.org/2013/...



By Megan Burks



Video Production: Brian Myers, Media Arts Center San Diego

http://www.mediaartscenter.org/





Video by Brian Myers, Media Arts Center San Diego.