Cruz puts religious agenda over women’s liberties

Apparently, there’s no room in the Texas budget for basic women’s healthcare.

Recently, Republican leaders in Texas, due to their lack of decision-making skills, have come to the conclusion that funding cervical and breast cancer screenings by Planned Parenthood are deemed an unnecessary expense.

If we think we live in a progressive era, we should consider the notable changes that have recently proven otherwise.

Ted Cruz assumes his religious convictions are “American values,” but why should his opinion be the only one that matters?

It’s obvious that the fight for pushing Planned Parenthood out of Texas is not only a morality issue, but also the ultimate goal on Cruz’s agenda.

Last month he even emailed and invited over 100,000 pastors for an “all-out assault on Planned Parenthood.” His intention was loud and clear. America should defund the organization completely.

“I am urging you to confront this evil in our nation by praying and preaching with an unbridled passion until funding for Planned Parenthood ends and this barbaric practice is purged from the land,” Cruz said.

“The battle we face is not political. It is spiritual. To enter this arena in a prayer-less condition invites failure.”

Cruz likes to play on emotion as well as dramatics. He hones in on the opportunity that religious institutions can do his PR work for him. It becomes less of an issue of women’s health as it becomes a race for the public’s approval, after falsified videos were leaked a few months ago.

According to Bloomberg Politics, this advancement in Cruz’s campaign against the organization has many states following suit such as Louisiana, which plans to cut its Medicaid assistance to Planned Parenthood on Monday.

Last Wednesday, congressional meetings were held focusing their attention on abortion and the issue of the circulated videos. Planned Parenthood representatives were not invited to attend and defend themselves.

What a shocker.

Alyssa Quesada, 25, is a single mother who works as a medical assistant for home health with Planned Parenthood.

“(The) first time I came to their clinic, I was quickly seen and given information pertaining to safe sex and guidance on the different methods of birth control that were offered. They were kind and informative,” Quesada said.

“Ted Cruz’s cult followers are the first in line to judge about what is and isn’t right and how this organization ‘defies God’ But they will also be the quickest to turn their backs on the young women of America who really need help and government assistance,” she said.

It has become a back-breaking struggle to find other outlets for affordable women’s healthcare with the new restricted laws. Planned Parenthood offers thousands of women birth control for as low as $9 without insurance.

The government of Texas needs to look past conservative virtues and give women that are seeking support a better alternative before they revoke what we do have.

Cruz, we as women, take note that you are trying to compensate in your deficiency of leadership skills with religious authoritarianism. But please refrain from abusing your power and limiting ours.

CORRECTION: The word ‘delusion’ was originally misspelled in the SEO headline.

Opinion columnist Phylicia Sneed is an English senior and may be reached at [email protected]