SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

For five days a coordinated DC Media has been attacking as racists anyone opposed to President Obama’s plan to resettle thousands of Syrians refugees here in America. A new poll shows that the emotional blackmail being hurled by both Obama and his DC Media allies has failed miserably. By nearly 2-to-1 (53% to 28%), Americans oppose the resettlement program.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Bloomberg:

Fifty-three percent of U.S. adults in the survey, conducted in the days immediately following the attacks, say the nation should not continue a program to resettle up to 10,000 Syrian refugees. Just 28 percent would keep the program with the screening process as it now exists, while 11 percent said they would favor a limited program to accept only Syrian Christians while excluding Muslims, a proposal Obama has dismissed as “shameful” and un-American.

When you add in the 11% who only want Christian refugees, that adds up to 64% who do not want Muslim refugees from Syria.

The American people are compassionate but they are not stupid, nor are they suicidal. They know ISIS is cunning and effective, they also know that Obama and the federal government are inept.

After 7 years of watching Obama’s government fail at building a simple ObamaCare website; fail to deliver health care to our own veterans; and fail to properly vet IRS employees, no thinking person would believe a determined ISIS can be stopped by this same government.

Moreover, the American people know that Obama and his DC Media allies are presenting a false choice.

The question is not that we must either bring the refugees to American or leave them in Syria to suffer. And make no mistake, millions of innocent Syrian Muslims and Christians are suffering horribly in that region.

But this is why no one is opposed to spending the money and talent required to set up and protect a refugee camp in the area. The American people also understand that this is what is best for these refugees. Someday they will want to go home.

To prop up Obama’s obscenely stupid refugee policy, to distract from his breathtaking failures in the Middle East, to smear the Republican Party as racist in service to Hillary Clinton, the DC Media is lying through omission and engaging in outright propaganda.

It is not working.

Not even close.

UPDATE: A second poll, this one from NBC, backs up this one. By a margin of 56% to 41%, Americans oppose accepting Syrian refugees. That includes 31% of Democrats and 59% of Independents.

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC