RALEIGH, N.C.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Digital Benefit Advisors (DBA) (digitalbenefitadvisors.com), a national leader in employee benefits with 34 offices nationwide and four in North Carolina, is pleased to announce the addition of Debbie Jones as Regional Director of Operations. An esteemed industry veteran versed in employee benefits, Jones brings 30 years of experience to DBA and will support and strengthen the operations for all offices in the Carolinas.

“Debbie is a thought leader in the employee benefits space and understands the profound changes impacting our clients and internal employees,” says Wally Dawson, managing principal of Digital Benefit Advisors of the Carolinas. “She is talented addition to our agency, and her proven abilities, helping organizations navigate the complex world of benefits and developing innovative health insurance solutions for those she works with, is quite impressive.”

Prior to joining DBA Jones spent 12 years with Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina as the Regional Director of Sales and Sales Retention Manager. She is an active contributor to business and industry panels including The National, North Carolina and Triangle Health Underwriters. Jones earned a bachelor’s degree in Public Relations and Advertising from East Tennessee State University.

DBA continues to increase its market share throughout North and South Carolina with offices in Raleigh, Sanford, Winston-Salem and Charlotte. DBA offers leadership, simplicity and value, combining the commitment of experienced local market advisors with sophisticated technology, industry expertise and resources of a respected national company. As healthcare and insurance changes continue to evolve, Digital’s strategic leadership and operational support make the system work better for employers and employees. In addition to providing legal, legislative and compliance expertise, the firm helps employers understand and navigate the complexities of the Affordable Care Act. Employers receive access to a broader variety of carriers, dynamic tools and proprietary products, such as the company’s private exchange solution, Digital Benefits Marketplace (DBM) (digitalbenefitsmarketplace.com). DBA drives value for employers and employees through aggressive, market-leading cost containment and innovative solutions.

About Digital Benefit Advisors

Digital Benefit Advisors (digitalbenefitadvisors.com) is a national alliance of experienced, local market experts who offer advanced solutions and expanded services to help companies meet their strategic business objectives. Distinguished by its focus on innovation, advocacy and education, DBA creates greater value for employers and inspires individuals to become more engaged healthcare consumers. DBA is the leading division of Digital Insurance (digitalinsurance.com), the nation’s largest employee benefits-only agency and a subsidiary of Fidelity National Financial (NYSE:FNF). Digital Insurance has been named to the Inc. 5000 List of America’s fastest-growing companies every year since the honor’s inception in 2007.