Congressional leadership is rushing to avoid a government shutdown, with federal funding for Planned Parenthood at the center of the debate.

Over the summer, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) called Planned Parenthood a “scandal-plagued political lobbying giant,” while pushing to defund the organization. A series of undercover videos of Planned Parenthood officials discussing how the organization provides fetal tissue to researchers has definitely caused controversy. But is Planned Parenthood really a lobbying juggernaut?

The short answer: Yes, but only when compared to anti-abortion groups, which have spent far less.

From 2010 through 2014, the nonprofit spent $6.6 million lobbying the federal government. Last year, one area of focus was the Peace Corps Equity Act, which gives Peace Corps volunteers the same coverage for abortion as federal employees and women in the military, who are covered in cases of incest and rape or to protect the woman’s life. Other issues over the last few years have included ensuring women are guaranteed contraception under the Affordable Care Act, fighting various efforts to further restrict abortion, and arguing against restrictions on contraception and abortion in foreign aid bills.

Last year, Planned Parenthood spent $1.6 million lobbying, which put the organization in 322nd place out of 4,070 organizations that reported spending money to lobby in 2014. As with many organizations trying to make their case to the government, most of the group’s lobbyists previously worked on Capitol Hill or at a federal agency.

Among reproductive health organizations that lobby federal officials, Planned Parenthood appears to spend the most. In 2014, Planned Parenthood paid out three-and-a-half times as much to lobby as the second-highest-spending group, the Center for Reproductive Rights.

How does that compare to anti-abortion rights organizations? National Right to Life and the Susan B. Anthony List each spent about $380,000 to lobby in 2014.

Planned Parenthood’s lobbying peaked at $1.9 million in 2011, the same year a dispute over funding the organization was part of a near-shutdown of the government. Undercover videos were also involved in that controversy.

Kelly Dittmar, an assistant professor of political science at Rutgers University and a Center for American Women and Politics scholar, said Planned Parenthood’s power is tied in part to how it responds to attacks.

“As you see efforts like in Congress to really directly attack Planned Parenthood, what it does, it seems to me, is you see a large population mobilizing to support them,” Dittmar said. “Their power increases as they’re attacked because people realize this is an issue.”

But Scott Ainsworth, a political science professor at the University of Georgia, said the group is “probably happiest when it isn’t quite so much in the public eye.”

“The video controversy didn’t change any minds or many minds on the Republican side, but it makes it a whole lot harder to operate on a day-to-day, year-to-year basis if you’re Planned Parenthood and you’re constantly having to respond to these things,” Ainsworth said.

Still, it has responded, and so have surrogates and fact-checkers who have found exaggerations and inaccuracies in some GOP portrayals of the videos. In addition to its lobbying outlays and grassroots support, Planned Parenthood, through its employees and PAC, has made and kept friends by contributing hundreds of thousands of dollars to federal candidates – overwhelmingly Democrats.

During the last presidential election cycle, they donated $71,000 to President Barack Obama’s re-election campaign. They gave a total of $1.2 million to Democrats, the largest sum of any year. In 2008, they donated $62,000 to Obama and $28,000 to his primary opponent, Hillary Clinton. During the 2014 midterms, the total to Democrats dropped to $892,000.

But the group also has both a super PAC and a dark money arm, both of which can accept unlimited contributions and make substantial independent expenditures. In the 2014 midterms, their spending totaled $4.2 million and $930,000, respectively, and several of Planned Parenthood’s local affiliates laid out substantial sums as well. The dark money side – a 501(c)(4) social welfare organization – doesn’t have to reveal the names of its donors.

In the 2012 cycle, individuals and committees involved in the Susan B. Anthony List gave a total of $333,000 to Republicans. They donated $1.9 million to outside spending groups, most of which went to an affiliate, Women Speak Out super PAC. In the 2014 cycle, they gave $288,000 to Republicans, and $1.8 million to outside spending groups.

Separately, Susan B. Anthony List’s dark money arm invested $946,000 boosting GOP congressional candidates and attacking Democratic ones. The bulk of the funds went to ads skewering Democratic Senate candidate Bruce Braley in Iowa. Braley lost to Republican Joni Ernst of hog-castrating fame.

This cycle, Planned Parenthood’s dark money offshoot has reported spending $74,000 attacking six of the Republican presidential candidates, including $16,000 aimed at former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush.