corrections

It will oversee transition of prison inmates into community

by anthony a. mestas the pueblo chieftain

The Pueblo County Board of Commissioners appointed six citizen members Monday to the Pueblo County Community Corrections Board.

Terry Hart

The board will oversee community corrections, undoing a 2010 resolution that set up the Board of County Commissioners as the primary authority.

Community corrections provide an intermediary step between prison and the streets. They are sometimes called halfway houses.

The board appointed six people from 11 candidates who applied.

Those appointed include Cobea Becker, a Pueblo attorney; Pamela Cress, a previous board member; Melissa Michaelis, a public defender; and Patricia Tripp, a former Department of Corrections employee.

Others include Robert Cannon, community service coordinator at the Pueblo Municipal Courts and Amiel Markenson.

Commissioner Terry Hart said it is critical to have a solid balance on the new board between the defense (of criminals) side, the law enforcement side and the general community side.

“That balance is what delivers the best services that we can get to the community and also to the clientele coming from a diversionary or a transitional perspective,” Hart said.

“I am thrilled that we are going back to doing this.”

The board already had seven standing members representing the district attorney, Pueblo chief of police, Pueblo County sheriff, chief district judge, chief probation officer, public defender and the DOC.

Those appointees include Karl Kuenhold, 10th Judicial District DA; Capt. Eric Bravo, city of Pueblo chief of police; and Bureau Chief Darlene Alcala, Pueblo County sheriff.

Others include Chief Judge Deborah Eyler, 10th Judicial District; Chief Probation Officer David Simental, 10th Judicial District; David Lipka, Colorado State Pueblo Defender-Pueblo Regional Office; and Deborah Duran, DOC.

These members serve a three-year term as ex officio members.

The commissioners in 1999 set up a community corrections board to provide fairness in screening offenders for placement in two community corrections centers. In 2010, the county commissioners repealed that resolution and recreated a structure with the commissioners serving as the community corrections board, along with revised screening criteria.

The process to revise community corrections started two years ago, when there were three agencies providing the service.

A 2012 state audit ranked Pueblo facilities as the least safe in the state, a finding that was disputed by community corrections operators at the time.

anthonym@chieftain.com