Sarah Palin is having a good laugh about the Rose Garden fainter and conspiracy theorists opining on whether the pregnant woman's near-fall during Obama's speech was part of an elaborate scheme to distract attention from the health care service's flawed rollout.

The tea party darling admitted she has been "cracking up" as people debate whether the damsel-in-distress stunt was staged, adding she "found this hilarious."

Citing the administration's "lack of transparency," she said that it was no surprise that jaded citizens would wonder whether the interruption was staged.

Palin took to Facebook to post the message, which drew more than 28,000 likes in just a few hours.

The former Alaska governor, a mother of five, chimed in after a far-fetched analysis of the footage was provided by conservative commentator Sharon Schuetz.

The President’s efforts to help the woozy supporter have been characterized as an attempt to take attention away from the technical glitches of the Obamacare rollout. (Charles Dharapak/AP) Karmel Allison, who is pregnant and diabetic, said she was simply dehydrated. (Evan Vucci/AP)

The woman in question, Karmel Allison woozily swayed to and fro Monday as she stood behind Obama during his Rose Garden speech.

A group of supporters stood behind Obama, but it was Allison, dressed in a bright red frock, who nabbed the spotlight when she appeared disoriented and nearly fainted toward the end of the speech.

The President interrupted his remarks to turn around and offer his help to the distraught woman — a move some have said was meant to take the attention off the real issue: the technical failures of the rollout.

"We never know what kind of props he's going to come up with, but this is a new one," Schuetz, who founded the Lady Patriots website, says in video analysis of the incident.

One Conservative commentator notes that the friend on the left, next to the fainting woman, had her arm securely around Allison as she began to sway to and fro. (Youtube)

Schuetz says some people were enlisted to pull off the alleged stunt, including the woman standing beside Allison, who holds her hand to help her stand, and the man behind Allison who reaches out to steady the ill invitee.

With a skeptical eye on the footage, she says a woman in the crowd "whispers" something to the friend next to Allison just moments before Allison nearly topples down.

"That's when the action begins ... She nudges her friend to let her know it's time," Schuetz says.

"She's very aware that this woman is fixin’ to go down, she's very much part of it and she was the one that prompted it to happen."

Obama's critics also noted how the man standing behind the ill woman put his hand on her shoulder to help steady her - which they allege suggests the swooning was well planned. (YouTube)

But Allison has denied a secret plan was in place. She has Type 1 diabetes, is 20 weeks pregnant and says she was dehydrated.

She said she started to feel lighthearted and to "see stars" as she stood at attention in the Rose Garden.

"I wasn't expecting to faint behind the President," she told KNSD.

"It certainly wasn't [staged]. They would have chosen someone better than me to fake it. Trust me," she added with a laugh.

llarson@nydailynews.com

On a mobile device? Watch the video here.