Going away to college can be a daunting task for any teenager.

Stefano Peschiera is looking to join a list of College of Charleston athletes who have competed in the Olympics: Name (Country) Event Year Andrew Lawrence (Great Britain) Men's basketball London 2012 Juan Maegli (Guatemala) Sailing (Laser Class) London 2012, Beijing 2008 John Lovell (USA) Sailing (Tornado Class) Atlanta 1996, Sydney 2000, *Athens 2004, Beijing 2008 Jim Brady (USA) Sailing (Soling Class) *Barcelona 1992 *Won silver medal - College of Charleston media relations Cougars in the Olympics

Being more than 3,100 miles away from your family in another country makes it even tougher.

Add in a rigorous training schedule in hopes of qualifying for the Olympics in sailing, and the task becomes more daunting.

Nevertheless, College of Charleston freshman Stefano Peschiera, 19, is making it happen.

In November, Peschiera captured the Glen S. Foster Trophy for winning the ICSA men's single-handed nationals in Bellingham, Wash.

He became just the sixth sailor in school history to win the single-handed event.

The victory was a major milestone in his quest to reach the Olympics.

Peschiera, from Lima, Peru, said his first encounters with sailing began around the age of 2.

Along with his older sisters, Claudia and Adriana, 24 and 23 respectively, Peschiera spent the Southern Hemisphere summer months of January, February and March at Ancón Bay, 30 miles north of Lima.

There, with his parents Pablo and María elena de Peschiera, Stefano enjoyed time on his grandfather's 42-foot wooden sloop called Anfitrite.

A few years later, Peschiera embraced this newfound passion for the sea and began racing.

He started off, like most do, in an Optimist - a small, single-handed dinghy designed for children - and found success on the racecourse early and often. He won three national and South American Optimist Team titles before making the transition at age 15 to the Laser - a popular single-handed dinghy about 14-feet long. That change didn't slow him down, as he has won national and South American titles in the Laser radial and standard rig.

"Stefano makes us as proud as parents can be, not only because of his success as a sailor, but also because he has grown into a good, enjoyable and generous young man, with strong values and high standards," Pablo Peschiera said. "All of which encourages us to keep supporting his career and the pursuit of his dreams."

Latin connection

Peschiera's dream to sail competitively came to a crossroads a few years later when it was time for college. While there are a lot of great sailors in Peru, Peschiera said he could "get lost" staying in his home country because Peru does not support college athletics as the United States does.

Peschiera's father went to Stanford University, so going to the U.S. to study and sail wasn't a foreign idea.

"I not only allowed but encouraged Stefano to study in the U.S. because I wanted him to have the opportunity to experience one of the best educational systems in the world, as I had, while being able to sail as much as possible and pursue his Olympic dream," said Pablo Peschiera, who graduated from Stanford's MBA program in 1986. It didn't take long for Stefano Peschiera to find the right place for himself.

"I liked (Charleston) very much when I visited. I liked the idea that we had other Olympic sailors here and the academic programs and advising system for athletes," Peschiera said. "And that's why we decided to come here, and I think it's been one of the best decisions I've made.

"It's incredible here, and they support the athletes, so it's nice to be here and represent the school."

Peschiera and sophomore sailor Enrique Arathoon, from Guatemala, met in 2007 and live together in Charleston. They have similar class schedules, so it makes it easy for the them to train and get adjusted to life on and off the water in Charleston.

"It's difficult to accept, but Enrique has been winning more racquetball games lately," said Peschiera, who like Arathoon is competitive in everything he does, from bike riding around town to playing basketball. "I have to train secretly to beat him."

Peschiera and Arathoon are following in the footsteps of another College of Charleston sailor from Central America. Juan Ignacio Maegli is an All-American sailor from Guatemala who finished ninth racing Lasers in London during the 2012 Summer Olympics and was the Guatemalan flag bearer during the Opening Ceremony. He also competed in the 2008 Olympics in Beijing.

"Juan was a big draw," College of Charleston sailing director Greg Fisher said. "Because of Juan's experience, Stefano and Enrique were impressed about Charleston. We want the Charleston program to be as inviting as possible and allow them a chance to pursue Olympic dreams as well."

Like Peschiera, Arathoon (El Salvador) will also look to qualify in the Laser for the 2016 Olympics in Brazil, while Maegli is likely to return for Guatemala.

College success

At the College of Charleston, Peschiera continues to chase his dream while studying and experiencing life in the United States.

"It's a big (sailing) team and everyone is nice," Peschiera said. "They have helped us get used to life here and we are friends with everybody on the team. It's like my family here. They give me a lot of feedback in what I am doing. They really look up to us - Enrique and I - about how efficient we are with our work, so I think we motivate them too to put more effort into things."

Peschiera wasn't the only College of Charleston sailor at the single-handed nationals - juniors Reed Baldridge and Dodge Rees placed sixth and 12th respectively, while on the women's side senior Clerc Cooper finished eighth overall and junior Beka Schiff placed 14th.

"Having Stefano on the team provides excellent motivation and a model to mimic in the Laser," Cooper said. "He is extremely motivated and dedicated to his Laser campaign, yet he still somehow finds time to focus on his studies.

"He has helped me personally with several of the nuances of the Laser, which is a very technical boat. Simple maneuvers (tacking and jibing) in other boats are significantly more difficult in the Laser, and he has helped break down those maneuvers so we can improve upon them. Additionally, it is exciting to watch his success from afar and cheer him on when he's at international events."

Peschiera has also been named the College of Charleston athlete of the week twice.

"Stefano brings a very professional approach to his sailing," College of Charleston sailing coach Ward Cromwell said. "He is very open to new ideas and always looking to improve his game."

Team approach

Peschiera is far from alone as he chases an Olympic medal.

His effort is being coordinated by sailing coach Airam Rodriguez, along with a staff from Health & Sport, a group based in Tenerife, Canary Islands.

Peschiera met Rodriguez at a sailing clinic in Paracas, Peru, two years ago. The clinic was sponsored jointly by the Emerging Nations Program of Olympic Solidarity, within the International Olympic Committee, by ISAF and by the Royal Spanish Sailing Federation.

The program's goal is to help sailors from emerging nations qualify for the 2016 Olympics.

"I look back at the results - especially in the last year - and I can't believe what I have done. We have set ourselves a lot of goals and they would be really tough to get them all," Stefano Peschiera said. "I look back, but now I have to look forward and concentrate for my real goals. In the short term, qualify for the (2016) Olympics and in the long run, try and win an Olympic medal."

Those goals are becoming closer to a reality. He is ranked No. 61 in the world on the Laser. Some of his career highlights include finishing fourth in Laser Standard and first in Laser Radial at the 2014 South American Championships in early October, placing 58th at the 2014 ISAF Sailing World Championships in September, third at the 2014 Laser Standard Men's Under-21 World Championship in August, seventh at the 2014 Laser North American Championship in June, fifth at the 2014 South American Games in March and second at the 2013 Bolivarian Games.

"Hopefully many other kids in my country could have this opportunity," María elena de Peschiera said. "Hopefully, Stefano can be an example of hope for the children of my country."

Even with all the training, and the distance between them, Stefano Peschiera always has his family on his mind.

"(My dad) was always there for me. We are good friends," Stefano said. "We can share these moments. That is what motivates me. To show them what all this training has been for and I put as much effort in as I can to make them proud."

Thanks to today's technology, Stefano is able to keep in touch with his family on a daily basis.

"We miss him too much," Pablo Peschiera said.

Follow Luke Reasoner on Twitter @lukereasoner