Fresh from Saturday's South Carolina Republican primary, Donald Trump and Sen. Ted Cruz appeared on "Meet the Press" where they were asked about their ability to clinch their party's nomination.

For Trump, he attempted to clear up past statements over his current positions on Obamacare and the Iraq War. Cruz, on the other hand, tried to dismiss Trump's potentially decisive South Carolina win by positioning himself as the conservative candidate to watch.

NBC's fact-checking partner, PolitiFact, watched the Sunday broadcast and rated several claims made by both candidates.

Obamacare offers "no options"

Trump has yet to offer a concrete policy plan on healthcare, but he told moderator Chuck Todd that his plan would offer more insurance options and would be "much less expensive than Obamacare."

"We're going to come up with a great healthcare plan, whether its health care saving accounts, we're going to get rid of the lines between states, we're going to have great competitive bidding," Trump said on "Meet the Press."

The billionaire said that his plan would prevent people from "dying on the streets," which he claimed is what the healthcare program causes now.

PolitiFact acknowledged that Trump's statement has some truth to it. They found that about 10 percent of counties where individuals bought health insurance under the Affordable Care Act could only chose from one provider. However, 30 percent have at least two options to chose from, while 60 percent have three options at most.

Since Trump's statement "leaves out a lot of information," PolitiFact rated his claim as "Mostly False."

.@realDonaldTrump says #Obamacare gives people "no options". Not so for most people. https://t.co/N4a6fy2B1X pic.twitter.com/qB2N2dhoQj — PolitiFact (@PolitiFact) February 21, 2016

Donald Trump is not the "right guy" to compete against Hillary Clinton

Cruz tried to downplay his third place finish in South Carolina, telling Todd that he is the one "true conservative" left in the race, not Trump.

"For anyone who doesn't believe that Donald Trump is the best candidate to go head-to-head with Hillary Clinton in November, and that's about 70 percent of Republicans nationwide who don't think Donald Trump is the right guy," Cruz said. "Our campaign is the only campaign that has beaten Donald Trump and that can beat Donald Trump."

PolitiFact points out that Sen. Marco Rubio has also made a similar 70 percent claim in a recent "Face the Nation" interview.

Per the fact-checking group, Cruz was citing a number of polling averages that say 34 percent of Republican voters firmly support Trump. That leaves 66 percent of likely voters lining up behind another candidate.

"That doesn't mean, however, that the 66 percent refuse to support Trump overall," PolitiFact writes. "The highest estimate we found for Republicans flat-out protesting Trump is 42 percent."

Cruz's claim rates "Mostly True" in PolitiFact's "Truth-O-Meter" for leaving out some context.