Sean Maher For the Camera

Last Tuesday, City Council discussed the possibility of putting a "head tax" on the ballot this fall. Also known as an "occupational privilege tax" this is essentially a tax on both employers and employees for the privilege of creating jobs in our community.

The theory is that workers, especially those who commute into Boulder, create negative impacts that need to be offset. Taxing the people who cause problems is a logical way to pay for mitigating them.

Some proponents of the new tax argue that much of our traffic congestion would go away if we offered community-wide Eco Passes to everyone who works in Boulder. Many of the 60,000 commuters who now drive into town would start taking the bus. And, of course, it is only fair to pay for these new Eco Passes with a head tax on the employees who receive them.

In theory, this sounds reasonable and it may in fact turn out to be a good idea. But the issue is far more complicated than it appears on the surface. There are at least two reasons City Council should not rush yet another new tax onto the November ballot.

First, there is a group of 30 leaders and transportation experts from all over Boulder County working through the complex issues involved in creating a broad, publicly funded

Eco Pass program. These issues include:

1) Should the program cover the entire county or just the city of Boulder?

2) Should passes be issued only to employees or to everyone who lives here?

3) How much will the program increase ridership and the resulting costs for RTD?

Advertisement

4) Should we eliminate passes and just let riders get on and off freely?

5) How much will Boulder and other cities benefit and how do we divide costs fairly?

6) Depending on answers to the above, how much will a program cost Boulder and what is the best way to fund it? A head tax may or may not be the right option.

I'm part of this task force and I can tell you there are some very dedicated volunteers and staffers at the table working hard to come up with the best possible Eco Pass program.

However, the process won't be finished until next spring which is one reason we should not rush to vote on a tax to fund a new program when we have no idea of the cost or if the proposed tax is the best way to pay for it.

Next is the issue of how many new taxes, fees and regulations our business community can shoulder before we unintentionally trigger an exodus of local businesses out of Boulder. Think about it. Last fall, voters passed a major property tax increase to fund BVSD projects. Council just passed new impact fees on commercial construction which will increase rent costs. Last month, Boulder became only the 3rd city in the country to impose mandatory composting and recycling for businesses. Next month, council will likely pass mandatory new energy efficiency requirements for business.

Boulder is already the most expensive city in the region to run a business. Yet we continue to add new fees and regulations that cost time and money with no apparent concern about the cumulative impact.

Keep in mind that not every employer is a tech firm or has the deep pockets of Twitter or Google. Those who feel the pain most are small, locally owned businesses that may not have the resources to keep up with all the new burdens. They include the folks who fix your car, teach your yoga class and clean your kid's teeth. At some point, who could blame them for giving up and moving to a more affordable community?

So I urge council not to push for a head tax this year. Let the Eco Pass Task Force finish its work and define the scope of an effective program along with the best funding options.

Next, evaluate the cumulative impact of all the recently imposed taxes, fees and regulations on small businesses before promoting yet another one.

In the end, a head tax might be a good idea in Boulder but there is no reason to rush into it this fall.

Sean Maher is the CEO of the Downtown Boulder Business Improvement District and Downtown Boulder, Inc. Views expressed in this column are his own and do not reflect the position of either organization. He can be reached at sean@dbi.org.