David and Jay Minaya were born in Lima, Perú. Jay moved to Colorado in 2004 and graduated from CU Boulder in 2006 in the marketing and administration program. David moved to Colorado in 2006 to work in an architectural office. David did architecture work in Colorado for six years but now is totally focused on their language school. We checked in with both of them as they work to expand their business.

1. Your new company, Journey Language Center: How did that come about?

Jay: David and I love traveling and learning about cultures. As we both were born overseas, we are aware of the importance to learn and understand a different culture and language. After learning a second language, and then a third one, we expanded our horizons tremendously creating a lot more opportunities in our personal life. Also, communicating with a lot more people in the USA and abroad is fun and makes different aspects of your life a lot more enjoyable. We opened Journey Language Center to guide travelers and culture lovers to see the world with a different perspective, enhance their traveling experiences, (and) decrease language and cultural barriers by teaching them language skills they need to succeed and enjoy their experience speaking a second language overseas or here in Colorado.

2. Your previous company, Spanish Easy & Fun, focused on one language. Now you are expanding?

Jay: Correct. In 2007 I founded Spanish Easy & Fun (SEF) in Longmont, focusing on learning Spanish with one on one private lessons through conversation. After reviewing several books and traditional programs available to learn Spanish, we realized there weren't enough efficient choices and we understood why many people struggle too much to learn Spanish. Next year, David and I created our own interactive Spanish program for all levels. Throughout the years we expanded our services to offer Spanish group classes for adults and after-school programs for children. In 2014, we created our own Italian and French program. Now with Journey Language Center we are expanding our services to all of Boulder County and Denver. We provide instruction for six languages in small classes and private lessons, we offer certified translations and interpretations in 20 languages and abroad immersion program in 25 countries in Latin America and Europe. We are continuing our conversational approach through interactive conversational exercises. It is a better and more fun way to learn a second language. Learning only grammar will not make you proficient; we teach language so our student can converse and communicate with others.

3. Are most of your clients older, or more middle age?

David: It is very diverse clientele; we have a children program oriented to 5- to 11-year-olds, tutoring services for high schoolers, group classes for adults (of all ages including teenagers). We recently had a lady who completed all our beginning and intermediate Spanish levels; she is 79 and is ready to move out of Colorado to live in Ecuador. A few months ago we had a 15-year-old who took French for two months with us, and now he just sent us a postcard thanking us for making his staying in France a lot more pleasurable. Hearing about our students' experiences when they went abroad or learning how our programs have enriched them so much personally are the reasons why we opened Journey.

4. What sorts of things do you plan, and get involved with, in addition to language instruction?

David: We are planning to continue giving back to our community offering our cultural events in our Boulder and Longmont facilities for free. At Journey you do not only learn linguistics, you also have a culture experience. For instance: We have Spanish, French and Italian conversational clubs happening once or twice a month. Unlike most language meetup groups in Boulder County, we provide an actual certified language instructor who will conduct and guide the participants to sound more proficient in their second language. Also in our conversational clubs you meet with people of a similar level than yours and go beyond basic conversation. Everyone is welcome to attend and it is completely free.

Another cultural event we host is our Speedy Spanish, where participants talk to several native Spanish speakers from different Latin American countries, only in Spanish, for 15 minutes with each of them. Complementary South American wines and snacks are always served as part of the cultural experience. We will start providing this event for our other languages as well, so do not be surprised if you are handled a glass of Grappa or Porto in our future events.

5. So now you have two locations, in Boulder and Longmont?

Jay: We would like to invite our community to our grand openings in Longmont and Boulder. Come and visit our new and innovated facilities, designed and decorated by David, the architect. He designed a new and interesting concept of classrooms to enhance the learning experience. We will have a DJ playing international and local music, exotic South American drinks, appetizers, and dance exhibitions. The Longmont office grand opening is June 5, from 3 to 6 p.m. (706 Kimbark St.). The Boulder office grand opening is June 27, from 5 to 8 p.m. (850 Laramie Blvd. Unit C).

(For more information visit the brothers online at www.JourneyLanguageCenter.com, or call them at 303-827-5965.)

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel