Perhaps someone should tell the Boulder City Council that in the biblical story of Solomon, the king didn't actually cut the baby in half. Even if you seldom cracked open a Bible, you probably knew he proposed this solution to smoke out the child's true mother, then awarded her the infant — all of it.

Had the council followed his example, it would have smoked out the true owners of the dilapidated bungalow at 747 12th St. — not the neighbors and not the landmarks board, but the people who pay the ample real estate taxes — and returned to them control of their private property, apologizing for an addled venture into government overreach.

Alas, such wisdom is currently in short supply in these parts. The city could not withdraw its inane insistence on landmarking a bungalow remarkable only for its current state of disrepair without admitting it was wrong, a humility not likely to be expressed by the current council.

On the other hand, it couldn't dip the property in amber over the owners' objections without risking a backlash at the polls, not to mention possible legal action.

So it turned Solomon's ploy into policy and cut the property in half, preserving the run-down bungalow on one side and permitting construction of a new house on the other.

In a victory dance that rationalized the irrational, the city identified the compromise as a win-win-win. Preservationists get their landmark, the owners get to sell the property to a family member willing to build on the subdivided lot, and the city gets to walk away without confronting the mess it made here.

We would call it a bad precedent all the way around, though admittedly preferable to the more comprehensive government overreach first contemplated.

First, the house did not deserve a landmark designation. Neighbors, who feared that the original plan to demolish the bungalow and build a new house on the lot would lead to more scrapes on the block, found allies in the activists on the landmarks board. Bereft of architectural arguments, they took refuge in a "social history" claim that could be applied — or not — to any home in the city where anything interesting ever happened. This was twisting the landmark procedure with pretzel logic to achieve an altogether different purpose.

Second, at least some of the block's residents may end up regretting their interference in a neighbor's perfectly legal plans under existing zoning. Now they get a subdivided lot, the new construction they didn't want, and, presumably, a little more density when it's all said and done.

Finally, the owners probably end up with less value. Although the calculation remains incomplete as of this writing, the city's interference prompted the original buyer to withdraw. A member of the family that owns the property stepped in and made an offer for the subdivided lot. Interference by the city in what was a fully legal transaction sets a bad precedent for private property rights in the city.

The severe bias in the city's approach revealed in this case should lead to a reform of the landmarking process. We will have some suggestions on that score shortly.

The city did manage to find a face-saving partial retreat, which is better than no retreat at all, but subdividing lots to preserve dilapidated houses of dubious historical value is a bizarre precedent that arguably changes the nature of the block more than a scrape would have.

The bottom line remains government arrogance and perversion of the original intent of the landmark ordinance, which was to preserve extraordinary buildings, not ordinary bungalows on blocks where residents fear redevelopment. The cause of meritorious historic preservation is damaged, not aided, by such zealotry.

—Dave Krieger, for the editorial board. Email: kriegerd@dailycamera.com. Twitter: @DaveKrieger