Opinion Matters With Gazette Opinion Editor Greg Peck

Greg Peck: One of Paul Ryan's biggest critics goes silent

John F. Macek

Here's a dose of reality for critics who suggest The Gazette is so conservative that it doesn't give a fair voice to liberals. I plugged the name John F. Macek into a search of our computer archives Friday, and it came up dozens of times. Many links were tied to letters critical of Republican Congressman Paul Ryan of Janesville. The most recent two computer items, however, were of Macek's death notice and obituary.

Funeral services for Macek were Friday. Though I think we only met once, we exchanged emails dozens of times and spoke by phone from time to time. As his obituary explained, Macek worked 17 years with a mental health center in Michigan before becoming director of the University Health and Counseling Services at UW-Whitewater. He retired emeritus in 2007. He started six health care organizations, and his obituary says political analysis and writing were among his passions.

I'm not surprised. He was always pushing the envelope with his letter writing and even requested column length space. He often would send the next letter before our 30-day requirement between letters had expired. He wrote nine letters in 2012; six in 2013.

Gazette reporter Jim Leute interviewed Macek for a Page 1 story in January 2012 about Macek's “My Life Preferences” document. This advanced health care directive is designed to help doctors, patients and their families consider end-of-life decisions when the patient no longer can make those decisions for himself or herself.

In his letters to the editor, Macek could be biting. Still, facts he used to support his opinions seemed spot on. I did question a couple of facts he made in a letter a few months ago. He apologized and blamed the slip-ups on health problems he had been having.

Whether I agreed with his criticisms and points made no difference. My job was to let those opinions run, and I did.

“I am disgusted, but not surprised, by Rep. Paul Ryan's budget,” Macek wrote this May. “Growing up in privilege, Ryan is totally disconnected with the plight of the poor.” Macek was speaking from experience, explaining that he saw the problem firsthand while volunteering the summer of 1963 in Chicago's Woodlawn area.

In January, Macek attacked critics of the Affordable Care Act and Ryan's budget reforms, which he argued would shut down Head Start, reduce food stamps and take away Medicare as we know it. “Ryan plays deficit hawk but approved Bush's cut in revenues while starting an unfunded war,” Macek wrote.

Last December, Macek wrote: “Don't be deceived by Ryan's photogenic smile. He is a master strategist for the tea party, a Republican opinion leader planning ruthless strategies to protect the wealthy while hurting us. He thinks starving the cow will increase milk production. Any dairy farmer can assure you that's a good way of killing off the herd.”

In November 2013, Macek urged readers to vote for Ryan opponent Rob Zerban when Macek criticized the congressman for having met with strategists the night of Barack Obama's first inauguration and plotting how to get rid of the new president. “That is not only un-American but a violation of the sacred trust voters placed in him.”

In October 2013: “The Republican claim that the Affordable Care Act will bankrupt our nation is preposterous. Tea party leaders such as Paul Ryan and Eric Cantor demand budget cuts in critical areas needed to sustain a customer base. Without a stable customer base, our standard of living is doomed.”

In November 2012: “Some of the worst power mongers are Mitch McConnell, John Boehner, Eric Cantor, Paul Ryan and tea party ideologues, all hell bent on their interests and ideology.”

In September 2012, Macek called Ryan a “self-serving hypocrite.” Macek also believed Ryan followed the atheist Ayn Rand more faithfully than his own Catholic religion. That July, Macek wrote: “Ryan's budget is based on Rand, not the Gospels. It favors the wealthy, cutting programs for the disadvantaged, and giving the so-called 'job creators' more tax cuts.”

Ryan wasn't Macek's only target.

In May 2012, he wrote of Gov. Scott Walker: “Recent videos of Walker interacting with wealthy contributors give grave reason to question where his loyalties lie.”

Macek criticized “tough on crime” politicians: “We have created a prison industrial complex in which for-profit prisons profit handsomely from quasi criminals such as undocumented workers,” he wrote in April 2014.

We've filled prisons with people whose only job skill is dealing drugs, he wrote a month earlier: “The bulk of inmates are poor minorities who lack job skills and resort to crimes of desperation. The most efficient answer is training, not incarceration.”

Macek wanted more gun control and criticized the National Rifle Association. “I'm sick of the NRA's ruse,” he wrote in March 2013. “We need responsible gun use; documented training and proper licensing of both guns and gun users. Why should this killing machine be an exception?”

And in January 2013: “I applaud President Obama for taking the initiative on regulating guns used for massacres. I decry the fraud perpetrated by the NRA and others claiming violation of Second Amendment rights. It's deliberate, almost psychotic, misrepresentation.”

You might disagree with Macek's liberal politics, but it's hard to question the passion in his viewpoints.

My sympathies go out to his wife and family. Rest in peace, John F. Macek.

Greg Peck can be reached at (608) 755-8278 or gpeck@gazettextra.com. Or follow him on Twitter or Facebook.

Greg Peck can be reached at (608) 755-8278 or gpeck@gazettextra.com. Or follow him on Twitter or Facebook.