Pennsylvania has enrolled 462,000 people in the Medicaid expansion which became available Jan.1.

"If it was a city of people, it would be the second largest city in the state," said state Secretary of Human Services Ted Dallas. "That's a lot of people who never had health care before."

For what it's worth, Philadelphia is Pennsylvania's biggest city, with about 1.5 million people, followed by Pittsburgh, with about 300,000 according to newsmax.com. Harrisburg is tenth, with about 50,000.

Pennsylvania was among the slower states in expanding Medicaid, which is the part of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, the U.S. Supreme Court decided is voluntary on the parts of states.

The federal government made funding for the expansion available as of Jan. 1, 2014. But Republicans including former Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Corbett were apprehensive, with Corbett finally making his own version available at the start of 2015.

But Democrats including new Gov. Tom Wolf opposed Corbett's version, saying it was confusing and flawed, and Wolf eventually switched to the approach favored by President Obama.

Dallas, in recently providing the latest numbers, said well over half of the new enrollment has taken place since the switch, which is also favored by advocates for the poor.

State officials say about 140,000 more state residents are eligible for the coverage, which is available to people earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, or $16,243 for a single person and $33,465 for a family of four.

Dallas said the state is ramping up outreach to the remaining people who are eligible. He said he expects another 100,000 people will eventually be enrolled, but the process will take one to two years. Advocates say that's because most of the remaining eligible people aren't in dire medical need, or are located in remote communities, or may have heard bad things about the program.

Dallas said he has heard of few people who, upon learning they qualify for coverage that involves no premiums and only small co-pays, turn down the offer.

The federal government is paying 100 percent of the medical costs through next year, then will gradually scale back the federal share to 90 percent by 2020 and beyond.

Information about enrolling in the expansion can be found here.

RELATED: The federally-run health insurance exchange, which is for people who earn too much for Medicaid, opens Nov. 1.