Opinion

AMA sells its members' most intimate data

As of last month, physicians will have to think twice about attending a pharmaceutical-industry-sponsored lunch. August marks the implementation of the Affordable Care Act's Sunshine Rule, which requires drug and device manufacturers to disclose contributions of more than $10 to physicians.

The rule, however, sheds light on only half of the transaction. Remaining unaddressed is a perverse practice carried out by the most well-known physician organization in the United States: the American Medical Association.

The AMA, whose most recent meeting theme was "helping doctors help patients," has been scrutinized for doing precisely the opposite. The AMA may be hiding the pharmaceutical industry's greatest influence on doctors: compulsory inclusion in the AMA's databases.

All of this matters because the intimate relationship between drug representatives and doctors has a negative impact on health care cost and patient safety.

Over the past 60 years, the AMA has forged a relationship with health care information organizations. The exchange is simple: The AMA compiles physician demographic data on all doctors in the United States, even those who decline AMA membership, and the organizations buy it. These organizations then combine this data with records from pharmacies, and sell it to pharmaceutical companies.

These data provide the license and necessary tools to manipulate physicians. A pharmaceutical representative, thanks to the AMA, walks into a doctor's office armed with a full diagnostic workup of prescribing history, preferred medications and referral network. Has the doctor recently switched to prescribing patients with depression Paxil instead of Prozac? How often and to whom? Sales representatives learn to use emotional triggers. Male-female pairs keep spreadsheets of hobbies, anniversaries, children's birthdays, esoteric interests.

If the doctors don't change their prescribing habits, the representative will know by checking the database, and can tinker with the strategy as needed until the desired behavior is achieved. Doctors become little more than a Pavlovian experiment.

According to a 2006 nationwide survey, two-thirds of physicians opposed the AMA's use of their personal data. In response, the AMA created a means for "opting out." However, even for physicians who do, the AMA still supplies pharmaceutical reps with the most relevant prescription information, including medication classes and frequency. Legislative attempts to block the AMA in Vermont, New Hampshire and Maine were thwarted by lobbyist campaigns, supported by both the AMA and the data brokers.

The AMA's 2012 annual report notes well more than $40 million in earnings related to database products, a figure larger than its revenue from physician membership and one that equates to 15 percent of its total annual revenue.

In an era where health care costs are increasing exponentially, pharmaceutical reps frequently persuade physicians to prescribe brand-name drugs instead of cheaper generic alternatives. These industry relationships increase prescriptions of drugs for off-label uses, and the adoption of new, patentable drugs before their long-term safety have been assessed. While this may increase a drug company's bottom line, it poses a direct risk to patient safety.

We were not so naive as to believe that the AMA's objectives always serve patient interests, yet we were astounded to find that its activities may serve to manipulate even its own members. Even more disturbing is the realization that there may be no way out.

The AMA should sever its relationship with the health care data-mining industry. Doing so has the added benefits of improving its reputation, restoring physicians' faith in an organization that claims to speak for them, and setting an example for generations of doctors to come.