Buy Photo U.S. Senate nominee Gordon Ball talks with Bernard Werthan at a fundraiser in Nashville. U.S. Rep. Jim Cooper, , Metro Council members Megan Barry and Jerry Maynard, and businessman Kevin Lavender were hosting the event on Thursday Sept. 4, 2014, in Nashville in Tenn. (Photo: John Partipilo, John Partipilo / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Gordon Ball caught the political bug when he was a young man, then flushed it out of his system for 36 years.

Now he's got the fever again, in a big way.

Ball, 65, is Tennessee's Democratic nominee for the U.S. Senate in the Nov. 4 general election. He's a big underdog as he takes on Sen. Lamar Alexander, the second-term Republican incumbent and former governor.

But he says he has a fighting chance to overturn the conventional wisdom and give the state its first Democratic senator since Republicans took control of both seats in 1994.

"Lamar Alexander can be beaten," Ball said to applause during a small fundraiser co-hosted by U.S. Rep. Jim Cooper, two Metro Council members and Nashville's vice mayor at Mafiaoza's restaurant on Sept. 4. "Everybody can stay too long at the table. It happens to all of us, and it's happened to Lamar Alexander."

Ball, a wealthy plaintiffs' attorney from Knoxville, isn't new to political battle. But he hasn't picked up his sword in quite a while.

He ran for Congress in Tennessee's First Congressional District in 1978, losing to Jimmy Quillen, the Republican who was first elected in 1962 and represented the district for 34 years. Then he let that ambition slip away.

"I just forgot about it," Ball said in an interview in his room at the Omni Nashville Hotel the day of the fundraiser. "I wanted to be exactly the best lawyer that I could be. I just decided politics wasn't for me.

"Now I've sat on the sidelines too long, and I want to be off the sidelines."

Ball, a moonshiner's son who grew up in Cocke County in northeast Tennessee, said he decided to run for the Senate about six months ago. He said he wants to take his negotiating skills, experience helping people solve problems and "common-sense Tennessee background" to Washington, where he says Alexander has lost sight of his home state's biggest needs: job creation, affordable health care, strong public schools and a higher minimum wage.

Ball won a contested, four-man Democratic primary in August, defeating another Knoxville attorney, Terry Adams, by about 2,000 votes. After the sometimes contentious primary campaign, Adams quickly joined Ball's general election team.

Tweaking his lines from earlier in the summer, Adams said Ball has a better chance than the average pundit would have people believe.

"There's a little bit of a fallacy when it comes to Tennessee being such a red state," Adams said. "If you look at past elections and what the base vote is on either side, it's almost identical. There are about 515,000 people who will vote for a Democrat, period, and about 540,000 people who will vote for a Republican, period."

But the math cuts another way. Many more people voted in the Republican primary than in the Democratic contest on Aug. 7. Alexander didn't quite win 50 percent of the GOP vote, and his 331,705 votes still easily topped the 240,949 ballots cast for the entire Democratic field.

Getting populist — and personal

At the fundraiser, Ball threw populist punches at Alexander and Republican Gov. Bill Haslam. He said he would vote no on Amendment One, the constitutional amendment that would remove abortion protections from the state's constitution.

Ball also said he would push for a higher minimum wage and work to get Tennessee to accept federal Medicaid expansion money, which he said would immediately help 43,000 people in Davidson County alone.

Linda McFadyen-Ketchum, a Democratic activist and political consultant, said she doesn't know Ball well, but she supports him because he supports background checks for gun purchases.

"That lets me know he would probably be pretty commonsensical about other things," said McFadyen-Ketchum, who is a local leader of Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America but said she was speaking as an individual, not for the organization.

Ball also went after Alexander personally, arguing that he has essentially gotten rich in public office. Alexander's estimated net worth in 2010 was $22.5 million. The senator, who is 74, was Tennessee's governor from 1979 to 1987 and later served as president of the University of Tennessee and U.S. education secretary.

"He's never had a real job," Ball said in the interview. "You couldn't save every check and (make) it amount to $22 million. How do you that unless you are put in deals, quote-end quote, by your friends or people that seek to influence you in some way? I'd like to debate Sen. Alexander and hear his answer to that."

But Alexander's official biography on his Senate website says he had spent more of his adulthood in the private sector than in public service before he was elected to the Senate in 2002.

"In 1972 he co-founded a Nashville law firm," the bio says. "In 1987 he and his wife and three others, including Bob Keeshan, television's Captain Kangaroo, founded Corporate Child Care Inc. The company became publicly traded in 1997 (NASDAQ) and later merged with Bright Horizons Inc., creating the world's largest provider of worksite daycare."

A challenging task

Alexander has been noncommittal about debating Ball so far. But he worked to define his opponent for voters when he was asked about the possibility recently.

"There'll be plenty of opportunities for people to see the differences between my opponent, who will be one more vote for the Obama agenda, and me, which is one more vote for a new Republican majority to move the country in a different direction," Alexander said.

Most experts say Tennessee voters, who have never warmed to President Barack Obama, will agree with Alexander in November and give him another six years in Washington. But Democrats say it doesn't have to be that way if Ball can get his message out. Encouraged that Alexander didn't break the 50 percent mark in the GOP primary, they think an entrenched incumbent could run into more disgust with how things are going in Washington than expected.

"He needs to work his tail off, because many of the people in this state still need to be convinced that Democrats are the party of the people," said Councilwoman Megan Barry, a co-host of the fundraiser and a candidate for mayor of Nashville next year.

Cooper noted that Alexander not only failed to win a majority in the seven-candidate Republican primary but also lost Blount County, where he lives, as well as Davidson and Williamson counties.

"That's a real wakeup call," Cooper said. "What we need is the independent vote. If we get enough of them, this is not only a horse race; this is an upset. Time is short, but that's what campaigns are all about. Competition is good."

Alexander's campaign, while confident, is keeping an eye on Ball, who could write his campaign a check, as he did in the primary, when he loaned the campaign more than $379,000 through July 18, according to financial disclosures.

Mike Lottman, chairman of the Cheatham County Democratic Party, said the white-haired, well-dressed Ball "certainly looks the part" of a U.S. senator and "has a very progressive outlook." He said Ball's TV commercials during the primary campaign were some of the best political ads he's ever seen.

"I really like what I've seen," Lottman said. "I think he's got a good chance."

But if Ball loses, don't expect him to run again in another 36 years.

Reach Michael Cass at 615-259-8838 and on Twitter @tnmetro.

Gordon Ball on the issues

• Immigration: Ball's website calls for "a fair and just path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, one that would require them to pay taxes and be registered before their path to citizenship begins."

• Health care: Says the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, has some good provisions that should remain in force, including not letting insurance companies deny coverage to people with preexisting conditions and allowing young people to stay on their parents' insurance until they turn 26. But Ball's website also says this: "Any legislation that is over 2,200 pages long and is administered by the IRS is, from its inception, way over-the-top."

Ball says the state should accept Medicaid expansion money from the federal government so more people can receive quality health care.

• Minimum wage: Ball says the $7.25 minimum should be increased. "I don't know how a single mother or single father, after deductions are taken out, can live on $250 a week," he says.

• Jobs and the economy: Wants to strengthen small business lending programs, simplify the U.S. tax code, make Tennessee a leader in green technology and invest in infrastructure.

— Michael Cass

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1s3jNzj