It has all the ingredients of a perfect hot-stove potboiler.

The New York Mets need a premier shortstop. The Rockies have one in Troy Tulowitzki. The Rockies have a new general manager in Jeff Bridich, who has said repeatedly that his “eyes and ears are open” to all trade possibilities.

Indeed, rarely does a day go by that I don’t get a tweet or an e-mail from someone asking me about the status of a Tulo trade. The inquiry usually comes from a zealous Mets fan.

I get it. The “Hot Stove Season” is fun — for fans, reporters and even harried GMs. Speculation keeps baseball from being completely swallowed up by the NFL. But a lot of rumors tend to take on a life of their own.

Such is the case with all of the Tulo talk percolating in the Big Apple.

But I’m here to tell you that reports of a Tulo trade to the Mets are, in the words of one big-league executive, “overblown.”

I talked to Tulo the other night for a story I’m writing for The Sunday Denver Post, and I can tell you that he does not believe a trade is in the works.

Still, it’s a story that has captured the fancy of national baseball writers.

On Friday morning, Jon Heyman, the respected writer for CBSsports.com, wrote:

The Mets and Rockies have been quietly discussing a potential Troy Tulowitzki blockbuster for weeks, though it isn’t known yet whether New York will have a decent chance to complete such a deal. Prized Mets pitching prospect Noah Syndergaard is said to be the centerpiece of discussions revolving around a potential package of young players in a possible deal for Tulo, though it seems like there is still quite a ways to go to have a chance to complete such a monster trade.

Heyman, to his credit, makes sure to couch the trade speculation with plenty of qualifiers. In other words, the chances of the trade happening are slim.

How slim? Check out what Adam Rubin of ESPNNewYork.com wrote:

The Mets and Rockies have engaged in some talks this offseason regarding Troy Tulowitzki, but a well-placed source told ESPNNewYork.com the chances of something ever materializing are 5 percent at best. … And an insider said the Mets fans clamoring for a Tulo acquisition would go “bat s—” if they knew the package the Rockies wanted for Tulowitzki.”

There are, of course, plenty of obstacles to a blockbuster trade, not the least of which is Tulo’s health and injury history. Although his rehab from hip surgery is going well, a lot of people around baseball say that Tulo needs to play and perform before he becomes a tradeable star.

Then there is the money. Tulowitzki has $118 million remaining over six seasons. That’s not an unreasonable contract in today’s era of crazy salaries, but I would imagine the Rockies would have to pick up a chunk of that salary if the Mets were to give up some of their top young players.

My bottom line: I think Tulo is the Rockies’ opening day shortstop.

Chew on this

• The clock is ticking on Terrell Davis’ next chance to make the Pro Football Hall of Fame. A group of 26 will be cut to 15 in early January and if there is any justice, the Broncos running back will take his next step to Canton.

As The Denver Post’s Mike Klis noted last month, Davis has been eligible for the Hall of Fame since 2007. All nine years he has come up for vote, he has made the cut to the 25 modern-era semifinalists (there are 26 this year because there was a two-way tie for 25th). But he’s never advanced from the semifinal 25 to the final 15.

That’s got to change. TD, even though his career was cut short by a devastating knee injury, is a Hall of Fame player. It’s not just his 2,008-yard season in 1998, or his 1,750 yards in 1997, or his 1,538 yards in 1996 that make him worthy to slip on one of those yellow blazers.

The clincher is this: In eight postseason games, from 1996-98, Davis rushed for 1,140 yards — 142.5 yards per game. He gained 91 yards in his first playoff game, then ran off seven consecutive 100-yard postseason games.

• Friday’s happy birthday wish goes to former Broncos QB Jake Plummer. He may look like he’s 22 (once he he shaved off his Sasquatch beard), but he was born on Dec. 19, 1974. Lordy, lordy, Jake the Snake is 40!

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp



Visit denverpost.com each weekday near noontime for a serving of dish concerning Colorado’s sporting landscape from a Denver Post sports writer. Care for another helping? Scan the Lunch Special menu.