HOUSTON — North Carolina’s latest step on the way to a title was shaping up as strictly an inside job.

Out of nowhere, Marcus Paige figured out how to hit from 3-point land and the Tar Heels put an end to any hopes of another Syracuse comeback.

Using layups, floaters and putbacks — then, finally, three very timely 3s from Paige — the Tar Heels outmuscled Syracuse 83-66 on Saturday to move a win away from the program’s sixth national title.

Paige finished with 13 points and Brice Johnson and Justin Jackson led North Carolina (33-6) with 16 apiece, as the Tar Heels, the lone No. 1 seed in the Final Four, beat Jim Boeheim’s 10th-seeded Orange for the third time this season and advanced to Monday’s title game against Villanova.

Earlier, the Wildcats made 11 of 18 shots from behind the 3-point line, debunking the theory, first advanced at the cold-shooting Final Four in 2011, that nobody could shoot in Houston’s cavernous stadium.

Then, the Tar Heels, ranked 284th in the country this season from long range, reversed that one-game trend. They bricked up 3 after 3, going 0-for-10 in the first half and barely drawing iron on some of them. Paige opened the second half with North Carolina’s 11th straight miss, and for the next 10 minutes, the Tar Heels basically ignored the 3-point line.

Only when Trevor Cooney and Malachi Richardson triggered a 10-0 Syracuse run to trim a 17-point deficit to seven did Carolina start thinking long range again. Paige made three 3s and Theo Pinson hit another to stifle the rally and make Carolina almost respectable from the 3-point line: 4 for 17 for the game.

Kennedy Meeks finished with 15 points and eight rebounds, including a paddy cake putback after batting a second offensive rebound to himself off glass. That gave the Heels a 67-53 lead.

Before Paige found his range, Carolina built its lead on the inside, with big-time help from an in-your-face defense that held Syracuse’s leading scorer Michael Gbinije to 12 points on 5-for-18 shooting.

“We had a brain lapse there for about three minutes in the second half, but other than that I thought we were really good defensively against a team that’s hard to guard,” said Carolina coach Roy Williams, in search of his third title.

It was a reminder of the days before the 3-point shot was invented, when the way to really beat a zone — and Boeheim’s 2-3 is the best in the game — was to make blink-of-an-eye passes in and around the paint and crash the offensive glass to take advantage of a defense that doesn’t put bodies on bodies when the ball goes up.

That plan still works these days.

Early in the second half, Jackson made a jump pass from the corner to the lane, where Paige was waiting and batted the ball with an open hand over to Meeks, who dunked.

A bit later, Joel Berry got an easy offensive rebound and a layup to put the Tar Heels ahead by 17.

North Carolina finished with 16 second-chance points on 16 offensive boards. Even more telling were points in the paint: Tar Heels 50, Orange 32.

Syracuse trailed by 16 in its crazy comeback victory over Virginia last week to make it here. But there was no full-court press that could beat the Heels, and no meltdown awaiting from them either.

Cooney led the Orange (23-14), the first No. 10 seed to make it to the Final Four, with 22 points. Richardson had 17, but after his 3 trimmed the deficit to seven with 9:48 left, Syracuse couldn’t pull closer.

TIP-INS:

North Carolina: Meeks missed only two shots and tipped both of them back to himself. His line for the last two games: 11 for 13 from the field with 11 rebounds. … Overall, Carolina outrebounded Syracuse 43-31.

Syracuse: Syracuse went 4 for 13 from the free throw line and 8 for 25 from 3.

UP NEXT:

North Carolina: Monday vs. Villanova for the program’s sixth title.

Syracuse: Season over.