Cigna Health logo (Photo: Logo)

Southwest Floridians who purchased Cigna insurance on the government's Health Insurance Marketplace will have to shop for new policies in the coming weeks if they want to remain covered.

The Bloomfield, Connecticut-based health insurance company has announced it will withdraw Florida plans from the exchange to avoid what it considers fraudulent billing from substance abuse treatment centers, including those on the state's east coast.

Cigna's decision will not affect off-exchange policies, those offered through employers and unions, and its Cigna-HealthSpring Medicare Advantage Plans.

"Cigna is temporarily discontinuing its participation on the Florida public health insurance marketplace for 2016 because we have experienced an exponential increase in fraudulent and abusive care delivery practices in 2015 in Florida," Spokesman Joseph Mondy said in a written statement. "The problem is particularly concentrated with out-of-network substance abuse clinics and labs."

Cigna claims that certain outpatient facilities are taking advantage of plans that offer out-of-network benefits. The alleged abuses include kickbacks to doctors and excessive, high-cost drug testing. Mondy pointed to several stories published recently in The Palm Beach Post about questionable billing practices to back up the company's claims of fraud.

About 30,000 Floridians in 23 counties, including Lee and Sarasota counties, purchased Cigna policies on the exchange for this year, according to Cigna and the state's Office of Insurance Regulation. It did not offer them in Collier or Charlotte.

The company's decision to temporarily suspend its marketplace participation, first reported by Health News Florida, came just weeks before the Nov. 1 start of Obamacare's enrollment period.

Notices to brokers were sent via email last week, Mondy said. Customers notification letters went out over the weekend.

Cigna said it did not become fully aware of the scope of the alleged fraud until the government's deadline to submit plans for 2016 had passed. As a result, the company will pull out this year and retool the plans for 2017, Mondy said.

Individuals can still buy Cigna plans through brokers. But, because they will not be offered through the federal exchange, buyers of those plans would not be eligible for premium-reducing tax credits, Cigna noted.

"We understand that this action will cause significant disruption for you and your customers, and we will assist you and your customers through this transition," the Cigna letter to brokers states. "We are fully committed to the Florida market and look forward to reentering the public health insurance marketplace in 2017 with a new portfolio of health plans..."

Amy Bogner, spokeswoman for the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation said other insurers have voiced similar concerns, though no others have announced a pullout from the marketplace for this reason. Bogner did not identify those other insurers, citing ongoing reviews of their claims.

Connect with this reporter: @FrankGluck (Twitter)

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1RY9BkL