Topics: 2014 elections, Dick Armey, Editor's Picks, GOP, John Cornyn, Lindsey Graham, midterm elections, Midterms, Newt Gingrich, Politics, Republican Party, Republicans, The Right, Politics News

Another midterm election will soon be upon us, and that means it’s time for eager Republicans to dust off one of their favorite decades-old political tropes: the Contract With America. Lindsey Graham, who was part of the 1994 Republican wave that witnessed the birth of the original Contract, wants to recapture that magic with a 2014 version of the document that will let voters know what the GOP intends to do with the Senate majority, should they win it.

Graham’s thinking makes sense, sort of. The Republicans are poised to win a few Senate seats in states where incumbent Democrats are fighting structural disadvantages, and it’s in their interest to convince anyone silly enough to listen that they actually have a national mandate to repeal the Affordable Care Act or cut taxes forever. A “Contract With America” is a ham-fisted way of nationalizing those races – it says “America” right there in the title, after all.

That’s precisely what Newt Gingrich and Dick Armey did when they unveiled the original Contract With America six weeks before the 1994 midterm election. The Republicans were poised to make huge gains, so they slapped together an agenda and told reporters after the fact that they’d been swept to power on a national mandate to prohibit welfare assistance to teen mothers under the age of 18 (a provision of the original Contract). The Contract itself had little impact on the Republicans’ success at the polls; only 31 percent of voters had even heard of the Contract by late October 1994.

But it’s since attained this mythic status as the most potent device of electoral persuasion ever devised. As such, whenever Republicans think they have a chance at a pretty good election cycle, out comes the “new” Contract With America.

In late September 2010, not long before the Tea Party wave, the Republicans unveiled the “Pledge to America,” a gauzy and unspecific “plan” for taking the country back from Barack Obama and the socialists. It was a long-form recitation of rote GOP policy positions – taxes bad, spending bad (military excluded), Obamacare double-plus bad – paired with inspiring photos of cowboys and Mt. Rushmore. The newly empowered Republicans broke a bunch of the promises (Obamacare was not repealed, taxes were raised on the wealthy), and went on to lose House and Senate seats in 2012.