Making the decision to get behind the wheel after a night of partying could cost you your life, or someone else's.

"The lives that are lost every year will speak volumes on the importance of what it means to drive sober," said Lieutenant Warden with the FHP.

Spring break attracts thousands of people to our beaches every year, but more visitors also mean more people on the roads, that's why the Florida Highway Patrol is making it's presence known in Panama City Beach.

"The checkpoint is designed so we can help motorists remember you need to drive safely, you need to plan your trip, give yourself plenty of time to get there, don't rush, and of course by all means don't consume alcohol or prescription medication that will cause you not to be fully attentive to your driving," said Lieutenant Warden.

The sobriety check point is on state road 79.

"I believe that this road will be heavily used for the entire spring break period. This is one of the main avenues of getting to the beach," said Lieutenant Warden.

Although the FHP conducts these check points routinely, Lieutenant Warden says spring break is an important time to raise awareness about the dangers of drinking and driving.

"We're getting a good cross reference of everyone that comes to this part of the state and the specific purpose is to have a party and so with that being said drinking is part of that and we try to encourage safety and responsible drinking," said Lieutenant Warden.

ThE FHP has also brought 15 additional troopers onto the beach and local law enforcement is also beefing up its staff.

Panama City Beach Police is getting additional help from the Bay County Sheriff's Office, Panama City Police, and Washington County.

"We go from a population of 14,000 people during a normal year with some visitors coming and going to we'll have anywhere from 100 to 200 thousand kids here the next few weeks, so, I have to increase it to make sure my community is safe, my residents are safe, and the visitors are safe," said Panama City Beach Police Chief, Drew Whitman.