With the explosion of social media and digital advertising, marketers are expanding the number of ad agencies they use to help them produce a broader array of advertising.

Georgia-Pacific is the latest firm to bulk up its agency lineup, bringing on additional creative agencies that it says have the ability to do better strategic and creative work. The company is expected to announce it is adding four new agencies to its roster — Droga5, Cutwater and Interpublic units Martin Agency and Deutsch LA– to take the lead on a half dozen of its best-known paper products brands including Dixie tableware and Brawny paper towels.

Georgia-Pacific will continue to work with agencies DDB and Eric Mower but those firms do not currently have any assignments from the brands, the company said.

Decades ago, marketers used to rely on single agencies to do the bulk of their work. While some still follow that strategy, an increasing number are opting for a multi-agency approach. That can spur competition between different agencies, helping generate better marketing ideas.

“Different agencies will also encourage a more entrepreneurial experience and bring more fresh ideas to the company,” said Douwe Bergsma, chief marketing officer, North American consumer business for Georgia‑Pacific.

The move could help Georgia-Pacific, owned by privately held Koch industries, better compete against consumer products giants like Procter and Gamble and Kimberly-Clark. The consumer products industry, however, has been barely growing in recent years. According to market research firm Nielsen, unit sales of consumer products have been largely flat for the past three years.

“The competition in our category is extremely strong,” Mr. Bergsma said. “In that environment, you have to be the best in order to progress. Standing still is not an option.”

Georgia-Pacific’s Dixie brand is the market leader in the plates and cups categories, while Vanity Fair has a leading position in napkins, the company said. In the tissue category, Angel Soft is the leading mainstream brand while Quilted Northern is the No. 2 premium brand. In the towel category, Sparkle is the leading mainstream brand while Brawny is a distant No. 2 premium brand.

Georgia-Pacific didn’t use a traditional creative “pitch” process to vet its new agencies and said it instead used an approach that focused on the specific marketing capabilities each agency could add to the needs of individual brands.

For example, Mr. Bergsma said Quilted Northern bath tissue has used multiple agencies for advertising over the last few years. “While that content has been good, it is not the breakthrough creative that the brand is striving for in the marketplace,” he said.

Having multiple agencies isn’t without challenges — Mr. Bergsma acknowledged that there is some complexity that comes with working with several firms.

“The key is to keep everyone playing nice in the sandbox, and everyone in service of the account,” said Deutsch LA Chief Executive Mike Sheldon.