Trenda Fecht of the Hyannis, Neb-based Y Six Livestock team gets ready to rope calves in a pen for the calf branding competition for Saturday's Women's Ranch Rodeo Association's 11th annual World Finals Rodeo . ( Shelley Widhalm / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Competing in ranch rodeo doesn't compare to life on the ranch for 16-year-old Morgan George of Yuma.

"We work way more on a ranch," said Morgan, who lives on a 2,500-acre ranch with hundreds of cattle and sheep. "This just shows you what you do on a ranch."

Morgan sat atop her horse Saturday next to her sister and teammate, Madison, 21, for the Women's Ranch Rodeo Association's 11th annual World Finals Rodeo. The two, part of a team of four, joined girls and women from the mid-West and West to compete in two performances on Friday and in the final performance on Saturday.

The Women's Ranch Rodeo Association, based in Fall River, Kan., promotes the sport of women's ranch rodeo and the lifestyles and skills of the cattle, equine and ranching industries.

The finals competition Saturday started with a noncompetitive stray gathering in the morning, in which a four-person team of men and women roped and tied down two steers in a timed event.

"It's a side event, not part of the finals," said Karen Betzen, treasurer of the association, adding that the event started last year to give competitors and their families something to do in the morning.

In the main event that afternoon, teams of women competed in the ranch rodeo in five competitions born out of daily ranching. They included calf branding, trailer loading, doctoring, sorting and tie-down lugging.

This year, there are 18 teams, or 72 women total who competed. They qualified by placing in one of 18 sanctioned rodeos in Nebraska, Wyoming, Kansas, Texas and Oklahoma.

Advertisement

"We show them what we do in our everyday lives," Betzen said. "It's our chance to do our lifestyle and have a little fun with it, too."

The competitions included:

• Calf branding: a roper rides into a pan of calves, or a small herd, to rope two head and drag them out, so that the other team members can put a fake chalk brand on them.

• Trailer loading, the team has to sort a steer out of the herd and drive him to other end of arena to load him into the front of the trailer and load one of their horses in back.

• Doctoring, the team has to head and heel a steer released from the pen and mark his forehead with a chalk marker, indicating he needs a shot.

• Sorting, the team draws numbers to sort out three cows from a herd of cattle.

• Tie-down lugging, the team has to head a steer released from the pen, making it easier if they also heel it. The members wrestle down the steer and tie three legs together. Heading is roping the animal's horns or head, and heeling is roping its hind feet.

Jenna Adams of Shidler, Okla., who raises cattle, likes competing with other women "who work every day like I do," she said.

"You get to come to town and show off your skills that you use on a daily basis," she said. "It's kind of nice to have a little fun and show off what you can do and see fellow cowgirls that are just like you."

For Tara Nab of Fleming, who competes in rodeo, she likes the mix of ranching with being able to compete. She and her family raise angus cattle on 1,000 acres.

"It shows our horses' abilities as well, good teamwork and how people work with cattle," Nab said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm