Topics: Beyonce, beyonce album, Music, Entertainment News

We hadn’t yet recovered from “Scandal” when “Beyoncé” dropped as an iTunes exclusive late Thursday night, and it snapped our collective necks around. The use of digital-exclusive distribution to control its release while flouting conventions of promotion had many people who pride themselves on being insiders scrambling to explain “how,” and left Beyoncé the only one asking “why?” I am a deep fan of this moment. Beyoncé got what she wanted: the ability to be vulnerable, communicate her wants (and how she wanted them) and to call her own shots. Beyoncé the Person revealed parts of herself through Beyoncé the Artist, which only the acumen, work ethic and security of Beyoncé the Billionaire superstar could provide.

As chart-toppingly popular as it is, Beyoncé’s music is impossible to appreciate outside the context of her life. Her art is centered around who she is, what she experiences and where she came from. “No Angel” sounds like a romantic ballad and the video looks like a love letter to Houston. Her Houston of candy cars, projects, trunk memorials and strippers. The luminaries of Houston hip-hop are presented with no names. We see her singing to the place she loves because and despite of what is. The complexity of loving her is sonically tied to the complexity of the city’s aesthetic. You can appreciate it on the level of gorgeous Beyoncé and interesting Diane Arbus-like portraits, or you can recognize a complex love song to all facets of the place she sees as creating her. If you get it, you get it. This is how Beyoncé is living right now; you can do with it what you want.

That context includes the fact that Beyoncé is a black woman, and being able to relate to her newest album as one (before the avalanche of analysis in 2013) may have been the most important thing about this album for me. When Alex Hardy sets Kitty Pryde to rights about the lyrics “eat the cake Anna Mae” in “Drunk in Love,” it’s a reminder of how flippant people have been with black entertainment. Pryde believes that Jay Z is referencing Japanese anime and uses it to dismiss the track as nonsense. In reality, the lyric is a reference to a scene in the Tina Turner biopic “What’s Love Got to Do With It” where Ike forces Tina to eat a cake for their anniversary, and it has a very specific meaning. Is it problematic? Yes, but rather than being a silly throwaway, it may refer to Beyoncé and Jay Z’s relationship and possible bedroom talk between the two. Rather than wonder what it meant, Pryde simply dismisses it, something far too common when it comes to references to black culture.

This year has been a “race-themed” doozy. The experience of being black, living black and making black cultural art has been dissected, refracted and appropriated in ways that sometimes emptied entertainment of enjoyment. Dancing — particularly twerking and all the vernacular dances that were mislabeled as twerking — were constant battles. In her documentary “Life Is But a Dream,” Beyoncé references Nina Simone as an artist in control of her medium. These moments reminded me of the song “Images.” Pop culture so often shreds black women by commodifying, deconstructing or degrading them before we get a moment to truly experience them. Seeing someone who looks and moves like you do freely is a beautiful and rare thing. When Trudy of Gradient Lair remembers the dances from “Drunk in Love” as stuff you do in the club, I remember doing it in a living room with my girls in between editing a script. For us, it was a healing moment; for Kitty it was a weak punch line to a weak joke. As scrutiny rises, having a cultural moment to enjoy your relationship to a culture you and a pop star share is increasingly nothing short of magical.