On Friday, the conservative blog Gateway Pundit encouraged visitors to participate in a poll that asks: "Are Democrats tyrants?"

The link takes visitors to a page that recalls recent moves by Democrats, including the indictment of filmmaker Dinesh D'Souza, actions against James O'Keefe, the IRS scandal and several other instances of what many say is an effort to silence conservatives.

"2016 filmaker D'Souza has been indicted by Holder's DOJ, Cuomo's Department of Labor has issued a subpoena for 'Acorn destroyer' James O'Keefe's financial records, TSA abuses passengers, DHS violates your rights, NSA violates rights to privacy, Obamacare mandates dictate your insurance, EPA is after wood stoves, DOE demands Common Core be taught in schools and the IRS is changing the rules to attack conservative groups," the page says.

The poll then asks two simple questions.

"Are the Democrats tyrants?"

"Whom do you believe has better solutions for the nation's problems?"

Participants are asked to enter their email addresses and zip codes.

Currently, the poll says it is new and therefore doesn't have any results to report.

The question is a valid one, considering recent statements and actions taken by Democrats.

New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, recently said those who oppose abortion and support the right to keep and bear arms "have no place" in his state.

"Who are they? Are they these extreme conservatives who are right-to-life, pro-assault-weapon, anti-gay? Is that who they are? Because if that’s who they are and they’re the extreme conservatives, they have no place in the state of New York, because that’s not who New Yorkers are," he said.

Cuomo has backtracked from that statement somewhat, claiming that his comments were "distorted" and taken out of context.

But Cuomo is not the only Democrat to make outrageous comments.

Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., also said the IRS should be used to shut down the Tea Party, and Sen. Maria Cantwell, R-Wash., said lawmakers would "definitely" go after the NFL's tax-exempt status if it doesn't pressure the Washington Redskins into changing their team name.

One conservative group responded by calling Schumer a "fascist" who opposes free speech.

Vulnerable Senate Democrats have also asked the IRS to essentially help them win their upcoming elections by targeting conservative groups.

As we recently reported, Mike Dickinson, a Democrat looking to unseat Rep. Eric Cantor, R-Va., said the FCC should monitor and regulate Fox News.

In early February, White House Press Secretary Jay Carney called freedom a "buzzword."

These are just a few of the many examples one can point to, and when combined with Obama's repeated promises to rule by executive action, are enough to present a terrifying overview of the modern Democrat Party.

Related:

----------------------------------------------------------------

If you like this article, you can follow Joe on Twitter @jnewby1956, visit and like his Facebook page, or subscribe to receive email updates when a new article is published.

For hard-hitting conservative commentary, please visit Joe's blog, the Conservative Firing Line. You can also find Joe's articles at Right News Now, Liberty Unyielding and PolitiCollision.