LONGMONT - The crowd cheered. The band played. The home team had just gone up 14-0 on a beautiful Saturday morning.

It couldn't be more hometown, more normal, even on a borrowed football field. And for the friends and family of the Lyons Lions, that was kind of the point.

After a devastating flood has swallowed your town, you need normal.

"This is the first time we've relaxed since the whole thing started," said parent Dave Kelly, watching the Lyons High School players form up at Everly-Montgomery Field. "I'm thinking we're going to win it. They've got so much anxiety built up."

Normally home turf for a different set of "boys in blue," Longmont High School offered its field and quite a bit more to the flood-evicted Lions. Trojan cheerleaders greeted their counterparts with goodie bags in hand. The two LHS bands played together. A banner in the stands proclaimed the unity: "LYONSTRONG: The Longmont High Student Council Supports You!"

For starting quarterback Logan Watson it couldn't have been more welcome.

"At times like this, you've got to settle down and focus on the game, let everything else leave your mind," he said. "I can't believe how many people are here to support us."

Advertisement

Lyons was hit first and hit hard in the St. Vrain flood, quickly becoming isolated from the rest of the Front Range. After power, phones and sewer services all failed, the National Guard began evacuating the town of 2,500 last week. The residents have been allowed back to visit flood-damaged homes, but not to return for good.

One resident, former Lyons basketball coach and teacher Gerald "Gerry" Boland, went missing early in the flooding. His body was found Thursday, a few hundred yards downstream from his home. Saturday's game against Clear Creek High School opened with a moment of silence for Boland.

Boulder County Sheriff's deputy Brit Fell greets Lyons High School cheerleader Courtney Molz during the football game against Clear Creek on Saturday. ( LEWIS GEYER )

"He truly loved Lyons," the announcer said over the PA system. "Our thoughts and prayers are with his family."

It's been a time for families. The ones that have students at Lyons but homes in Longmont have frequently been offering living space to friends from the town whose homes were cut off, ruined or destroyed by the disaster. "We have a family living with us right now," said Ann Cisar, a Lyons High office worker. "A lot of teachers do." Kelly, whose son Dawson is a freshman on the team, said his life has been a series of lines since evacuating his home. A line to leave town with the National Guard and head to LifeBridge Church in Longmont. A line to get a temporary pass back into Lyons. A line for FEMA aid. All of it helpful, he acknowledged, but it's nice to get away for a bit.

"Sunday's going to be the first day we don't have to go anywhere involving our home," said Kelly, whose family is staying in a motel in Firestone.

He'll be the first to admit that he got lucky. His home has water in the basement, he said, but many of his neighbors are far worse off. For that matter, that's probably true of his old home, too; the Kellys moved five or six years ago from a house on Park Street, one of the worst-hit parts of town. "My neighbor's house, water came in the window and just wiped them out," he said. It's not going to be completely normal for a while yet. The town's students will soon start classes at the old Main Street School, with materials and even locker contents retrieved from the dry but unusable Lyons High School. Games have been scheduled at Longmont and Skyline and even the October homecoming will be ... well, not coming home yet.Town officials have said that a true return to Lyons will be months away, maybe two, maybe six.

But for now, it'll be as normal as it can. And someday, home will return in truth.

"It'll come back," said Vicki McCarthy, a former Lyons resident, as she took tickets for the arriving crowd. "It'll be different, but it'll come back."

Scott Rochat can be reached at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com.