Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

LOS ANGELES (AP) — A pregnant teenager, the daughter of an unmarried mother and granddaughter of another, is repeating family history. Does she decide to keep her baby and do her immature best to raise it, or choose adoption for her offspring?

That quandary anchors the season finale of CBS’ “Mom” (9:30 p.m. EDT, Monday) a freshman sitcom that has balanced punch lines and pathos in tackling alcoholism, cancer, broken families and other weighty themes.

Any one of them would have fitted what TV sitcoms once somberly heralded as “a very special episode,” but they are the bread-and-butter of “Mom,” starring Anna Faris and Allison Janney.

It’s a daring approach and, given its lineage, a surprising one: “Mom” was hatched by Chuck Lorre, the executive producer behind “Two and a Half Men,” a show that traffics in superficial raunchiness, and the smartly frothy “The Big Bang Theory.”

The women of “Mom” are winning but brittle and complex characters, deftly played by Faris as Christy, the mother of 16-year-old Violet (Sadie Calvano) and a son (Blake Garrett Rosenthal) from another relationship, and Janney as Bonnie, Christy’s mom and a soul mate in battling alcoholism.

“Mom” has its own comedic pacing as well as content. Laughs are delivered at a pace more measured than that of a typical sitcom, giving emotions time to rise and fall convincingly.

For Lorre, “Mom” represents a return to the kind of real-life nuance that he explored in the early 1990s as a writer on “Roseanne” and in a sitcom he created about another single mom with addiction issues, “Grace Under Fire.”

He got “turned in a different direction,” as Lorre put it, with his hits “Two and a Half Men” (which developed its own real-life subplot, ex-star Charlie Sheen’s ugly public clash with Lorre and Warner Bros. Television) and “The Big Bang Theory.”

“Mom,” which Lorre created and produces with Eddie Gorodetsky and Gemma Baker, was the way back. The show, which ranked No. 20 in recent weekly ratings among advertiser-favored young adult viewers, has been renewed for next season.

“I really wanted ‘Mom’ to be an opportunity to take chances, to see if storytelling and character development could be expanded, and maintain the promise that it’s a comedy,” Lorre said.

There’s no “high concept” and nothing remotely funny in breast cancer or seeing your mom relapse into alcoholism, he said, “but the challenge of it, it seemed worth trying.”