ATLANTA | “The night I found out, I slept one and a half hours,” recalls D, a 29-year-old black gay man.

He’s talking about being diagnosed with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.

“Even though I work in public health and tell people daily that HIV is not a death sentence, that first night that’s all I could think of,” says D. “This has to be wrong, I thought. I work in public health. This can’t happen to me.”

D, who requested anonymity, says he contracted the virus when a condom broke during sex. Two weeks later, he was tested for two sexually transmitted infections – chlamydia and gonorrhea – but not for HIV. Shortly afterward, he went back for an HIV test and found out that he had the virus.

Soon after his diagnosis, D moved to Atlanta, which also happens to be the epicenter of a re-emerging national HIV crisis.

According to the latest CDC HIV surveillance report released this spring, metro Atlanta has the fifth-highest rate of new HIV diagnoses. And that statistic may understate the problem. Patrick Sullivan, an Emory researcher and former CDC director of HIV surveillance, says, “Atlanta has one of the most intense epidemics in the country.”

Three of the five core metro Atlanta counties – DeKalb, Fulton and Clayton – are among the top counties nationally in rates of new HIV diagnoses.

What sets Atlanta’s epidemic apart, says another Emory researcher, Travis Sanchez, is how severely the new diagnoses are concentrated within a specific population: young black men who have sex with men.

The combined problems of poverty and lack of access to health care in Atlanta are the driving forces behind the HIV epidemic, and they disproportionately affect the black community in Atlanta, experts say.

“We think that HIV is no longer a death sentence, and in the era of antiretroviral drugs, we think that no one is dying,” says Emily Brown of the LGBT advocacy group Georgia Equality. “But the reality is that in the black community, HIV is advancing to AIDS for many, and people are dying. No one is talking about it.”

Atlanta is home to a large black gay population, a community in which transmission of HIV is high. Also, a recent study by the Brookings Institution, a Washington-based think tank, found Atlanta to have the highest income gaps between rich and poor, and many whose income is below the poverty line do not have access to health insurance. Georgia has among the highest rates of uninsured residents in the United States, and has rejected Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act.

In 2013, Fulton and DeKalb counties had the highest number of people living with HIV diagnoses in Georgia – 14,695 and 6,116, respectively. These two counties also had the highest numbers of new HIV diagnoses in Georgia, with Fulton at 667 and DeKalb at 414, according to the latest figures from the Georgia Department of Public Health.

Public Health says that while there is cause for concern about the increase in HIV cases, the change may come partly because we’re getting better at tracking the number of infections. A more comprehensive reporting system has resulted in more accurate reporting of HIV cases to the CDC, state officials say.