Portland and Augusta, Maine and Manchester, N.H.– Bernstein Shur, one of northern New England’s largest law firms, announced the election of two new shareholders: Eben M. Albert and Steven R. Gerlach.

Eben M. Albert is a member of the firm’s Business, Litigation & Dispute Resolution and Technology, Outsourcing & Data Security Practice Groups. His practice includes commercial litigation, personal injury, data security, real estate litigation, professional negligence and general civil litigation. He has argued numerous cases in state and federal court, including both bench and jury trials, and has participated in various administrative hearings and alternative dispute resolution proceedings.

A resident of Portland, Maine, Albert earned his JD from Vermont Law School, magna cum laude, and his BA from College of the Atlantic. He is a member of the American Bar Association and the Maine State Bar Association.

Steven R. Gerlach, a tax attorney by training, is a member of the firm’s Labor & Employment and Business Law Practice Groups. His practice includes employee benefits, executive compensation, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, the Affordable Care Act. He works with all types of employers including health care entities, businesses, nonprofits, and individuals on ERISA requirements and liabilities, as well as the tax and ERISA implications of mergers and acquisitions.

A resident of North Yarmouth, Maine, Gerlach earned his JD from the University of Maine School of Law, his LLM from Boston University and his BA from the University of Rochester. He is a member of the Maine Employee Benefits Council, the American Bar Association and the Maine State Bar Association.

About Bernstein Shur

Widely regarded as one of New England’s most entrepreneurial law firms, Bernstein Shur has more than 100 attorneys in offices in Maine and New Hampshire. Founded in 1915, the firm provides practical and innovative counsel in the areas of business law, litigation, and municipal law to clients throughout the region and around the world. Bernstein Shur is Maine’s exclusive member of Lex Mundi, the world’s leading association of independent law firms. More information is available at www.bernsteinshur.com.

This post was contributed by a community member. Submit your news →