Primary care. (File)

Hoosiers who buy individual health insurance through the federal exchange will find that prices and plan offerings are changing next year.

In filings with the Indiana Department of Insurance, companies already selling plans are seeking rate changes ranging from 11 percent less to 96 percent more. And new entrants in the exchange mean some Hoosiers could buy cheaper plans than they have now.

Five companies are seeking to join the four insurers that currently sell plans on the exchange. That's the most new entrants of the 16 states for which filings are public.

"It's good for the citizens of Indiana to have a competitive health insurance marketplace," said Jim Brunnemer, chief financial officer for Physicians Health Plan of Northern Indiana. "That seems to be bearing out for 2015."

The premiums that one new entrant — CareSource — wants to charge are so much lower than other insurers' that state regulators raised that issue with the company, according to the filings.

Because of the changes, many Hoosiers who qualify for federal help in buying a plan could pay less in premiums next year, according to an analysis by the consulting firm McKinsey & Co.

About 130,000 to 140,000 Hoosiers get their insurance on their own, mostly through the exchange, instead of through an employer or a government program like Medicare. That figure could double next year as the exchange — which was created by the 2010 Affordable Care Act — becomes more established.

The rates for specific plans won't become final until fall, shortly before the enrollment period for 2015 coverage begins Nov. 15.

But the filings give a first look at what the market could look like, as well as the reasons insurers gave when seeking higher rates.

The largest driver of costs is what insurers expect to spend on medical care.

Health care costs are growing at about 5.4 percent, according to the healthcare actuarial firm Milliman. When premiums are increasing more than that, it suggests insurers are facing greater-than-expected claims costs, Richard Evans, an analyst at the investment-research firm SSR Health LLC, has written.

The changes Indiana's insurers are seeking range from an 11 percent decline for an Ambetter plan sold by the Coordinated Care Corp. to a 96 percent increase for one of MDwise's offerings.

In factoring costs for next year, Indiana carriers had to take into account a change in the way the state is handling Medicaid coverage for the disabled. The change will move about 6,800 people in that category into the individual insurance market. Because medical costs for that group are about eight times the annual costs for those already in the market, insurers are raising rates to cover the additional cost.

Karl Knable, chief actuary for the Indiana Department of Insurance, said the change could raise premiums by 3 percent to 8 percent. It could be higher if the total number of people buying insurance doesn't grow as expected. It could be lower if the state expands Medicaid eligibility next year, which would move some of the sicker patients back into the Medicaid program.

Another main reason for price increases is that insurers are still trying to figure out the demographics of the changed marketplace in which they have many more customers, but are no longer allowed to select only the healthier ones.

"This really is a transition," Elizabeth Hall, a WellPoint Inc. vice president said at a forum on insurance premiums. "You really have to think about this as potentially a three- or even a four-year process, until we get full claims data, full experience that we can factor in."

For the products that the Indianapolis-based WellPoint —the dominant player in Indiana's individual insurance market — sells on the exchange, the company is seeking changes ranging from about a 17 percent increase for one of its lower tier, "bronze" level plans to a 3 percent cut for a top tier, "gold" level plan.

WellPoint, the parent company of Anthem, is also lowering the relative costs of plans sold in Southern Indiana while raising them in most other regions in the state. (Insurers are allowed to vary prices by region, which takes into account such factors as the demographics of a population, local health care costs and rates of utilization.)

"There are both changes downward in rates and changes upward in rates," Hall said. "People made educated guesses. They are now adjusting based on additional information and they will have to do it again next year."

The Medicaid changes were the reason MDwise cited for seeking a 21 percent to 96 percent increase in its rates and is the reason state regulators questioned the lower rates of new entrant CareSource.

Steve Smitherman, executive director of CareSource's Indiana market, said regulators wanted to make sure his company had factored in that change. Smitherman said CareSource had, and is able to offer lower rates because it's a nonprofit and has low administrative costs.

"Our goal isn't to satisfy shareholders," Smitherman said of the Ohio-based nonprofit, which is also expanding into Kentucky's exchange next year. CareSource is targeting the uninsured in its exchange plans that will be offered in parts of Indiana.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com or @mgroppe on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1mrm526