Shutterstock Images

The Healthy Indiana Plan 2.0 is now just over a year old. It’s Indiana’s version of the expanded Medicaid program offered by the Affordable Care Act. But unlike traditional Medicaid, Indiana received waiver approval for an alternate system that incorporates personal responsibility and consumer-driven health care. Here’s the theory: if one is financially engaged, it encourages a sense of ownership, personal empowerment, and responsible utilization of medical services.

Waiver approval was important since the expansion is almost entirely funded by the federal government. Before the expansion, Indiana Medicaid covered only low-income pregnant women, children, the disabled and parents below 24 percent of poverty; childless adults were excluded. Now, HIP 2.0 covers all adults below 138 percent of poverty. That’s nothing short of a sea change for Indiana.

I support the HIP 2.0 approach. It adds a small measure of financial responsibility but does not appear to discourage participation by the eligible poor. Actually, the personal financial contribution is negligible for the vast majority of HIP participants. If below the poverty level, participants can opt not to contribute to a HSA-like POWER account and pay small co-pays for medical services other than preventative services. If participants do contribute to the POWER account, they receive enhanced services and have no co-pays. The typical contributions are from $1 to a few dollars per month for the vast majority of participants. If between 100 to 138 percent of poverty, the personal contributions are moderately more substantial.

The HIP 2.0 program has been a great success and well received by patients. The Pence administration has aggressively encouraged participation through effective outreach; approximately 370,000 people are now covered, including 270,000 new participants and more than 5,300 new health-care providers. Seventy percent of participants have chosen to contribute to a POWER account. Emergency department visits by HIP recipients formally on Medicaid are reported to be down 40 percent, and patients appear more aware of the cost of medical care. HIP 2.0 has also been a godsend to Indiana hospitals, important economic and medical-care anchors for our communities, which are now seeing significant reductions in uncompensated care while facing reduced reimbursements from Obamacare.

I inquired with my hospital’s Neighborhood Health Center, a clinic opened in 1997 to serve our community’s underinsured and uninsured, regarding their experience with HIP 2.0. In the past year its uninsured rate has dropped from 70 percent to less than 5 percent. Ninety-five percent of its patients qualify for the HIP program; of those enrolled, 95 percent contribute to a POWER account. Patients are paying an average of about $8 and at most $24 monthly. Even those patients paying only $1 a month are proud that they are contributing to their insurance and, interestingly, are even happier knowing that their providers are now receiving insurance payments for their services. Those with higher incomes have enrolled in the ACA insurance exchange and receive subsidies. Importantly, patients are now accessing preventative services for the first time. However, the clinic reports that it has not yet seen the expected reduction in emergency department use.

Gov. Pence deserves credit for submitting a reasonable plan that necessitated significant compromise on the foundational concepts of consumer-driven health care to win federal approval. Give credit to the Obama administration for its flexibility.

Look what is attainable by compromise and cooperation within the ACA paradigm. Low-income Hoosiers, many of whom with health insurance for the first time in their lives, can now hope for a healthier life.

Sure, Obamacare has flaws. Let’s work together and fix them to extend coverage to more Americans.

Feldman is director of medical education and residency training at Franciscan St. Francis Health and a former Indiana State Health Commissioner. Email him at richard.feldman@franciscanalliance.org.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1pov4KF