ORANGE, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The Word & Brown General Agency, California’s and Nevada’s largest general agency focusing on group and individual and family insurance, has introduced the next generation of its online, proprietary quote engine, Quot-O-Matic®. Offering brokers an easier way to quote, Quot-O-Matic includes functionality that automatically highlights benefit differences when it’s time for a small business to renew its benefits, so brokers can be better advisors to their clients. Built-in safeguards prevent quotes from going out with incorrect information, and Quot-O-Matic offers brokers the tools to customize and even translate quotes, so each presentation is tailored to the employer.

“We’ve already heard from many of our brokers that the new functionality of Quot-O-Matic is saving them time better spent on working with their clients on finding an affordable, comprehensive benefits package for employees,” says Jessica Word, president of the Word & Brown General Agency. “The updates to our online quote, as well as the launch of our redesigned website and our new online enrollment solution powered by EaseCentral, are just a few more examples of Word & Brown’s ongoing commitment to ‘service of unequalled excellence,’ which has been our general agency hallmark for more than three decades.”

Quot-O-Matic allows brokers to view the entire small group market in a single quote, including ancillary. It automatically maps a client’s existing plan to Affordable Care Act-compliant options, which is especially important as employers with grandmothered coverage transition to new plans for 2016.

Comparison-shopping is easier with highlighted plan differences, so brokers and clients can zero in on co-pays, prescription benefits, and other features. Multilingual benefits spreadsheets and customizable output are also built into Quot-O-Matic’s technology, giving Word & Brown brokers a proposal that sets them apart from competitors.

For brokers interested in EaseCentral, they can get started at no cost for business placed through Word & Brown. This option gives them complete access to the Word & Brown team, which can assist with all aspects of account setup, adding benefits and rates, routing of paperwork once groups have completed an online enrollment, and personal assistance throughout the year.

Interested brokers can gain access to Quot-O-Matic or EaseCentral’s online enrollment, benefits, and HR management platform through the general agency’s updated website, www.wordandbrown.com.

About Word & Brown and The Word & Brown Companies

Trusted for more than 30 years, The Word & Brown Companies include: Word & Brown® General Agency, the largest general agent in California and Nevada focusing on group and individual and family insurance; Word & Brown Brokerage, offering Medicare and individual and family plan coverage outside the service area of the Word & Brown General Agency; CHOICE Administrators®, the nation’s leading developer and distributor of health insurance exchange programs; Quotit® Corporation, the foremost national provider of Internet sales and marketing solutions for the health insurance and employee benefits industry; and HealthCompare®, helping individuals, families, and seniors easily research, compare, buy, and enroll in the right health insurance or Medicare Advantage, Medicare Supplement, or Medicare prescription drug plan at the right price. For more information, visit www.wordandbrowncompanies.com.