Buy Photo Borough resident Desiree Pierce moves back into her newly rebuilt home that was destroyed in superstorm Sandy. The rebuild was made possible by Sea Bright Rising, the St. Bernard Project, Temple Rodeph Torah of Marlboro, and Jewish Federation of Monmouth County. Sea Bright, NJ Tuesday, June 17, 2014 Doug Hood (Photo: Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

Desiree Pierce needed three snips of the oversized scissors to cut through the orange ribbon that stretched across the front door of her New Street house.

And it took the combined effort of religious groups, non-profit organizations and countless volunteers to get this lifelong Sea Brighter, who was displaced by superstorm Sandy 20 months ago, back home.

"It's been a long time being out of this house," said Pierce, 59, of the home where she grew up and has lived with her own children. "I just want to thank everyone involved for caring and having compassion to help people."

Pierce's house is the first home to be rebuilt through a partnership of Sea Bright Rising, a local non-profit that formed in the wake of Sandy to feed residents and volunteers and St. Bernard Project, a Louisiana-based non-profit that started after Hurricane Katrina and is known for rebuilding homes in disaster-stricken areas.

The partnership, which also includes the Jewish Federation of Monmouth County, has a goal of completing 30 homes in Sea Bright and the adjacent towns this year and 70 more next year.

Sea Bright Rising and St. Bernard Project has been asked to expand its operations to all of Monmouth County, said Chad Carson, director of Sea Bright Rising. The state has also expressed interest in having it serve Ocean County, he said.

The non-profits work with homeowners by helping bridge the gap between what they've gotten from their insurance and federal aid and what it costs to rebuild their homes with volunteers and fundraising, Carson said.

For Pierce, that gap was $43,000. Pierce had homeowner's insurance for her home, but was not required to have flood insurance because the family home had been paid off years ago.

The policy she did have was only enough to repair a section of her roof. Pierce had been using money she had been saving for retirement to pay for housing for her family while she worked to get federal disaster aid.

But the Jewish Federation linked Pierce with its Sandy Teen Fellows, a 45-member teen leadership and service program that formed to help Sandy survivors and helped rebuild her home. The organization also connected Pierce with Temple Rodeph Torah in Marlboro, which adopted her family and donated a large portion of the money needed for reconstruction.

Rabbi Don Weber, the congregation's leader, said the commitment to Sea Bright is not done now that Pierce's house is complete. He urged all religious organizations to adopt homes to help roughly 100 more Sea Bright families get into their homes.

"These are our neighbors," he said. "There's no reason it can't be done."

Susanne Cervenka: 732-643-4229; scervenka@app.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1qaIWDW