Minnesota elderly showing preference of independence over nursing homes

Judy Otten waters flowers at Wilder Community Center for Aging in St. Paul on Monday, August 3, 2015. Otten's daughter Chris Geerdes said Wilder has prolonged the need to put her mom in a nursing home, and that her mom looks forward to going there three days a week. (Pioneer Press: Holly Peterson)

ST. PAUL -- When Judy Otten moved in with her daughter, Chris Geerdes, and her family in St. Paul last December, she had lost the homemaking skills she had honed over a lifetime.

Suffering from memory loss, Otten, 74, a lifelong cook, could no longer follow a recipe and had difficulty cleaning her house and using a telephone.

“All she’d do is sit and watch TV,” Geerdes said. It was time to start thinking about a nursing home.

But Geerdes was familiar with the Amherst H. Wilder Foundation’s Adult Day Health program at its Community Center for Aging, just down Marshall Avenue from her home. The center helps older adults remain independent by providing socialization, creative arts and recreation programs, and health, nutrition and other services.

Otten was reluctant to try Wilder, but after participating in a three-day-a-week program for a few weeks, Geerdes and her family “noticed a brightening in her.”

Her mother started talking more, paid more attention to the way she dressed and learned how to paint, draw intricate pencil designs and even dance.

“Mom is always learning something new, something that catches her fancy,” Geerdes said last week as her mother watered plants in the center’s garden.

She said she believes the changes will enable Otten to live in her family’s home — and out of a nursing home — “for a long time.”

And now Geerdes has been able to return to work.

“It’s been life-changing,” she said.

‘Aging in place’

The vast majority of older Minnesotans strongly desire to stay at home as they age. Nearly nine in 10 Minnesotans older than 65 own their homes, and 80 percent of them have no plans to move, according to a Minnesota Board on Aging survey.

But in order to stay in their homes, many will need a wide range of services — from lawn mowing and housekeeping to transportation, home modifications and memory care.

“Ten or 15 years ago, when people needed services, they moved into a nursing home,” said Jean Wood, the Board on Aging’s executive director. “Now, the market has made it clear people want to stay in their homes.”

To make that possible, a vast array of government agencies, nonprofits, civic organizations, faith groups and private businesses are driving an “aging in place” movement.

Aging in place, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, is defined as “the ability to live in one’s own home and community safely, independently and comfortably, regardless of age, income or ability level.”

With a wave of baby boomers sweeping over the state and nation, the demand for housing options and services is soaring.

The number of Minnesotans age 65 or older is expected to double to 1.4 million from 2010 to 2035, according to the Minnesota State Demographic Center. By then, more than one in five Minnesotans will be a senior, including all the baby boomers (those born between 1946 and 1965).

Wood and other specialists on aging issues contend that with some relatively modest changes in services and housing options, most older adults can stay in their homes and out of nursing facilities for months and even years.

That would provide huge cost savings for families — and taxpayers. The average cost of nursing home care in Minnesota is $180 a day. By comparison, Wilder’s fee is $79 per day for adult day care, and assisted-living facilities, which house about 70,000 older Minnesotans, cost $115 a day on average.

Some 27,500 Minnesotans, or 3.7 percent of the state’s seniors, live in nursing homes on a typical day, the state Department of Human Services reports. Minnesota spends more than $2 billion a year on nursing homes; about two-thirds of the bill is paid by public sources, such as Medical Assistance and Medicare.

The growing emphasis on home- and community-based services has sharply cut use of nursing homes. The Department of Human Services reported a 39 percent reduction in the state’s nursing home industry since 1987.

“Helping homeowners, especially those with very low incomes, stay where they are and get the services they need can be an incredibly good investment for the state,” said Mary Tingerthal, commissioner of the Minnesota Housing Finance Agency.

Aging boomers want more housing options. Couples with big homes in the suburbs will look to downsize to easier-to-maintain houses, townhouses and apartments. Lower-income seniors will seek affordable housing.

But a lot of them won’t be able to find it.

Wood said housing officials tell her that “with the coming of the baby boomers, we can’t build our way out of this.” She said they don’t have enough time in the next 10 to 15 years to build all the affordable housing boomers will need.

“That’s why the emphasis is on people staying in their own homes,” Wood said.

Connecting with services

There is a huge number of services available, but the tricky part is connecting seniors with the services they need, said Jess Luce, program manager for the Dakota County Communities for a Lifetime initiative.

His program brings together residents, local businesses, community groups and city and county staff to create networks to make services more accessible. They help with transportation, sidewalks and paths, housing options, access to services for older adults and caregivers and work and volunteer opportunities.

Luce said a program known as Living Longer and Stronger in West St. Paul is the oldest and most active community effort under the county’s initiative to meet the needs of its aging population.

Up and running for four years, the program provides a wide array of services. This year, for instance, it launched “the Loop,” a free circulator bus service that shuttles shoppers to and from businesses along South Robert Street.

Among other projects, Living Longer and Stronger publishes an extensive resource directory for older adults and provides “boomer bags” with information for new retirees.

Luce also is starting a project to create “neighborhood networks” to link neighbors through a “virtual world online,” he said.

His program has surveyed residents in a Mendota Heights neighborhood to find out what their interests are and to encourage them to get involved by offering to shovel a sidewalk, take care of a cat while the owner is out of town or post security alerts.

He hopes to test the idea in other neighborhoods soon.

In the Board on Aging’s biennial surveys of service gaps for older adults, transportation always ranks No. 1, Wood said.

Many options exist, such as Metro Transit, Metro Mobility and shuttle services, but they often don’t match seniors’ needs.

Dakota County has a number of transportation providers, each with a different target population and separate funding sources. Luce said the county has organized a transportation coordinating council to “get the providers on the same page” to look for efficiencies and identify service gaps and overlaps.

Dakota County cities also need to address a “walkability gap,” by providing more sidewalks and paths, he said.

“Walking on streets is not safe for older adults, little kids or mothers with strollers,” Luce said. “My hope is that in the next five years, as more boomers get older, they will realize that their communities are not age-friendly, and they will want to do something about it.”

In St. Paul, the mayor’s advisory committee on aging is conferring with city officials who are drafting a 10-year comprehensive plan on housing, land use, transportation, parks, water and related issues.

“We want the needs of older adults to be imbedded in everything that we do in planning for the city’s future,” said Nancy Homans, Mayor Chris Coleman’s policy director.

That involves recognizing the changing wants and needs of older residents.

“For instance, it used to be that senior programming was just having craft classes,” Homans said. “But now, active seniors want to bike, walk, run and play tennis. We want our park system to meet their needs.”

In the Twin Cities area, the Metropolitan Area Agency on Aging is the main source of information about services delivered in homes.

One of seven regional aging agencies in Minnesota funded largely under the federal Older Americans Act, the metro agency does pre-admission screenings to determine if seniors are eligible for public programs. It provides links for all older adults to dozens of public, private and nonprofit services available in their homes.

Last year, the agency granted $6.6 million to its “community partners” for services to help seniors age in place.

The most popular services funded by the agency include meals, support for caregivers who care for family members and friends, and household services such as cleaning, grocery shopping and yard maintenance.

“Older adults might not live in their same residence, but what’s important is they’re in the community they choose so they’re close to their faith community, their clinic, dentist and the retailers and restaurants they like,” said agency executive director Dawn Simonson.

The agency’s main point of contact with older adults is the Senior LinkAge Line, the Board of Aging’s free phone line that bills itself as a “one-stop shop for Minnesota seniors.”

It also has “strong linkages” with county social service agencies, clinics, hospitals and other health care providers, Simonson said.

“Younger older adults find (the services they need) on the Internet,” she said.

Housing shortage

For low-income seniors, the greatest unmet need is affordable housing, said Tingerthal, the Minnesota Housing Finance Agency commissioner. “And with the age wave, it’s going to get worse.”

Nearly one in four Minnesota households pay more than 30 percent of their income on housing, she said, “and it’s worse for renters.” With housing costs rising and incomes stagnant, she predicted that number would rise.

“Seniors cannot find affordable housing,” said Barbara Dacy, executive director of the Washington County Housing and Redevelopment Authority. Citing a survey commissioned by a coalition of Minnesota HRAs, she said, “There’s a zero percent vacancy rate.”

To provide more places to live, an association of state HRA officials has asked the Legislature to allow state bonds to be used to finance senior housing. It will seek $40 million for that purpose in a bonding bill that lawmakers are expected to pass next year, Dacy said.

But, she said, that would only finance 400 apartments, a “very small part of the need.”

Since most low-income older adults own their homes, the Housing Finance Agency focuses on providing rehabilitation loans to help older homeowners finance repairs and improvements, Tingerthal said.

The agency has provided 200 to 300 rehab loans a year since 1976, but it typically runs out of money nine months into each year, so it falls short of meeting the demand, she said.

The good news for senior homeowners is most of them own their homes free and clear without a mortgage, resulting in lower housing costs.

Seniors ages 65 to 74 are the least likely of any age group to move, according to MHFA data. But when the boomers start to reach age 75 in five years, the risk of becoming disabled increases, and people with disabilities are likely to move to rental properties. Two-thirds of households with a person older than 85 have someone who is disabled.

The age wave will wash hardest over Greater Minnesota. In 23 outstate counties, seniors will comprise 30 percent to 50 percent of the population by 2035, according to the state demographer’s office.

In the seven-county metro area, Washington and Dakota counties will see the fastest growth in older residents. The proportion of their population ages 65 or older will jump from 15 percent or less now to from 25 percent to 30 percent in 20 years.

The Washington County HRA is partnering with private developers to build affordable senior housing, Dacy said, but “more tools” are needed to meet the demand.

She estimated the county would need 5,000 additional housing units by 2030, including nearly 1,000 affordable dwellings. But a 2013 HRA study projected the county would produce less than one-fourth of the affordable units needed.

The challenge for Washington County and most of the rest of the state, she said, is to find ways to provide more affordable housing at reasonable costs.

How will Minnesotans pay for housing and related services for boomers?

“I don’t think anyone has figured that out yet,” said Jocelyn Schowalter, director of Wilder’s aging services.

To learn more

Looking for information about how aging adults can stay in their homes and communities? Here are three resources recommended by the Minnesota Board on Aging:

Senior LinkAge Line: The board’s toll-free “one-stop shop for Minnesota seniors” that connects callers with services in their community and provides the information and personalized help they need to make decisions. The number is 800-333-2433.

MinnesotaHelp.Info: A state website for all Minnesotans that includes help to find services for seniors, caregivers and families.

MNLiveWellatHome.org: The board’s online quiz to help older Minnesotans learn steps that will enable them live at home as long as possible. It provides links to support, services and products.

The Pioneer Press is a media partner of Forum News Service.