Local fire departments are looking for ways to help residents by keeping them out of the hospital.

The Eden Prairie Fire Department recently joined the Community EMT firefighter visit program, a partnership with the fire departments of Minneapolis, St. Louis Park, Hopkins and Minnetonka, as well as the Park Nicollet Methodist Hospital.

With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, hospitals are now more concerned than ever with patients who are re-admitted within 30 days of being discharged from the hospital. This pilot program is set to determine the efficacy of firefighters doing checks on these recently released patients within the first 24 to 72 hours of discharge.

“The program is proving effective in the pilot phase,” Fire Chief George Esbensen said during a presentation at the Oct. 21 Eden Prairie City Council meeting. “In order for the program to gain more permanent status it is desirable to have a Community EMT standard adopted statewide.”

The pilot stemmed from Park Nicollet’s work on patient care delivery changes for transitions and readmissions, and the St. Louis Park Fire Department’s similar desire to lower medical calls. Thus, the firefighter visit concept was born.

These visits focus on five components: medications, follow-up visit, symptoms, food and home safety. The firefighters work with patients to make sure they understand which medications to take as well as be aware of their own symptoms and who they should call for help. The firefighter also checks to make sure the patient schedules a follow-up visit with their doctor. Another key factor is making sure they have enough food and that their home is free from any safety risks.

Eden Prairie has partnered with the local food shelf, PROP, to ensure that food is readily available for patients who are in need. Hopkins and Eden Prairie joined the pilot program after it had been extended an additional 90 days, but Esbensen presented some of the findings from the first 90 days of the program. Of the total visits conducted so far, five patients were referred to the local food shelf, 10 patients were referred to social/community services, three patients needed medication follow-up from their Patient Care Team (PCT), and 18 patients were referred to their PCT a high risk follow-up with home healthcare.

The pilot was originally slated to last 90 days, but was extended an additional 90 days, now running through the end of December. The five fire departments and Park Nicollet Hospital communicate via conference call each week to check in on the progress of the pilot program. All of the firefighters involved are donating their time for the pilot, but each visit isn’t much of a time commitment. Of the visits conducted thus far, the average visit time is 24 minutes. As a result of these visits, 17 smoke/CO detectors were installed or batteries were changed. The average patient age is 68, but the firefighters have visited patients as young as 11. The patients visited are split between 61 percent females and 39 percent males. Patients must choose to opt into the program to receive visits from firefighters.

As the program continues, the fire departments will gather more data and assessments toward the viability of a more permanent program. After the pilot is done, the departments will evaluate the result and developing a game plan, Esbensen said.

“We have the capacity to continue,” Esbensen said.

In addition to Esbensen, all four Eden Prairie assistant chiefs and seven firefighters have been trained to conduct patient visits.

Contact Natalie Conrad at [email protected] or follow her @EPSunCurrent.