Proving that sometimes Congress can work, the House passed a bill called the 21st Century Cures Act by an overwhelming, bi-partisan margin, according to a Monday story in the Atlantic. The bill would infuse nearly $9 billion dollars over the next five years to fund research into finding cures for diseases such as Alzheimer’s and cancer. It will also attempt to streamline the FDA approval process for such cures to get them to patients and doctors more quickly. The bill now goes to the Senate where it will likely find no more fervent supporter than Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, a candidate for president.

Cruz has discussed the need to spend more to cure diseases in the Senate Science, Space, and Competitiveness subcommittee which he chairs. A Tea Party favorite, Cruz can be usually counted on to be stingy with federal dollars. But that is not the case where curing deadly diseases is concerned.

“We’re spending over $1.1 trillion a year in treatment costs, and we’re investing collectively about $9.9 billion in medical research.

“Does that ratio seem appropriate, not only in terms of dollars and cents, but also in terms of the human lives that are dealing with the terrible consequences?”

Cruz also cited the death of his own grandmother from Alzheimer’s to add a personal note for his plea to pay more attention to curing rather than just managing diseases.

Cruz has been a warm opponent of Obamacare, the health care reform measure that has upended and, some suggest, damaged the way medical services is delivered in the United States. It seems that part of his alternative is to find cures for diseases that currently are expensive to treat. If Alzheimer’s, for example, could be cured, or even staved off by medication, the great expense of caring for people with the disease as they slowly and inexorably decline into death will be avoided. Of course, a great deal of human suffering would be avoided as well. It is a principle advanced by former Speaker Newt Gingrich.

Conservatives are concerned about the House bill because it makes the spending mandatory. They would prefer to make the spending toward finding cures discretionary so that it can be revisited every year and adjusted accordingly.