Merv Hughes ponders life while at the Canberra Comets. Photo: Pat Scala

The most experienced player in Australian Capital Territory cricket history believes Cricket Australia missed an opportunity in not bringing back the Canberra Comets into the domestic one-day competition.

No one has played more games for the ACT first XI than Peter Solway, who maintains that excluding the Comets from the Mercantile Mutual Cup after the 1999-2000 season was a "political decision."

Cricket Australia last week announced that it would be adding a development side made up of young players outside their state squads to next summer's one-day tournament. It will be the first time there will have been seven teams in the competition since the the Comets' three-year stretch at the turn of the century. The Comets finished sixth, sixth and last across their three summers in the nation's elite limited overs series, but had a number of memorable wins, including claiming two of their three clashes with Victoria. A rather portly Merv Hughes bowled his heart out for the side in the first two seasons, as he came to lend a hand at the tail end of his career. One of his teammates was a young Brad Haddin, whose century against the Bushrangers at Manuka helped to grab the points in January 1999.

Advertisement

Solway, 50, played all 18 of the Comets' games in the competition. "I thought it was a really good initiative at the time, and I thought it was pretty ordinary when we got punted out," Solway told Pssst this week.

He thought the call to get rid of the Comets was made because other states didn't want to "slice the pie up".

Peter's son, Dean, is one of Canberra's best cricketers, a regular in the ACT XI, which plays in the second-tier Futures League, but the glass ceiling in the nation's capital means he would need to move elsewhere to get a chance for higher honours. "Unless you make the move, pretty much you're done," said Solway snr.

He believed that adding an ACT team to the Matador one-day cup as well as the Sheffield Shield would only help Australian cricket. "Another good grade competition where you'd end up getting people from all over the place coming to play for an opportunity to play first-class cricket, I think that would only benefit cricket in Australia ... but [national high-performance chief] Pat Howard has different ideas," Solway snr said.

Batter up

The infringements upheld against Stephen Dank by the AFL anti-doping tribunal included trafficking banned peptides and human growth hormone to former Carlton tackling coach John Donehue and baseball coach Jon Deeble. Deeble and Donehue also reportedly made admissions to the Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority about their personal use of substances, which were legal and allowed under anti-doping rules applicable to them. However, as an intriguing aside, a spokesman for the Australian Baseball League insists Deeble had never met Dank. "Stephen Dank has had nothing to do with baseball and Jon Deeble has never worked with Stephen Dank so the AFL report is not accurate. Because he doesn't fall under Baseball Australia's anti doping policy [e.g. as an official, support staff, coach etc], there's been no ban as such [on Dank]," the spokesman said.

Strauss' wrong'un

England cricket director and former captain Andrew Strauss' move to all but blacklist Kevin Pietersen from the England team has gone down like a lead balloon in many circles. It seems even at Middlesex, Strauss' county of 14 years, the decision has not been well received. Pssst spoke to a leading figure at the Lord's-based club. "Everyone is up in arms to be honest ... the nearest that's come to 'supporting Strauss' was to say that it was 'never a question of form with KP'."

Giant message

As Wayne Carey and Cameron Ling noted on Channel Seven's pre-game show on Friday night, there is growing talk that the Greater Western Sydney Giants will soon announce several major re-signings, including Dylan Shiel and Adam Treloar. Certainly one to keep an eye on.

Bovine Ace

Australian women's tennis' leading hope Sam Stosur has found plenty of success at the French Open over the years. In 2015 she has found a novel way to prepare for what she hopes will be a strong fortnight at Roland Garros. The veteran recently reunited with her former coach Dave Taylor and has spent a week getting ready for the clay slam at Taylor's base in Liechtenstein. Stosur trained in the shadow of the Alps, posting photos on social media, posing with cows. The year's second grand slam begins on May 24.

Love all

Speaking of the French Open, Andy Murray has pulled out of the Rome Masters, citing exhaustion and the need to rest ahead of a slam where he will begin as one of the favourites to win. Having won back-to-back clay titles in Munich and Madrid, as well as being recently married to long-time girlfriend Kim Sears, it has been a busy time for the Scot. However, it's clear he believes marriage and sport work well together. "A lot of people have told me there's the sort of 'honeymoon period', and it gets harder after that. But we've been together a very long time. Obviously, getting married was the next step for us, and the tennis has gone well. I've always said that when the personal stuff and your private life is under control, and you're happy, that helps your performances on the court," Murray said. But there has been one issue - just what to do with the wedding ring when he takes to the court. The answer? A clever solution - he threads it through the laces of his left shoe. He was unable to leave it on his finger as it left a blister.

The good and bad

Grant Thomas has never been afraid to criticise umpires, either during his time as coach of St Kilda (one incident led to a $15,000 fine in 2005) and later as a media commentator. That's what made his comments on Twitter all the more surprising: "People want positives? I'll give you one - Wait for it - I'm serious about it too. Special 'Hell yeah' & well done to umpires who have come a long way under the tutelage of Wayne Campbell. Definite improvement. Good to see." But he has questioned why players escape a strike if they test positive through hair testing to illicit drug use in the off-season. "Great message to society. AFLPA only allow hair tests off season without positive strike record. Seems an incentive to me not a deterrent?"

THE WATCHMAN

10 minutes to midnight for... Essendon, seemingly forever.

Just when they thought it was all over, Essendon was pulled back into its supplements scandal when WADA this week appealed the AFL antidoping tribunal's findings.

LOCAL HERO

Matthew Dellavedova has come a long way since his days as an Aussie rules player from the Victorian country town of Maryborough. His journey has not been an easy one in the NBA where he was once deemed too slow, Charles Barkley could not pronounce his name and Cleveland openly admitted they were looking for a replacement. But his team-high 19 points for the Cavs that helped dump Chicago out of the playoff s has made him an instant hero with the NBA website showing a montage of his big game six shots with the heading "Dellavedova Dagger".

NUMBERS UP

9.74 seconds. The blistering time that Justin Gatlin, the 2004 Olympic 100 metre champion, who has twice been banned for doping, ran in this season's opening Diamond League event.

17 seasons after first pulling on a red jersey, Steven Gerrard was overnight due to play his final game for Liverpool.

32 is the ideal number of teams that FIFA president Sepp Blatter maintains should compete at a World Cup despite calls for an expansion.

Got a tip? Contact Daniel Cherny or Jon Pierik. Twitter: @danielcherny or @pierik_agesport