Phillip Byron Jones holds a bachelor's degree in history from Trevecca University and a law degree from the University of Louisville. He has practiced law in Nashville for 25 years. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights The historical phrase “landed gentry” referred to wealthy landowners who lived entirely from rental income.

Unlike previous generations, young homebuyers want charm, character and, yes, diversity.

The rise in property values has empowered longtime residents whose properties are now valuable.

In the ever-expanding world of political correctness, I am regularly amazed (or dumbfounded) by the birth of new words, the resurrection of old words, and the misapplication of words, particularly when done to advance an agenda. And so it is with that amazement that I explore herein the recently in-vogue word “gentrification.”

To start, I must first confess that my familiarity with the term arose in a unique circumstance. As the father of three college-age students, I was visiting my oldest son last summer in Chattanooga when we passed through an older neighborhood en route to a restaurant. I commented about several of the nice older cottages, whereupon my 23-year-old son quickly replied, “These will all be gentrified in two years.”

I studied history in college, so I was familiar with the phrase “landed gentry,” which was a historically privileged social class in England consisting of landowners who could live entirely from rental income. “Landed gentry” included four groups in England, including baronets, knights, esquires and gentlemen. Confused as to the relation between “gentrification” and “landed gentry,” I inquired of my son, whereupon he explained: “you know, gentrification ... when rich people push out poor people from neighborhoods.”

As a 53-year-old Southern lawyer, I traditionally have come down on the right side of the political spectrum. However, of late, and with my disgust of the two-party system, I have migrated to the middle of that spectrum (whereas my son, the recent college graduate, probably occupies an area left of me). Nonetheless, I was taken aback by his comments, and in the months that followed, I have heard, overhead or read the word “gentrification” on countless occasions. I pondered if it was a new word, or if I was simply ignorant to a historical term, or previously deaf to its usage.

Sadly, when I’ve heard the word used of late, it typically is in a contemptuous tone, as if wealthy majorities were bulldozing over the homes of minorities without adequate compensation, and as if the property owners were powerless to stop the blitzkrieg. Thus, I think some research is appropriate.

Merriam-Webster defines "gentrification" as "the process of renewal and rebuilding accompanying the influx of middle-class or affluent people into deteriorating areas that often displace poor residents."

Oddly, the traditional dictionary does not contain any citations as to the origin or historical significance of the term.

Before digging further, I want to first take a stroll down memory lane. This stroll starts with that concept historically called “white flight.” This event, real or perceived, started approximately 40-50 years ago, when courts ordered school integration and related remedial steps. Minorities, who were previously disadvantaged economically and/or academically, began to boldly advance themselves and on occasion move into or near neighborhoods or school zones typically occupied by majorities. The closed-minded began to relocate in droves; hence, the phrase “white flight.”

Now, nearly five decades later, we have the opposite migration. Namely, young, bright and open-minded individuals are moving into areas that were historically minority neighborhoods or economically depressed neighborhoods, including, in Nashville, the 12 South area, the Nations area off of 46th, East Nashville and others.

These buyers, who are now willing to pay exorbitant prices per square foot, are no longer satisfied with living in the "burbs," where every house looks like the next house and where every restaurant is a chain. No, these buyers want charm, character and, yes, diversity.

Thus, the world is shrinking and, from my hopeful optics, growing color blind. Meanwhile, minorities living in neighborhoods previously deemed economically depressed are now selling their homes at outrageous prices. Admittedly, some of these homes are rental units and the displaced occupants are merely tenants forced to move. But others are minority owners enjoying a seller's market.

Thus, I choose to view gentrification through the paradigm of hope. In fact, a recent article in The Atlantic magazine, “In Defense of Gentrification,” emphasized that the prevailing narrative regarding gentrification ignores an abundance of positive evidence. I subscribe to this view as well. Separately, however, I think the real defense of the positives of gentrification lay elsewhere. This is because I believe that when one has something that is desired by another, then the former person has an intangible commodity that on occasion can be priceless; namely, the commodity of power. And, as everyone knows, the economics of power cannot be ignored.

Phillip Byron Jones holds a bachelor's degree in history from Trevecca University and a law degree from the University of Louisville. He has practiced law in Nashville for 25 years.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1S3F8Te