Congressman Ed Perlmutter has endured some high-profile campaigns, squaring off against Ryan Frazier in a wave GOP year and family friend Joe Coors in the last election.

This time around Perlmutter faces Don Yetterberg, former chairman of the Jefferson County Republican Party.

Republicans aren’t talking about unseating Perlmutter, and the congressman’s campaign admits it’s a much more low-key race this year.

“I’ll be frank: our campaign is different than ones you’ve been hearing about in the news,” campaign manager Chris Kennedy wrote. “We aren’t flashy. We aren’t gimmicky. You won’t find any special tricks up our sleeves — though we all know Ed does a pretty nice cartwheel. If you’re looking for drama, look elsewhere. We certainly aren’t the most talked-about campaign in the state — and we’re OK with that.”

The subject line of the e-mail: “We left the glitter at home.”

Actually, the glitter’s going to other races: the matchup between Gov. John Hickenlooper and GOP challenger Bob Beauprez, Congressman Cory Gardner’s attempt to unseat U.S. Sen. Mark Udall and the 18 state Senate races.

Perlmutter first ran for the 7th District in 2006 when Republican Bob Beauprez opted to run for governor instead of seek reelection. It was a Democrat wave year and Perlmutter easily handled Rick O’Donnell, who had worked as Gov. Bill Owens’ policy director. Perlmutter’s second race was a snoozer against an unknown candidate whose own campaign T-shirt read “John Who? John Lerew!”

The race got interesting again in 2010 when Perlmutter faced Frazier, a charismatic Aurora city councilman. Although it was a tough year for Democrats, Perlmutter prevailed. Last election was even more interesting when Coors, whose family has been interwined with Perlmutter’s for years, got in the race. Perlmutter won.

There’s a reason why Republicans have found it to difficult to take out Perlmutter: He seemingly knows everybody in the district.

Here’s how Perlmutter has fared in each of his congressional races:

2012

Perlmutter, 54 percent; Coors, 41 percent

2010

Perlmutter, 53 percent; Frazier, 42 percent

2008

Perlmutter, 63 percent; Lerew, 37 percent