Sioux Falls, SD

A very busy forecast is ahead as another clipper system brings a wide variety of weather to KELOLAND, including another blizzard. Blizzard watches are now in effect for much of NE South Dakota and western MN starting Sunday morning. This watch includes Aberdeen, Watertown, Sisseton, Marshall, and Worthington.

Also, a high wind watch has been issued for many areas of KELOLAND including Rapid City, Pierre, and Sioux Falls.

Details:

A colder day is forecast in much of eastern KELOLAND today with north winds. Temperatures will slide through the teens, but eventually will rebound this evening into the 20s as a warm front develop across most of central KELOLAND.

This front will trigger areas of snow this afternoon in central and northcentral SD.

This activity will spread east through the evening. As temperatures warm, light snow may change to sleet or freezing rain in the Sioux Falls areas late tonight, but will likely stay all snow to the north toward Watertown. The amounts of snow tonight will generally be 1-3” from Sioux Falls-North late tonight into the first half of Sunday.

The new snow will be blowing around in the developing wind Sunday. Even areas not in the blizzard watch will experience hazardous travel with areas of blowing snow in many areas. Temperatures will be dropping through the day with morning highs in the 30s in southern KELOLAND.

By the end of the day Sunday, Aberdeen could be -5 to -10 with wind chills below -35. Again, strong winds and blizzard conditions are likely through Sunday night in the blizzard watch areas.

Monday looks very cold with subzero highs likely East River. Wind chill will be bad through much of the day. Tuesday looks slightly warmer, but still well below normal with single digit highs in the east and upper teens and lower 20s West River.

The other story will be a chance of accumulating snow on late Wednesday into Thursday, mainly in southern KELOLAND. The chance of snow may also increase by next weekend, a trend we’ll follow in the day ahead.