National travelling exhibit getting debut in Fort Morgan

Fort Morgan Museum Curator Brian Mack lifts up one of the interactive elements in the Anne Frank section of new travelling exhibit "The Power of Children" last Thursday. The exhibit will be on display in Fort Morgan through June 22 before moving on to another city. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

The wait is over for Fort Morgan Museum's chance to be the first museum in the country to host a national exhibit, according to Museum Curator Brian Mack.

"The Power of Children: Making a Difference" opens today at 9 a.m. in the Lower Level Gallery at Fort Morgan Library & Museum, 414 Main St., in downtown Fort Morgan.

Last Thursday and Friday, representatives from the Mid-America Arts Alliance in Kansas City, Mo., came to Fort Morgan to set up the exhibit's first stop on a nationwide tour that will run through 2020.

This powerful national exhibit features the stories of three children who played significant roles in three important parts of modern human history. It is sponsored by the National Endowment for the Humanities and includes original and replica artifacts, audio-visual elements and hands-on interactive displays.

One of the displays in "The Power of Children" is a replica of the diary Anne Frank kept as a girl while in hiding from the Nazis. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

The section about Anne Frank, a young Jewish girl who was killed in the Holocaust, includes "the Secret Annex where Anne Frank and her family spent two years in hiding," according to a news release, as well as a replica of her original diary.

Ruby Bridges was one of the first African American children to go to a previously segregated school after the U.S. Supreme Court's Brown v. Board of Education decision. The display about her story shows "the first-grade classroom in which Ruby Bridges spent an entire school year alone with her teacher Mrs. Henry," according to the release. "The Power of Children tells the story of Ruby and the pioneering role she played in the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s."

Advertisement

Ryan White came to national attention as a teenager in the 1980s at the start of the AIDS crisis. He contracted Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome through medication for hemophilia and got expelled because he had AIDS, which was not understood and scared people. "His fight to return to school and live a normal life made him famous around the world," the release stated. "The exhibit shows how Ryan chose to speak up for his rights and dedicated himself to educating the world about AIDS and its victims.

Ryan White's dresser and bookshelf are part of "The Power of Children" exhibit at Fort Morgan Library & Museum. Visitors can pull out the drawers and see some of the AIDS-afflicted teenager's favorite things. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

" The display about White shows his bedroom, with dresser drawers filled with his "treasured" things.

These three children's lives "teach us about overcoming obstacles to make a positive difference in the world," the release stated.

The exhibit will be on display through June 22, with regular hours from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m Monday, 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. Tuesday through Thursday, and 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Friday. The facility is closed on Sunday.

Fort Morgan Library & Museum staff plan on holding special programming and possibly guest speakers related to it, according to both Curator Brian Mack and Library/Museum Interim Director Chandra McCoy.

"The Power of Children" exhibit was organized by the Children's Museum of Indianapolis along with the Mid-America Arts Alliance.

Shown is one of the displays about Ryan White's life and how he fought against public fear after he contracted AIDS in the early 1980s as hemophiliac teenager. "The Power of Children" exhibit opens today in the Lower Level Gallery at Fort Morgan Library & Museum. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

Although it is about children, the exhibit does explore some serious and mature themes, the release cautioned, and it is intended for ages 8 and up.

"This exhibit encourages children and families to explore issues of isolation, fear, and prejudice throughout 20th-century history and today," the release stated.

To find out more about "The Power of Children: Making a Difference" exhibit, visit www.nehontheroad.org/.

For more about the exhibit's stop in Fort Morgan, call Brian Mack 970-542-4011.

Jenni Grubbs: jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, Twitter @JenniGrubbs or tout.com/jennigrubbs