LITTLE ROCK — A House committee on Tuesday rejected a bill to expand community-based services for the disabled and elderly and approved a bill to impose new restrictions on abortion.

The House Public Health, Welfare and Labor Committee also approved a bill to allow state employees to receive paid maternity leave.

House Bill 1749 by Rep. Josh Miller, R-Heber Springs, failed in a 9-6 vote, falling two votes short of the 11 needed to clear the 20-member panel.

Under the bill, the state Department of Human Services would have until Sept. 1 to investigate options for providing services under the Alternative Community Services Waiver Program to about 3,000 Arkansans who now are on a waiting list for the program.

No later than Sept. 15, the state would have to begin implementing a plan to eliminate the waiting list by either adopting the Community First Choice Option — a part of the federal Affordable Care Act that would increase federal Medicaid matching funds for the services — or an alternative plan developed by DHS and the governor.

Several disabled people and advocates for the disabled attended the hearing. Miller, who uses a wheelchair because of an accident, told the panel, “I think my record shows that I hate Obamacare as much as anyone, but when something is right it’s right, and when it’s wrong it’s wrong.”

DHS Director John Selig testified that Gov. Asa Hutchinson and DHS want to serve the people on the waiting list, who are people with disabilities who want to live in their communities and families trying to keep children with disabilities at home.

But Selig noted that a legislative task force on health care has just been created and said the governor “would like this to be taken up as part of the broader Medicaid reform.”

Rep. David Meeks, R-Conway, said he also believed that “it should be done through the task force.”

Miller told the committee, “These folks have been hearing ‘if’ for a long time. Let’s pass some legislation that gives them a guarantee — and not ‘if,’ but ‘when.’”

Miller said later he planned to run the bill in the committee again.

Also Tuesday, the committee gave a “do pass” recommendation to House Bill 1578 by Rep. Robin Lundstrum, R-Springdale.

Under the bill, an abortion could not be performed unless the patient has met with the doctor who is to perform the abortion at least 48 hours in advance and been informed of what the procedure will entail; the fetus’ probable age and physical characteristics; medical risks associated with the procedure and with carrying the child to term; alternatives to abortion; and available resources if the patient chooses to carry the child to term.

The bill also would require the state Health Department to develop a DVD, printed materials and a website containing information about the physical characteristics of a fetus at different stages of development, medical risks associated with abortion and available resources if a woman chooses to carry a child to term. The printed materials and DVD would have to be presented to a patient at least 48 hours before an abortion.

“I’m asking you to give women good information,” Lundstrum told the committee.

Ashley Wright, attorney for Planned Parenthood of the Heartland, testified against the bill, which she said would restrict access to abortion and would require the Health Department to publish warnings of the risk of “adverse psychological effects” of abortion, which she said is not a risk recognized by the American Psychological Association or the American Psychiatric Association.

The bill cleared the committee in a voice vote and goes next to the House.

The panel also endorsed HB 1426 by Rep. Clarke Tucker, D-Little Rock, which would allow a state employee to receive up to six consecutive weeks of paid maternity leave. The employee would be paid her regular salary, up to a cap of $500 per week.

The bill cleared the committee in a voice vote and goes to the House.