This Thursday is National Healthcare Decisions Day. I imagine the organizers deliberately chose a beautiful time of the year, when the morning light has a honeyed and hopeful slant, to think about what might be your final days on earth.

Because if you can't picture yourself helpless in a hospital bed on a warm spring day, then when can you?

According to its website, this annual observance — which went national in 2008 — exists to call attention to a very loosely coordinated movement toward more rational, intentional and even compassionate medical decisions at the end of life.

The most recent national survey I could find, from just over a year ago, put the number of people who have completed those basic forms known as "advance directives" — brief instructions about what life-extending measures you do or don't want performed on you — at 26.3 percent of the 18-and-older population. Not surprisingly, that percentage goes up with age, education and income.

But people who spend a lot of their time thinking about end-of-life issues will tell you that advance directives are just the beginning of what you need to do to prepare for very old age. You need a different document to name a health care surrogate — someone you trust to honor your wishes if you can't speak for yourself — and yet another to forestall emergency resuscitation efforts.

I know; it should be easier. People are working on that in many states, including Florida. But for now, dealing with the paperwork is better than dealing with the consequences of putting it off.

And while advance directives are just the beginning of your legal journey, Frank Kavanaugh of Punta Gorda wants you to know that they should not be the very beginning of your thought process.

"Everybody always wants to jump to the advance directives," says Kavanaugh, a a former professor of health care information science at George Washington University School of Medicine, who still teaches online in his retirement. "It's really about thinking through what it is you do or do not want at the end of your life."

And that means talking it through with the people close to you. Kavanaugh, on the national advisory board of Final Exit Network since 2007, says he often hears comments like, "I cannot get my husband to talk about dying."

His answer? You have to "force the conversation," he says. He recommends sitting down to watch a movie like "Wit" together — any movie that will make you laugh and cry about death — and following it up with a good, long discussion.

"Tell your family, 'I want you to know what I want, and I want you to honor my wishes,' and be as clear as you can," Kavanaugh advises.

And listen to their responses, he adds, before choosing the person you hope will speak for you.

"The health care surrogate is so important; you can easily pick the wrong one," he says. "It's not always a spouse; it's not always a child. It does have to be somebody who will fight for you. It can't be a wishy-washy person."

Final Exit Network is a national group of volunteers who support people seeking a peaceful death instead of a medically extended life. Kavanaugh says the group received 136 applications for assistance in the past year. California had the most, at 46, but Florida had more than any other East Coast state — 13.

"There are different kinds of cases," he says. "The ideal situation is a family where everybody is supportive, and the end of a person's life becomes a kind of celebration of the end of suffering."

On Wednesday, April 22, Kavanaugh will give a talk called "Critical Choices at the End of Life" from 10:30 a.m. to noon at Elsie Quirk Library in Englewood. Seating is limited to 99 participants. Register online by visiting the library calendar, or call 861-1209.

And current and former members of Final Exit Network in Florida will meet from 1 to 4 p.m. on Saturday, April 25, at Fruitville Library in Sarasota. Members with questions about the gathering can call Jim Chastain at 953-9539 or email him at chastainj@comcast.net.