Tossing Easter eggs from a helicopter sounds like a nice, fun, family-friendly event, until news about it goes viral and your staff can’t control a 10,000-person crowd.

Related See: Dallas Easter Pooch Parade's return to Lee Park in Oak Lawn

LifePoint Church in Plano planned to drop Easter eggs Saturday from a helicopter into a field next to the church.

“When we thought about a fun Easter event for the community, we thought tossing Easter eggs from a helicopter seemed like a good idea. We didn’t expect our event to go viral across blogs, event websites, Facebook,” the church said in a prepared statement Sunday.

However, controlling the egg-loving crowd, which the church estimated at 10,000 people, proved too much, and no eggs were delivered.

“Getting people off the egg drop field proved to be a near impossible task — given the amount of people that ignored communication and rushed the field,” pastor George Feiser said in the prepared statement.

The church received complaints that the event was unorganized. “We did our best to plan and organize, but the pure unforeseen volume of people made the entire event feel disorganized,” Feiser said. “I can assure you it would not have felt that way had there been less people.”

The Plano event was not the only Easter egg event to go awry this weekend.

A cherished Easter tradition at the Pez candy company visitor center in Orange, Conn., turned into a mess after pushy parents caused a scene at egg hunts over the weekend.

The event drew hundreds of people, some of whom ignored the rules.

“Everyone just rushed the field and took everything,” Pez general manager Shawn Peterson told WFSB-TV.

Event organizers placed more than 9,000 eggs on three fields with the intention of having staggered start times for each age group. But Pez officials say parents didn’t wait.

Peterson said the crowd was “kind of like locusts.”

Pez, in a prepared statement, apologized for “an unfortunate situation,” adding that the actions of a few turned the event into “a mess.”

“We sincerely tried our best to create a fun, free activity for everyone to enjoy,” Pez said.

People who attended the hunt took to Facebook to comment on the event, calling it “a joke” and blaming “greedy parents” for ruining it. The event ended early. No injuries were reported.

In Proctor, Vt., police were called to an overbooked Easter egg hunt Saturday at Wilson Castle after someone reported “multiple irate parents.” Organizers say more than 1,200 people turned out for the event.

Michael Cuthbertson, 34, of Newbury, Vt., turned his anger toward police, allegedly threatening them before fleeing. A foot chase ensued, and police used pepper spray to subdue him. He was charged with disorderly conduct and resisting arrest.

Cuthbertson did not immediately return a call seeking comment.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.