Conservative political commentator Matt K. Lewis is known for his hard-hitting examination of conservatism’s successes and shortcomings. His recent book, “Too Dumb to Fail: How the GOP Betrayed the Reagan Revolution to Win Elections (and How It Can Reclaim Its Conservative Roots), seems especially relevant in this season of Republican discontent, the party having been effectively commandeered by Donald Trump.

But Lewis argues that the problem long predated Trump and his supporters. He shared his insights recently about how the party lost its bearings, how conservatives can reclaim their roots, and the chance that we could be seeing the end of the GOP.

Why is the GOP broken at this point?

Even before Donald Trump emerged, conservatism was going through a bit of an identity crisis. The Reagan coalition was held together by an existential threat in the Soviet Union. That united disparate groups like social conservatives, fiscal conservatives and national security conservatives, and kept them together and got them to kind of overlook their differences. Now you basically have a coalition of people who don’t have that much in common, and frankly you couldn’t put in the same room together. What is happening now is natural, and all sorts of weird phenomena are compounding it.

Such as?

Look at Donald Trump, who I think is a unique character. Would he be able to flourish, and do what he was done before 24/7 cable news? I doubt it. Would he have been able to flourish before Twitter? I think that is questionable. What we are seeing with Trump is partly the fault of the Republican Party and partly the result of this identity crisis. But populist demagogues also need the right political environment in order to thrive. Barack Obama’s presidency, where I think he exerted a lot of executive authority and did not honor the rule of law; the rise of ISIS and the beheading of Christians; the economy and working-class whites feeling the American Dream has left them behind, are all factors contributing to the weird political environment that has given rise to Trump.

Can’t there be disparate groups without dumbing down discourse?

We can blame technology, and to some extent television and reality shows, for contributing to the dumbing down of political discourse. But there also is an inverse relationship between being an intellectual and philosophical movement and being a majority political party. Conservatism began as a thoughtful, intellectual party. Then at some point conservatives actually wanted to win elections, which requires what you would call, in the rock band world, “selling out.” Over the years conservatives started focusing more on winning elections than on policy ideas and being innovative and solutions-oriented.

Just as the nation needs to assimilate immigrants to provide energy and ideas, so do political parties. The Republican Party and conservative movement have had multiple influxes — neoconservatives, the Christian Coalition, the tea party folks — and liberals who came in after 9/11 because they felt the Left wasn’t taking radical Islam seriously enough. The truth is [conservatives] don’t have a coherent ground to establish a worldview. What has come to define conservatism are people who hate Obama or are angry. In the case of Donald Trump, it is white identity politics. The “Make America Great Again” slogan has a certain nostalgia for a bygone era and anti-intellectualism developed in the late-1970s and early 1980s, when Christian conservatives joined the Republican Party.

Let’s take the Affordable Care Act. Much of that began as a conservative think tank idea, but conservatives now oppose it. What does that say about conservatives and the Republican Party going forward?

I don’t think there is a problem with conservatives having hatched an idea and later changing their minds. But I do think there is a problem when people become afraid to have innovative ideas or solutions. There is a strain of conservatism that views government as inherently bad and, therefore, any governmental solution will eventually get you in trouble. Ironically, Marco Rubio championed immigration reform, and look where he is today. Here’s a guy who was a conservative rabble-rouser and insurgent five years ago. Today, he is considered the establishment partly because of this apostasy. I think that is problematic.

So why do Republican candidates continue to campaign as if the nation hasn’t changed since the 1950s?

Demographically speaking, all sorts of groups that Republicans do really bad with are growing in numbers, and all sorts of groups that Republicans do really well with are shrinking in numbers. Romney voters are even dying at a higher rate than Obama voters. It is entirely possible that Republicans can win Hispanics. But there are other factors. More Americans are getting college degrees. However, a college degree makes you less likely to vote Republican. More Americans are delaying marriage and children. These are huge problems for Republicans. If you are married and have kids you are more likely to vote Republican. Republicans, however, do very poorly with single women. This is why Donald Trump’s rise, long-term, is even more devastating than it otherwise would be. Trump is the candidate who doubles down on frustrated and angry working-class, white voters and does it in a way that also would likely alienate everyone else. Trump is a long-term danger for Republicans because he could redefine what it means to be a Republican or conservative in a way that only perpetuates this problem.

How do Republicans overcome this pull?

Returning to first principles. We have strayed from what I would call the conservatism that Edmund Burke espoused. A lot of things that we attribute to conservatism have nothing to do with the political philosophy. There is nothing conservative about a rebel flag or a McMansion, which are stereotypes. The party must be forward-looking. I call it modernizing without moderating. Uber is a classic example of how we should be applying conservative principles and values in the 21st century. A woman gets on her smartphone and orders Uber. She gets on the phone and orders concert tickets. That woman shouldn’t be a liberal. She obviously doesn’t like onerous government regulations that stifle creativity and the next big idea. She is not going to trust the federal government to manage her retirement fund. But when that young woman thinks of what it means to be a conservative, she thinks of some guy riding around with a rebel flag on the back of his truck. She is probably not going to vote Republican.

Sometimes, political parties break up, cease to exist and have a reordering. We could be on the cusp of that happening. There could be a Donald Trump Nationalist Populist Party and Ben Sasse/Marco Rubio cosmopolitan opportunity party. It is hard to say how this is going to shake out. On one hand, you see Trump and the direction he is going. Then in South Carolina, you have Nikki Haley, a female, Indian-American governor of South Carolina endorsing Marco Rubio, a son of immigrants. And standing alongside them is Tim Scott, an African-American, Republican senator from South Carolina. They aren’t moderates or RINOs. This should be a diverse party that appeals to a lot of people who don’t know that they are conservative yet.

William F. Buckley pushed out of the conservative movement the Ayn Randers and John Birchers. It was a service in policing the elements that would tarnish the entire conservative movement and brand. But no one has imprimatur to do that now.

There are no adults who have the statutory power to force people to do what they want to do. There are no party bosses in smoke-filled rooms. Even the speaker of the House can’t use carrots and sticks to get his will done. Only a handful of people on the right have the moral authority or gravitas, and they have abdicated that authority.

We have to take personal responsibility, to be our brother’s keeper and to hold each other personally accountable. It is a matter of humbling ourselves and putting the country and the cause first.

So how long does the GOP stay in the wilderness? The party has done well at the state level.

It seems that you have to lose three national elections before you have the come-to-Jesus moment. It could be a long time. I don’t think it is a win of ideas at the state level, but I don’t think it is to be discounted, either. Republicans have built at a stronger bench, a much stronger bench than Democrats. State attorneys general are underrated and much more influential with a Democratic president than most people realize. Republicans now have a majority of those, as well as state houses. All of which makes it even more ironic and horrible that Trump has hijacked this party and sucked up so much oxygen.

This Q&A was conducted, edited and condensed by Dallas Morning News editorial writer Jim Mitchell. Reach him at jmitchell@

dallasnews.com. Twitter: @jimmitchell18 and at @mattklewis