Like most other businesses in the country, ArcBest Corp., a trucking company based in Fort Smith, Ark., has spent considerable time considering how to manage the rising costs of healthcare and the new requirements under the Affordable Care Act. The discussions led to an insight that changed the way the carrier does business.

“We had an 84-page manual on periodic maintenance of tractors, but on people, we were lacking,” said Rich Krutsch, director of human resources, in an interview with Arkansas Business.

The company discovered that it was spending money on major medical costs because it wasn’t addressing common primary care and preventative measures for its employees. To solve the problem, ArcBest built a free clinic for its employees.

“The cost in our health care is hospitalization stays,” said Krutsch. “That is where the costs are. If we reduce that, get to the cause of those hospitalization stays, that’s where the benefit is.”

The clinic opened last month and serves approximately 1,200 non-union employees who work out of the Fort Smith area. Services are free to those employees and just $15 for their dependents. Non-union employees who work out of other areas visit the clinic when they come through headquarters. Union employees are covered under their union’s healthcare plan.

ArcBest will spend around $600,000 each year for the clinic’s service, but the company is confident it will pay off in healthier employees.

“When people have access to care and someone to be an advocate for their health, it is always going to be a better outcome. Having access to health care is always beneficial,” said Dr. Shawn Miller, the clinic’s family practitioner.

The added convenience of having a free walk-in clinic has improved the quality of life for employees. Truck drivers often overlook or put off health concerns because their schedules prevent them from making an appointment at a traditional office. When they do seek care at acute care clinics along their routes, they do not have access to the same resources or continuity of care that a primary care physician offers.

ArcBest has already seen employees come in saying that they wouldn’t have visited a doctor if not for the company clinic. As a result, those employees have been able to address issues that might have worsened or affected their job performance without treatment.

It will be a few years before company executives have the numbers to prove whether or not the clinic is good for the bottom line in the long run, but that hasn’t staunched their optimism.

“It’s a win for us, and it’s a win for our employees,” Krutsch said. “That feels good to us.”