During a speech on the floor of the Senate, Ted Cruz said that those who doubted the fight against Obamacare were similar to those who doubted the fight against the Nazis. Obamacare, known as the affordable care act, provided millions of uninsured Americans with health cover and enabled millions more to shop around for policies more easily. Criticising those hesitant to rally against Obama, Cruz said: "If you go to the 1940s, Nazi Germany. Look, we saw in Britain, Neville Chamberlain, who told the British people, 'Accept the Nazis. Yes, they'll dominate the continent of Europe but that's not our problem. Let's appease them. Why? Because it can't be done. We can't possibly stand against them.'"

Cruz's rhetoric terrified a child at one of his packed rallies in 2014, yet even this did nothing to persuade him to tone down his polemics. According to the Concord Monitor, during a passage on the Obama administration, Cruz declared: “The Obama economy is a disaster, Obamacare is a trainwreck, and the Obama-Clinton foreign policy of leading from behind – the whole world is on fire." To which a 3-year-old girl piped up from the front row to clarify: “The world is on fire?” Prompting Cruz to say: “The world is on fire. Yes! Your world is on fire. But you know what? Your mommy’s here and everyone’s here to make sure the world you grow up in is better.”

Tea party, pro-life, small government advocate Glenn Beck is one of America's most popular right-wing radio hosts, and has thrown his weight behind Ted Cruz, whom he believes can save America. "Nobody listened to me about the Caliphate," Beck told Fox News, "the time to listen to me about the Republican party is now." Beck is a former Fox News host who set up his own multi-million dollar network which broadcasts from its own version of the Oval Office and is "free from special interests". His long-running right-wing radio talk show is known for fervent political debate, with Beck famous for controversial diatribes taking aim at everyone from Barack Obama to the GOP to those supporting health systems of the Netherlands. He once compared Obama's administration to the Nazis, and once joked about poisoning leading members of the Democratic party. But now Ted Cruz appears to be "pinning his hopes" on Beck in an attempt to shore up the anti-establishment, conservative vote.

In an article asking "Is Senator Ted Cruz our new McCarthy?", the New Yorker quoted Cruz as saying of his time at Harvard Law School: "There were fewer declared Republicans in the faculty when we were there than communists. There was one Republican. But there were 12 who would say they were Marxists who believed in the communists overthrowing the United States government."

Speaking to CNN about his thoughts on climate change, Cruz said: "You know, back in the '70s - I remember the '70s, we were told there was global cooling. And everyone was told global cooling was a really big problem. And then that faded. And then we were told by Al Gore and others there was global warming and that was going to be a big problem. And then it morphed. It wasn't global warming anymore, it became climate change. And the problem with climate change is there's never been a day in the history of the world in which the climate is not changing."

Footage destined for the cutting room floor revealed the role of theatre in Cruz's campaign. Media quickly tracked down the videos and dutifully downloaded them. There are awkward, scripted interactions with family members aplenty. During an emotional moment with his own mother an aide interjects to suggest: "One more hug, hold it for longer."