In one of the myriad unexplained “special provisions” buried deep in the its version of the 2016-17 budget, the North Carolina Senate takes the remarkable and destructive step of repealing the state Fair Housing Act. As Sarah Ovaska-Few reported last week:

“The provision, which would repeal the State Fair Housing Act and shut down the state office that investigates discrimination complaints, was buried deep in the 500-plus budget (pages 390-391) that was made public and quickly passed the chamber last week. The elimination of the state anti-discrimination measures got no attention during debates when the budget passed the Republican-controlled Senate last Thursday. The move to repeal the state’s Fair Housing Act would also eliminate the N.C. Human Relations Commission, which is funded partly with federal funds and tasked with investigating and pursuing legal claims of discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or disability when it comes to housing, employment and civil rights violations.”

One can only hope that this outrageous provision gets deep-sixed in the negotiations over the final budget. And if conferees need any reminders about the continued relevance of fair housing laws in 2015 North Carolina, they might want to check out yesterday’s announcement from the good folks at Legal Aid of North Carolina detailing the terms of a settlement in a fair housing case involving demands of sex for receipt of housing vouchers brought in Scotland County.

Raleigh, July 1, 2015 – Lawyers for 16 women who alleged they were sexually harassed by two employees of Southeastern Family & Community Services (SCFS), a Scotland County nonprofit that administers a federal housing program, have settled a federal housing discrimination lawsuit against the group and its former employees, John Wesley and Eric Pender. The settlement, which also involves the U.S. Department of Justice, requires the housing agency and its former employees to pay $2.7 million, among other provisions. The case, Sellers, et al v. Southeastern Community and Family Services, Inc., et al, was filed in 2012 and is pending in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina, in Greensboro. The women were represented by Kelly Clarke, of Legal Aid of North Carolina’s Fair Housing Project; Craig Hensel, of Hensel Law PLLC in Greensboro; and Chris Brancart, of Brancart & Brancart in Loma Mar, CA. In December 2014, the U.S. Department of Justice filed a related lawsuit on behalf of the United States against SCFS, Wesley, and Pender, which was later consolidated with the earlier case. SCFS, formerly known as Four-County Community Services, receives funding from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to administer the Housing Choice (“Section 8?) Voucher program in Scotland County. The Section 8 Voucher program provides rental subsidies to low-income individuals living in private housing. John Wesley and Eric Pender, respectively, were responsible for approving Section 8 recipients and conducting inspections of their homes. According to the lawsuit, during their employment with SCFS, Wesley and Pender repeatedly demanded sex from the female plaintiffs in exchange for awarding them a Section 8 voucher, passing their homes for inspection, increasing the amount of their subsidies and moving them up on the waiting list.

Click here to read more details about the case and the settlement.