The combined cost of two common surgeries — knee and hip replacement — is twice as high in northeast Colorado as in Denver and Colorado Springs, according to a new study that puts numbers to the state’s rural health cost problem.

The Center for Improving Value in Health Care used data supplied by health insurance providers on the two procedures and found stunning variations by region of the state.

The price of the surgeries averages $78,000 for insured people in an eight-county northeast region that stretches from Larimer and Weld counties to the Kansas border, the center reported. The mountain region, which consists of 15 counties bisecting the middle of the state, had the second highest cost at $69,000.

By contrast, the cost averaged $39,000 in a nine-county Denver region and $41,000 in a three-county area that includes Colorado Springs. Still, the results were not crystal clear. Costs in southeast Colorado, also rural, were not nearly as high as the northeast.

Generally, the study’s findings are reflective of disparities in health care costs across Colorado that have not changed under the Affordable Care Act. Private health insurance premiums in the Colorado mountains have been among the nation’s highest for several years, and efforts by the state to lower those costs in rural areas have had little impact.

The CIVHC study found the commercial price for a hip and a knee replacement in northeast Colorado is more than three times the Medicare reimbursement, which averaged $23,000. That reimbursement — the amount Medicare pays for the procedures for seniors covered by the federal insurance program — varied slightly from region to region but also averaged about $23,000. CIVHC and hospital officials agree that more study is needed to understand why charges vary so much from place to place within the state.

A shortage of medical providers in rural areas may account for some of the regional variations, but the complete answer is undoubtedly complicated, said Jonathan Mathieu, CIVHC’s vice president for research and compliance.

He said such comparisons help because “the increasing cost of health care is unaffordable,” he said. “We can’t understand what we don’t measure, and we can’t fix what we don’t understand.”

At the Colorado Hospital Association, “it is widely accepted that there are significant cost variations in health care and that more progress in understanding the drivers of that variation is needed,” spokeswoman Cara Welch said. “(The association) believes that the release of the summary data by CIVHC should be the start of the conversation, not the end of it.”

Southeast Colorado, while largely rural and agricultural like the northeast, averaged $44,000 for a hip and knee — $34,000 less than in northeast Colorado. The commercial cost averaged $48,000 on the Western Slope.

The CIVHC study suggested Colorado could learn from Medicare’s comprehensive joint replacement program, which encourages hospitals, doctors and post-surgery therapists to work together from hospitalization through recovery.

In 2014, more than 24,300 Colorado residents received a new hip or knee, and the state’s over-65 population is projected to more than double in the next 15 years.

“Reducing Medicare and commercial price variation could result in significant savings now and in the future and provides a prime opportunity for Colorado to improve care and lower costs,” the study says.

While commercial costs can drive up insurance premiums, many patients have little idea of the actual charges for their surgeries.

Bob Howard, whose wife underwent knee surgery recently, took her to the Sky Ridge Medical Center south of Denver on her doctor’s recommendation. She is eligible for Medicare, and the couple pays Kaiser Permanente for supplemental insurance.

“The only cost to us so far under our plan has been $450 we paid to the hospital,” he said.

Still, he would like to see more information about variations in medical prices. “If you were going to buy a car, you’d look at several places,” he said.

The CIVHC study also reported that the median commercial price varied from $18,000 to $40,000 for a hip replacement and from $19,000 to $48,000 for a knee replacement at different Colorado hospitals, without post-surgery costs. It did not name the hospitals but expects to release that information this year.

CIVHC undertook its study after a recent national report that places such as Grand Junction had low Medicare costs but high-priced commercial claims. Generally, higher commercial prices drive higher insurance rates. The center previously reported that surgery costs vary significantly from hospital to hospital, but not by regions of the state.

David Olinger: 303-954-1498, dolinger@denverpost.com or @dolingerdp

High surgery costs

A recent study by the Center for Improving Value in Health Care found large disparities across Colorado in the combined cost of a knee and hip replacement.

Northeast ………….. $78,000

Mountain ………….. $69,000

Western Slope …….. $48,000

Southeast ………….. $44,000

Colorado Springs ….. $41,000

Denver ………………. $39,000