Update at 4:58 p.m.: Have clarified that it’s more than 7 of 10 Americans, not Texans, who can cut costs while staying in same tier, if they comparison-shop. Also have included Dallas County data, deadlines for signing up and current Texas enrollment.

Related HealthCare.gov average premiums going up in 2015

Original item at 11:30 a.m.: This fall, the federally run health insurance exchange in Texas has 15 insurance carriers participating, up from 12 last year, creating more choices and better prices, Obama administration officials announced Thursday.

On average, Texas consumers buying coverage for next year will be able to select from 31 health plans in their county — up from 25 for 2014, U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell said in a release.

In Dallas County, the number of available plans sold on the so-called health insurance marketplace increased to 64, up from 36. All 64 plans cover essential health benefits and preventive care, and don’t exclude anyone with a pre-existing condition.

More than 7 of 10 Americans now covered in the marketplace will be able to find a lower premium plan in the same metal level — bronze, silver, gold and platinum — if they return and compare products, the federal report said.

“For returning customers, it pays to shop,” a release from Burwell’s department said.

“The Health Insurance Marketplace is open for business, and Texas consumers have affordable choices for renewing their coverage and signing up for the first time,” Burwell said. “In today’s Marketplace, issuers are competing for business. With additional quality, affordable plans available, returning Texas customers may find an even better deal if they shop and save.”

Not all of the latest Obamacare news is good, however. On Wednesday, Texas insurance regulator Katrina Daniel spoke of rising prices to a GOP-dominated legislative committee, according to this (paywall protected) story in the Austin American-Statesman. Some premiums would increase as high as 9 percent, Daniel told a House panel. And a front page story in Thursday’s editions of The Wall Street Journal, citing a report from market data cruncher HealthPocket, said the Affordable Care Act is accelerating a trend toward higher deductibles and out of pocket costs for Americans.

The federal report said that in Dallas County, a 27 year old choosing the benchmark plan — the second-lowest cost silver plan — would be looking at a premium, before subsidies, of $230 a month. That’s up 3 percent from this year’s $223 a month price. Nationally, the average increase was about 2 percent. In a silver plan, the insurer pays 70 percent of costs; and the consumer, 30 percent.

Through last March, nearly 734,000 Texans enrolled in the exchange. The state insurance department said that as of July 31, the number shrank to about 602,000. Nonpayment of premiums, deaths and people moving out of state or finding other coverage may explain the decrease. Of the initially covered 734,000, about 616,000 — or 84 percent — received subsidies.

People can enroll for 2015 coverage through Feb. 15. Federal officials recommend, though, that they do so by Dec. 15 to make sure their coverage takes effect on Jan. 1.