In 93-year-old Civic Center, just north of a Greek amphitheater, a collection of 20-somethings ate a hipster’s feast with kale salad and Moroccan chicken tagine with apricots Sunday night while talking about making downtown Denver a little more hip.

“The future of Denver is in our hands,” said 26-year-old Brianna Borin, chairwoman of CityBuild, a new organization of civic-minded millennials — the nickname for people born between the late 1970s and the late ’90s.

The Downtown Denver Partnership helped launch the group in September to get young adults more involved in planning the city’s future.

“Part of what the Downtown Denver Partnership wanted was to develop the next generation of civic leaders,” said Tami Door, the partnership’s president and CEO. “They are the voice of the next generation, and they needed a platform to share their ideas.”

Sunday night’s platform was called CollaborEAT.

About 200 millennials discussed a series of questions:

What do they like best about Denver? What would they change? How can you collaborate with the community and people around you to have a positive impact on Denver? How can millennials best activate a plan for positive change?

With police nearby, the group’s focus was improving the reputation of the park, a gathering place for thugs and the homeless after dark.

“Getting people to come down here is one of the most important things we can do as a community,” said Eric Lazzari, events coordinator for the Civic Center Conservancy. “Positive activity is the best deterrent to negative activity.”

CityBuild hopes to generate ideas and enthusiasm on a range of topics at social functions. The organization’s first event was a happy hour last month.

“Millennials have creativity to offer,” said Borin, the human resources director for Denver restaurants Snooze, an AM Eatery. “They want to be engaged in their community, and there’s no other organization in Denver offering this.”

Millennials nationwide are considered key to revitalizing downtowns by living there and creating a market for fun things to do. A Brookings Institute report last year ranked Denver first in the nation for attracting residents between 25 and 34 years old.

In a 2011 report, the institute indicated that millennials can drive the relocation of corporations. “Highly educated young workers, the life’s blood of many industries, have been flocking to center cities in recent years,” according to the report.

Education is a big part of the program, said CityBuild spokeswoman Jenny Starkey, 30. Those who participate learn about their subjects before discussing their ideas, she said.

The next gathering hasn’t been planned, but “it could be something that involves arts and culture,” Starkey said.

Those interested in participating can visit the CityBuild website.

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch