Where would we be without Jon Stewart’s “The Daily Show”? Well, we’ll find out soon, because Stewart announced Tuesday he’s leaving the seat after 16 years. The comedian hasn’t announced his post-show plans yet, but we can only hope that whatever it is, it involves his style of lancing the inflated egos of the powerful with his sharp wit — and otherwise mocking the world’s absurdities that other TV news shows ignore. In his tenure at Comedy Central, Stewart was at his best when he used the cloak of comedy to land some punches on deserving targets. Here are the 10 best times Jon Stewart kept it real.

The most busted name in news

Stewart was at his best when he was attacking the innate absurdity of 24-hour news, which means that Fox was far from his only target. His jabs at CNN for being a doofy, self-serious organization that turned news into a sport came to a head during the Boston bombing aftermath. The network flubbed its “exclusive” news of an arrest which never happened.

“Oh it’s exclusive, because it was completely f - - king wrong,” he says.

Attack on Bulls - - t Mountain

Maybe no target got as much attention from Stewart as Fox News Channel. You can tell his frustrations with the network had taken a new form when he coined the term “Bulls - - t Mountain” during the 2012 election, when the network tied itself in knots to defend Mitt Romney’s chances.

“The turd containment crews have been working overtime,” he says.

Stewart versus Cramer

After the collapse of the financial market, Stewart took the financial networks to task for failing to predict the fallout. When CNBC host Jim Cramer came on the show, Stewart pinned him to the wall, using Cramer’s own clips against him. Cramer seemed humbled by the lashing; he could barely think of anything to say but to apologize.

The ObamaCare challenge

Stewart’s targets were the absurdities of politics, not any one party. That’s on display in this interview with Kathleen Sebelius, then secretary of health and human services, right after the disastrous ObamaCare rollout.

“We’re going to do a challenge,” he says, pulling a laptop onto his desk. “I’m going to try to download every movie ever made, and you’re going to try to sign up for ObamaCare, and we’ll see which happens first.”

Advocating the James Zadroga bill

It’s a rare sight to see Stewart come off the bench and actually advocate for a cause, but when he did it, he went big. His biggest chance to do that was in helping get the James Zadroga 9/11 first responders health bill passed. He called out the hypocritical Republicans who had used 9/11 as a cudgel for other issues but were not acting on this one, and had a panel of first responders on the show to talk about why it was needed. The successful effort earned him comparisons to Edward R. Murrow and Walter Cronkite.

Pizza etiquette with Donald Trump

Donald Trump has given Stewart lots of material to work with. But nothing got the comedian more worked up than when Trump took Sarah Palin to a, let’s say, less-than-representative New York pizza place, instead of getting an authentic slice. To top it off, Trump ate his meal with a fork.

“Donald Trump, why don’t you just take that fork and stick it right in New York’s eye.”

Glenn Beck parody

“It’s so ingenious it almost doesn’t make any sense whatsoever,” Stewart says while donning thick glasses and scribbling over a chalkboard in the fashion of Glenn Beck’s paranoid ramblings. This 15-minute parody is pitch-perfect as it unwinds into frantic rantings, revealing the true villain behind it all: Bert of “Sesame Street.”

Bush versus Bush

As the conflict in Iraq was ratcheting up and the first Bush term was winding down, Stewart brought on “the one man we believe who has the insight and cojones to stand up to” the president: a younger George W. Bush. The head-to-head debate was one of the best moments where Stewart and his team used the simple act of video research to reveal political hypocrisy.

The “War” on Christmas

“You might wonder why on this news channel they’re making assertions of fact about a fictional character?” Stewart asks before going off on Fox News’ opposition to the idea of a black Santa.

Post-9/11 return

It’s easy to still get choked up watching this clip now, even 14 years after the attacks. Stewart opened his first show back on the air with a heartfelt, teary-eyed and stirring message of hope. Coming from him, it means something: The view from his downtown apartment at the time used to be the Twin Towers; after the attacks, he says in the clip, it was the Statue of Liberty. It marked the change in tone for the show, too: After this episode, Stewart started focusing on political topics and guests more, which was how the show really started to shine.

“It’s light, it’s democracy,” he says. “We’ve already won. They can’t shut that down.”