Q: Is it safe to give birth while sitting in a tub of water?

A: Many midwives and mothers favor the underwater delivery method; doctors and hospitals tend to be more conservative. And scientific evidence remains scarce.

New recommendations for the nation's obstetricians say sitting in a tub of warm water can relieve a mom-to-be's pain during the early stages of labor, but actually giving birth under water has no proven benefit and may be risky.

There's no count of how many babies in the U.S. are delivered in water, but it is increasingly common for hospitals to offer birthing pools or tubs to help women relax during labor.

In the just-released joint opinion from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American Academy of Pediatrics, a distinction is made between the two uses, saying that early on immersion may be helpful, as long as some basic precautions are taken.

But there has been little scientific study of underwater delivery, along with a handful of reports over the past decade or so of near-drownings and other risks to the infant.

Although complications appear to be rare, the report urges that underwater deliveries be performed only in research studies to settle the questions.

"We want people to do more research," said ACOG committee member Dr. Aaron Caughey of Oregon Health & Science University.

Midwives at Caughey's hospital perform several dozen underwater deliveries a year and are collecting data on how mothers and babies fare, said Cathy Emeis, a certified nurse-midwife at the Oregon university. She cautioned that the numbers are small but so far don't show increased risks.

Pregnant women are required to take a special class and sign a consent form, Emeis said.

"We always acknowledge to our patients that there is not a lot of high-quality evidence that shows there's a benefit to birthing under water," she said.

The report says potential risks of underwater delivery include infection, difficulty regulating the baby's body temperature and respiratory distress if the baby inhales water.

–Lauran Neergaard, Associated Press