Pennington Health Plan chief

When Jim Pennington returned to his home state, he knew the company he planned to lead needed to do the same.

“When I came in, I felt that I was coming back to West Virginia and making a commitment to West Virginia, and I asked our board if they would support us if we moved the headquarters back to West Virginia,” he said.

The Health Plan of the Upper Ohio Valley, a private and government insurer and one of the state’s four Medicaid managed-care organizations, announced in December that it would return its main offices to Wheeling by 2017. Pennington, president and CEO of The Health Plan since 2014, said the insurer had moved its operation to nearby St. Clairsville, Ohio, 30 years before, but he and others felt that the company, which was started in West Virginia, needed to return there to move forward. The company plans to construct a 50,000-square-foot, $16 million facility in Wheeling that will house roughly 400 employees.

“It’s a West Virginia company, and has been one from day one,” Pennington said. “If you look at our objectives, our number one objective, of course, is to grow our revenue, and the best opportunity is in West Virginia with Medicare and Medicaid, and our number two objective ... is to create jobs in West Virginia.”

The Health Plan has been expanding its footprint both in West Virginia and nationally — the company has taken on new Medicaid managed care consumers following the state’s Medicaid expansion and its decision to include behavioral health services in its managed care program, has taken its self-paying employer program to a new level, and moved its Charleston office earlier this month after adding 40 new staff members.

“We’d like to continue to grow our footprint in Medicaid in West Virginia and the awareness of The Health Plan in West Virginia,” Pennington said. “We think we’re a very unique company in the sense that we have great relationships with the health-care systems in West Virginia, and we know the market here very well. We think we know the market better than folks from other places that may be trying to come into the state, and we think we’re an easier company to work with.”

Pennington, an Elkins native and West Virginia University alumnus, has spent 20 of his more than 30-year career in insurance working outside the state, but said the prospect of returning to head up an insurer like The Health Plan was a tempting challenge after all of the changes that have taken place in the insurance business after the passage if the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

“I’d never really been involved in Medicare, I’d never really been involved in Medicaid, and I’d never run an insurance company. It really intrigued me, and the stars just aligned,” he said. “I wanted to be a driver of change; that’s kind of been my background wherever I’ve been. I’ve gotten involved with organizations that have either struggled or gotten stuck, and tried to determine how to take them to the next level.”

For the Health Plan, the challenge became building a technology support system for its already strong clinical team, Pennington said, and pushing the company to offer more plans on a statewide and national level, breaking with its image as a local or regional insurer.

“You could probably have asked 10 people on the streets of Charleston what The Health Plan was a year and a half ago, and most of them would’ve said ‘I don’t know,’” Pennington said. “Now I think it’s pretty visible — we’ve done a nice job rebranding the company and remarketing it.”

The insurer has also been working to expand one of its smaller product lines, self-funded employer groups, and is now licensed to do business in every state, Pennington said.

“We have [accounts] now in 43 states. We’ve sold accounts in California, Arizona, Nevada, Texas, Kentucky, North Carolina, New York — we’ve had a pretty good year-and-a-half run on that new block of business,” he said.

The company nearly doubled its staff with the state’s behavioral health rollout and saw another 50 percent increase in staff with the Medicaid expansion, Pennington said, adding that he hopes to continue to improve care coordination as the Health Plan grows.

“We want to improve the quality of care — getting the people the right care at the right time in the right place and at the right cost,” he said.

Reach Lydia Nuzum at lydia.nuzum@wvgazettemail.com, 304-348-5189 or follow @lydianuzum on Twitter.