In some ways, the nation owes Ted Cruz a measure of gratitude for taking the wind out of the sails (however briefly) of Donald Trump, who suddenly doesn't seem as invincible as he did last week.

But we're still left with a bipartisan electoral nausea, upon realizing that 51,000 people in Iowa are still unable to recognize that the senator from Texas is more extreme and just as politically unhinged as the GOP frontrunner.

Let us count the ways:

The man who wants to run the U.S. Government is the same one who shut it down nearly three years ago, which halted critical programs and services and bled $24 billion from the national economy, making him a pariah in his own party.

If he reached the White House, Cruz would "repeal every word of Obamacare," on the basis that it is "the biggest job-killer in this country," and has forced "millions into part-time jobs." Actually, the economy has added 11 million jobs since the Affordable Care Act began, and the number of part-time workers who would rather work full-time has fallen by nearly 3 million

Cruz would be the Commander in Chief that tears up the Iran nuclear deal, and issues orders with a macho blather that makes military people cringe. The most cited example is his repeated pledge to "carpet bomb" ISIS, which our top commander had to explain is "Indiscriminate bombing, where we don't care if we are killing innocents," and is "inconsistent with our values."

President Cruz vows to abolish marriage equality, because the Supreme Court ruling that allowed it is "fundamentally illegitimate, lawless, and unconstitutional." In fact, he's calling for a Constitutional amendment that would subject Justices "to periodic judicial retention elections."

And a Cruz presidency would abolish the Internal Revenue Service, the Department of Energy, and four other federal agencies; introduce another amendment that would end birthright citizenship; defund Planned Parenthood; privatize Social Security for future retirees; and push for a 10-percent flat tax, which the nonpartisan Tax Foundation says would cost the government $768 billion over 10 years.

Some of that might appeal to 51,000 people in Iowa who occupy the theocratic wing of the Republican Party, but Cruz rarely makes sense to the public at large.

His celebration speech Monday night actually included an appeal to Reagan Democrats, yet he's running ads that condemn GOP politicians who strike deals with Democrats. He also seems to forget that by the time Reagan got to Washington, he had been a two-term governor who was willing to work with a legislature, and ultimately a drinking partner for Tip O'Neill.

He also predicted a landslide next November, an event that will "once and for all drive the liberal elites and the Washington cartel into the Potomac and out to sea, never to be seen again."

You know, unifying speech.

Give Cruz this much: He confounded the vast majority of pollsters, and he won despite his opposition to ethanol subsidies, which in Iowa takes Cruzian audacity. His ground game was superior and he rallied church pastors from all over the state to gather their flocks – and survived the Iowa Secretary of State accusing his campaign of voter intimidation to inflate the turnout.

New Hampshire is unlikely to be friendly territory for him, but he has an electoral firewall in the so-called SEC states. He'll be around for a while, and there's no telling how far he can go in this anti-establishment climate. For more information, consult your worst nightmare.

More: Recent Star-Ledger editorials.

Follow NJ.com Opinion on Twitter@NJ_Opinion. Find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.