“It will be no one thing,” he added. “When you call down the thunder, sometimes it’s not pretty.”

Conservatives say emotions over immigration run so high that the issue could be even more politically potent than the Affordable Care Act. Like many of the economic concerns that animated Tea Party supporters, immigration issues play to people’s anxieties about their financial well-being and the future. Many conservatives who have long mistrusted Mr. Obama because they think his policies will fundamentally alter America believe that his new immigration order will do just that, with millions of potential new foreign-born citizens even though the president’s action does not call for a path to citizenship.

The conundrum for the Republican Party is how to channel that energy. Turned against liberalism, as it was in the 2010 elections that ousted Democrats from power in the House of Representatives, it can deliver serious political advantage. But turned inward, as it so often has been over the last four years, it threatens to tear the party apart. In Virginia, Mr. Cantor’s ouster so emboldened activists that they have started using “to Cantor” as a shorthand for defeating establishment Republicans.

Conservatives see a moment of truth for Tea Party supporters as well. If they think Republican leaders in Congress are not doing enough to fight Mr. Obama on immigration, what is their recourse?

“What the Tea Party has struggled with doing is translating their ideological appeal into political clout,” said Laura Ingraham, the conservative author and radio host. “They don’t have a lot of political clout. They can get out the vote, yes. But I’m talking about getting individual committee chairmen and senators who can mount a real challenge to the establishment forces when required. And can you do that from within the Republican Party?”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

One challenge is that some of the party’s biggest financial backers want to see an immigration overhaul pass in Congress. And groups that helped finance the Tea Party’s rise, like Americans for Prosperity, which is supported by Charles and David Koch, will not be there to help the anti-immigration overhaul cause.

Republicans on Capitol Hill are discussing ways to challenge Mr. Obama but are struggling to find a path that does not anger the right. One would be to go to court; another, though it has been discounted by the House Appropriations Committee, would be to try to cut off funding. Other possible pressure points include refusing to confirm the president’s nominees, like Loretta E. Lynch, Mr. Obama’s pick to replace Eric H. Holder Jr. as attorney general.

Photo

But satisfying the conservative base will be difficult. Tea Party activists are not likely to sit patiently while a lawsuit works its way through the courts. And many have already expressed skepticism about the Republican leadership’s willingness to see through a fight over appropriations.

Some Kentucky Tea Party activists are already talking about a primary challenge to Representative Harold Rogers, chairman of the Appropriations Committee, who has been in office since 1981. Breitbart News, a conservative website, reported on the possible primary challenger last week. Mr. Rogers’s office has said Congress could not simply defund the president’s directive, because the agency that carries it out, Citizenship and Immigration Services, is not financed by appropriations but by the fees it generates.

“Yes, there’s a risk to overreacting, but there’s a risk to underreacting as well,” said Rich Lowry, the editor of National Review. “And I fear that’s the way the congressional leadership is leaning.”

Mr. Lowry suggested one way Congress could react. “If I were John Boehner,” he said, referring to the House speaker, “I’d say to the president: ‘Send us your State of the Union in writing. You’re not welcome in our chamber.’ ”

Other potential primary targets, Tea Party groups say, are Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, the 2012 Republican vice-presidential nominee, and even Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, who was elected initially with the help of Tea Party energy.

But that would be a tough and expensive fight. Almost all Tea Party challengers were defeated this year — with the race against Mr. Cantor the notable exception. And patience for low-reward tactics like a government shutdown is waning. As shown by how quickly even many of the staunchest conservatives on Capitol Hill tried to dismiss talk of closing the government to pressure Mr. Obama on immigration, the lessons of the 2013 shutdown are sinking in.

Still, others see a conservative populist cause that will be hard to stop. In a speech to the Heritage Foundation on Friday, Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, made the case that Mr. Obama and the titans of business who supported his immigration policy, like Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg, were ignoring the will of ordinary Americans who want good-paying jobs that are not taken by immigrants.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We are a nation, and a nation owes things to its people,” Mr. Sessions said. “And the average working truck driver is worth just as much as Mr. Zuckerberg, just as much as the Wall Street masters of the universe. And who’s representing them?”