Selected responses to a post on The Jackson Sun’s Facebook page about controversy over a Snapchat filter that attempts to honor late reggae icon Bob Marley. The filter lets users take a selfie in Snapchat and then alters the image to make the user look like Marley, complete with dreadlocks, a colorful hat and brown skin. Comments have been edited for spelling and grammar.

Join the conversation by “liking” The Jackson Sun’s Facebook page at facebook.com/JacksonSun.

Rodney N Angela Tharp: Actually it’s called Bob Marley. I didn’t see anything about it being called blackface on mine. There are all kinds of filters. Today there is one called Time Traveling Bong that changes scenes every time you open your mouth like you are blowing smoke. Why aren’t they offended by that?

Holly Bahm: This is beyond stupid! Snapchat is for fun! What’s next – the older people are going to say they are offended because one filter is old? Overweight people are gonna be offended by the ones that make you fat and spew food out of your mouth?! People need to grow up!! This world is full of pathetic whiny people who have to make everything an issue or about race! It’s pathetic!!

Donna Williams Hargrove: I’m confused – aren’t people using this app because they LIKE Bob Marley? They are not making fun of him. They want to look like him.

Cheri Johnson Spencer: Actually they created the Bob M lens to commemorate the date as it relates to smoking weed, which was part of his religion. It has nothing to do with color, but ...

Donna Williams Hargrove: That’s what I thought. I guess I thought it was being complimentary of Bob Marley but looks like the whole thing got twisted around. I’m just gonna leave it right there.

Paul Lindsey: You would think so. Offended, everybody’s offended.

Cheri Johnson Spencer: Maybe a Willie Nelson lens on April 20 next year.

Paul Lindsey: I think that’s an excellent idea.

Donna Williams Hargrove: I think Willie would like it, too!

Mary Ann Owens: What I don’t get is why people chose to be offended because they used his face instead of being offended because Snapchat has reduced Bob Marley to a poster boy for weed instead of the best reggae musician of all time. I just don’t understand people anymore. It is basically a Bob Marley mask. It’s not like people painted their face and put on some dreads.

Scott Reeves: It doesn’t even look like Bob. I’m outraged!

Brandon McManis: Is this country this sensitive? Or is it a slow news day?

Angela Oliver: I’m so sick of everyone being so offended by everything!

Brian Renfroe: This is the dumbest thing I’ve ever seen.

Jennifer Leanne Yelverton: Don’t understand why it’s bad

Cheri Johnson Spencer: They also have the “old person” lens. That’s hurtful to us old folks.

TENNCARE MISERY METER

Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey’s, House Speaker Beth Harwell’s and the Tennessee General Assembly’s lack of leadership and urgency and failure to expand TennCare under the Affordable Care Act are bringing misery to an estimated 280,000 Tennesseans who could have received health insurance, including an estimated 30,000 veterans. Meanwhile, the financial stability of hospitals is at risk, and workers could lose their jobs. It is costing Tennesseans an estimated $2.5 million per day. The loss to date is:

$2,617,500,000

Read or Share this story: http://www.jacksonsun.com/story/opinion/readers/2016/04/25/readers-react-bob-marley-filter-snapchat/83517544/