With four birdies and an eagle on his last six holes in regulation play during yesterday’s Player’s Championship Golf Tournament, Navajo golfer Rickie Fowler put himself into a playoff, and then bested everyone to win one of the game’s biggest prizes.

The win has been called “a completely insane” championship by CBS Sports; “the win heard round the world” and ‘the greatest finish in the 41-year history of The Player’s Championship,” by the PGA.

To add to the sweetness of his victory, Fowler pulled off the win in the wake of an anonymous survey in Sports Illustrated in which his peers voted him and Ian Poulter the most overrated players in the game. Though Fowler appeared bright-spirited during the tournament, Fowler’s swing coach Butch Harmon said he was seething about the survey, USA Today said.

Sergio Garcia and Kevin Kisner matched Fowler’s score, so the three of them went back out on the course for a playoff. When Kisner missed his long birdie putt on 17, Fowler nailed down his victory with a clutch putt.

Regarding Fowlers final putt of the “17th Sudden Death playoff,” CBS’s Kyle Porter said, “Fowler might as well have burned the 17th hole to the ground on Sunday. He hit three different shots inside of seven feet in the same day on the scariest hole on the course.”

Fowler spoke to NBC after the round. "My game has felt very good. I struggled a little bit the last two days, just fairways and greens. I had a lot of confidence coming out of last week. It's pretty fun. This is special."

"I'd say this is a pretty big one," Fowler said of proving himself to those who vote him overrated. "I'm happy about the week. This is one to look back on for sure."

There were several videos by the PGA covering Fowler’s win, but notably, one video shows the excitement of his win by several announcers all over the world. You can view it here:

VIDEO: Rickie Fowler birdies No. 17 to win THE PLAYERS in sudden-death playoff.

Follow ICTMN Correspondent Vincent Schilling on Twitter – Twitter.com/VinceSchilling