Watching from Chapel Hill the unfolding, very public and acrimonious debate about the future of the Conference on World Affairs is painful. I am a "newbie" as I attended my first CWA this year as a participant and wanted to add my "outsider" view to the debate. After 33 years in academia, I was entranced by CWA. From my perspective there are many wonderful and unique components to the conference. These include: free attendance; location on the university campus allowing student and faculty participation; priority given to student questions; audience participation and discussions; the talent of the participants and the rigorous selection process involving community and university; the wide variety of topics with expertise on each panel from multiple areas; great publicity for Boulder and CU; video and audio links for those who couldn't attend; involvement of the entire community as volunteers, hosts for housing and social events; the commitment of the participants (in my case a week of time and my travel expenses); and the social events each lunch and evening with faculty, community, and students which led to many connections continuing beyond the week.

Advertisement

We academics tend to talk to each other in our own departments, rarely engaging the broader community.

As a recent participant, I am not aware of all of the ins and outs or passions and personalities. But I have run very large programs at UNC and elsewhere for many, many years so am aware of common problems that come up. Just because something has worked well for many years, it doesn't mean that there shouldn't be improvements proposed. For instance, I feel that there must be more student inclusion other than the volunteers perhaps having "meet the professor" hours at the beginning or end of the day. Any change, good or bad, on a program as old as CWA will be met with resistance no matter what is proposed. Implementing change can be tricky. As a physician and academic, I was not trained in management, yet as a young professor was quickly thrust into that role managing 80-100 staff and millions of dollars. I made some mistakes initially. When I realized this, I sought advice from experts and issues were painfully resolved eventually. I can't help feeling that there has been an enormous amount of miscommunication and misstatements in Boulder which has led to hurt feelings, lines drawn, inflammatory language, unfortunate arguments in the press, and paranoia.

The most important concept is that the conference itself should continue in its present form and all of us should keep our eyes on the prize. The personalities and hurt feelings are irrelevant to that. If the U.S. can negotiate with Iran, our sworn enemy, certainly the participants, CU, CWA leadership, and the community can figure this out. Although I signed the letter from many participants, I believe that this boycott will be terrible if it continues. Yes, CWA may continue, but given the goldfish bowl of CWA, Boulder, and CU, it would be irreparable and that would be sad.

Charles Van Der Horst, M.D., is a infectious disease specialist in Chapel Hill, N.C.