Larimer Humane Society houses parrots thought to be killed in Berthoud storm

Jennifer Eyl is reunited with her dad's parrots, Bacall and Bogie, on Friday at the Larimer Humane Society after they survived a tornado that destroyed her parent's home, west of Berthoud. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Bill Eyl was sure the tornado that destroyed his home near Berthoud took his two parrots, too. His daughter Jennifer said each of the family members had a different vision of how the parrots died and how they would find them.

Yet somehow, they survived.

Bill Eyl and his wife Lorraine were on the second floor of their house on Blue Mountain Avenue when one of the tornadoes was spotted near Berthoud that Thursday, and they saw a debris cloud get close to them. It also was getting dark and had started to hail. They grabbed their 2-year-old puppy Duffy and ran down the stairs.

As soon as they did, Bill said they heard a bang and the roof fell in. Water began pouring through the ceiling, heating ducts and electrical fixtures. There was standing water in the house, he added.

Bill Eyl's parrots, Bacall and Bogie, sit in their cages on the porch of the Eyl home that was destroyed by the tornado west of Berthoud, before being taken to the Larimer Humane Society where they were housed until Eyl's daughter could pick them up. (Special to the Reporter-Herald)

Bill said first responders came quickly and told them to stay put downstairs. Lorraine put Duffy in one of the lower back bedrooms.

"He sat in the same position for the longest time," Bill said. "He was afraid to move."

And Bill said they knew they left the parrots upstairs, but they had no way to get to them. The house he and his wife built in 1972, he said, was totaled.

"We figured they were dead," he said of the birds.

The fire department first responders then smelled gas in the house when they were checking it, so the couple was evacuated to a neighbor's until a bus was sent to Berthoud to take evacuees to the Berthoud Community Center. Jennifer and her brother Eric were waiting for their parents there.

Advertisement

The next day, Eric went back to his parents' house to look through the wrecked home.

In the same room where they were kept — minus a roof — he found the two African Grey Parrots, Bacall and Bogie (named after Lauren Bacall and Humphrey Bogart) — and they were alive and in their cages.

"I was dumbfounded. I just couldn't believe it," Bill said. "Either the bars of the cages broke up the hail stones or their heads are a lot harder than we thought."

The cages and food bowls, Bill said, were filled with fiberglass insulation, debris and dirt.

Bill, a longtime dog trainer and pet store owner as well as former chemist turned chemistry teacher, has had the parrots for more than 30 years, and they are not fully tamed.

He bought them as breeding birds. They don't speak as some of his other parrots did because he wanted them to bond more with each other than their owners. But they are vocal — especially when they want attention, he said. And, Jennifer said, they have distinct personalities.

"(Animals) are a very important part of my life," Bill said. " I would be lost without them."

Eric called his friend at the Larimer Humane Society, Danielle Hastings, when he found the parrots.

Hastings was able to pick up the birds with Animal Protection and Control officers Paul Dulany and Benjamin Denogean that afternoon and transport them to the shelter.

The birds, which Hastings called the "miracle in the craziness" stayed at the shelter for five days — free of charge — and surprisingly, Hastings said, were the only animals the shelter was asked to house for tornado victims.

The shelter staff members also put together a care package for Duffy.

"It just felt really good to be able to help someone on a personal level," said Hastings, the shelter's marketing and community relations manager.

Jennifer picked up the birds on Friday, and staff members said the birds had calmed down a lot but that they were still a little stressed.

"I'm excited to have them be somewhere safe where my parents can come visit them and know they're OK," Jennifer said.

Bill said the support from the community has been overwhelming and everyone has rushed to help him and his family, which they have appreciated. He and his wife are looking for a rental now until they can rebuild a new home, which Bill said may not be for another year.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.