SARASOTA — Breon Brannic, 5, is quiet and serious as he lines up at the starting gate at a recent Sarasota BMX clinic. He wears black shoes, a special racing suit and rarely takes his helmet off as he hops on his bike, staring forward, always ready.

“He’s just getting the balance down,” mom Sandy, of Bradenton, says. “We used to have to stand behind him and hold him.” Breon may compete as a five and under novice now, but not too long ago he started practicing with the Sarasota BMX club with a "strider," meaning he used a bike without pedals that he propelled with his feet, teaching him balance and giving him the confidence to ride.

"Soon, we bought him a pedal bike," Sandy Brannic said.

This year, Sarasota BMX will host its fourth STRIDER South East Invitational for riders between 18 months and five years of age on Oct. 3 and 4.

Also on the agenda?

- A free clinic for the Striders at 2 p.m. Oct. 3. Carley Young, a ‘Ride Like A Girl’ pro, will teach from 4 p.m. to 5 p.m.

- An exhibition race for riders 6-years old to adults on 16” and 20” Strider bikes. The entry fee will be $10 with all proceeds going to Suncoast Charities.

- An invitation for young athletes with special needs to participate in riding 16” and 20” inch Strider Bikes on Saturday.

Registration Times

- 2 p.m. to 6 p.m. on Friday, Oct. 3

- 8 a.m. to 9 a.m. on Saturday, Oct. 4

Practice Times

- 5 p.m. to 6 p.m. on Friday, Oct. 3

- 8 a.m. to 9 a.m. on Saturday, Oct. 4

The races will start at 10 a.m. immediately after the Opening Ceremonies.

Cost

The entry fee for the two-day event will be $25. Each rider receives a free clinic, practice, race, racing jersey, custom number plate, backpack, medal or trophy, and goodies. Riders must be registered before getting on the track, according to a release.

There is free admission for all spectators and parents on both days. The Strider Track will be open both days for riding and free to any toddler wishing to test ride a Strider.

Children do not have to be a member in order to participate. Parents need to sign a waiver. All children will be required to wear helmets, long sleeve shirt, long pants or elbow/knee pads and closed-toed shoes (no sandals) for their protection. The track will have loaner bikes and helmets available. Any balance bike can be used but must have a maximum 12 inch tire.

Heats

The riders will be divided into heats where 2, 3, 4, and 5-year olds race against kids their own age. Riders will race the age they are on Oct 4. Each rider will race in two motos and with no more than 8 riders on the gate. Riders will then be eliminated to A, B, and C mains for determining the top 8 riders. The riders will all receive their awards during a finish line podium ceremony.

Sponsors

Kid Dynamite, Riderz Ready, TB Trophies, Sarasota County Sports Commission, Sarasota County Parks and Recreation Department, Suncoast Charities for Children and USA BMX.

For More Information

www.sarasotabmx.net

facebook.com/sarasotabmx

Erma Miller, Sarasota BMX, 614.496.3999