After missing the health-insurance enrollment deadline last year, 30-year-old Sandra Rodriguez sat hunched alongside a state assister at the Portland Family Health Center this week, weighing premiums, deductibles and coverage on kynect, Kentucky's state health exchange.

The restaurant worker, who lives on a tight budget but wants to start a family, said this time she'll make the deadline and finally have health insurance, hopefully with a subsidy to make it affordable.

"When I go to the emergency room now, it's very expensive," she said.

Although the second open enrollment period on Kentucky's Obamacare health exchange continues through Feb. 15, residents must sign up for coverage by Dec. 15 to be covered when the new year begins — a deadline that's just days away.

Already, nearly 18,000 new applications have been filed since open enrollment began Nov. 15, and state officials say they expect sign-ups to increase in the coming days.

"Now is the time to go take a look at the plans that are available for you and your family," Gov. Steve Beshear said in a statement this week.

This year, the penalty for not having coverage in 2015 will rise from $95 per adult, or 1 percent of household income, to $325 per adult or 2 percent of household income, whichever is greater.

State officials have estimated that around 290,000 Kentuckians are potentially eligible for subsidies with the Obamacare plans.

More detailed figures on sign-ups, age breakdowns and which types of plans are proving most popular one month into the enrollment are expected to be released next week.

A full month into the sign-up period last year, more than 32,000 people had enrolled, but only 15 percent purchased a private plan through the exchange. The remaining 85 percent were enrolled in Medicaid, which was newly expanded in Kentucky last year but now accepts sign-ups year round.

That same time frame is nearing once again, but officials said they have not determined how many of the nearly 18,000 applications were for Medicaid and how many were for private plans.

By Tuesday of this week, kynect had handled 116,000 preliminary screenings. Last year, there were 318,000 such screenings at the full one-month mark.

"I think it will really pick up momentum" as the deadlines near, said Gwenda Bond, a spokeswoman for the heath benefits exchange.

In addition to new people signing up who are currently uninsured, about 80,000 individuals who purchased private plans last year will be automatically re-enrolled. However, because premium and subsidy amounts are changing in many plans — in some cases increasing — officials encourage people to re-examine offerings from a larger pool of providers this year.

"You could get a bigger subsidy, a lower monthly cost, or more network options if you shop again," according to Carrie Banahan, executive director of kynect.

Subsides are based on income, but are capped at $46,680 for individuals and $95,400 for a family of four. For example, a 35-year-old single parent of two who earns $35,000 per year could get a monthly subsidy of $240; a retired couple with $50,000 in income could get a $526 monthly subsidy.

State health officials said they expected many of the most needy had likely already signed up last year, when more than 521,000 Kentuckians enrolled — mostly in Medicaid.

About 75 percent of them reported they were not previously insured, according to the state, and one poll has found that Kentucky's uninsured rate fell from 20.4 percent in 2013 to 11.9 percent midway through 2014.

At the Family Health Center in Portland, where "kynectors" aid sign ups, things haven't been as busy as last year, when on some days people were lined up outside the door before the center opened.

Again this year, Kentucky's online health exchange has largely avoided problems that last year plagued the federal Healthcare.Gov, which Indiana and many other state rely upon.

But while Kentucky is often held up as a national model, some argue it hasn't been problem free. Louisville resident Maggie Noffke, for example, said poor coordination between her insurer and kynect contributed to unexpected policy cancellations and double billing issues that she's still working to straighten out, she said. "It's been an ordeal," she said.

This year, the exchange has enacted changes to improve service, including adding staff to reduce wait times at call centers, creating an app, opening a store in the Fayette Mall in Lexington and making it easier to compare plans and subsides.

For those who miss the Dec. 15 deadline and sign up between Dec. 16-Jan. 15, their coverage would have a Feb. 1 effective date. Those who enroll after Jan. 15 would have a March 1 effective date.

To examine kynect options, visit https://kynect.ky.gov or call 1-855-4kynect (459-6328)

Reach Chris Kenning at (502) 582-4697. Follow him on Twitter at ckenning_cj.

For help

To examine kynect options, visit https://kynect.ky.gov or call 1-855-4kynect (459-6328) To find the location and hours of a state office for assistance with your application, visit https://kynect.ky.gov/General/LocateAnOffice and type in your county or zip code.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1AfFpYP