PUNE, India, Mar 16, 2016 (PR Newswire Europe via COMTEX) -- PUNE, India, March 16, 2016 /PRNewswire/ --

According to a new market research "Patient Engagement Solutions Market by Component (Hardware, Software & Services), Delivery mode (On-Premise, Web & Cloud), End User (Provider & Payer), Applications (Home Health, Financial Health), Therapeutic Area - Global Forecast to 2020", published by MarketsandMarkets, the report studies the global Patient Engagement Solutions Market over the forecast period of 2015 to 2020. This market is expected to reach USD 16.39 Billion by 2020 from USD 6.68 Billion in 2015, at a CAGR of 19.7%.

<end_newscom>

Browse 95 Tables and 34 Figures spread through 231 Pages and in-depth TOC on "Patient Engagement Solutions Market" http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/patient-engagement-solutions-market-105975994.html

Early buyers will receive 10% customization on this report.

In this report, the global Patient Engagement Solutions Market is segmented on the basis of component, delivery mode, end user, application, therapeutic area, and region.

On the basis of component, the Patient Engagement Solutions Market is categorized into hardware, software, and services. The software solutions segment is estimated to account for the largest share of the global Patient Engagement Solutions Market in 2015. However, the services segment is expected to witness the highest growth rate during the forecast period.

On the basis of delivery mode, the Patient Engagement Solutions Market is segmented into web-based, cloud-based, and on-premise solutions. The cloud-based solutions segment is expected to command the largest share of the global Patient Engagement Solutions Market in 2015. However, the market for cloud-based solutions is expected to witness the highest growth rate, owing to the higher flexibility, scalability, and affordability offered by these solutions.

The Patient Engagement Solutions Market has been further segmented on the basis of end users into providers, payers, individual users, and other end users (including employer groups, government bodies, and pharmaceutical companies). The healthcare providers segment is expected to account for the largest share of the Patient Engagement Solutions Market in 2015 and is poised to witness the highest growth rate during the forecast period. This can be attributed to the implementation of government mandates such as the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) and meeting the requirements of Meaningful Use (MU) in the U.S.

On the basis of applications, the market is segmented into health management, social and behavioral management, home health management, and financial management. The health management segment is expected to command the largest share of the global Patient Engagement Solutions Market in 2015.

On the basis of therapeutic area, the Patient Engagement Solutions Market has been segmented into chronic diseases, women's health, fitness, and others. The chronic diseases segment is the fastest-growing segment and is expected to command the largest share of the global Patient Engagement Solutions Market in 2015.

Geographically, the global Patient Engagement Solutions Market is divided into four major regions, namely, North America, Europe, Asia, and the Rest of the World (RoW). North America is expected to account for the largest market share in 2015, followed by Europe and Asia.

Talk to Our Expert: http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/speaktoanalyst.asp?id=105975994

As compared to other healthcare IT markets, the Patient Engagement Solutions Market is growing at a double-digit CAGR. Europe is the second-largest market, growing at a higher CAGR as compared to that of North America. The Asian market is relatively new; factors such as increasing government initiatives for HCIT adoption as well as growth of the medical tourism sector in the region are contributing to the growth of this market.

McKesson Corporation (U.S.), Allscripts Healthcare Solutions, Inc. (U.S.), Phytel, Inc. (U.S.), athenahealth, Inc. (U.S.), Orion Health Ltd. (New Zealand), Cerner Corporation (U.S.), GetWellNetwork, Inc. (U.S.), Lincor Solutions Ltd. (U.S.), YourCareUniverse, Inc. (U.S.), WelVU, Inc. (U.S.), Get Real Health (U.S.), Oneview Healthcare (U.S.), PatientPoint (U.S.), and Medecision, Inc. (U.S.) are the key players in the global Patient Engagement Solutions Market.

Browse Related Reports:

Healthcare IT Market by Product (EHR, RIS, PACS, VNA, CPOE, mHealth, Telehealth, Healthcare analytics, Supply Chain Management, Revenue Cycle Management, CRM, Claims Management, Fraud Management) by End User (Provider, Payer) - Global Forecast to 2020.

http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/healthcare-it-252.html

Population Health Management Market by Component (Software, Services), by Delivery Mode (Web-based, Cloud-based), by End-User (Healthcare Providers, Healthcare Payers, Employer Groups) - Analysis & Global Forecasts to 2020. http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/population-health-management-market-263411936.html

About MarketsandMarkets:

MarketsandMarkets is world's No. 2 firm in terms of annually published premium market research reports. Serving 1700 global fortune enterprises with more than 1200 premium studies in a year, M&M is catering to multitude of clients across 8 different industrial verticals. We specialize in consulting assignments and business research across high growth markets, cutting edge technologies and newer applications. Our 850 fulltime analyst and SMEs at MarketsandMarkets are tracking global high growth markets following the "Growth Engagement Model - GEM". The GEM aims at proactive collaboration with the clients to identify new opportunities, identify most important customers, write "Attack, avoid and defend" strategies, identify sources of incremental revenues for both the company and its competitors.

M&M's flagship competitive intelligence and market research platform, "RT" connects over 200,000 markets and entire value chains for deeper understanding of the unmet insights along with market sizing and forecasts of niche markets. The new included chapters on Methodology and Benchmarking presented with high quality analytical infographics in our reports gives complete visibility of how the numbers have been arrived and defend the accuracy of the numbers.

We at MarketsandMarkets are inspired to help our clients grow by providing apt business insight with our huge market intelligence repository.

Contact: Mr. Rohan Unit No. 802, 8th Floor Tower - 7, Magarpatta City SEZ Hadapsar, Pune - 411013 Maharashtra, India Tel: +1-888-6006-441 Email: sales@marketsandmarkets.com Visit MarketsandMarkets Blog @ http://mnmblog.org/market-research/healthcare/healthcareit Connect with us on LinkedIn @http://www.linkedin.com/company/marketsandmarkets

Photo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160303/792302

Copyright (C) 2016 PR Newswire Europe

More from MarketWatch