An undated aerial handout photo shows the National Security Agency (NSA) headquarters building in Fort Meade, Maryland. REUTERS/NSA/Handout via Reuters (UNITED STATES - Tags: POLITICS) THIS IMAGE HAS BEEN SUPPLIED BY A THIRD PARTY. IT IS DISTRIBUTED, EXACTLY AS RECEIVED BY REUTERS, AS A SERVICE TO CLIENTS. FOR EDITORIAL USE ONLY. NOT FOR SALE FOR MARKETING OR ADVERTISING CAMPAIGNS - RTX10DXS

4022099

“If you like your plan you can keep it,” President Obama once said. He now says, “I am sorry that they are finding themselves in this situation based on assurances they got from me.”

Senator Ron Wyden (D-OR) once asked Director of Intelligence James Clapper, “Does the NSA collect any type of data at all on millions or hundreds of millions of Americans?” Clapper replied “No.” He now says, “I responded in what I thought was the most truthful, or least untruthful manner…”

Government lies. It is incompetent and inefficient. It cheats. It destroys. It deceives. Conservatives know this. Our entire philosophy is dedicated to that knowledge.

The rollout of the Affordable Care Act has taught millions this lesson in spectacular fashion. Americans have seen their plans dropped and premiums doubled or tripled. Healthcare.gov is a joke. The President’s approval ratings have plummeted. The Washington Post’s Marc Thiessen says it’s about to get worse: “5.5 million. That is how many people the administration needs to sign up in just 23 days because Obamacare drove them out of their health-care plans. That’s some 240,000 sign-ups every single day, just to break even.”

The revelation in June that the National Security Agency was collecting the phone data of every American outraged millions. Recently we learned that the Guardian newspaper, responsible for publishing Snowden’s leaks, claims to have only released 1 percent of the information he gave them. The original leak about NSA collecting phone metadata was only the starting point in painting a picture of an agency completely unbound in its surveillance power.

On Sunday, we learned that NSA officials are so worried about what Snowden might yet reveal, there is talk of amnesty in exchange for him returning his documents.

As with Obamacare, the more we have learned about the NSA’s activities, the worse it gets. Both the ACA and NSA have quickly become exemplary models of how abhorrently the government mismanages its commitments.

Perhaps no one is more fed up than young Americans. A Harvard poll released this month showed that among millennials, 57 percent disapproved of Obamacare. National Journal also reported: “In addition to health care, domestic spying is an issue that puts Obama on the wrong side of the rising generation … strong majorities of 18-to-29-year-olds oppose the government collecting information from social networks, Web-browsing histories, email, GPS locations, telephone calls, and text messages…”

Added National Journal: “A majority of Americans under age 25 — the youngest millennials — would favor throwing Obama out of office.”

Obamacare is not the same thing as national security. We do not have to have government healthcare but we certainly do need intelligence and spying for security purposes. Still, it is not an accident that the Obamacare mess is mirrored by an out-of-control NSA. Both are massive government bureaucracies and behave as such. Both abuse their power and the people they allegedly serve.

Americans deserve to know the truth about the damage caused by the ACA and NSA. With Obamacare, we continue to see this monstrosity before us, with each passing, painful day.