Highlight: Intensity increased. Music blared. Language made sailors blush. The amped-up Broncos practice Tuesday created energy, and attitude. Running back Brennan Clay has become a marked man, attracting the wrath of veterans. One day after trash-talking defensive back Quinton Carter, Clay went toe-to-toe with safety Duke Ihenacho. Ihenacho attempted to choke Clay with an arm bar to the throat, and the players stayed engaged for several seconds as it spilled over onto the sideline and into the the wall of the Dove Valley headquarters.

“Sometimes they pick on a rookie, and harp on it. I came out there today to make a point that us rookies are tired of getting pushed around,” said Clay, who’s newfound assertiveness has produced his two best practices of camp as he claws for a roster spot. “It’s dog eat dog out there.”

Lowlight: Chippy works at practice. It is welcomed the final week of training camp. Reckless doesn’t fit. Moments after Clay and Ihenacho exchanged barbs, linebacker Lerentee McCray and reserve tackle Paul Cornick scuffled. Terrance Knighton jumped, literally, into the fray as it became briefly out of control. After another questionable hit on a drill, coach John Fox stopped practice. His message: be aggressive, but smart. The Broncos want a more physical team, but not one that undermines itself with stupid penalties.

“We had a couple of things happen that we have to clean up. Guys respect each other out here. Guys are little feisty,” said tight end Jacob Tamme, who helped break up the Clay-Ihenacho tussle. “There’s a healthy balance. You can’t keep fighting your own guys. It’s not a big deal. Everything will be fine.”

Position battle: The personnel matches the message. The Broncos want to be tougher, and their defensive line relishes delivering on that promise. The group is deeper than a year ago, especially if Kevin Vickerson can return to full strength after his hip injury. Terrance Knighton leads the grunts, and Derek Wolfe and Malik Jackson provide versatility as ends who can move into tackle spots on passing downs. Jackson’s athleticism intrigues scouts. He picked off a pass on Monday that he batted in the air. The emergence of Marvin Austin, who believes he’s finally healthy after back issues sabotaged his career, has been one of the feel-good stories this month. A trusted rotation is critical to create better matchups. The Seahawks provided a template, employing completely different playing time for their defensive line in the Super Bowl compared to the NFC championship game.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck