SAN DIEGO, California -- Tonight, the sidewalk from the Hilton San Diego Bayfront to the Embarcadero Marina Park South will come to life with the spirits of the dead.

It’s too early for Halloween and almost a month before Dia de Los Muertos, yet attendees of the United States Conference on AIDS (USCA) will make the walk amid festive, costumed dancers to celebrate those they’ve lost to AIDS.

The procession is free and open to the public, starting at 6 pm on the sidewalk adjacent to the north side of the Hilton San Diego Bayfront (1 Park Blvd., San Diego, CA 92101). From there, participants will march to the Embarcadero Marina Park South (1 Marina Park Way, San Diego, CA 92101) where community members and HIV/AIDS service organizations display ofrendas, or altars, to the spirits of loved ones. Community members are invited to bring memorabilia and offerings to add to the altars, for loved ones who were lost to AIDS.

“The altar display is a community effort,” said Terry Cunningham, USCA 2014 Host Committee co-chair and former chief of the HIV, STD and Hepatitis Branch of Public Health Services at the County of San Diego. “It is a chance for us to remember all of those we’ve lost to AIDS and symbolizes the community effort it will take to be the generation to end HIV.”

After the procession ends and marchers have had a chance to view the altar displays, participants are invited to enjoy free traditional Mexican food and non-alcoholic beverages. Alcohol will be available for purchase with a valid photo ID. The celebration will continue until 9 pm with the Manny Cepeda Orchestra playing live.

About the USCA 2014 Host Committee

The USCA 2014 Host Committee is made up of a collaboration of community members and HIV/AIDS service providers in and around San Diego County. It is committed to highlighting the cross-border issues unique to the HIV/AIDS epidemic in San Diego and Tijuana. Through its efforts with USCA 2014, the committee brings the HIV/AIDS community together to showcase partnerships among service providers and agencies that are working together to be the generation that ends HIV/AIDS in San Diego.

About USCA 2014

The 18th annual United States Conference on AIDS (USCA) continues through Sunday, Oct. 5, at the Hilton San Diego Bayfront Hotel in San Diego. For nearly two decades, USCA has sought “to increase the strength and diversity of the community-based response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic through education, training, new partnerships, collaboration and networking.

In 2014, USCA will continue to highlight how the Affordable Care Act can help us draw even closer to ending the epidemic, while focusing on the challenges we still have to overcome to achieve this vision.

USCA is the largest AIDS-related gathering in the U.S., bringing together thousands of workers from all fronts of the HIV/AIDS epidemic – from case managers and physicians, to public health workers and advocates, people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHAs) and policy-makers – to build national support networks, exchange the latest information, and learn cutting-edge tools to address the challenges of HIV/AIDS.