Families of the 12 victims murdered at an Aurora, Colorado movie theatre, gathered in bitter-sweet victory today as murderer John Holmes was found guilty of 24 counts of first-degree murder. The massacre took place in 2012 when Holmes opened fire in a theater filled with people who came to see The Dark Knight Rises. 12 people were killed in the shooting with many others severely injured and traumatized from the attack. Now, almost three whole years later, Holmes has been convicted for his crime.

The emotional responses were varied in the courtroom, but overall relief was the emotion that seemingly settled in the hearts of the massacre’s survivors and families of those killed. District Judge Carlos Samour slowly read all 165 verdicts to the courtroom; every single verdict a solid “guilty”. The father of Alex Teves, one of the victims killed during the massacre July 20, 2012, low-fived a deputy sheriff in a celebratory action after hearing the verdicts. Arapahoe County District Attorney George Brauchler, lowered his face into his hands at the conviction, seemingly glad to have this almost three-year trial over and done with. Holmes, a murderer of 12 people, was found guilty of 24 counts of first-degree murder for the Colorado theater massacre.

Jansen Young, one of the survivors of the movie theaters attack, was protected from Holmes’ bullets by her boyfriend Jonathon Blunk. Blunk was unfortunately killed during the massacre in trying to save Young. Young told the media she was a bit confused as to how she was going to feel walking into the courtroom, but after the verdicts were in, she simply felt relief. The Colorado theater murderer, John Holmes, was found guilty of all 24 counts of murder in the first degree. Young added that she was looking for Holmes parents after the verdict being that in the midst of all the chaos and bittersweet celebration, they too lost their son.

By Danyol Jaye

Sources:

NBC News- ‘So Relieved’: Survivors, Loved Ones Welcome James Holmes Convictions

Feature Photo Courtesy of Sarah Ackerman’s Flickr Page- Creative Commons License

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr