The state budget crisis is now being felt in the area of health care in a big way.

If the legislature can't come up with additional funding, there has been talk of 25-percent cuts to Medicaid reimbursements.

The two best legislative options to prevent that situation appear to be a new state cigarette tax or the Medicaid Rebalancing Act.

RELATED HEADLINE

The cigarette tax went before a legislative committee Monday afternoon.

The Rebalancing Act is far more controversial because it would increase state medical funds with coverage through Obamacare. That is a hot-button issue for many Oklahoma conservatives who have fought that avenue of funding for years.

They say federal health dollars come with strings attached and probably much greater costs to the state in the future.

Ronda Vuillemont-Smith is the founder and president of the conservative Tulsa 9-12 Project. She doesn't trust Washington and all the rhetoric she's hearing about health cuts.

"More fear mongering," said Vuillemont-Smith. "It's not going to be that much. It may be 5 percent, but they're blowing it up and they're making it seem worse."

The opponents of more federal involvement argue that state lawmakers need to find workable cuts and live with the budget at hand, but people in the health care field are calling for more funds in any form.

They say the Oklahomans who are most in need will be the ones who suffer.

At the Green Country Care Center in north Tulsa, 95 of 105 residents are on Medicaid.

Administrator Joanna Birkenholtz said they won't have a place to live if there's a major Medicaid cut from the state.

She said as it is their operations aren't profitable, so lawmakers need to find the dollars.

"What are these families going to do? They can't take on the burden. They're working two jobs to make their own ends meet. So where's mom gonna go," said Birkenholtz.

Her facility is secured because all the patients have Alzheimer's or dementia.

She added that most couldn't be safely handled by their families, so a nursing home is their only option.

Some of the employees of the Green Country Care Center have offered to take pay cuts or fewer hours to help out. But Birkenholtz says the legislature must do the right thing and solve the problem.