By Brad Avakian

Two years ago, I testified in favor of U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin's (D-Iowa) proposal to raise the federal minimum wage and index it to inflation. I believed then — as I do now — that Oregon's system of calculating yearly wage increases should serve as a model for Congress. But Oregon shouldn't wait for Congress to act. We should raise our minimum wage to a more realistic level so that no full-time worker has to raise a family in poverty.

When the Legislature gets back in February, it should increase our state's wage floor to at least above the poverty line for a family of four. Keep wages tied to the Consumer Price Index, but give it a reset so families can stay afloat. That would address the central problem: that earning less than $20,000 is not enough for families to keep pace with the rising cost of housing, child care and other essentials.

Portland is experiencing an acute crisis in housing costs, but it's a problem that I see in many parts of the state. I agree that we need to increase the supply of affordable places to live, but we shouldn't have to choose between taking action on housing and fair wages.

We should do both. Now.

As I told the U.S. Senate two years ago, Oregon's law is guided by the understanding that increasing workers' purchasing power leads to a healthier economy. Virtually every dime that comes through a higher minimum wage is reinvested in the local economy when workers buy groceries, gas, clothes, school supplies and other essentials. It's the right thing to do for workers and Oregon's economy.

Just days ago, we saw New Seasons Market call for a higher minimum wage while announcing a big increase for its own workforce. Other local businesses fighting for a higher minimum wage include Better World Club, Chef's Table, FMYI, Grain & Gristle, Grand Central Bakery, HOTLIPS Pizza and Neil Kelly.

Not long ago, I was in Bend visiting a soup kitchen staffed by volunteers from a local church — a great example of people pulling together in tough times. I asked them about whom they serve. Their answer is part of what you'd expect: veterans, single parents, some struggling with addiction or mental health issues. But on the third week of the month, said the volunteer, that's when the Walmart workers start showing up.

We need to do better for these workers and provide a level playing field for all the businesses already doing right by their workforce.

Listening to Pope Francis, I was struck by his call that the fight against poverty and hunger must be fought constantly and on many fronts.

Yes, we need to create a better environment for family wage jobs — starting with sustained investment in skills training for workers and students. Yes, we need workplaces in which workers are respected, treated fairly and paid every dollar they've earned. But the minimum wage is also a powerful public policy tool for the common good — and we should use it.

•

Brad Avakian serves as Oregon's commissioner of labor and industries, where he oversees the state's minimum wage and its enforcement.