Kerry urges action on climate change in name of food security

With help from Helena Bottemiller Evich and Jenny Hopkinson

KERRY URGES ACTION ON CLIMATE IN NAME OF FOOD SECURITY: Secretary of State John Kerry called on world leaders to take action to address climate change to promote global food security in a speech at the Milan Expo on Saturday.

Story Continued Below

“In order to meet the food security and climate challenges at the same time, we have to be creative,” Kerry said. “We have to be flexible. We have to think big, and we have to be committed to pursuing multiple approaches at the same time.”

Kerry called on world leaders to come together and be “on the same page” for the United Nations Climate Conference in Paris to push “for an ambitious, durable, and inclusive agreement that will finally put us on the path towards a global clean-energy future.” He cited reducing food waste and using natural resources, including fisheries, more wisely, as key and called for increasing agriculture productivity “in a way that’s sustainable over time.” He also argued that food systems should reduce greenhouse emissions and be able to adapt to changes in climate.

“Together, we can harness our energy in order to cultivate food and feed the mouths of the world, and in the process we will protect the food security of billions of people on this planet,” he added. The full text of Kerry’s speech is here: 1.usa.gov/1QJHQex

HAPPY MONDAY, OCT. 19! Welcome to Morning Ag, where your host listened with interest to this story about the history of some of America’s greatest African American cooks and chefs. Check it out here: http://n.pr/1LYeyot. You know the deal: news, tips? Send them to cpurdy@politico.com and @chasepurdy. Follow the whole team @Morning_Ag.

SMALL MEAT PRODUCERS GO TO CONGRESS OVER SLAUGHTER RULES: Small meat producers are looking to Washington to make it easier to do business at the local level, NPR reports. They want to capitalize on trends that show many consumers are willing to shell out more money for meat produced close to home. But there aren’t enough government-regulated slaughterhouses to accommodate the demand in a cost-effective way, and the alternatives, so-called custom slaughter houses, restrict which cuts of meat producers can sell, the story says. That can mean long drives for farmers to get their meat to slaughterhouses, upping the overall production costs.

That’s where legislation introduced by Rep. Thomas Massie (R-Ky.), a producer of grass-fed beef, comes in. The bill, dubbed the Processing Revival and Intrastate Meat Exemption Act, would clear the way for farmers to get meat processed at custom slaughterhouses that are occasionally inspected by the USDA but don’t have meat inspectors providing daily oversight. It's legal for farmers to use custom slaughterhouses to cut animals into frozen quarters and halves, but these large quantities cannot be labeled and sold commercially, the story states. Massie’s bill would allow farmers to do so within state lines. Read the bill here: http://bit.ly/1LXtsLA. Check out the full NPR story here: http://n.pr/1NiWAAx.

NYC TO RELEASE UPDATE ON SODIUM PROGRESS SOON: Has New York City’s sodium reduction initiative worked? We may soon have an idea: The New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene is planning to make some announcements later this fall about how the city is doing at meeting its sodium reduction goals, Sonia Angell, deputy commissioner, said Friday at a New York Academy of Sciences' obesity policy conference.

In 2008, the city launched the National Salt Reduction Initiative, a network of more than 90 state and local health groups that worked with the packaged food and restaurant industries to set voluntary sodium reduction targets for more than 80 food categories. Close to 30 companies, including Mars, Campbell Soup Company, Kraft and Starbucks, committed to the targets, which took effect in 2012 and 2014.

One of the key ways city health officials are measuring the impact of the initiative is by looking at sodium intake through a 24-hour urinary sodium analysis. When the city measured its baseline in 2010, it found consumption by New Yorkers overall was pretty close to the national average — at about 3,240 milligrams of sodium a day — but African-American residents had significantly higher sodium intake, Angell said.

The hope is that the city's sodium reduction efforts will help close that gap, she said.

NYC is about to kick its sodium strategy up a notch: Starting Dec. 1, the city will require warning symbols be placed next to menu items at chain restaurants if the dishes contain more than 2,300 milligrams of sodium. See more about that here: http://on.nyc.gov/1ZP6mBb.

REVISITING THE NY SODA WARS: While we’re here: A behind-the-scenes account of the ‘soda wars’ in New York City has been published by Tom Farley, former commissioner of the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. Farley has written a book called “Saving Gotham: A Billionaire Mayor, Activist Doctors, and The Fight for Eight Million Lives,” an excerpt of which was just published in Salon, here: bit.ly/1LElTO8

When New York was mulling a soda tax “the serious combat took place in back rooms,” writes Farley. “In New York State in 2009, the American Beverage Association had increased its donations to state legislators from nothing to $900,000, and the two soda companies increased their state lobbying spending to $3 million. ... In 2010 ... the companies went into higher gear. Coke and Pepsi sent workers to meet with the governor to tell him the tax would kill their jobs. They brought in the Teamsters, whose members drive soda delivery trucks, to pressure union-friendly legislators. The ABA opened its wallet further, spending nearly $13 million – more than lobbyists spent on any other issue.

“The tax proposal went nowhere in the legislature,” he continues. “Coke and Pepsi had shown that they were stronger than a governor, a mayor, and the state’s health commissioners, hospitals, and most powerful union combined.”

Farley concludes: “The fight over sugary drinks – health advocates versus the soda companies – is only growing. Obesity is now an epidemic around the world, with some countries rivaling the United States, and the battle has spread to them.”

Full court press: Farley penned an op-ed for the New York Daily news over the weekend arguing that the idea of soda taxes should be resurrected:nydn.us/1XdrIpw.

** A message from the Coalition for Safe Affordable Food: The Coalition for Safe Affordable Food is fighting for a uniform, national food labeling standard that brings transparency and consistency to the marketplace while protecting American farmers and families from needless price hikes. http://bit.ly/1LprXGN **

WATCHDOG PUSHES INVESTIGATION OF ORGANIC PROGRAM: Organic industry watchdog group the Cornucopia Institute is pushing the Agriculture Department to complete an investigation into the National Organic Program and its head, Deputy Administrator Miles McEvoy. Leaders of the group claim that USDA’s Office of Inspector General is looking into ethic complaints they have filed over the way the program is being run, according to a statement. The IG’s office wouldn’t comment on whether it is, in fact, conducting an investigation, a spokesman told MA. Of the nearly 4,160 complaints received in 2015, more than 4,000 were referred to law enforcement agencies, so the vast majority of complaints are getting reviewed.

Mark Kastel, director of Cornucopia, told MA that he met twice this summer with an investigator over his group’s allegations. Making the group’s complaint public is a “shot across the bow” to get the IG’s office to finish its investigation and release the findings, he said. Cornucopia alleges that the National Organic Program is giving favorable treatment to large food companies and producers and has failed to investigate the group’s concerns that certain large organic livestock and poultry farms are not following the law. Cornucopia details its concerns here: http://bit.ly/1jPuuml.

However, an organic industry source tells MA McEvoy “is doing some great work, I think the fact is that politically its difficult to get things done in Washington.” The source added, “Miles is managing a program to the best of his abilities. It’s not him that’s limiting the perfectness of organic.”

USDA CONSIDERS CHANGE OF ‘ROASTER’ CHICKEN DEFINITION: The deadline for public comment on the Food Safety and Inspection Service’s proposed change to the definition and standard of identity for the “roaster” chicken ends tonight. The National Chicken Council requested the change, which would remove the minimum 8-week-old age to any bird under 12 weeks and raise the ready-to-cook carcass weight from 5 pounds to 5.5 pounds. Right now, the description of roaster is “a young chicken (between 8 and 12 weeks of age) ... with a read-to-cook carcass weight of 5 pounds or more, that is tender-meated with soft, pliable, smooth-textured skin and breastbone cartilage that is somewhat less flexible than that of a broiler or fryer.”

Genetic changes and management techniques have reduced the growth period and increased the ready-to-cook weight of the class of poultry.

One commenter has pushed back against the proposal to do away with the minimum age: “The older the bird gets the more firm and less fatty the meat is,” the comment says. “Roasters have a much superior texture and flavor spectrum because of the age of the animal. It's not just that they have reached the weight limit. Please leave the 8-12 week time restriction in place.” Read the proposal here: http://1.usa.gov/1GcYoeW.

GUIDANCE OUT FOR EVALUATING E. COLI DRUG FOR COWS: The FDA has published its final guidance to industry for evaluating the effectiveness of new animal drugs intended to reduce pathogenic, Shiga toxin-producing E. Coli in cattle. The document recommends study designs and criteria that drug manufacturers can develop to perform evaluations. The guidance doesn’t establish legally enforceable responsibilities but just presents the FDA’s thinking on the subject. Check out the final guidance here: http://1.usa.gov/1ONF8FY.

MA’S INSTANT OATS:

— More should be done to help farmers transition to organic production, argue Maria Rodale and Kimbal Musk in a Des Moines Register op-ed: dmreg.co/1jP30xc.

— El Niño is giving California a little drought relief, reports AgriPulse: http://bit.ly/1GNRwPG

THAT'S ALL FOR MA! See you again soon! In the meantime, drop your host and the rest of the team a line: btomson@politico.com and @billtomson4; jhopkinson@politico.com and @jennyhops; cpurdy@politico.com and @chasepurdy; hbottemiller@politico.com and @hbottemiller; mkorade@politico.com and @mjkorade; and jhuffman@politico.com and @jsonhuffman. You can also follow @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Ag on Twitter.

** A message from the Coalition for Safe Affordable Food: This week, the Senate Agriculture Committee is holding a hearing on the importance of biotechnology in feeding a rapidly growing world and the need for a uniform, national labeling standard. Learn more: http://bit.ly/1LprXGN **

** A message from Just Label It: Without mandatory GMO labeling, consumers will not be able to make food choices that reflect their values, according to a long-awaited report by the National Academy of Sciences. Congress should act now to require mandatory, GMO labels on the package, not just high-tech gimmicks. Nine out of ten consumers want mandatory GMO labeling on the package — just like consumers in 64 other nations. Listen to the experts: the right-to-know is reason enough to require GMO labels. http://bit.ly/1W6njad **