Republican Del. Chris Head will face competition for his party’s nomination from a first-time politician at the polls Tuesday.

Head, R-Botetourt County, will face challenger Harry Griego in the open primary.

Head is running for his third term serving the 17th District, which covers parts of Roanoke, Roanoke County and Botetourt County. His challenger is a Roanoke County resident who was in the Air Force for 23 years and now works as a pilot for Freedom Aviation.

Griego’s main campaign point has been that his opponent said he would not increase taxes, but then voted for a bipartisan transportation funding bill in his first term that has been called the largest tax increase in Virginia history.

The bill, which became law in 2013, decreased gas taxes by changing the per-gallon tax to a tax on the wholesale price of fuel, but increased retail sales taxes. Head’s opponent in the 2013 election, Democrat Freeda Cathcart, also challenged him on the same issue, but ultimately lost the election by more than 20 points.

Head claims the bill was falsely mislabeled as “the largest tax increase in Virginia’s history” and said it simply rearranged the way things are funded. There were tax increases for people living in Northern Virginia, but not in the southwest part of the state, he said.

“We had a transportation funding problem and a massive roads problem,” Head said. “The lowering of the gas tax in this area more than offset the sales tax. For the people in this area, it was a lowering of the taxes.”

Griego, who has previously helped with local and national Republican campaigns, has signed the Americans for Tax Reform Pledge that promises he will oppose any new tax increases. He failed to set up an interview with The Roanoke Times before the publication of this article, but in a March interview he said he feels a sense of duty to do something to oppose tax increases.

“The people here ... were concerned about our taxes being raised,” he said.

Griego, who opposes the Affordable Care Act and supports Second Amendment rights, is vague on other issues that he would take up if elected.

He mentions maintaining roads and bridges before funding new projects and fighting for parents to have more involvement in the education of their children, but does not offer any specifics.

Thursday, Griego received the endorsement of the Roanoke Tea Party. He’s also supported by former Republican nominee for lieutenant governor E.W. Jackson, a tea party favorite.

Head, who calls himself a conservative Republican, said he hopes to continue advocating conservative values and fiscal responsibility. He was recently endorsed by the National Rifle Association and the National Federation of Independent Business.

In an earlier term in the House of Delegates, Head and a group of other businesspeople-turned-legislators formed the Virginia Business Development Caucus aimed at crafting legislation for small and medium-sized businesses. They have conducted about 15 town hall meetings with business owners across the state since.

If re-elected, Head said, he aims to improve economic development in Southwest Virginia with more workforce development and technical education and by making the region more technologically advanced by increasing the amount of broadband.

“You have a ringside seat to every piece of legislation,” Head said. “You’re involved with all of it and if there are areas around the commonwealth that are doing things and have good ideas we can mimic, we need to shamelessly steal that and do it here.”

The incumbent, who runs a franchise of Home Instead Senior Care, also wants the legislature to take a more in-depth look at the state’s aging population and the resulting state costs.

Head has a 16-to-1 advantage over Griego in campaign finances, according to the Virginia Public Access Project. Head has $35,548 on hand and spent about $32,000 from April 1 to May 27. Griego has $4,162 on hand and spent $102 in the same time period.

Polls at five precincts in Roanoke, 19 in Roanoke County and two in Botetourt County will be open from 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. for the primary on Tuesday.