Reid: 'Despair and hopelessness' feed community violence

With the ongoing turmoil in Baltimore as a backdrop, Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid urged Congress to do something about the lack of opportunity in rural and urban America.

In a passionate floor speech on Tuesday, Harry Reid (D-Nev.) mourned the death of Freddie Gray, the 25-year-old Baltimore resident who was severely injured while in police custody and died several days later. And he made clear the riots that broke out after Gray’s funeral need to stop.

Story Continued Below

“We can’t condone the violence we see in Baltimore. But we must not ignore the despair and hopelessness that gives rise to this kind of violence,” Reid said in his speech. “When there is no hope, anger and despair move in. That’s the way it is. We can’t ignore that. So let’s condemn the violence but not ignore the underlying problem.”

But Reid also said he identifies with the feeling of hopelessness pervading West Baltimore, and other cities across the country where clashes with authorities have broken out after young black men have died following confrontations with police in Staten Island, New York, North Charleston, South Carolina, and Ferguson, Missouri.

“Freddie Gray will not be forgotten. This young man’s death is the latest in a series of disturbing and unnecessary deaths of young men of color at the hands of police and vigilantes,” Reid said. “It is easy to believe the system is rigged against you when you spent years watching what President Obama called a slow-rolling crisis of troubling police interactions with people of color.”

Obama earlier on Tuesday said America has some “soul searching” to do if it wants to break the cycle of deadly confrontations between police and the communities they serve. He said more must be done to lift impoverished communities by providing better educational and economic opportunities.

Reid spent Tuesday talking with staff about what to say about Gray’s death and the unrest in Baltimore. And he twice declined to address the events in his weekly press conference, where he normally engages on any issue that reporters bring up.

Reid, who grew up in the crushing poverty of Searchlight, Nevada, said the country shouldn’t assume that poor people have the same chances of success today. The sense that there’s no ladder to success is gripping large swaths of the United States, Reid added.

“Let’s not pretend the path from poverty like the one I traveled is still available to everyone out there as long as they work hard,” he said.

In contrast to Reid’s remarks, which emphasized a lack of opportunity in poor communities and the treatment of minorities by police, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) focused on bringing rioters to justice in remarks to reporters.

“Obviously our hearts go out to those who’ve been injured and the other activities that have occurred there that are so regretful. I hope the investigation into illegal behavior will be concluded soon and those that engaged in criminal behavior will be promptly pursued and charged,” McConnell said.

Though it never came to a vote when he controlled the Senate, Reid urged passage of criminal justice reform legislation that attempts to reverse decades of disproportionate jailing of minorities. But he called that only a start, and he panned McConnell’s economic agenda and claimed that an extension of transportation funding is the only thing on the Senate’s horizon that would create jobs.

Notably, Reid opposes new trade deals that proponents says would help create opportunity and raise wages.

“There’s nothing else. Look around. That’s not enough. We need to do more. It’s up to us here in this Capitol to create these jobs,” Reid said.