This has been obvious since the Avalanche’s season ended … or even earlier: Colorado’s top priority in free agency this summer will be landing a defenseman to join Erik Johnson in the top pairing or to anchor the second.

Joe Sakic and Patrick Roy reconfirmed that in their Thursday conference call with media and agreed that ideally the signed defenseman will be of the left-shooting variety.

That makes sense, given that Johnson and Tyson Barrie, the embraced survivor of the organization’s former affinity for scooter-type defensemen in the draft, shoot right.

It’s nice to have that left-right symmetry on the blue line, especially on the power play if a forward isn’t on the point. But it’s also not the Holy Grail.

So the key word there is ideally.

Sakic and Roy will go into this looking to upgrade the defense, period, ending up with two trusted pairings, which so far project to have Johnson in the top tandem and Barrie in the second. Under Roy, Colorado alternately has gotten away with (2013-14) and struggled (2014-15) on defense when asking declining veterans or American Hockey League journeymen to do too much.

Chicago won the Stanley Cup with former Avs scooter-type, off-the-scrap-heap Kyle Cumiskey in the third pairing, and Joel Quenneville and assistant Mike Kitchen made marathon men of Keith, Hjalmarsson, Brent Seabrook and Johnny Oduya.

I’m certain the Avalanche realizes it would be a mistake to excessively prioritize the quest for a left shot. If Sakic and Roy are convinced Washington’s Mike Green, for example, isn’t physically suspect after missing an average of 20 games in the past seven seasons, they shouldn’t dismiss him because he’s a right shot.

A trade of Ryan O’Reilly also could land a defenseman. It’s universally recognized that he’s a terrific two-way player. The question continues to be whether that is sufficiently coveted — especially given his salary benchmarks and his camp’s past negotiating militancy in a hard-cap league — for him to be the major element in a deal that brings a difference-making defenseman to Colorado.

Sakic’s comments about O’Reilly on Thursday were virtual word-for-word repeats of what he has been saying for months. There will be no Paul Stastny replay here, and I say that uncritically, because as that drama played out, I thought the Avalanche’s calculated risk in accepting the possibility of Stastny getting to unrestricted free-agent status in July 2014 was justifiable.

But it isn’t going to happen again.

If O’Reilly isn’t signed to an extension, he’s gone.

That’s no revelation. Sakic has made that clear for months.

Also in July 2014, Colorado and the O’Reilly camp managed to put aside the contentiousness long enough to come to an agreement on a two-year, $12 million deal minutes before an arbitration hearing.

They could pull that off again, but O’Reilly’s sincerity likely will be tested. He repeatedly has said his preference is to stay with the Avalanche. It’s tricky for a lot of reasons, among them that the annual salary cap hit is $6 million and his 2015-16 salary is $6.25 million.

I get that players deliver a mandate to agents to get as much as possible, and most agents love the art of the deal as macho-testing gamesmanship. But it’s a cop-out for players to shrug and essentially say: Hey, I pay my agent to take care of that stuff.

At some point, including after months of conventional and even contentious maneuvering to maximize the offer on the table, the player — any player — can step in and say it’s time to shake hands then reach for the pens.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tTFrei

Updated June. 22 at 12:48 p.m. The following corrected information has been added to this article: Because of an error by a reporter, the names of the third marathon man was initially incorrect. It was Johnny Oduya.