Average Medicare margins fall despite hospitals being more efficient

Each year, the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission issues a report to Congress on the financial health of hospitals, physicians, home health agencies and other providers paid under Medicare, along with recommendations for reimbursement policy



For hospitals, the March 2015 report said that only about 35 percent of the nation's 4,700 hospitals made money treating Medicare patients. Since 2002, hospitals have suffered declining Medicare margins averaging minus 5.4 percent in 2013, 6 percent in 2014 and 9 percent this year, said the commission, commonly known as MedPAC.



Slightly less than half of the hospitals in Southeast Michigan earned positive margins on Medicare, according to a Crain's analysis of IRS Form 990 reports and hospital interviews.



Hospitals have improved efficiency and quality over the past decade, but payment reductions, financial penalties for inappropriate hospital readmissions and overbilling still have caused Medicare hospital margins to drop to negatives nationally from an average positive 2 percent margin in 2002.



Future positive margins also appear doubtful, Medpac said. Hospital Medicare margins will continue to decline this year and into 2016 even for the 13 percent of hospitals deemed "efficient" by MedPAC.



Despite low Medicare margins, overall margins for hospitals nationally increased to 7.2 percent in 2013, the highest level since tracking began 20 years ago, MedPAC said.



High overall profitability over the past several years, Medpac said, "was caused by average (private health insurance) payment rates rising slightly faster (5 percent nationally) than average cost growth, which was in the 2 percent to 3 percent range."



But in Michigan, hospital financial experts say, commercial rates have not risen faster than costs.



Dave Mazurkiewicz, CFO of Flint-based McLaren Health Care, said total profit margins are lower than national averages because payers haven't increased reimbursements at the same rates as those in other states.





They are usually part of a larger health care system.

They closely track Medicare services delivered to patients, making sure overuse is minimized.

They make sure employees are meeting productivity targets, including average hourly labor rates, staff overtime pay, per-capita Medicare costs and net patient revenue per equivalent discharge.

Hospitals also look closely for variations in length of patient stays, pharmacy use and selection of implants, experts said.





Related Links