University student Jamie Gao was killed during a drug deal with former detectives Glen McNamara and Roger Rogerson, police will allege.

Investigators suspect Mr Rogerson was the second person sitting in a car when Mr Gao, 20, got inside, carrying what they say was $3 million worth of ice.

A security camera in Padstow caught some of the last movements of Mr Gao, showing him walking from his sports car on Arab Street with a bag tightly held in his right hand.

CCTV footage shows what are believed to be some of the last moments of Jamie Gao's life.

Within an hour police allege he would be killed for the bag's contents - by former Kings Cross detective Glen McNamara.

Advertisement

The 20-year-old is seen walking away from his white Nissan Silvia at 1.30pm, where he meets up with two other men.

He gets in their car and is driven to a storage unit nearby, where police allege he was murdered before 2.30pm.

Wanted for questioning: Roger Rogerson. Photo: Janie Barrett

Police claim the two men in the car were Mr Rogerson, a disgraced former detective, and Mr McNamara.

Mr McNamara was charged on Monday with the murder of Mr Gao, whom police believe was killed over the three kilograms of ice he was carrying in that bag. The drugs have a street value of $3 million.

Detectives have flown to Queensland to speak to Mr Rogerson and have not ruled out further arrests.

Detective Inspectors Mick Sheehy and Russell Oxford arrive at Brisbane Airport to question Roger Rogerson. Photo: Glenn Hunt

Mr Rogerson has been in Brisbane as part of a speaking tour. He had said he would return to NSW on Monday but did not catch the flight as planned, prompting officers to make the journey north.

The revelations come as a body wrapped in a blue tarpaulin – possibly that of Mr Gao – was found in the sea off Cronulla.

The body was floating about 2.5 kilometres off Shelly Beach, said Lachlan Steven, who spotted it at 7.30am while travelling from Sydney Harbour to Cronulla.

Charged with murder: former detective Glen McNamara. Photo: Steven Siewert

He said the body was wrapped in a bright blue-coloured tarpaulin held together by white rope. He saw two feet with "white leather runners" on.

Sources close to the investigation have told Fairfax Media the body "fits" with the events they allege happened about the time of Mr Gao's disappearance.

The University of Technology student was reported missing on Wednesday, 24 hours after he was joined by two others in meeting Mr McNamara and Mr Rogerson in the Padstow industrial area, police will allege.

Missing student Jamie Gao. Photo: Police Media

It is understood that the meeting was an arranged large-scale drug deal in which Mr Gao was to supply the three kilograms of ice.

After the men met on Arab Street, police will allege they all went to a nearby storage unit where Mr Gao was murdered.

The head of the Robbery and Serious Crime Squad, Detective Superintendent Luke Moore, said detectives were still trying to determine what transpired during that alleged drug deal.

He said that Mr Gao had gone to the meeting voluntarily and was reported missing the next day.

Mr Gao's own car, a white Nissan Silvia sedan, was found abandoned near where he was last seen. His phone, keys and wallet were nearby.

Mr Gao is an only child from Hurstville; his mother was in Hong Kong when he went missing.

On Sunday, Superintendent Moore said the circumstances of Mr Gao's disappearance suggested foul play.

Hours later, Mr McNamara was pulled over during a traffic stop at Kyeemagh in Sydney's south and he was questioned overnight before being charged with murder and drug offences.

Mr Rogerson, 73, was a decorated senior police officer until he shot and killed drug dealer Warren Lanfranchi in 1981.

He was twice convicted for lying in court and served two separate jail terms.

He was later accused of supplying drugs, assault, bribery and conspiring to murder, but was never convicted.

Mr McNamara is a former investigator with the National Crime Authority and the NSW police; he was a detective stationed in Kings Cross and in Sydney's south. He gave evidence to the NSW police royal commission about alleged police protection of paedophiles.

Mr McNamara's Cronulla home has been searched by police and a blue Ford Falcon XR6 was seized from his premises.

Mr Rogerson's Padstow Heights home was also searched and a car, a silver Ford Falcon, was taken away.

Police also searched a storage unit at Caringbah where a boat was taken away for forensic testing.

A third car, a silver Ford Falcon, was found at another location in Cronulla. It is this car detectives believe Mr Gao got into on Arab Road last Tuesday.

Superintendent Moore said the investigations would continue.

“Our inquiries to date have led us to conclude that Mr Gao has been murdered,” Superintendent Moore said.

“While we have charged a man with murder, this investigation will continue and we may make further arrests.

Mr McNamara returns to court in July.