CLEVELAND, Ohio — University Hospitals and Aetna, the third largest U.S. health insurer, have launched an accountable care organization collaboration (ACO) designed to coordinate care and reduce costs for participants enrolled in the insurer's health plans.

The ACO, which launched July 1, covers 22,000 Aetna members who currently receive care from UH physicians. It is UH's sixth ACO in the state and Aetna's fifth.

ACOs are a cost-saving method of delivering care by a network of doctors and hospitals created by the Affordable Care Act. The main goal of an ACO is to reduce cost with better communication among all the doctors involved in a patient's care, by improving quality, outcomes and patient experience, and by advocating wellness and preventive care.

Participants in the Aetna and UH collaborative ACO will not have to switch doctors, and should only notice positive changes in their care, said Nitin Bhargava, president of Aetna's Ohio operations. These may include more timely reminders about preventive health screenings such as colon cancer testing, or better follow-up after leaving the hospital to ensure full recovery.

"We have a set of technologies that we bring to the table that allow us to partner with healthcare systems to do just that," he said.

The technologies include Medicity, which allows health systems to exchange information securely; the ability to aggregate claims data across the health system to identify "gaps in care," or places or situations in which participants aren't receiving the care they need when they need it; information on drug interactions; and the time it takes for patients to get follow up from their doctors. The data allows for better feedback to doctors on what they're doing right and wrong, and also helps identify population health issues such as smoking rates, emergency room usage, and which tests are ordered where.

Aetna will also be providing the funding for UH to expand its staff so that the health system can assign "care coordinators" to help primary care offices keep track of patient care and follow up after appointments and hospital discharges.

"We want people thinking about care delivery in a different manner and we think it's really important to use data to drive that," said Dr. Eric Bieber, president of UH's Accountable Care Organization.

UH now has 200,000 patients in its pediatric, employee, commercial and Medicare ACOs and attributes over $1 billion in revenue to the relationships. The largest of these programs manages about 65,000 pediatric patients through a $12.7 million grant from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation. About 25,000 employees are part of the University Hospitals Accountable Care Organization, or UHACO, and an additional 42,000 Medicare patients are managed under University Hospitals Coordinated Care, which rolled out in 2012. About 10,000 other patients are part of a collaboration with health insurer Cigna, and another 19,000 are part of a UH and UnitedHealthcare ACO.

"The landscape is really changing," said Bieber. "We're starting to see real traction, where real differences are being made in how people are getting care."

Two examples, Bieber said, are a drop in pediatric ER visits within the pediatric ACO, and the system's ability to keep its employee premiums stable for the past three years, when healthcare costs have steadily increased across the rest of the country.

The UH ACOs have been able to achieve these goals by focusing on a few key areas, he said, which will also be the target of the Aetna collaboration. They include:

Increase the percentage of Aetna members who receive recommended preventive care and cancer screenings.

Improve the management of patients with chronic conditions such as diabetes and heart failure.

Reduce avoidable hospital re-admissions and costly ER visits by improving primary care access hours and care coordination.

Both Bieber and Bhargava emphasize that the ACO model is not about denying care, or about forcing people into programs or tests.

"Of course at the end of the day it's always going to be up to the patient to make the decision about what they do and don't do," Bieber said. "But it's also about education" and helping people navigate a complex healthcare system.

"The goal ultimately becomes how do we create healthier communities, one community at a time?" said Bhargava.