Published: Saturday, 3/12/2016 - Updated: 2 months ago



Kasich takes Trump to task during Ohio tour Touts state's economic rebound under his leadership



ASSOCIATED PRESS Enlarge Republican presidential candidate, Ohio Gov. John Kasich speaks during a news conference at the Northeast Hamilton County Republican Club pancake breakfast, today, Cincinnati.

HEATH, Ohio — While Republican presidential contender and Gov. John Kasich vowed he would remain positive in his campaign, he was directly asked today by an audience member at one of his own town halls why he was not defending his chief opponent's First Amendment rights.

Mr. Kasich has criticized billionaire buisnessman Donald Trump's rhetoric, but has at the same time vowed to maintain a positive campaign. The audience member asked him why he was not defending Mr. Trump's rights versus those of rally protests by groups like Black Lives Matter.

“It's undeniable that he has created a toxic atmosphere dividing us ... ,” Mr. Kasich said as he stood in front of scores of compressed natural gas vessels at a factory in a Licking County industrial park.

RELATED ARTICLE: Kasich touts job creation at once-closed former GM plant

“When you have a toxic atmosphere, nothing good ever happens,” he said. “He has a right to speak, and the people have a right to protest. I tell you at some of these events, there is no doubt...people go to things looking for trouble, looking to cause trouble...

“Why don't we just be positive. Why don't we talk about our visions?” he asked.

Earlier, he had directly criticized the tone of Trump’s rallies, particularly since Mr. Trump cancelled a Chicago rally Friday because of the tensions around the venue.

“We cannot create in this country a toxic environment where images of people slugging it out at a campaign rally -— think about it — are transmitted all over the globe...,” he said. “They say 'What happened to America? What happened to our country?'”

The governor’s business-focused road tour through Ohio continued today, with Mr. Kasich defying attempts by Mr. Trump for the state's 66 winner-take-all delegates and to downplay the state’s economic bounceback as just mere luck in finding shale oil and gas.

Mr. Kasich picked a 50,000 square-foot Xperian manufacturing plant east of Columbus to ramp up voters going into Tuesday's state primary in which he's not only banking on his first win but one that could serve as the make-or-break moment of his presidential campaign.

Xperian, a German-based company which makes pressure vessels for the compressed natural gas market, picked Ohio in 2013 for its first North American plant. It fits the scenario Mr. Kasich is repeatedly trying to hammer home — that he has been successful in luring jobs to Ohio and in bringing them here from other countries.

“Today we are standing in a facility primarly driven by German investment,” Mr. Kasich said. “We're not sending our jobs there. They're sending their money here to put our people to work.”

The fight for Ohio's delegates has boiled down to Mr. Kasich and Mr. Trump, who has stepped up his criticism of the governor after largely leaving him alone compared to his vitriliolic criticism of other current and former foes including U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, and former Florida Governor Jeb Bush.

While Mr. Kasich has cited the 400,000 new jobs in Ohio since the depths of the recesssion, Mr. Trump on the campaign trail and in debates has belittled that record as little more than luck from “fracking” of shale oil and natural gas.

On Friday, Mr. Kasich declined to respond to a new Trump ad describing an absentee governor who has brought “Obamacare” to Ohio in the form of expanded access to Medicaid, he left it to the superPAC supporting his candicacy to respond,

New Day for America did so with its own TV ad with the terms “Trump losing. Unhinged lies.”

“Ohioans are too danged smart to ever trust you,” states the narrator.

Mr. Kasich's depiction of his record as governor of a quintessential sing state has been the centerpiece of his case to Republican voters that he can translate his success here to the nation as a whole. He has promised that he will not only win Ohio on Tuesday in a bid to block Mr. Trump's path to the nomination but stands the best chance of delivering the battleground state in the fall.

U.S. Sen. Rob Portman, who is also on the GOP primary ballot Tuesday, traveled with Mr. Kasich Saturday, downplaying suggestions that Mr. Kasich is now the “establlishment” candidate.

“You know John,” he said. “I know John. He's a reformer.”

Mr. Kasich started the day with Mr. Portman at a pancake breakfast in Cincinnati and plans to finish tonight with a town hall at another business in Mansfield. Mr. Cruz and Mr. Rubio have abandoned Ohio, choosing not to invest time and money in a primary where a second-place finish yields zero delegates.