CLEVELAND, Ohio – Little more than two weeks remain to sign up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act, which means that the final push is under way to reach the uninsured before the Feb. 15 deadline to get health coverage in 2015.

In Cleveland and around the country, the federal government and non-profit organizations are focusing their energies on getting young adults, LGBT communities and others insured.

Spotlight on the "young invincibles"

Thursday is National Youth Enrollment Day, which is about educating young adults that insurance is affordable. That group accounts for more emergency room visits than any other group except for people over age 75.

From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. that day, the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame and Museum in Cleveland will be the site of an insurance education and sign-up event geared toward that age group -- what the health insurance industry calls "young invincibles." One of the messages that will be shared is that members of the group tend to benefit most from available financial subsidies to help pay for coverage.

Of the 9.5 million people who have selected or re-enrolled in private insurance through the federal marketplace as of Jan. 16, about 2.5 million of them are under age 35, according to the Obama administration.

Before Obamacare, roughly 1 in 5 people age 18 to 34 was uninsured.

As a group, they more than any other demographic, tended to wait until the last few days of the first sign-up period before choosing a plan.

And while the percentage of uninsured young adults has gone down, it's still hovering at around 14 percent – and accounts for more than 40 percent of the entire uninsured population.

The Rock Hall event is one of more than 200 events across the country being held on National Youth Enrollment Day. Organizers hope the Rock Hall event, which promises games and entertainment by two DJ's, will be enough to lure people in. Along with events is digital and social media outreach, including pushing the #YoEnroll Twitter hashtag.

"Coverage is especially important for young people," U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy said earlier this week in a call with reporters. Speaking about his experience as a hospitalist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, Murthy said, "Most of them were pretty healthy before I saw them, and never thought that they would get ill ... that's why coverage is so important for Millennials."

LGBT communities urged to get insurance

For the past few weeks, enrollment assistance has been available at the LGBT Community Center of Greater Cleveland, 6600 Detroit Ave., Cleveland. That will continue, from 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Friday; 3 to 8 p.m. on Feb. 2, Feb. 4, Feb. 9 and Feb 11; and from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday, Feb. 14.

The center is one of several groups throughout Ohio working with Get Covered America on getting more LGBT people signed up for insurance. "According to a Gallup poll, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender adults are more likely to be uninsured than the population as a whole," Get Covered America Ohio State Director Trey Daly said during a conference call on Wednesday.

As of Jan. 16, 196,000 Ohioans had chosen a new plan or re-enrolled in their existing plan during the current open enrollment period, Daly said. "But members of the LGBT community still seemingly continue to lag behind," he said.

Some of positive impacts of Obamacare on the LGBT communities include not being denied coverage because of sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression; and not being denied coverage for a pre-existing condition such as HIV.

With Obamacare, legally married couples are able to get financial assistance even if they live in a state like Ohio that doesn't recognize same-sex marriage.

"People don't seek insurance because they fear being discriminated against," Columbus Public Health LGBT Health Advocate Dwayne Steward said during the call. With Obamacare, "[They] have better access to affordable care and can live healthier lives."

Other sign-up assistance available

For in-person assistance, people have several options.

You can schedule an appointment at areyoucoveredohio.org, getcoveredamerica.org/connector/ or find a location with enroller assistance near you at 211cleveland.org, which has information on 15 counties in Ohio; or at Localhelp.healthcare.gov. If you're getting in-person assistance, remember to bring a photo ID, proof of income, W-2, and/or immigration cards/papers, and your Social Security card or number.

An appointment is typically required for tax assistance offered through the United Way of Greater Cleveland (and can be made by calling 211). However, from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Thursday people can drop in the office, at 1331 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, to talk with experts about health care and how to get enrolled. Tax specialists will also be on site to help those who were not covered in 2014 understand how their tax refunds will be impacted.



Online information is available at HealthCare.gov or Cuidado DeSalud.gov. You can also call the consumer assistance center at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services at 1-800-318-2596.