The U.S. Supreme Court soon will decide whether federal tax credits that have helped millions buy health insurance on public exchanges created under the Affordable Care Act are limited to consumers in states that set up their own online marketplaces.

The case, King v. Burwell, aims to clarify language in the act that says who is eligible for government subsidies to buy health plans. The decision likely would affect 34 states that, like Illinois, do not have their own exchanges and instead rely on the federal exchange, HealthCare.gov.

As a result, a ruling that would strip the subsidies would have a profound impact in Illinois, absent quick solutions just now becoming visible.

Illinois enrolled 294,000 consumers in marketplace health plans; 232,000 received tax credits, on average $2,500 per year. Insurers will be affected directly. An analysis this year by the Kaiser Family Foundation predicted that “the elimination of subsidies would destabilize the individual insurance markets in states not running their own marketplaces." With marketplace clients dropping coverage due to cost, carriers would increase their rates. Rand estimates possible premium spikes as high as 47 percent, furthering the exodus of clients from the insurance market and likely the exit of the insurers that serve them.

Hospitals and pharmacies also would be hurt. A decrease in coverage would mean fewer clients for the former, while fewer covered lives would mean an overall decrease in access to prescription drugs for the latter. Plans compliant with the Affordable Care Act are required to cover 10 essential benefits, including prescription drugs. In their 2014 annual reports, Walgreens Boots and CVS Health cited expanded coverage under the ACA as benefits to their business.

BAD NEWS—AND GOOD NEWS



That's the bad news for Illinois businesses. The good news, potentially, is that there might be a fairly straightforward fix. In addition to congressional action—the possibility of which you can handicap on your own—the state of Illinois has options far less expensive than the $92 million that was estimated the last time "establishing" an exchange was discussed in Springfield.

Now that HealthCare.gov is operational (and used by Illinois as one of seven partnership states), there's very little additional regulation required to establish an exchange other than passing state legislation that identifies the entity and a governing body. This would require states to lease the HealthCare.gov site and get the approval of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for a self-sustaining business plan (which would involve taxing insurers to pay for the maintenance overhead).

By making these changes, Illinois would more closely resemble the three other states the federal government now refers to as state-based marketplaces using the HealthCare.gov platform.

Additionally, this option could save the state and federal governments a minimum of $92 million by leasing the national portal, instead of creating a new one, which was never actually required by the ACA.

The Obama administration has been mum on this option in advance of a court decision, perhaps for good reason. To be sure, since the June 1 deadline for establishing a 2016 exchange has passed, additional regulatory assistance may be needed, depending on the effect of a final court order. But if a decision to reverse in King v. Burwell is not quickly met with congressional action, Illinois has practical alternatives—if it has the will to act.

Jennifer Koehler, an attorney and health care consultant, was the first executive director of Get Covered Illinois, the state's first health insurance marketplace established under the Affordable Care Act.

Mark Rust is managing partner of the Chicago office of Barnes & Thornburg and is immediate past chair of the firm's national health care department. He advises Illinois co-op insurer Land of Lincoln Health.