The costs for this event were modest and we've been quite conscientious about that.

University of Michigan regents spent $20,000 on a January trip to New York City.

The visit took place Jan. 16 and 17 in place of regularly scheduled public meeting that month.

While in New York, regents talked to higher education leaders and former university presidents — discussing topics ranging from integrating technology into learning environments and keeping college affordable to how the Affordable Care Act will affect academic health systems.

The eight-member group also schmoozed with donors for U-M's $4 billion fundraising campaign, attending a donor event hosted by Stephen Ross, a New York real estate tycoon who recently donated $200 million to the university.

"We were able to spend time as a board thinking about and discussing the future direction of higher education and how Michigan will play a significant role in defining that future," U-M Board of Regents Chairwoman Andrea Fischer Newman said during a public meeting Thursday afternoon at the Michigan Union.

"The costs for this event were modest and we've been quite conscientious about that," Newman said. "It was an important and intense two days of hard work."

U-M spent $20,118 on the trip, including $12,436 for travel, $5,318 for lodging and another $2,364 on hosting, food and beverage. Officials say the trip was not paid for using the general fund, which is comprised mainly of tuition and state appropriations. Regents stayed at the JW Marriott Essex House in New York City.

Last January the board went to California, meeting with leaders of universities there and attending events with California donors. That trip cost $27,200.

U-M has upward of 25,400 alumni living in New York. In 2012, donors from the state gave $33.8 million to U-M, trailing only donations from Michigan and California.

President Mary Sue Coleman, provost Martha Pollack, university secretary Sally Jo Churchill, CFO Tim Slottow, vice president of student affairs E. Royster Harper, CEO of the health system Ora Pescovitz and top development officer Jerry May also attended the New York trip.

The group met with Bill Bowen, president emeritus of Princeton University and former president of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundationl; Peter Salovey, president of Yale University; Ed Miller, retired executive vice president for medical affairs at Johns Hopkins University; and Mike Johns, retired executive vice president for medical affairs at Emory University.

Kellie Woodhouse covers higher education for the Ann Arbor News. Reach her at kelliewoodhouse@mlive.com or 734-623-4602 and follow her on twitter.