The first three months of 2015 saw Washington consider one of the most expansive trade negotiations in history; the future of technology and the Internet; and the merger of major cable communications companies. You’d better believe that those debates — and other, perennial wrangles on subjects like the Affordable Care Act — caught the attention of some major companies and trade groups.

Lobbying reports for the first quarter of the year reflect those interests, and, while the ranks of the biggest spenders stayed mostly the same, there were a couple of big moves.

Google, for instance, dropped $5.5 million to come in at No. 5 for the quarter. Just a year earlier, Google ranked 14th overall, and dropped to 20th in the fourth quarter (though it was the ninth for the year). But Google put muscle into its lobbying effort in early 2015, spending $1.7 million more than the previous quarter. As OpenSecrets previously reported, Google isn’t alone in this: Other relatively young tech companies like Amazon and Facebook recorded huge lobbying in the quarter, too.

This year, the tech giant has been a vocal supporter of Internet neutrality (the FCC rules earlier this year to treat the Internet like a utility, basically codifying net neutrality and pleasing consumer advocates), and has sought to overhaul immigration laws to let in highly skilled workers. Google is also interested in antitrust matters (currently a thorn in its side across the pond), and lobbied heavily on cyber security while D.C. mulled over its response to the highly publicized Sony cyber attacks late last year and whether or not CISPA was a solution.

General Electric was the another “newcomer” to the top 10 list, at least in recent years. In the first quarter of 2014, GE was 16th biggest spender, and was 18th in the final quarter of last year. After spending $4.75 million in 2015’s first three months, GE placed ninth. Google and GE replaced United Technologies ($4.3 million) and Dow Chemical ($3.1 million) in a comparison of the first quarter of 2015 to the that of the prior year.

In its reports, GE mentions a laundry list of interests befitting a company active in so many areas — including water infrastructure initiatives, renewable energy standards, increasingly contentious chemical safety legislation, and the corporate tax rate. GE also lobbied on the medical device tax, an issue that many thought would be swiftly dealt with once Republicans took control of both chambers of Congress this year (but hasn’t yet been addressed).

Despite this shuffling, the names at the top remained firmly entrenched. The always-on-top U.S. Chamber of Commerce led the way, even though it spent only $19.7 million compared with $25.4 million in early 2014. The Chamber, with its Burj Khalifa-sized influence tab, lobbied on issues ranging from finance to education to aviation to clean air and water.

After the Chamber, the National Association of Realtors was No. 2 ($7.7 million, up from $7.1 million the year before), followed by the American Medical Association ($6.9 million, up from $6.6 million), and insurance network Blue Cross, Blue Shield ($6 million compared to $5.6 million the year before).

Rounding out the top ten were the Pharmaceutical Researcher and Manufacturers of America ($5.5 million), the American Hospital Association ($5.4 million), the National Association of Broadcasters ($4.7 million) and American Electric Power ($4.7 million).

Aside from the usual giants, some companies seriously turned up their spending in the quarter.

SAS Institute, a business analytics and intelligence software company, showed the highest percentage increase from the fourth quarter of any lobbying client. It spent $1.25 million on lobbying the federal government: an increase of 12,400 percent from the $10,000 the company spent the quarter before. In the first quarter of 2014, SAS spent $110,000 on lobbying.

Intrepid Potash showed the second biggest percentage gain overall. The potassium chloride manufacturer — a compound that is used mainly in fertilizer production, but is also used to make medicines and as an ingredient in lethal injections — spent $10,000 in the fourth quarter of 2014, but has already paid out $460,000 for lobbying this year, a 4,500 percent increase quarter-to-quarter.