Aeroflow Breastpumps partnership with Medela offers moms the best breastpumps through insurance. “Aeroflow takes care of all paperwork, and communication with insurance and physicians. All moms have to do is fill out our qualification form online, choose which pump they want, and we’ll send it out based on their insurance."

Aeroflow Healthcare's Breastpumps division assists mothers in getting a breastpump covered through insurance under the Affordable Care Act, and has utilized their exceptional reputation to build privileged partnerships with breastpump suppliers. “We’ve heard stories about moms not being able to find a supplier that takes their insurance companies or having trouble getting a quality pump. Our goal is to eliminate those instances; we offer many features and pumps that other DME companies do not,” says Jennifer Jordan, Aeroflow’s Business Development Team Leader.

Medela is regarded as the top breastpumps manufacturer by hospitals and mothers around the world. “We are grateful for the strong relationship we have with Medela. We are able to offer the best pumps to mothers, and even offer upgrade models far above what other DME companies can supply,” says Jordan.

Among Medela breastpumps offered by Aeroflow Healthcare are the Medela Pump In Style Advanced with options to add a cooler set and stylish carrying bag, and the Medela Freestyle, which has the same features as the Pump In Style Advanced but with added benefits such as hands-free pumping, a digital display, and long-lasting battery.

Aeroflow Healthcare works with leading insurances such as Aetna, United Healthcare, Blue Cross and Blue Shield and select smaller insurance companies as well. “We do our best to make the process as quick and easy as possible. Aeroflow takes care of all paperwork, and communication with insurance and physicians. All moms have to do is fill out our qualification form online, choose which pump they want, and we’ll send it out based on their insurance,” says Customer Service Representative, Courtney Bradshaw. She says that the response from mothers has been overwhelmingly positive, and the team is hoping to carry this momentum into the second half of 2014.

Medela and Aeroflow are partnering up in more than just products, and will soon be offering online breastfeeding education and support to mothers who get their pumps through Aeroflow, as well as expos and forums for pregnant women in the Southeast (near Aeroflow Healthcare headquarters). “Through education and Aeroflow’s simple qualification process, we hope to eliminate any stress associated with breastfeeding. It really is so beneficial to both moms and babies,” Jordan says.

Aeroflow Breastpumps is a division of Aeroflow Healthcare, the premier medical equipment provider in the Southeast and services patients nationwide. Aeroflow is an accredited Medicare, Medicaid and select commercial insurance provider. Their qualified staff offers years of experience in helping patients receive mobility, respiratory, sleep apnea and other medical equipment. Aeroflow is also the parent company of FetchRx Pet Pharmacy and CheapCPAPSupplies.com. For more information, visit breastpumps.aeroflowinc.com or call 1-844-867-9890.