The Buzz - Nov. 9, 2015 - (One thought. Any topic. No name)

Editor’s note: Buzzes can be no longer than 20 words. Please put the word “buzz” by itself in the subject line of the email or it will not come through. The Buzz is now online. Read previous submissions, comment on them via Facebook and find an easy link to submit a Buzz.

Attention (Wrightsville Beach) Loop Walkers! Spandex. It is a privilege, not a right.

The Democratic party, like a plantation, is made up of poor minorities, while the leaders are old, very rich, liberal white people.

magine the press digging into Obama’s birth, transcripts & heritage like they are doing Ben Carson –shocking results?

My 2016 Social Security won't increase because of low COLA. But my monthly Medigap insurance doubled to $380. Thanx Obamacare!

CNN where lies become truth and truth becomes lies and tragedy becomes ratings as they make viewers cry

Ben Carson exaggerated about a scholarship; Hillary lied to the families killed in Libya for political reasons. Which is worse?

Despite the media, Republicans have earned 31 governorships, 68 (of 98) state legislative chambers, the House and the Senate.

The Clintons ....have already found a way to turn the presidency into a global moneymaking opportunity for themselves.

Sunday paper had no national political news, nothing on Carson, etc. Get with it!

I propose a new, permanent section of the StarNews called "National Political News" - same place in paper every day.

Peat&repeat news and features in Sunday StarNews. Refund?

It's been awhile, but as a Michigan high schooler I received a Congressional appointment to a Federal Academy, not a 'scholarship'.

Given all the disgust with Washington by the right, why no discussion of term limits by the candidates and media ?

Notice how old, stodgy, white, entrenched all the Dem. debaters/candidates were? Opposite traits of diverse GOP frontrunners speaks volumes.

Why is it that you need a license to practice law, get married, and drive a car but you don't need one to have children. Go figure.

Democrats are great digging up dirt and slime , their media lackeys who wallow in it teach them how it’s done.

Submit a Buzz

buzz@starnewsonline.com

Follow The Buzz

StarNewsOnline.com/buz