Updated at 3:21 p.m.: Revised to include statement from Sen. Huffines.

Texas Rep. Jason Villalba is accusing a state senator — a fellow Dallas Republican — of injecting race into Villalba’s re-election campaign.

Villalba slammed Sen. Don Huffines on Friday for paying for a series of mailers that were sent out last week on behalf Villalba’s opponent, lawyer Dan Morenoff.

“I find it deeply troubling the third party that put this out is funded almost entirely by Sen. Huffines,” he said. “Here’s a Texas senator, who has no stake at all in this race, and yet he’s poured $150,000 dollars of his own money.”

Villalba also complained that Huffines, a freshman senator in the middle of his term, wrote a letter to voters “insinuating lies about me and about my record in the House … and he recently endorsed [Morenoff] publicly with some very pejorative language about one of his own representatives in his own district – me.”

Villalba said that one “distasteful and disgusting” piece of mail depicts him next to a hooded man and suggests Villalba is giving handouts to convicted felons. The text reads: “Representative Jason Villalba voted to expand welfare benefits to convicted drug felons,” and “while honest, hard-working Texans struggle, Villalba wants to give handouts to felons.”

Villalba said he wasn’t sure what Huffines, whose district engulfs House District 114, motives were for sending out the mailers.

“I don’t know the answer to that. Is it because he also has a problem with me being Hispanic in this region? If not, then he shouldn’t put that information out there,” Villalba said. “He is equally culpable in these kinds of attacks in our district and it’s distasteful, disgusting and I’m so disappointed in the direction this race has taken.”

When asked whether Huffines knew what was in the mailer when he paid for it or why he was getting involved in the race a spokesman for the senator did not directly answer the questions, but said Villalba “continues to lie and deceive voters.”

“He clearly wants to hide that he supports welfare for felons and that he supports expanding Medicaid under Obamacare,” Huffines’ spokesman Matt Langston said in a written statement. “I’m not surprised that Jason would rather whine than try to defend his liberal voting record.”

Huffines has contributed more than $54,000 worth of mailers and other voter outreach efforts on behalf of Morenoff, the Dallas lawyer looking to unseat Villalba in Tuesday’s primary, according to recent campaign filings.

According to the filings, a majority of Huffines’ contributions were to the North Texas Conservative Coalition, a political action committee registered in Tyler that supports Morenoff. Huffines’ contributions have made up all but $5,500 of that group’s funding for the last year.

According to finance reports, this month Huffines paid several installments of $9,136 for mailers to House District 114 voters.

The treasurer for the North Texas Conservative Coalition, which paid for the mailers, did not respond to a request for comment.

Morenoff also did not return calls seeking comment, but he told KXAS-TV (NBC5) this week that he only learned about the mailer when he saw it in his mailbox. He doesn’t take issue with it.

“When I look at it I just see a guy in clothes in the shade. I didn’t actually see another face,” Morenoff said. “Me and Jason are both Hispanics…. I don’t see anything that’s racist about it. It’s really just focusing on the policy issue.”

Villalba said he isn’t bothered by the attacks on his record, saying the idea that he voted to provide benefits for felons is “inaccurate.” The bill, which passed with bipartisan support, dealt with food assistance for first-time drug offenders.

“Politics is a rough and tumble business,” he said. “You can expect that in any major race we are going to have situations where people say things about you and that’s to be expected … and I’m comfortable with those kinds of issue-based attacks.”

But, he said, he took issue with the images in the mailers, which he said had “racial overtones.”

“When the attacks became about making the other candidate look foolish … in this instance putting my face looking contorted as I was speaking next to the face of an African-American male in a hoodie looking very ominous, those are the things you don’t expect,” he said.

“It’s the issue of using race and injecting fear into this climate in order to scare someone away from a certain race,” he said.

Huffines publicly endorsed Morenoff this year. He and his wife have also contributed more than $15,000 directly to Morenoff’s campaign and for voter outreach.

This week, voters also received a nearly two-page letter from Huffines likening Villalba to Hillary Clinton, saying he “vocally supported expanding Medicaid in Texas to support Obamacare,” and calling him a “big government liberal who has aligned himself with Democrats and betrayed the voters of the 114th District.”

Villalba and Morenoff, two Dallas lawyers who said they have known each other for years, have clashed at recent forums over a variety of hot-topic issues, like vaccinations, interpretations of the Constitution and school funding.

The race is part of a the new normal for North Texan Republican incumbents: challenges from hard-right candidates for House seats. Villalba has been a staunch ally of House GOP leaders who are facing a small but persistent group of challengers over immigration, spending and other matters.

Huffines and Villalba are also on differing sides of the GOP presidential contest. Villalba has backed Sen. Marco Rubio. Huffines is behind Sen. Ted Cruz.

Villalba called Morenoff’s denials about the mailers “disingenuous” and asked that he disavow the tactic.

“When he stands by that flyer, he is essentially endorsing that flyer, endorsing the content and he becomes the issuer of that flyer, regardless who paid for it or not,” he said.

Morenoff told NBC5 he was “perfectly happy being judged by the campaign that I’ve run.”

“We’ve been very respectful about the differences between me and my opponent,” he said.

The winner of Tuesday’s primary will face Democrat Jim Burke in November.

Twitter: @juliefancher