LOS ANGELES — The route to landing a sitcom is rarely smooth, but for three relatively unknown stand-up comedians from Denver, it has been particularly bumpy.

“Those Who Can’t,” a pilot by the Denver comedy trio Grawlix, was a longshot in the first place. Beginning life as a Web series, the show about inept Denver high school teachers was picked by Amazon as a top viewers’ choice in 2012 to be continued as a series. Then it was declared dead when Amazon passed on it in 2014.

Now, because the girlfriend of a programming executive happened to see it on Amazon, it is not only resurrected but in production for a basic cable network where it will be prominently featured as the network’s debut scripted project.

Adam Cayton-Holland, Ben Roy and Andrew Orvedahl are currently shooting the last of 10 episodes in their series about the dysfunctional teaching staff. Cayton-Holland plays a haughty Spanish teacher, Orvedahl is the clueless gym teacher and the much-inked Roy is a punk-rock history teacher. They write, star in and have executive producer credits on the project, supported by experienced crew, including a veteran of “Arrested Development,” and a real budget.

“I’ve never worked so hard in my life,” Cayton-Holland said during a break in shooting on a recent afternoon. In February, as truTV’s first scripted series, “Those Who Can’t” will signal the direction of the new tru (as the former crime-and-court channel will call itself), in a rebrand backed by Turner’s corporate promotional muscle.

“It’s nuts to be thrown in, in charge,” Cayton-Holland said. It’s an unusual responsibility for Hollywood newcomers. For now, “we’ve surrounded ourselves with incredible people.”

Sarah Michelle Geller will have a guest role. Peter Stormare (“Fargo,” “The Big Lebowski”), Michael Madsen (“Reservoir Dogs”), Susie Essman (“Curb Your Enthusiasm”) and Denver pal T.J. Miller (“Silicon Valley”) also have parts. Tracey Baird (“Flight of the Conchords”) and Krysia Plonka (“Mind of Mencia”) of Thank You, Brain! Productions are executive producers. Dean Lorey (“Arrested Development”) is the showrunner, a fact that cast and crew utter with some reverence.

On a recent weekday, a fight was underway on the set in a darkened hallway of empty Van Nuys High School, standing in for the fictional Reed Smoot school in Denver. The team was shooting Episode 8, a highly stylized horror movie spoof, with Bobcat Goldthwait directing and Gaelle Cohen, stunt coordinator for “Zoolander 2,” choreographing the slapfest.

The guys’ headlamps and Orvedahl’s light-up sneaker soles pierce the dark. Take after take, they slap, shout, take hits, slap, fall back and repeat.

“Someone just tell me that this is a dream!” Cayton-Holland shouts, again and again, in character as Loren Payton. They trade slaps to wake whoever might be dreaming.

Watching on monitors in a science classroom, executive producers Baird and Plonka crack up.

“They are incredibly professional,” Plonka said. “They respect the process and appreciate the opportunity they’ve been given. It’s great the network took a chance on some relatively unknown names. Talent aside, they are incredibly nice guys.”

“That may be a Colorado thing,” Cayton-Holland said. “We’re not boastful. You roll up your sleeves and go to work.” … “Cut to 10 years from now,” he jokes, “and we’re all a–holes.”

Colorado references are sprinkled into the scripts, including Broncos jokes and talk of skiing, Stapleton and local companies that granted clearances such as Illegal Pete’s and Trve brewing. Grawlix stickers dot the lockers. So far, there’s only one legal weed joke, to avoid the obvious.

A crash course

Between takes, the guys discuss the Rockies’ trade to the Blue Jays and their fatigue due to the scene’s repeated sprints and freakouts.

“I hesitate to call myself an actor,” Cayton-Holland said. “It has been a crash course, all day, every day.” Leading to this moment, “we’ve been making these sketches for five years, all DIY, we’re self-taught.” The goal is to produce a series on par with “The League” or “Broad City,” two popular and similarly, modestly budgeted, youngish, hippish series.

All are eager to get back to stand-up when shooting is complete. “It uses different muscles, scratches the same itch,” Cayton-Holland said. “If stand-up comedy is cruising down a highway, (television) is stop and start,” requiring endless repetition, reverse angles and more.

The tedium of making a TV show is unavoidable. The line they hear most often from the producers: “That was perfect! Do it again.”

While Cayton-Holland’s character, Payton, is a ringleader, Roy describes his character, Billy Shoemaker, in a scene in which he’s wearing a pink lace tank top that shows off his tattoos, as “the Klinger of this show.” Orvedahl paints his eager-to-please character, Coach Fairbell, as “a human golden retriever.”

Out of character, together as The Grawlix, they were just named to Variety’s “10 Comics to Watch.”

Part of Turner

Production has been ongoing for five months. While writing hours are fairly fixed — 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. — shooting runs 12 hours and the executive producers tweak, edit and text ideas at all hours.

In the writing room, Cayton-Holland tends to shine. According to Roy, “he’s probably the smartest of all of us.”

If Cayton-Holland is the analytic one, Orvedahl is the idea person. Roy, who is big and loud in his stand-up, said: “Onscreen, I’m trying to learn how to tone it down a bit.” He’s finding acting “way harder” than stand-up. “Like, what do I do with my arms?”

Orvedahl, heading for a lunch break in gold light-up sneakers, said it doesn’t feel like acting just yet, more like playing with friends. “I’m super-proud of it.”

The guys are still amazed to have a budget that allows them to write things such as “Door with window” where one doesn’t exist, and a door with a window magically appears on set.

At the upfronts in New York, where networks hope to entice advertisers with new shows, they were part of Turner’s truTV presentation.

“We got a feel for the giant company,” Orvedahl said. Because they’re all part of Turner, “Anderson Cooper (of CNN) and Conan O’Brien (of TBS) were right there!” He was admittedly star-struck. This year, the Denver guys were represented in a clip. Next year, if all goes well, they’ll be on stage.

Tempered expectations

“Having it pulled out from under us (by Amazon) gave us perspective,” Cayton-Holland said. “You learn to temper expectations.” But there’s no doubt they’re on their way.

Ratings decisions will be merciful at the start. “The network understands we’re their first scripted show,” Orvedahl said. “On Comedy Central, the expectations would be brutal.”

And will the impressive lineup of guests behind and in front of the camera continue?

Cayton-Holland offers a measured response: “You can only call in so many favors if the show sucks.”

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp