Russian President Vladimir Putin claimed Friday that he has provided weapons, air cover and supplies to a key Western-backed Syrian opposition group.

But Putin's spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, later walked back the claim, saying Putin did not mean to say weapons and supplies and that Russia is only providing air cover, according to The Associated Press.

Putin also made a veiled swipe at Turkey and again called for the United States to cooperate with him to fight terrorists.

In his speech, Putin asserted that he is working with the opposition group, known as the Free Syrian Army, as well as forces loyal to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. The idea of supporting opposing sides in a civil war is an incongruous one, but Putin cast it in terms of both groups opposing the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and other "terrorists."

“I would like to emphasize that the work of our air force group has helped combine efforts of the government forces and the Free Syrian Army," Putin told a meeting of his Ministry of Defense, according to The AP. "Now its several units totaling more than 5,000 people, along with regular troops, are conducting offensive operations against terrorists in the provinces of Homs, Hama, Aleppo and Raqqa. We have provided air cover for them as well as the Syrian army, and also supplied them with weapons, ammunition and supplies."

Russia had previously claimed to be cooperating with the Free Syrian Army, but this is first time the Kremlin has talked about providing weapons or supplies.

The opposition group denied Russia’s past claims of cooperation and has instead said Russian airstrikes are actually targeting it.

Russia and Turkey have been exchanging barbs and warnings since Turkey shot down a Russian fighter jet that Ankara says was in Turkish air space.

Putin did not mention Turkey by name in his speech, but did urge his military to respond in full force to any "further provocations."

"I order you to act in the toughest way," he said, according to the AP. "Any targets threatening the Russian groups of forces or our land infrastructure should be immediately destroyed."

Russia’s military base in Syria, he added, has more aircraft and air defense weapons now.

Putin also talked about the need to coordinate with the U.S.-led coalition, saying the military should "develop cooperation with all countries, which have a real interest in destroying terrorists."

-- Updated at 1:10 p.m.