If you're going to talk about health care in Alabama, there's one company that has to be part of the conversation.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama is one of the largest businesses in the state with $4 billion in revenue, the insurer with the largest market share in a single state by far, according to the American Medical Association.



In Alabama, the state Department of Insurance through a rate review process is by law supposed to make sure that premiums for health service plans, such as Blue Cross, "not be unreasonably high or excessive." But the federal government has labeled the state's review process inadequate.



A federal class action lawsuit filed in Birmingham alleges a conspiracy among Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans nationwide to stifle competition, hurting providers and consumers alike. Blue Cross in Alabama denies any negative impact of its size, pointing to historically low premium rates, high consumer satisfaction survey results and its more than 70 years of business in Alabama.

Regardless, there's no denying the strength of BCBS of Alabama. Consider only that the company is a major player in the national health insurance debate as the Affordable Care Act kicks in. Last month, BCBS of Alabama made news when it said it would not reinstate current health plans for individuals, denying a request by President Barack Obama to extend those plans for one year.





"A one-year continuation of policies that violates the ACA's requirements could create significant legal and financial risks to our policyholders, the state and our company," said Blue Cross spokeswoman Koko Mackin in a statement at the time.

Even before the Affordable Care Act had become law, BCBS of Alabama's market dominance prompted attention from Obama. "In Alabama, almost 90% is controlled by just one company," he noted in a speech to Congress back in 2009.



Biggest share anywhere



Alabama's commercial health insurance market is the most concentrated of any state, and by a significant margin. According to the AMA, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama served 86 percent of the commercial health insurance market as of 2011. The next closest state was Michigan, with 67 percent of its state's market. Just four other insurers control at least 60 percent of their state's commercial health insurance market (Hawaii, Delaware, Alaska, and South Carolina).

Serving such a large share of the Alabama health insurance market means the company handles a lot of money. The roughly 1.6 million members served by BCBS of Alabama in 2012 contributed to $4.08 billion in revenue for the company last year, according to documents filed with the Alabama Department of Insurance.

Most of those revenues -- roughly 90 percent of them -- were used to pay for medical expenses. The company paid out $3.64 billion for such costs in 2012.

The net result was $114.6 million in profits for BCBS of Alabama last year. Because BCBS of Alabama operates as a not-for-profit company, those profits were reinvested into the company, rather than paid out to shareholders.





Jim McFerrin, a Birmingham lawyer with an expertise in health care and insurance, said the company is doing well based on its most recent financial reports.

McFerrin pointed out that 2011 total assets increased by about a half billion dollars in 2012, from $2.3 billion to $2.8 billion. Meanwhile, the cost of doing business in the individual market has been going down: it was $2.4 billion in 2012, compared to $2.65 billion in 2008.

One way the company uses its profits is to support cash reserves. Those reserves help the company handle unexpected surges in costs. As of 2012, BCBS of Alabama had more than $806 million in cash reserves on hand, according to the state's insurance department.

Mackin said reserves are maintained to protect insured Alabamians from "the burdens of unpaid medical bills." Reserves are regulated by the Alabama Department of Insurance, she pointed out.

"These reserves are maintained at a reasonable level that will ensure continued stability for our customers," she said. "The reserves represent less than four months of Blue Cross' insured claims."

Who's watching?

While many of the numbers are large for BCBS of Alabama, it is not clear whether the company's concentrated market power is a good or bad thing for Alabama.

"It may be surprising that Alabama, having the least competitive insurance market in the country, does not also have some of the highest premiums," said Cynthia Cox, policy analyst with Kaiser Family Foundation. "In fact, a dominant insurer may be able to negotiate lower reimbursement rates for doctors and hospitals and if the insurance market is well regulated this saving can be passed on to consumers."

BCBS of Alabama points out that among 50 states, Alabama has the lowest average family premiums in the country among employers, according to the federal government's Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. And according to the October edition of the AIS Report, the state has the second lowest premiums for a 27-year-old individual on the federal exchange.

Low reimbursement rates could keep coverage costs down for consumers, but may also influence care decisions for doctors. And even if premiums are low, there's evidence they are rising as ACA-compliant policies are written.

Such market influences should be controlled by the rate review process - the job of the Alabama Department of Insurance. But the federal government does not fully approve of the department's handling of that task.

Currently, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services considers Alabama to be one of six states where the rate review process is ineffective. That lack of effectiveness is not for a lack of resources: Between 2010 and 2011, Alabama received $1 million in federal grant money to improve its review process, but only elected to spend $226,000 of that.

"The department reviewed the BCBS rates for compliance under Alabama law," according to Mark Fowler, insurance department spokesman. "The department found they complied with state law. (Alabama) not being an effective rate review state, HHS reviewed the rates for compliance with federal law.





"It's important to note that these were 'new' plans with 'new' rates and not a 'rate increase' of an existing plan already on the market," Fowler added.

And therein lies a loophole, said McFerrin, the attorney.

McFerrin, who is not involved in any litigation with Blue Cross or any insurance company, said under the Affordable Care Act, passed in 2010, insurance companies are required to publicly justify their actions if they want to raise rates by 10 percent or more.



Sticker shock for some



Anecdotally, there have been many examples of people getting hit with premium hikes set for Jan. 1. But neither BCBS of Alabama nor the insurance department would say how many of the 87,000 plans that have been replaced by BCBS of Alabama to comply with ACA are higher in cost than the previous policy. Nor have they stated how much those premiums have risen or how many people have signed on.

Susan Jackson's daughter is one Alabama resident who will go from being covered to being uninsured. Her 22-year-old daughter is a part-time hairstylist barely making payments on a $74 per month catastrophic policy. Her Blue Cross letter said that her new plan would be $260 a month.

"She could barely pay the $74 and has decided to be uninsured come January," said Jackson of Birmingham.

Fowler said BCBS of Alabama did file estimates on rates for the new ACA-compliant plans, including estimates on how many would buy the policies, how many new insured would come aboard, how many would come over after being dropped from small group employers and, how many would stay uninsured and not apply for insurance. But those numbers can't be disclosed, Fowler said.

"Again, all estimates are information that is protected and, therefore, not publicly available," Fowler said.

The state's last significant review of BCBS of Alabama's business practices was conducted in 2009. The regulator included a handful of minor recommendations regarding how BCBS of Alabama conducts its day-to-day operations but did not comment on the company's rate structure.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield dominance

In the states highlighted below, a company affiliated with Blue Cross and Blue Shield is the largest health insurer. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama has the most dominant share among all states with 86% of the market. The color intensity indicates the range of market share, with the darker colors indicating greater market share in that state. (Source: American Medical Association)



AL.com reporter Mike Oliver contributed to this report.