In his "State of the Union" speech last month, among other things, President Barack Obama proposed a program that would make community colleges tuition-free for students in an effort to expand educational affordability and opportunity nationwide.

Several days later in a "60 Minutes" interview, both Speaker of the House John Boehner and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell agreed that this idea, like most of the initiatives included in Obama's address, is a nonstarter. In a follow up remark, McConnell said the notion would be too expensive. Yet both McConnell and Boehner, and a majority of their party, are criticizing Obama for not looking for an unbridled new war powers initiative to strike at ISIS that could cost the American public billions of dollars -- on top of the trillions already spent waging war in Iraq and Afghanistan.

It's interesting how eager the GOP is to bang the war drum -- damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead -- when it comes to engaging in yet another war no matter the cost, while eschewing out of hand an idea that could help millions of the same Americans, more precisely American youth, attain the education they will need to succeed and function in an increasingly knowledge-driven world.

And it's not as if similar programs don't exist. Tennessee already has a program in place, dubbed "Tennessee Promise" that high school graduates can avail themselves of which is proving quite successful. According to the latest figures, the program has 58,000 applicants or 90 percent of the high school seniors in the state. Further, the number of African-American and Hispanic applicants is greater than their numbers in Tennessee colleges.

Chicago also has a free community college program that began this year giving high school graduates with a 3.0 grade point average waivers to cover books, tuition and fees in the city's community colleges.

The Republican objection to Obama's program in some way recalls their strong resistance to Obama's Affordable Care Act. The ACA is modeled after a similar concept that emanated from the conservative Heritage Foundation and is actually the basis of a program in Massachusetts championed and passed with the approval of that state's former Gov. Mitt Romney. Like Romney, Tennessee Gov. Bill Haslam is a Republican and backs the tuition plan that's financed mainly from state lottery funds.

There are stipulations in Obama's plan that would cover full-time and part-time students who maintain a 2.5 grade point average. It would apply to students planning to obtain a four-year college degree or occupational training in tech or high demand fields.

Certainly Obama is under no illusions that getting such a program through a Republican dominated Congress will be easy or even possible, but it seems a better way to spend taxpayers' money than funding yet another war.

EDITOR'S NOTE: Earl Morgan's column appears every Wednesday in The Jersey Journal.