A newly released estimate by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development claims homelessness has plunged in Colorado since 2010, but you wouldn’t know it talking to anyone who works with the homeless. And you wouldn’t know it based upon what you can see with your own eyes in and around downtown Denver, either.

Ten years after John Hickenlooper, then Denver’s mayor, embarked on a plan to end homelessness in the city, the problem seems as bad as ever, and probably worse.

To get a better perspective of the current state of homelessness and what can be done about it, I sat down with Larry Smith, CEO of Catholic Charities for the Archdiocese of Denver, which has been a leading provider of services to the homeless for decades. The interview has been edited for length and clarity.

Q:Let’s start with the basics. What does Catholic Charities do in trying to address homelessness?

A: We’re a very broad, diverse organization, unlike a lot of groups that deal with homelessness and only provide, say, shelter. We provide shelter, counseling, rehabilitation, job training, and sustainable housing. So we meet someone on the street and we provide them with everything they need to get stable.

Not everyone gets to use all of those services because resources are limited. We have four shelters — one in Greeley, one in Fort Collins and two in Denver, the Samaritan House and the Father Ed Judy House. Father Ed Judy is a home for single women and children, with usually between 30 to 40 people living there. The average stay is five to six months. but the amount of time a mother and children can stay is unlimited until they get stable, find housing, get back on their feet, find a job.

And once they leave, we have something called the alumni program, where we follow up with volunteer calling to make sure they’re doing OK. We’re reaching out to these people on a weekly or monthly basis either through volunteers or case workers and saying: How are you doing? Do you have enough food? How are your kids? And inviting them back for holiday events and other things as you would with your family. You create a sense of community and an anchor for them to grab onto.

After three years, 93 percent of those women and children are still in stable housing with stable income. So the recidivism rate back into homelessness is extremely low, which is a beautiful thing, and that’s one of the solutions to homelessness that Catholic Charities is developing.

Q: What are your impressions of the state of homelessness in Denver? Has it gotten better or worse in recent years?

A: Our view is that it is getting worse, not better. What we’re seeing down at Samaritan House is a higher volume of people. Now that may mean that it’s concentrated whereas before it was more spread out. It’s hard to say for sure. We don’t do the point-in-time study [that counts the homeless]. What I can tell you is that we never have an empty bed, so that no matter how many people exit homelessness there is always someone to fill that bed. Our job is to help reestablish their own personal dignity and self-worth.

I will say that we are seeing a larger number of elderly people, especially women, since we’ve opened the Holy Rosary Shelter at Samaritan House. We converted our overflow men’s shelter through an agreement with the Salvation Army, and opened up that overflow shelter to women to become the first permanent women’s shelter in Denver. We were under the impression that there was a small group of women who needed shelter. And what we found was the opposite.

You’re seeing the composition of homelessness change somewhat, and you’re seeing greater needs among the homeless. So that is the challenge at Catholic Charities: How do we keep our eyes open to adjust the services that we provide to meet the needs of people who come to us today as opposed to 30 years ago?

Samaritan House launched in 1986 and it was a beautiful model. Just to give you perspective. About 350 people sleep there every night. They have a men’s dorm and a women’s dorm: 126 beds for the men’s extended stay program and 48 beds for the women’s extended stay program. And then we have a family floor. And what we traditionally see is people move through this shelter or come to us get into the extended stay program, which is essentially a four-month program to get people stable. They have to be sober when they come into the program. And then we help them find housing or income; that may be government assistance or it may be a job, or a combination of the two. and then stable housing.

It takes someone being in the program at least 30 days before you determine if they’re really serious or if they’ll go back to their old ways. Of those in the program more than 30 days we used to see a high percentage — high 80s or low 90s — who would leave with stable housing and stable income. Today we’re seeing the same high percentage leaving the program with stable income but we’re down in the 60 percentile for people leaving with stable housing because the housing market has changed so dramatically in Denver.

So there is a lot of pressure on the working poor.

Q: What percentage of people who come into Samaritan House have drug or alcohol problems or mental illness? How many are employed?

A: I would say the percentage of homeless who are working is probably in the high teens or 20s. The vast majority who come into Samaritan House are struggling to find work or are unemployed for a variety of reasons. There is work and income available for those people but they have to be stable from a drug and alcohol standpoint or they revert to their old ways. That’s a real struggle for some people.

So what we have to do is treat each individual who shows up for whatever their needs are. We focus on what we’re taught in the biblical story of the Good Samaritan. He found this poor man bleeding and knocked out on the side of the road and the victim was actually his enemy. And he picked him and took him and paid the innkeeper and said take care of him and I’ll come back and square up with you. And that’s a perfect example of what we do at Catholic Charities. We are always looking to help people right where they are.

Q: Yes, but it is important to understand what is going on with the homeless — what factors might contribute to their plight. For example, you sometimes hear that the legalization of marijuana has exacerbated the problem. Is that true?

A: Yes, that is my anecdotal sense. I can’t give you empirical data to confirm that, but I can say when we talk to the young men and women who are showing up, sometimes that is part of the draw to Denver right now. They can come here and get stoned. They run out of money, find themselves homeless and then you have a whole other drawerful of issues, such as sex trafficking to survive if they don’t have a job and are not going into a shelter. That is not uncommon. Urban Peak is a homeless shelter not far from Samaritan House and I know they’ve seen an increase in the number of young people.

Catholic Charities saw about a year ago, talking with the Denver Foundation and Denver’s Road Home, that there was a real gap in services for women. There was no permanent shelter. and so we created the shelter I mentioned earlier. Statistics tell us that on average a woman on the street in a city in America, and Denver will be no different, is going to be physically assaulted once a week.

I was for 30 years a corporate geek and started here about 2½ years ago. As a business person coming into a ministry you think, “Well we’ll just put a business plan together and let’s fix that problem.” But you know when you deal with people who are broken you just don’t do that. You have to work with them where they are and it’s not a simple solution. It’s not a business problem to solve. It’s a human problem to solve. And you have to fall back on the mercy, love and compassion of Christ to guide you in what you are doing. I’m a Catholic so you’ve got to hope that’s my motivation.

And when we go and meet these women we’ve opened our doors to, we find they were hiding out. That’s why when I hear of these point in time studies, I wonder how accurate are they. From our anecdotal experience I think the numbers are larger.

We were told these women were a small group. That’s not the case. And we’re seeing proof of it because in our extended stay program, all 48 beds are now occupied by graduates of the Holy Rosary women’s shelter. So not only are these women out there but they are looking for a hand up to get out of this misery called homelessness.

We started by feeding these women every night and then in the morning giving them some food to leave with. We’re up to feeding 150 to 200 women a night at Samaritan House. We can only sleep up to 90 to 100 women in that shelter. and so in coordination with Denver’s Road Home we bus some out to a facility at Peoria and I-70 where another 50 to 75 women will sleep every night.

We would love to open up additional shelters, but I don’t want to just open another shelter where people can go and get free food and a place to sleep. We want to open shelters that offer people hope, and a chance for them to regain their self-worth and dignity. We think that’s what we are all called to do, considering we are made in the image and likeness of God. Every single person who walks in our door has something to contribute regardless of where they are right now in life. And so when we talk about doing more, it’s always with that in mind.

We are looking at a number of ways of opening additional small group home environments. where it’s a smaller community.

Q: It’s probably easier to gain neighborhood support with smaller facilities, too.

A: Much easier. If you’ve got a controlled environment where you’ve got six to eight men or women living together in community who are supporting each other, cutting the grass, finding work, helping each other out, that’s a beautiful thing. Who’s going to object to that? They become members of society and neighbors just like you and me.

People ask who we serve. And I break it down into two groups. It’s givers and receivers. And I’m not sure who we help more, the givers or receivers.

Q: In terms of providing housing, your efforts go way beyond the homeless, right?

A: We run archdiocesan housing, so we have 25 apartment buildings for affordable housing. These are long-term for families and seniors. We work with HUD and other agencies to offer the housing at discounted rates. Broadway Junction is an example of where a one bedroom apartment could go for as low as $400.

We don’t just go in and rent an apartment. We bring all of the services of Catholic Charities on top of it. Of the 1,450 units that we have, we provide about 2,500 people with housing every night.

We have a year to three-year waiting list for every property. And these are all people who qualify. So when we talk about whether there a greater need, man there is incredible need.

E-mail Denver Post editorial page editor Vincent Carroll at vcarroll@denverpost.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.