Click To View Gallery

While healthcare organizations have always faced the challenge of adapting their facilities to evolving services, needs, technology, and healthcare delivery models, the tempo of that change is accelerating.

“It’s virtually impossible for a design that is one snapshot in time to support an ever-changing environment like healthcare,” says Lisa Regan, director of performance and transformation for Bluewater Health of Ontario, Canada. The organization runs two hospitals just across the Michigan border near Lake Erie and recently built a new five-story, 285,000-square-foot facility and renovated an existing five-story, 335,000-square-foot hospital tower. “Keeping up with the rapid pace of change—in terms of technology, new medical practices and procedures, process improvement/Lean initiatives, evolving regulations, and shifting patient demographics—is a real design challenge.”

Adding even more complexity to the mix in the U.S. is the expectation that the Affordable Care Act will drive more non-urgent acute care into ambulatory care settings. “This also implies that the care delivered on the inpatient side of the equation will continue to increase in acuity levels,” says John C. Schrott, president and managing principal architect with IKM (Pittsburgh). “To prepare for that eventuality, providers are looking to create flexibility for their patient units such that the conversion from acute to step down to critical care can be accomplished in the most cost and time effective manner.”

There are a number of ways that healthcare facility design—from infrastructure to interiors—can be approached to make future transitions a bit easier. Granted, there will be more upfront cost required. However, experts say the investment today will better prepare providers for the unknowns of tomorrow.

Starting with structure

To create necessary spatial clearances to support the reassignment of space in the future—and to accommodate the new equipment and clearances that may be required, as well—structural bays, defined as spacing from the center of one structural column to another, has grown from 28 feet to more than 32 feet for new clinical settings. This allows enough space for surgery, imaging, inpatient, or emergency bays, for example, to be sized appropriately now and retrofitted for other uses later without column placement restricting options, explains Curtis Skolnick, managing director of CBRE Healthcare (Richmond, Va.).

For deck heights—as measured from the top of one floor slab to the bottom of the floor slab above—Skolnick recommends 14 feet to 18 feet to allow mechanical, electrical, and plumbing (MEP) and information technology (IT) systems to be appropriately sized for current use and future adaptability.

In urban settings, or smaller sites with limited property space, it’s also important to build with the foundation and structural support systems to allow future vertical expansion, he continues. “By placing mechanical spaces on the roof, they can later function as interstitial spaces for vertical expansion, which will allow for easy tie-in to critical infrastructure in the future.”

Schrott also advises to analyze head-end capacities for MEP equipment, which refers to primary system components such as the chiller and air handling units, to permit changes in space usage without the need to modify the systems in place. This includes stubbing the IT and MEP infrastructure behind the walls so that it can be easily tapped or expanded. In addition, “placing the plumbing chases appropriately, typically on the outboard side or stacked, helps when converting a fit-out room from medical/surgical to intensive care, or vice-versa,” he adds.

Incorporating additional shelled space in an initial build-out should also be considered, to support everything from the addition of elevators to expansion bays for boilers to large mechanical equipment. ”Some shelled spaces can be used for soft functions, such as storage or offices, and repurposed and fit-out later for their intended long-term use,” Skolnick says.