She appeared to be leaving a workout on Friday.

But Drew Barrymore was in no mood to show off her figure.

The 39-year-old wore a baggy top as she hydrated with what appeared to be a green iced tea as she stepped out solo in Los Angeles.

Friday state of mind: Comfort was clearly on Drew's mind, with the actress opting to don a soft white top and stylish blue jeans

Flushed in the face, the actress looked quite worn out as she walked along the street, with her sunny blonde locks slicked back into a ponytail.

The 50 First Dates actress showed off her comfortable style with a soft white top and slimming blue jeans.

Drew teamed her cosy ensemble with a patterned grey purse and a pair of comfortable black flats.

Reviving: Drew Barrymore treated herself to a hydrating taste of cool green tea after a work-out on Friday in Los Angeles

Her blue-green eyes were protected behind orange sunglasses, and she added a splash of colour with a ruby red pedicure.

At one point, Drew visited a T-shirt store, perhaps combing through the shop's many styles with her husband Will Kopelman in mind.

Drew tied the knot with Will in 2012, and the couple are now parents to girls Olive, two, and baby Frankie.

The award-winning actress previously described her chaotic home life in an interview with Us Weekly.

'[I'm a] very traditional [mother]. I'm not organized in my life, like, I lose everything and I'm a complete disaster,' she said. 'With my kids, I really don't accept that for myself because I think kids learn from example of the way you live your life.'

Retail therapy: The 50 First Dates actress looked relaxed as she stepped outside of a hip clothing store

She's a great advert! The mother-of-two served as a model for the latest fragrance of her cosmetics line, Radiant

The actress recently confessed to Today she'd like to slow down her film career to focus on her children, yet she is currently filming Miss You Already.

Drew stars opposite Toni Collette in the upcoming 2015 romantic-comedy, which examines a friendship in the face of a cancer diagnosis.

More recently, Drew unveiled a lovely new promotional image for her latest fragrance, Radiant.

Drew's line of affordable cosmetics, Flower Beauty, announced the addition of three new perfumes back in August - among the new scents were Cherished and Sultry.