With our lives becoming more digital, cyber crime is on the rise. Experts at the White House Summit on Cybersecurity and Consumer Protection at Stanford on Feb. 13 discussed ideas for tackling payment security concerns and moving beyond passwords, while President Obama called for greater private-public sector collaboration on cybersecurity.

By Farida Jhabvala Romero

President Obama on Friday called on Silicon Valley and corporate America to collaborate with the government on cybersecurity, and signed an executive order that would promote the sharing of information on threats or attacks between government and the private sector.

By Liam Kane-Grade and Laura Forman

The number of payment options customers have today has created further opportunities for cyber hackers, leading companies to figure out how to solve the payment security problem.

By Yuqing Pan

Given that two out of three security breaches reportedly exploit weak or stolen passwords, password management is one of the biggest cybersecurity concerns.

By Alex Hicks

Between the lawsuits filed this week in the hack of the nation’s second largest health insurer, Anthem, Inc., and the White House Summit on Cybersecurity and Consumer Protection at Stanford on Friday, cybersecurity dominated the conversation this week in Silicon Valley.

By Ariha Setalvad

Some experts worry that California law requiring reports on breaches will be weakened by President Obama’s push for a national standard.

By Ariha Setalvad

Company executives and others who attended the White House Summit on Cybersecurity and Consumer Protection are far from agreement when it comes to embracing the idea of information-sharing with the government.

By Ileana Najarro

International cooperation among law enforcement agencies is key to investigating cyber crimes, according to a panel of federal law enforcement officials and security network experts.

By Carolina Wilson

A research symposium suggested that while the human relationship with cyberspace will continue to strengthen, educating the cybersecurity workforce and addressing consumer privacy should be the focus.