Marco Rubio speaks during the Republican presidential debate hosted by Fox Business and the Wall Street Journal on Nov. 10 in Milwaukee. (Joshua Lott/Agence France-Presse via Getty Images)

The easiest sell in politics, especially in conservative politics, is to tell the voters their leaders are untrustworthy, Christianity is under assault, the president is out of touch and foreigners are a threat to us physically and economically. Democrats tell us foreigners will steal jobs if we enter into free-trade deals; conservatives tell us they will steal their jobs if they come here. The Democrats sound as gloomy as Republicans when it comes to the economy. If cynicism is the default attitude in popular culture, gloom-and-doom politics is the tone of many campaigns.

Populist politics is rarely sunny. The particular conspiracy theory will differ among candidates and between candidates, but it is only by commiserating with and fanning discontent that opportunistic pols find their voice.

It therefore comes as a surprise that arguably the most likely GOP nominee at this stage, Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) remains so, well, darn cheery. His first early state ad invokes the American dream and envisions a new American century:

Even when delivering a tough message criticizing the president on Obamacare or his leadership in the war against Islamist terrorism, Rubio is calm, not angry, and analytical, not hysterical.

Commenting on the shoot-down of the Russian plane, he again seemed unrattled, albeit concerned about Turkey, which he reiterated is “still a member of the NATO alliance, and if we were not to come to Turkey’s defense and assistance in any instance it would undermine the NATO alliance. So that’s something we need to understand, because NATO is just as important today as it has been in 20 years.” He reminded viewers he saw this coming:

It’s the reason why I warned about having Russia in the Middle East is so complicated. I warned specifically that this could happen, that there could be an incident with Turkey, a NATO ally. That Russia could aggressively fly over Turkish territory and be shot down. The Russians do this to the Baltic States, and they obviously did it in this case when it comes to Turkey. So what would a confrontation look like? Well first of all, you are already seeing it. What will the Russian response be? And this is a critical moment. If Russia believes that it can respond and retaliate against Turkey because NATO is not going to do anything about it. What Russia is basically doing is making the argument that NATO is no longer viable, that it is a feckless alliance. So it’s important for us to be very clear that we will respond and defend Turkey if it comes under assault from the Russians; otherwise, the entire NATO alliance comes into question.

Rubio is gambling that, despite their gloom and disdain for politicians, voters want a calm figure with a vision for a positive future. In any other election this would be unexceptional. Pundits call this “gravitas” or “sounding presidential.” But in the era of Donald Trump’s bombast, Ben Carson’s peculiar introverted and bumbling style and Sen. Ted Cruz’s permanent scowl, Rubio seems preternaturally upbeat and in command. That might not be what the press says voters want, but voters sometimes need to be led, not simply provoked.