If you have been following the debate swirling around the medical device excise tax, as I have, you might have been startled by some recent headlines trumpeting that large medical device manufacturers have continued to see their profits increase, despite the 2.3% tax on the sale of certain medical devices. This is quite a contrast with what many in the medical device industry have pilloried as a job killer and stake in the heart of medical innovation. So, what gives?

Image courtesy Hywards/freedigitalphotos.net.

The recent headlines came on the heels of a report published by the Government Accountability Office (GAO), which analyzed information on the net sales and profits of 102 medical device companies before and after implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), aka Obamacare, based on their filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The study was requested by Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev), who is a supporter of the device tax.

The GAO found that net sales increased overall for the companies it examined from about $95 billion in 2005 to about $136 billion in 2014, which is in the neighborhood of a 43% increase over that period and an annual increase of about 4%. Net profits also increased overall from about $11.4 billion in 2005 to about $16.5 billion in 2014. Not too shabby.

However, the GAO notes that it does not infer a causal relationship between provisions of the ACA and changes in companies' sales or profits since other factors, such as mergers and acquisitions and new product introductions, may have played a role. It also noted that a solid majority of the companies reported uncertainty about the full impact of the ACA in their financial disclosure statements to the SEC, while some noted that the tax, reimbursement changes and coverage expansions likely had an impact on their earnings. I would add that companies plan business strategies well in advance, and they may have already enacted measures—layoffs, plant closures and other cost-cutting moves—to offset the perceived impact of the device tax.

Industry trade association AdvaMed, which has been an effective mouthpiece for industry in opposing the device tax, raised a few issues it had with the GAO report in a statement it released on July 30. Notably, according to a survey that it conducted, "more than half of medical device manufacturers have reduced their R&D budgets as a result of the tax, hampering innovation and slowing medical advancements."

The association also has published compelling anecdotal evidence on how the tax has negatively affected industry. B. Braun, for example, said that, because of the device tax, the company did not hand out raises to its workers for the first time in its history. "And we did it twice," said Senior VP and CFO Bruce Heugel. "We are not proud of it. We cut clinical trials. We cut research and development. We cut capital investment and product line expansion."

Steve Ferguson, Chairman of the Cook Group, said that the tax led his company to put on hold plans to open five new medical device manufacturing plants