HIGHLIGHTS

TRUMP AND HIS DEBTS: A NARROW ESCAPE: On Labor Day weekend in 1990, as Donald Trump faced the worst crisis of his career, he and Wilbur Ross Jr. headed to Atlantic City, N.J., for talks at Mr. Trump’s opulent Taj Mahal casino, which had just opened but was already on the verge of missing a bond payment. Mr. Ross, as an expert on distressed assets, represented bondholders. Mr. Trump brought him to the seaside town for talks, in a helicopter bearing the name “Trump” in giant red letters. The chopper landed on a helipad near the boardwalk. Instantly, people swarmed around a waiting car, thinking Mr. Trump was in it. “They were shoving video cameras at it…It was amazing the adulation he got from the crowd,” Mr. Ross recalls.

CHARLES REX ARBOGAST/ASSOCIATED PRESS

In 1990, Mr. Trump, though known publicly as financially savvy and very rich, was in deep financial trouble. He and his companies owed $3.4 billion and couldn’t make the payments. That posed the risk of lenders seizing his hotels, casinos and other assets. Worse, $830 million of the debt carried his personal guarantee. Creditors, if they wanted, could force him into personal bankruptcy. He survived. Today he is a billionaire, who cites his wealth and success as a reason that, as president, he could make America “great again.” Mr. Trump has no government record to weigh. One way to gauge the kind of president he might be is to examine his business career, and particularly how he dealt with its biggest crisis. Peter Grant and Alexandra Berzon report.

Plus: Mr. Trump said Sunday that he had no control over his words and image being used in terrorist recruiting videos … Mr. Trump released his first television spot Monday and said he would lavish at least $2 million per week on TV in the early-voting states of Iowa and New Hampshire.

NEIL KING JR.’S EARLY HIT: CERTAINTIES ABOUT THE UNPREDICTABLE 2016 RACE

No election in decades has offered more cause for humility among political prognosticators than the 2016 presidential race, now just weeks from its first real contests. A candidate dismissed as preposterous from the outset, celebrity businessman and GOP front-runner Donald Trump, has commanded center stage since July. Jeb Bush, the early smart-money pick to be the Republican nominee, has gone nowhere. The unbeatable Hillary Clinton is struggling in New Hampshire. And no one has any firm idea what this race will look like come early fall. Still, there are some certainties, or at least near-certainties, all of which serve to highlight the total weirdness of the 2016 campaign. Read Neil King Jr.’s full post in Washington Wire.

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

CANDIDATES DIVERGE WIDELY ON TAXES, GROWTH AND LIFTING THE MIDDLE CLASS: Presidential candidates of both parties say faster economic growth is crucial to giving middle-class families a raise. They disagree sharply about how to achieve it. At the broadest level, the candidates divide by party, with Republican contenders following a formula dating to Ronald Reagan that says tax cuts and closing loopholes are the answer. On the Democratic side, the top response calls for increased spending, especially on infrastructure projects, overlaid on tax increases for top earners to pay for parental leave and other programs. Though the campaign thus far has seemed light on economic policy, the different formulas for producing the most basic national goal—economic growth—shows how the divide between the two parties remains deep, and perhaps unbridgeable. Bob Davis reports.

More on 2016: A flurry of events is planned before voting in the presidential primaries begins next month, with Florida Sen. Marco Rubio casting himself as an outsider and former President Bill Clinton taking a more public role in his wife’s campaign … New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie recognizes New Hampshire Republicans after holding court at more than 40 town-hall meetings in the Granite State last year. What the Republican presidential candidate may be less familiar with is his Statehouse office in Trenton … GOP presidential candidate Ben Carson said failures by his top campaign staff to execute an effective strategy forced him to undertake a major personnel shake-up last week … Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina said Sunday that a tweet in support of the University of Iowa football team over her own alma mater, Stanford, was “tongue-in-cheek.”

J. SCOTT APPLEWHITE/ASSOCIATED PRESS

RYAN WANTS HOUSE TO STEER GOP POLICY AGENDA: House Speaker Paul Ryan starting this month will push to turn the chamber into a platform for ambitious Republican policy ideas, in a bid to help shape his unsettled party’s priorities and inject substance into a presidential race heavy on personality politics. The Wisconsin lawmaker has asked members of his conference to bring proposals to a policy retreat next week at which they will draw up the chamber’s priorities for the year. In doing so, the GOP’s 2012 vice-presidential nominee hopes to showcase policy positions from the chamber—and shore up his party’s electoral prospects—while Republicans settle on a nominee for the White House. The proposition that the congressional wing of the Republican Party could assert itself as a center of GOP leadership just months after the House was in turmoil reflects the free-for-all nature of the party’s presidential field. Mr. Ryan has been speaker for just two months, having taken over after conservatives pushed out his predecessor, John Boehner. Siobhan Hughes reports.

ABEDIN TAHERKENAREH/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY

SAUDI ARABIA CUTS DIPLOMATIC TIES WITH IRAN: Saudi Arabia cut off diplomatic relations with Iran on Sunday, giving Iranian diplomats 48 hours to leave the country, as the kingdom’s execution of a dissident cleric inflamed sectarian tensions in a region already brimming with conflict. Crowds of incensed Shiite Muslims demonstrated in cities from Tehran to Beirut, condemning the death of Nemer al-Nemer—a prominent Shiite cleric put to death in the mass execution of 47 prisoners on Saturday—and calling for the downfall of the Saudi government. Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei declared that Saudi Arabia would face divine retribution for Mr. al-Nemer’s execution. The unrest raised alarm in Western capitals about a new year of growing hostilities in the regional battle for influence between the Sunni kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Iran, the dominant Shiite power in the Middle East. Asa Fitch, Ahmed Al Omran and Karen Leigh report.

Plus: The sudden upheaval that shattered ties between Iran and Saudi Arabia over the weekend also saddled the Obama administration with unexpected complications in what already was a long-shot bid to ease the crises of the Middle East … The diplomatic rift could complicate OPEC’s efforts to calm oil markets if Iran begins exporting up to one million barrels a day of extra crude once Western sanctions are lifted as expected early this year … Bahrain severed diplomatic ties with Iran on Monday.

YEAR AHEAD: From the U.S. economy to Middle East hot spots, here is the news to watch for this year.

ALSO IN THE NEWS

A growing number of people are turning to health-care ministries to cover their medical expenses instead of buying traditional insurance, a trend that could challenge the stability of the Affordable Care Act.

President Obama will host a town hall focusing on gun issues, scheduling the event for Thursday, the fifth anniversary of the shooting of former Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.

The Obama administration this weekend began detaining Central Americans who have evaded deportation orders, launching a crackdown on people illegally in the country amid an increase in migrants trying to cross the southwest border.

If 2015 was the year that more than a million Africans, Afghans and Arabs crashed through the gates of Europe, 2016 will be the year Europe gets to grips with the issue—or doesn’t and faces the consequences.

A video released Sunday purportedly showed Islamic State militants shooting five men accused of spying for Britain, in what appears to be the latest piece of propaganda from the group after recent military losses.

When Iraq’s prime minister holds a meeting today to discuss the monumental task of rebuilding the recently liberated city of Ramadi, officials will encounter a grim pattern: Each time Islamic State is uprooted, the battles and the group’s tactics leave behind a legacy of destruction that will linger for years.

Col. Gulmurod Halimov was once on the fast track within the security service of his native Tajikistan, and trusted by the U.S. government. In late April, he left his home in this village outside the capital, Dushanbe, telling his family he was going on a routine business trip. A month later, the U.S.-trained commander resurfaced in an Islamic State propaganda video.

China said it landed a test flight on a newly completed airfield in the disputed Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, a sign of its growing military capabilities in the region.

A family previously involved in a showdown with the federal government has occupied a building at a national wildlife refuge in Oregon and is asking militia members to join them.

SEIB VIDEO: STAKES ARE HIGH FOR SUPREME COURT DECISIONS IN 2016

In the year ahead, the Supreme Court is expected to rule on big, divisive issues including affirmative action, abortion rights, unions and political redistricting. Here’s a closer look at the potentially dramatic new judicial season.

HERE’S A LOOK AT THE DAY AHEAD

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: President Barack Obama meets with Attorney General Loretta Lynch, Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates, Federal Bureau of Investigation Director James Comey and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives Deputy Director Thomas E. Brandon at 2:10 p.m. at the White House. The president will host a town hall focused on gun issues Thursday, on the fifth anniversary of the shooting of former Rep. Gabrielle Giffords. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew meets with community and business leaders in Mountain View, Calif., to discuss the U.S. economy and highlight initiatives aimed at spurring innovation and supporting financial inclusion in Mountain View, Calif. He participates in a policy forum at 2 p.m.

ECONOMIC INDICATORS: The Institute for Supply Management releases its manufacturing index for December at 10 a.m. The Commerce Department releases construction spending for November at 10 a.m.

CONGRESS: The House reconvenes at noon.

WHAT WE’RE READING AROUND THE WEB

Sen. Ted Cruz’s strength has been in Iowa and the set of Southern states that come up early in the primary calendar, but he is about to make a push in New Hampshire as well: “The Texas Senator has not been to New Hampshire since November, but he is planning an all-out blitz of the state later this month, pegged to a Jan. 17 bus tour that will take him to every corner of the state,” writes Jacqueline Alemany of CBS News.

German Chancellor Angela Merkel has told her country that the influx of about a million refugees, while posing difficulties, “is an opportunity for tomorrow,” adding that “countries have always benefited from successful immigration, both economically and socially,” writes of Hanna Kozlowska of Quartz.

The Washington Post’s Dan Balz, Philip Rucker, Robert Costa and Matea Gold tell the story of the GOP’s presidential race so far. One big change since the start of the campaign, they write, is that many candidates “have come to see that they all are operating inside that alternate universe” created by Donald Trump that they once thought they wouldn’t have to understand or manage.

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, eyeing an opening in Iowa, has shifted his strategy in the GOP race and has made the state a test run for his bet that he can leverage his relationships and connections as former president of the Republican Governors Association to tap into a network of governors’ staffers and donors in Republican-led states as he seeks the GOP presidential nomination, writes Time’s Zeke Miller. His goal is to be a Jeb Bush in the state.

In the WSJ’s Think Tank, Aaron David Miller writes that Saudi Arabia’s execution of a prominent Shiite cleric, setting off protests in the kingdom and elsewhere in the region, shows that “right or wrong, the Saudis are going their own way. The U.S. will be left to pick up the pieces.”

FEEDBACK: The Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter is The Wall Street Journal’s morning rundown of the biggest news stories and exclusive features from Washington on politics, policy, financial regulation, defense and more. Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.

SIGN UP: Capital Journal Daybreak, straight to your inbox http://on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup