Buy Photo Reporter Joe Gerth (Photo: Jessica Ebelhar/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

If you’re a fan of NBC’s “The Voice” or Sunday Night Football or WAVE-3 news and you haven’t seen much in the way of Matt Bevin commercials, there’s a reason.

Bevin is still mad at reporter Theo Keith.

You remember Theo. Tall guy. Dark hair. Glasses. Moved to Milwaukee in August.

He did a couple of stories over the summer about Bevin and his failure to pay taxes. Bevin didn’t like the stories, so, the GOP gubernatorial candidate publicly shut him out.

He refused to answer Keith’s questions during press conferences and went so far as to accuse him of being on Democrat Jack Conway’s payroll. As you may recall, there is a long list of reporters to whom Bevin won’t speak.

What you didn’t know and what I didn’t realize until this week was that Bevin had also shut out WAVE from his advertising budget — small as it may be. Since those stories ran, Bevin hasn’t run a single ad on WAVE.

The campaign didn’t answer an email asking why it wasn’t advertising on WAVE but was buying time on the three other major stations in Louisville.

But Ken Selvaggi, the vice president and general manager at WAVE, said Bevin’s media buyer told the station that Bevin had ordered the firm not to buy ads on WAVE because of the station’s news coverage of him.

Now, this on the surface, seems short-sighted a couple of ways.

Buy Photo At the Lincoln Day Dinner in Lexington on Saturday, nominee for Governor Matt Bevin showed his support for U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell in a video featuring his use of ‘Team Mitch’ shirts and stickers, as well as interactions with McConnell. Bevin is shown here during a press conference at the Republican Party of Kentucky Headquarters in Frankfort, KY. (Photo: Frankie Steele/Special to the Courier-Journal)

First of all, even if the news coverage has a pro-Conway flair (which I’m not saying it has), the lack of advertising for Bevin ensures that viewers of WAVE get a triple dose of anti-Bevin media throughout the day with news stories, Conway campaign ads, as well as ads from a Democratic super PAC.

Those messages are not being balanced by any Bevin ads, nor is it being balanced by ads from the Republican Governors Association, which, fed up with Bevin’s refusal to raise money or kick more of his own in to the race, stopped advertising a few weeks ago.

Second of all, it also misses the point of commercial television stations. They aren’t charities that exist to collect money from good-hearted candidates who want to enrich their owners with campaign cash. The stations provide a service in advertising that the candidates find beneficial.

By ignoring one station, they are missing out on reaching thousands upon thousands of potential voters — not just in Louisville but in the entire Louisville media market, which stretches far beyond Jefferson County. And as one television executive told me, “there are no dog stations in this market.”

One is hard pressed to recall a Kentucky politician who was under more fire from the media than former Gov. Paul Patton after former WHAS-11 reporter Mark Hebert aired a story accusing him of having an affair with a woman who had received a gubernatorial appointment.

It almost cost Patton the governorship and his marriage, and it did cost him any chance of winning a U.S. Senate seat in 2004. Yet Patton never expressed anger to Hebert or tried to exact revenge on WHAS.

“He told me, ‘Mark’s just doing his job,’ recalled Denis Fleming, Patton’s former general counsel.

Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1ROlObv