Using Medicaid to provide health insurance to more Americans is in keeping with the history of the Republican Party.

Editorial cartoon (Photo: Special to news-press.com) Story Highlights In 1986, Reagan allowed states to extend Medicaid to low-income pregnant women and young children.

Pennsylvania will be the 27th state to broaden Medicaid.

Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Corbett has apparently decided the Affordable Care Act isn't so bad after all. He recently reached a deal with the Obama administration to expand the state's Medicaid program under the controversial law to provide health insurance to about 500,000 low-income people.

Corbett was among the many Republican state leaders who initially rejected Obamacare and the Medicaid expansion. Now time has passed and reality has set in. Their states are losing out on billions of federal dollars. Their poor residents have no health care coverage. Hospitals and doctors are not reimbursed for treating the uninsured.

These leaders are faced with a new political pressure — one that comes from constituents instead of national party leaders. (It's likely no coincidence Corbett is facing a tough re-election fight. One poll shows him trailing his Democratic challenger by 25 points.)

Pennsylvania will be the 27th state to broaden Medicaid to residents earning up to a third more than the federal poverty level. Better late than never. Florida is not one of those states.

Hopefully, other Republican state leaders will follow Corbett, because whether they realize or admit it, using Medicaid to provide health insurance to more Americans is in keeping with the history of their political party.

First, Medicaid was not created solely by Democrats. In 1965, 13 Republicans in the U.S. Senate and 70 Republicans in the U.S. House voted "yes" to the legislation creating the program.

States didn't have to participate, and some initially resisted. Within four years, 48 states had signed on to use the program to insure the poor. They quickly realized it was the best way to get poor people covered.

In 1986, President Ronald Reagan signed legislation allowing states to extend Medicaid coverage to low-income pregnant women and young children. Three more times the Republican president signed legislation to expand coverage to more pregnant women and older children. (Former President George Bush, also a Republican, approved wider expansion, including coverage for children up to age 18.)

Then there was a little girl from Iowa named Katie Beckett. Most of the first three years of her life were spent in a hospital, and the tragedy of her illness was compounded when her parents' health insurer stopped paying the bills. Though her parents wanted to care for her at home, Medicaid refused to pay for that less expensive alternative to hospital care.

It was Reagan who demanded that Congress waive the income limit rule to help her and other children with disabilities live at home and receive medical care. It didn't matter that their families were not "poor enough" to be eligible. Reagan insisted on helping them. States were eventually able to secure Medicaid "waivers' to help children like Katie.

Despite the bipartisan heritage of Medicaid, Republicans have treated its expansion in Obamacare like the craziest, most irresponsible idea they've ever heard of.

Now the governor of Pennsylvania has seen the light. Or maybe he decided to listen to his predecessors.

Either way, we hope other members of his party will do the same, because millions of Americans will remain unnecessarily uninsured until they do.

— The Des Moines Register, a Gannett newspaper.

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1rXoiLL