White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest declined to make a prediction Wednesday on the outcome of marriage litigation before the U.S. Supreme Court, but said the administration remains “very confident” in the aftermath of oral arguments about the case presented by the federal government.

Whether a pending case is about marriage or Obamacare, Earnest has a habit of not making an assessment from the White House briefing room on how the Supreme Court seems poised to rule — a rule he applied when asked by the Washington Blade about pending marriage litigation.

“I have previously warned against drawing conclusions about what the Supreme Court will decide based exclusively on the public arguments,” Earnest said.

But Earnest praised U.S. Solicitor General Donald Verrilli, who argued in favor of marriage equality on the basis that same-sex couples “deserve protections under our laws and they deserve it now.”

“The president is very proud of the way in which the solicitor general presented the viewpoint of the federal government, and we continue to be very confident in the strength of the arguments he presented, but I’m not going to at this point prejudge the outcome of the decision,” Earnest said.

Earnest said President Obama was briefed on the arguments by White House counsel Neil Eggleston and Senior Adviser Valerie Jarrett. Both attended the oral arguments at the Supreme Court.

The Obama administration weighed in on the marriage litigation before the Supreme Court in a friend-of-the-court brief calling for a ruling that would strike down all remaining bans on same-sex marriage around the country.

Asked whether Obama sees such a ruling as a possible decision from the court, Earnest again declined to make a prediction about the ruling and talked about the strength of the federal government’s argument.

“Again, we’re going to let the Supreme Court decide, but Don Verrilli made a very cogent and persuasive argument about what he believes, and what the federal government believes, should be the outcome here,” Earnest said. “At this point, I’m not going to try to distill the arguments that he was making in this setting. I’ll just say that we feel very confident in the strength of the legal argument that he made, but we’ll let the Supreme Court decide as they should.”