FORT COLLINS — When Colorado State volleyball star Kelsey Snider was a seventh-grader in Westminster, she sensed something was wrong.

When she was active, her heart rhythm was irregular. It also was so emphatic, she recalled this week, “You could actually see it beat through my shirt.”

She told her mother, Debra, about it, asking, “Is this normal?”

No, a concerned Debra said, it isn’t. She took Kelsey to the family physician, seeking answers. Soon, Kelsey was found to be afflicted with the rare Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome, meaning she had an extra electrical pathway in her heart. After referrals to Children’s Hospital, she underwent two separate operations a month apart.

The first, an attempted freezing of the pathway to shut it down, was the less radical of the two possible solutions, but it didn’t work. The second, more risky, involved “burning” the pathway.

“They didn’t want to burn it the first time because there could be scabs and create a clot and more issues,” Snider said. “But they had to do that.”

She smiled and added, “It worked. … I’m good now!”

Yes, years later, the Pomona High graduate is a senior leader and middle blocker for CSU’s five-time defending Mountain West champions. The Rams are 10-1 and ranked eighth in the country after Friday night’s victory over No. 18 Arizona State in Tempe, Ariz. CSU plays Saturday against Pepperdine at 11 a.m. and North Carolina Central at 6 p.m. in Tempe.

Snider, 22, was named the conference player of the week Monday after she helped the Rams win four consecutive matches, including a victory over No. 9 Brigham Young in Las Cruces, N.M.

The current national ranking is the highest for the program since 2004. Although the Rams have made the NCAA Tournament in each of coach Tom Hilbert’s 17 seasons with the Rams, and have made game nights a campus happening at Moby Arena, the farthest they’ve gotten is the regional semifinals, or the Sweet 16. They’ve done that five times.

“Every year I’ve been here, we only made it to the first or second round,” said the 6-foot-1 Snider. “This is my last year here, and I want to make it farther. I want to be part of the team that goes to the Sweet 16 and Elite Eight. Final Four would be a dream.”

The funny thing is, Snider at first didn’t even like the sport.

“Freshman year of high school I wanted to be a three-sport athlete,” Snider said. “I said I was going to do basketball, track and soccer. Well, track and soccer were in the same season, so I said, ‘All right, well, let’s try volleyball.’

“On the second day of tryouts, I was saying, ‘I don’t like this. I’m going to quit. This is horrible. I don’t understand it.’ My dad was like, ‘Kels, you can’t quit. You’re not a quitter.’ “

She stuck with it, eventually also improving through her involvement with the Juggernaut club program and at Pomona.

“She’s playing well, and she’s a good leader,” Hilbert said, adding that Snider “is a great example of a top-level Colorado player who could have gone somewhere else and chose to stay home and has had a great career because of it.”

Snider and senior outside hitter Marlee Reynolds, who is engaged to marry former CSU and current New York Giants center Weston Richburg in March, both traveled to Slovenia and Croatia with an MW all-star team last summer.

This fall term, Snider is working in a for-credit internship in the CSU volleyball office, helping plan travel.

“If the flights aren’t correct, it’s my fault,” she said. “If the food’s not there, it’s my fault. If we don’t have rooms, if anything is wrong, it’s my fault.

“So it’s been stressful.”

Has anything been her fault yet?

“No,” Snider said, “we had our first trip last weekend (to Las Cruces) and it went smoothly. I went, ‘Yes!’ It was a personal victory.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei