Like the old sticks-in-the-mud of Downton, some viewers may wish things hadn’t changed.

They may believe life was better when “Downton Abbey” first caught the world’s attention. They may have been happier when it moved slowly, dwelling in the 19th century — and didn’t operate under the burden of being a ratings force and fundraising asset for PBS.

But while last season pushed the Crawley clan toward the Jazz Age, the extended grieving, especially on the part of widowed Lady Mary, begged for a fresh start. This week, creator Julian Fellowes obliges.

When “Downton Abbey” returns for season 5 on Jan. 4 (at 9 p.m. on RMPBS), the year is 1924 and change is everywhere. Here come the Roaring Twenties.

Mary has committed to living in the present, rather than continuing to mourn the tragedy in her past. The customs of well-bred courtship seem to be undergoing revision. Mary wonders aloud to Anna (Joanne Froggatt) why courting couples don’t test out the physical side of things before marriage. Suitor Tony Gillingham (Tom Cullen) will soon suggest a weekend away — with adjoining rooms.

Daisy is tired of seeing the world pass her by and intends to educate herself in case she really does have to run a farm someday. Lady Rose is pushing to get a wireless (radio), but for now, Lord Grantham is holding the line.

Several of the “old duffers” — notably Molesley — are worried about aging.

Not only is the government now led by a Labor Party prime minister, a shock to the old way of life at the grand manors, but the threat of more intermingling between the upper crust and lower classes can only be a worry to Lord Grantham and his set.

“The nature of life is not permanence but flux,” Mr. Carson (Jim Carter) wisely observes.

“Things are changing whether we are sad about it or not,” observes Mrs. Hughes (Phyllis Logan).

Maybe the pace of the drama is more rapid to signify the hurried pace of the more modern world. Or maybe the production is running in fear of losing its momentum. It appears to calm down after the first hour.

While change is the only constant, some things remain the same: Downstairs, Barrow is still a bully, while Bates is still hiding a secret; upstairs, Branson remains torn between his humble beginnings and his current elevated status, while Lady Edith (Laura Carmichael) is tormented by the fact that she abandoned her baby to the couple living on the Grantham property.

Luckily, Lady Violet (Maggie Smith) still manages to get the last, best word:

“Principles are like prayers, noble of course, but awkward at a party.”

This season’s guest stars include Richard E. Grant, Anna Chancellor (a riot as randy Lady Anstruther), Rade Sherbedgia, Harriet Walter and Peter Egan.

Even when it’s slow, “Downton” reunites us with favorite characters in a distant time of manners and dressing for dinner. The prettiest soap opera on TV continues to offer a refuge from the present while mirroring contemporary attitudes and evolutions. Really, it’s all about change.

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp