Spin This Return of the Cocaine Congressman Rep. Trey Radel is back on Capitol Hill. What should he do now?

Each week, Politico Magazine picks a political scandal to highlight, and our colleague Mike Allen asks Playbook readers to weigh in with their crisis-management expertise, both professional and otherwise.

This week’s challenge: The return of freshman Rep. Trey Radel (R-Fla.), who pleaded guilty in November to a cocaine possession charge and is back on Capitol Hill after a month-long stint in a Florida rehabilitation center. Radel, who is on probation, refuses to resign, and faces what likely be a stiff primary challenge in August. And his troubles don’t stop there: The House Ethics Committee is looking into his drug use, POLITICO reports. Radel says he’s spending more time in church and has enrolled in an outpatient treatment program, but otherwise it’s business as usual. “I look forward to getting back to work next week representing my neighbors in Southwest Florida as they face the burdens of Obamacare, a jobless recovery, and a federal government that continues to spend more than it takes in,” he said in a statement Thursday.

Story Continued Below

If you were advising Radel, what would you tell him to do now? We asked Playbook readers to give it a shot, and here’s what they came up with. We’ll announce a winner in Tuesday’s Playbook.

Amelia Chassé, vice president, Hynes Communications

Zero-three months: Give interviews to targeted Florida outlets (print, digital, radio) that will agree up front to keep the questions reasonable. Have short, non-detailed answer for rehab Qs that includes apology, gratitude to constituents, acknowledgment of personal progress and then pivots to getting back to work for Floridians. Be able to detail specific legislative goals.

Three-six months: Exclusive interview with glossy pub detailing personal progress post-rehab, ideally with spouse/family participation. Follow up with Beltway/national media blitz.

Six-nine months: Look for legislative outlet to demonstrate progress i.e. drug education/prevention legislation. Meet with teen/parent/community groups and deploy anecdotes on campaign trail.

Key for Radel here is that he’s not Rob Ford or Marion Barry. He did something that tons of normal citizens have done and moved beyond, so provided he is able to give the appearance of frankness on the issue while also demonstrating value as a legislator, the average voter should be open to forgiving and forgetting fairly quickly given the relatively minor nature of the offense.

James Ryan Hoyne, Playbook reader

If I were Rep. Trey Radel’s P.R. adviser, I would have told him to tenure his letter of resignation effective New Year’s Eve, in order to focus on both his recovery as well as to avoid putting his family through the media blitz as a result of his poor judgment.

Adam Dubitsky, Washington-based publicist and GOP political consultant

Congressman, good to speak with you.

I read your interview with Gannett, your first since being released from an in-patient treatment center if I’m correct. You seemed genuinely contrite and that you understand that your best thinking got you busted for coke halfway through your first term in Congress.

A lot of Hollywood types, surrounded by fawning yes men and assistants, somehow conclude that their 28 days of supervised recovery entitles them to share their vast experience with sobriety in a book or morning-show interview, only to get arrested weeks later. I’m glad that’s something else you don’t have in common with them. Right?

You and I both know that it isn’t easy for a first-termer to get national press attention. Well, you’ve got it now, and I’m glad you respect the gaggle of reporters camped outside your office enough to not pretend they’re here to get your opinion on Obamacare or Syria.

Really? Seriously? You think Anthony Weiner was mobbed by reporters because of left-wing media bias? No, you shouldn’t avoid them; in fact you should go out and take their questions—all of them. They’ll lose interest in you before long if you respect the fact that they are doing their job. Besides, someone else in our party will do or say something dumb in the near future and they’ll go bug him.

You owe it to your constituents to go on the air for ONE in-depth taped TV interview. Sure, NBC 6 is fine. No, you shouldn’t get into details about your recovery; twelve-step groups are anonymous for a reason. No, I wouldn’t say it was an isolated incident. Nobody will believe it. I’d say that you now recognize that your problem with drugs started when you first experimented with pot or whatever it was back in high school. You don’t have to talk about the legal case against you. Just be honest and work hard. Your political career is hardly in your hands anymore.

Oh, yeah—one more thing. You’re going to “meetings,” right? Got a sponsor? Great.