Five of today’s top Florida political stories at your fingertips:

Wasserman Schultz backs Iran deal – Democratic Party Chairwoman and Florida Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz said Sunday she will vote in favor of President Barack Obama’s nuclear deal with Iran. “In weighing everything, all the information, I’ve concluded the best thing to do is vote in support of the Iran deal and put Iran years away from being a nuclear state,” Wasserman Schultz, the first Jewish-American woman to represent Florida in Congress, told CNN’s Jake Tapper Sunday on “State of the Union.” Read more

Labor Day Weekend, brought to you by these Florida lobbyists and political organizations – Amid the parades and barbecues the meaning of Labor Day often gets lost on contemporary Americans, particularly in Florida, where unions scarcely carry political or cultural clout outside of Palm Beach, Broward and Miami-Dade counties. But as we celebrate the holiday, let’s take a moment to honor those who persevered through both dangerous working conditions and violent hostility from robber barons and Pinkerton agents in order to bring us the abolition of child labor, the minimum wage, and the 40-hour work week… Read more

Unintended consequence: GOP donor-class may hand Florida to Trump – Early in the 2016 cycle, the Republican establishment pushed Marco Rubio aside in Florida and put its money and support behind Jeb Bush. That decision has created a scenario which could rob both candidates of the state’s highly coveted delegates. Read more

Miami Dolphins visit boy hospitalized after termite fumigation – Members of the Miami Dolphins visited 10-year-old Peyton McCaughey on Sunday. McCaughey is recovering after his family says he was poisoned after his home was fumigated for termites in Palm City. Read more

Combee proposes bill to regulate home gun ranges – State Rep. Neil Combee said he has filed a bill to clear up murkiness in a Florida statute regarding home gun ranges. Current law states firing a gun outside a residence is legal so long as the person does not “recklessly or negligently discharge(s) a firearm outdoors on any property used primarily as the site of a dwelling.” Meaning, a gun can be fired, so long as it is done so safely. Read more

Uh-oh: New Mexico State bus target of theft during Florida game

ICYMI: Debbie Wasserman Shultz gets foul-mouthed in fundraiser; gets plenty of mockery back

For more Florida political news, visit BPR’s FLORIDA NEWS page