With one of the most challenging days of riding in the history of Ride The Rockies, the 29th annual cycling tour gets under way in Boulder on Sunday morning.

The 2,000 cyclists representing 49 states and nine other countries from ages 9-81 won’t have much of a chance to get their feet wet for the six-day, 471-mile trek over six mountain passes. Rather, the tour starts by taking an inverted plunge — 20 miles up Boulder Canyon with approximately 2,750 feet of elevation to the first aid station in Nederland.

“Day 1: There’s no sugarcoating it; it’s gonna be a tough day,” said Ride The Rockies tour director Chandler Smith. “And it’s a day where you need to pace yourself. There’s obviously a lot of elevation gain in the first day. And some significant climbs.”

Overall, Day 1 to Winter Park covers 89 miles with 9,911 feet of elevation. Smith was quick to reveal the bright side to the course’s profile.

“The route itself is a lot of fun,” Smith said. “Going up Boulder Canyon with westbound traffic closed? It’s not every day you get that experience. Riding Peak to Peak Highway: It’s a gorgeous stretch of road going through the likes of Black Hawk and Central City, and just seeing the character and charm of those towns will keep people’s minds a little preoccupied.”

The most menacing aspect at first blush might be the climb from Empire up Berthoud Pass — approximately 2,700 feet of climbing over 13 miles — because of its placement late in the course. However, Smith advises cyclists not to overlook the stretch preceding that final climb.

“The real challenge in this is you have a big day, and that only gets you to Empire,” said Smith. “And then you still have a big climb up and over Berthoud Pass before you finish out the stage. …

“But I think the part that is going to surprise people the most — you don’t see it necessarily on the profile — once you hit Idaho Springs to Empire, you have about 12-13 miles which is just a steady gradual. That stretch is notorious for headwinds. You just get done doing all this climbing, and then you get to Idaho Springs thinking, ‘Ah, I might have a little reprieve,’ by just looking at the elevation profile. But that 13 miles can be pretty punishing.”

Typically on Ride The Rockies, cyclists can start the day at their leisure. In the interest of traffic management in Boulder Canyon, however, Day 1 begins with a “wave start” (details below).

Smith: “We’re working closely with Colorado State Patrol, CDOT and Boulder and Nederland police departments to facilitate a more timely plan out of respect for everyday motorists and other tourists trying to get up and down the canyon. …

“So it’ll be waves of up to 300. Twenty-minute increments. With a break for an opening ceremony at 7 a.m. The first wave will be 5:45; the last wave is 8:05.”

At the end of the day awaits Winter Park, which will serve as a host community for Ride The Rockies for the first time in tour history.

“Yeah, I think without a doubt it’ll go down as one of the toughest days,” said Smith. “But perhaps one of the most rewarding days.”