Social connections and an ability to handle stress are among the factors that can help people live to be 100, according to researchers. ( Jeannie Lancaster / For the Reporter-Herald )

Vera Bodle and Antoinette Willey are two of a growing group of individuals who have lived to 100 years of age and beyond.

Bodle will celebrate her 104th birthday today at the Wexford Senior Center. Willey, a former Loveland resident now living in Maine, will be 101 in September.

Both of the women quickly dispel any stereotypes about older individuals. They are witty, clear-voiced and sharp.

It becomes apparent that both have a significant family history of longevity. Willey's parents lived into their 80s. Many of her male cousins lived into their 90s. Several female cousins lived to nearly 100. One aunt reached her centenarian birthday.

Bodle also has an impressive family tree. Her mother lived to 94. Her grandmother was one of 18 children. Of those 18, 13 made it through the Civil War and each lived to over 90 years of age.

Do you want to live to be 100 years old? If so, are there things you can do to increase your odds of longevity? The answer appears to be yes and no.

The number of individuals who reach the century milestone has increased in recent years. According to the New England Centenarian Study at Boston University, it is, "one of, if not the fastest growing segments of the population." In 1994, there was one centenarian per 10,000 individuals. That number has grown to where there are now about 80,000 centenarians in the U.S. or 1 per 6,000.

Advertisement

The New England Centenarian Study began as a population-based study of people living in eight towns in the Boston area. It has since grown to become the largest study of centenarians in the world. The study now includes 1,600 centenarians and 500 of their children. They noted that of those living to 100 or longer, 85 percent are women and 15 percent are men.

So, what does increase one's chances of living a longer life? Many of the answers may come as no surprise.

Vera Bodle, age 104, laughs Wednesday as she talks about how she still exercises, reads, quilts and much more. She says that her secret to living such a long life is that she stays active and keeps a positive attitude. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Researchers with the New England Centenarian Study found that those living to 100 had a number of characteristics in common. "Few centenarians are obese," they reported — important since those who are overweight are more at risk of heart disease, stroke and cancer.

"I've always been very careful about what I've eaten," said Willey, during a recent phone interview. "I stay away from cheeses and creams and red meat."

Bodle shared she has lived a very active lifestyle. She continues to exercise one half hour each morning.

Another finding was that a substantial smoking history was very rare in the centenarians studied.

Also, a preliminary study, "suggests that centenarians are better able to handle stress than the majority of people." In addition, their children score high in extraversion and low in neuroticism on standardized personality testing.

Although she has seen her share of sorrow in her life, experiencing the deaths of three husbands and a daughter, Bodle feels she is "basically a happy person."

"Just take it easy, and don't worry about things," added Willey.

One thing that may be helping women's longevity is that, "Women also tend to be more social than men, and social connections are believed to be critical to weathering old age," wrote researchers.

Willey and Bodle both report still taking an active interest in reading and current events. "Just for the utter joy of learning," Willey said. "One thing most people can have out of life is the experience of finding out something that you never knew. It's exhilarating."

While there may be things over which one has some control, there are other factors that individuals cannot influence. There is a strong familial component to longevity. "At least 50 percent of centenarians have first-degree relatives and/or grandparents who also achieve very old age, and many have exceptionally old siblings," wrote researchers with the New England Centenarian Study. "Many of the children of centenarians (age range of 65 to 82 years) appear to be following in their parents' footsteps with marked delays in cardiovascular disease, diabetes and overall mortality."

Not everyone wants to live as long as a century, citing loss of physical ability and dementia as their reasons. But the New England Centenarian Study found that 15 percent of centenarians showed no significant changes in their thinking ability. Dementia, though present in many, was not always a given.

Willey shared her insights for individuals, whether they live to 70 or 100. "So many years I kept saying that my body was being traitorous," she shared. "You can't really think like that. It's a natural thing that you're going through."

Bodle smiled as she shared a recent conversation with her physician, "What am I still doing here?" she asked.

"There must be something you need to do," he replied.

"We'll tell me what it is, so I can get it over with," she related laughing.