LAKELAND — From personal experience, nearly half of Polk County parents know the confusion and difficulties, as well as the relief and security, that come with having their children enrolled as Medicaid patients.

In 2014, 49 percent – or 65,089 children – were enrolled in Medicaid among the 96,413 Polk County residents ages 17 and younger. 57 percent of Polk children under age 6 – 25,890 – were on Medicaid. 41 percent of Polk youngsters ages 6 through 17 – 39,199 – were on Medicaid.

In 2014, 49 percent of Polk County children ages 17 and younger were covered by the government-funded health care program for children from low-income families. That percentage likely has grown since then as more low-income families learn, while signing up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, that even though the adults in the family may not qualify for government help paying for health insurance, their children qualify for Medicaid.

Medicaid is 60 percent funded by the federal government and 40 percent funded by the state.

Florida attempts to control its share of the costs in the $24 billion program that covers 2 million children by putting financial pressure on insurance companies (which run managed care programs) and on the doctors, hospitals and other providers that deliver care, and on the families, who must sort through confusing and changing regulations and paperwork.

Among the biggest problems parents face is finding a pediatrician who accepts Medicaid.

For private-practice physicians, Medicaid is a money-losing proposition. Office visit payments for a pediatric Medicaid patient can be as low as $14.30, an amount far below what private insurance companies pay.

Florida Medicaid spends only $1,707 per child annually, ranking it 50th among the 50 states and Washington, D.C., according to recent data analyzed by the Kaiser Family Foundation,

Dr. Donald Eason, a longtime pediatrician with Winter Haven Pediatrics, said that in the last two to three years his practice has been accepting Medicaid, partly because there “seems to be an increasing number of kids that have only Medicaid for access to care.''

“We want to serve the under-served but at the same time we want to be able to afford to pay staff salaries and have the electricity paid. You have to balance those two things. You feel bad for a lot of these patients. There may be significant poverty, even nutritional aspects.”

Eason said perhaps 10 percent to 15 percent of his practice's patients are on Medicaid.

“With reimbursements that are low, it makes it difficult to be able to afford to offer the services,” Eason said. “A lot of times these children are more needy for care than children with private insurance. Because of social, environmental and economic situations that lend them to less ideal health situations, sometimes these children can be tougher to take care of.”

Eason said that in the last couple of years since the state has rolled all Medicaid patients into managed care programs — rather than direct pay from Medicaid — it has become more complex for physicians. Insurance companies' guidelines can be similar to but vary somewhat from Medicaid guidelines, he said. On the upside, the managed care programs seem to be doing a better job of ensuring children are getting preventive care, he said.

But providing routine preventive care is more complicated than having guidelines in place. Families need to be able to get to appointments, Eason said.

“We have problems with parents not showing up for appointments, which could be as simple as a lack of transportation or a mom getting an $8 an-hour job and not being able to get off work for a 6-month well-care check,” Eason said. “They may be loving and caring mothers but they are working against the grain and it complicates life.”

With many pediatric practices limiting their Medicaid caseload, some agencies that receive public funding, such as health departments and community health clinics, are picking up part of the slack. The Florida Department of Health in Polk treated 1,430 children last year at the pediatric clinic it operates in Lakeland, most of whom were on Medicaid, according to Nicole Riley, spokeswoman.

Central Florida Health Care, a federally qualified health center, receives federal grant funding and contributions from Polk County's half-cent sales tax for indigent care. It operates nine clinics in its three-county coverage area, Polk, Highlands and Hardee counties, and those clinics see about one out of every six pediatric Medicaid patients in the area.

Because it is federally funded and meets an array of criteria, Central Florida Health Care's reimbursement rate can be higher than private practice physicians get for seeing Medicaid patients.

At $149 for an office visit, lab work and X-rays, the community health clinic's reimbursement rate is in line with actual costs for providing care, said Ann Claussen, chief executive officer of the nonprofit organization.

Central Florida Health Care has two expansion projects underway that will make it possible to serve more children on Medicaid — but it still nowhere near the need.

Within the month, it will open a small pediatric clinic in Dundee, where about 700 children are without a doctor's care after a provider pulled out.

And Central Florida Health Care is renovating a building at 201 Magnolia Ave. in downtown Winter Haven, where this spring it expects to open a pediatric clinic, an obstetrics and gynecology center for pregnant women and a pediatric dental clinic — all of them serving Medicaid, uninsured and underinsured patients.

The pediatric clinic will open with one pediatrician and one advanced nurse practicioner but there is enough space in the clinic to add more providers as the practice builds, Claussen said.

“We are very excited we will be able to give pediatric dental,” Claussen said. “I am not aware of any dentists in Polk that see pediatric Medicaid patients.”

The Florida Department of Health in Polk currently has four small dental clinics that see both adult and pediatric patients. But the need for pediatric dental care is huge. Data the state supplied to the federal government showed that before Florida rolled out its massive Medicaid managed care system in 2013, two-thirds of children on Medicaid received no dental care.

And specialty care, such as surgery for a broken bone, is a pressing need for pediatric Medicaid patients. Typically private pediatricians, as well as the Health Department and community health clinics, limit their services to primary care.

“Some subspecialties don't take Medicaid or may limit the number of Medicaid patients they will take,” Eason said. “They are getting low reimbursements, as well.”

With nearly half of Polk County children on Medicaid, that means a child who needs specialty care may go on the bottom of a waiting list or be referred to a physician in Orlando or Tampa, which presents transportation and time issues for families who may not have a reliable car and cannot afford to take a day off work, Claussen said.

“It is a frustration to try to find sources for referrals,” Eason said. “We have someone in the office delegated that task. It takes a great deal of a person's time to try to find a place that will accept those children in a timely fashion.

“When it gets to point that it starts to approach endangerment, we will get on the phone and talk to people and make a passionate plea and usually it gets done,” Eason said. “But certainly there are delays in care that can occur.”

Pediatric hospital care is sketchy in Polk County. Some hospitals offer no pediatric care, transferring all pediatric patients to children's hospitals in Tampa and Orlando. Others offer a limited number of beds. But, since the recent opening of Nemour's Children's Hospital in Orlando, both the for-profit Heart of Florida Medical Center in Haines City and the nonprofit Lakeland Regional Health have partnered to provide more specialty care. And, this month the nonprofit Winter Haven Hospital is expanding to provide pediatric services in its emergency department.

The partnership "will allow us to provide care to a greater number of pediatric patients locally at Lakeland Regional Health," said Shannon Hartwig, director of Women's and Children's Services. "We don't refuse treatment and care to patients based on the payor."

— Maggie Clark of the Sarasota Herald-Tribune contributed to this report. Contact Marilyn Meyer at marilyn.meyer@theledger.com or 863-802-7558. Follow on Twitter at marilyn_ledger.