The race between two GOP candidates for Texas House District 115 pits an incumbent with a familiar name in Texas politics against a challenger with strong tea party credentials.

Rep. Bennett Ratliff, son of former Lt. Gov. Bill Ratliff, is being challenged by Matt Rinaldi in the March 4 primary. Early voting starts Tuesday.

The winner will face Democrat Paul Stafford and Libertarian candidate Kim Kelley in the general election.

This isn’t the first time Ratliff and Rinaldi have squared off.

They were among five candidates vying two years ago to replace retiring Rep. Jim Jackson to represent the northwest Dallas County district. It includes parts of Coppell, Farmers Branch, Carrollton and Irving

On the surface, the two GOP contenders appear to have a lot in common.

Their campaign literature touts their support for property and Second Amendment rights and opposition to Obamacare and higher taxes.

But their views diverge sharply on some key issues, and they trade barbs over education, spending and campaign funding.

Rinaldi, who has won the endorsement of the North Texas Tea Party and Texas Right to Life, accuses his opponent of being a liberal cloaked in conservative clothing.

“I think he has more in common, policy-wise, with Democrats,” said Rinaldi, citing low marks Ratliff has received from some conservative groups.

Ratliff said he tries to avoid labels and describes himself as an “old-fashioned Republican.”

The incumbent said he supports lower taxes and has voted for a balanced budget, and he points out that his pro-business record is reflected by endorsements from “virtually every business group in the state.”

But Rinaldi argued that Ratliff supported a state budget that raised spending, voted for a bill that increased lawmakers’ pensions and advocated tax increases.

“His record as a whole doesn’t match his campaign rhetoric,” said Rinaldi, who has lived in the area for 13 years.

He said he supports school choice, including education savings accounts and school vouchers. “It’s the taxpayers’ money,” he said. “They should be able to use it as they want.”

Rinaldi accuses Ratliff of partnering with Democratic Rep. Rafael Anchia to tweak the voting maps to draw Rinaldi out of the district. As a result, he said he had to move to a new home to run for the District 115 seat.

Ratliff scoffed at the notion. To believe that, “you’d have to believe I conspired with the entire House, Senate, speaker of the House and governor,” he said.

If elected, Rinaldi said his first act would be to file a bill to end the so-called “Robin Hood” school financing system. He said he would place a priority on fiscal responsibility, fight illegal immigration and defend Second Amendment rights.

“I also pledge not to vote for any budget that increases spending more than inflation plus population growth,” Rinaldi said.

In his first term in office, Ratliff, a former Coppell school board member, has won praise as an education advocate.

Two of his bills — which would have required validation of accountability assessments and allowed some districts to create new assessment tools — won the support of both legislative chambers but were vetoed by Gov. Rick Perry.

If re-elected, Ratliff vows to introduce those bills again.

The freshman legislator believes that vouchers drain money from public schools and accuses his opponent of wanting to “dismantle the public education system in Texas.”

He defends his voting record, saying he worked to restore funding for public education, cut taxes for small businesses, eliminate “accounting gimmicks” and pass a “conservative budget.”

The incumbent stresses his strong ties to the community and service to the school district. “I’m the one who has lived, worked, played and prayed in the district for over 20 years,” said Ratliff, who has accumulated a sizable war chest for his re-election campaign.

Ratliff has raised more than $200,000, including donations from Atmos Energy Corp. PAC, Oncor Political Action Committee and Texas State Teachers Association PAC.

Rinaldi has raised less than $50,000, with more than $14,000 of that coming from Accountability First PAC. The new conservative group is supporting selected House candidates who are asked to sign a pledge to restrict spending and oppose tax increases.

Ratliff accused Rinaldi of trying to buy an election with “dark money” from groups outside the district. He said anyone who signs a secret pledge to get funding is “breaking faith with people in your district.”

Rinaldi acknowledged that he signed the pledge but said it’s no secret. “I signed a public pledge,” he said. “I will not raise taxes or increase spending. That’s the cornerstone of my campaign.”