So much mention of snowfall this winter makes you think it is the snowiest year ever for most places. But this is not the case, only a few areas in the country are dealing with above normal snowfall, and this is bad news for us out west.

Recently you have heard of the massive snowfall amounts outside the Boston metro and some of New England, and the recent rare snow for the south creating rough travel and facebook posts going viral. But in actuality snowfall this year in the United States is lacking quite a bit.

The above graphic shows where the snowfall has been heaviest and where the snowfall is lacking. Red dots indicate well below normal snowfall. Notice the red around the country, it definitely out weighs the blue and white which indicate the snowier places this year. Most of the west, south and northern plains are not doing well compared to the average snowfall those places see each winter. New England and the Ohio River Valleys are leaning toward a snowier and more average season.

There are many reasons why the lack of snow will be a problem in the coming months. Businesses out west are hurting badly due to lack of snow this year. Mount Shasta, Mount High and Badger Pass Ski Resorts in California are closed until the next major snowfall, currently closed due to the lack of snow. Boston has received three times the amount of snow Mount Shasta Ski Resort has this year, something unheard of normally.

Olympia National Park has received only three percent of the snow-water equivalent it normally would receive. Snow-water equivalent is the measure of how much water sits in the snow on the ground. A very important measurement for water management.



Source: Getty Images. The lack of snow in the 2013/2014 winter left many lakes in California dry all summer.

The lack of snow out west is hurting now, but it is going to lead to major issues come spring when the snow starts to melt. The lack of snowfall is going to lead to major water issues and short reservoirs this year unless something drastically changes in the next two months for the west. This is something that can be a problem here in Arizona if we do not get another big storm in the state. Lake levels are still extremely low across Arizona and our drought is only getting worse.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All Rights Reserved