Buy Photo A Lister Kelso and a Scarab from the Meister Brauser team lead the field at the start of an SCCA-sanctioned sports car race at the Kentucky State Fairgrounds in August 1960. (Photo: Robert Steinau/The Courier-Journal )Buy Photo Story Highlights The first races at the 1.8-mile Fairgrounds track closed the Kentucky Derby Festival in May of 1957.

The $15.4 million “Kentucky State Fair and Exposition Center” opened in 1956 near Phillips Lane.

The “old” Fairgrounds opened in 1908 on 150 acres at the end of Cecil Avenue in west Louisville.

Shortly after the Kentucky Fair and Exposition Center opened in 1956, one of the big attractions was a 1.8-mile, asphalt sports car racetrack around the perimeter — with nine “treacherous” turns.

The first races at the track capped off the Kentucky Derby Festival on May 5, 1957, showcasing “testy little sports cars” that included Volkswagens, Ferraris, Corvettes, Thunderbirds, Mercedes, Jaguars and the winner, a Porsche Spyder, a Courier-Journal story said.

The event attracted 110 cars and was sponsored by the Kentucky Region Sports Car Club of America and the Advertising Club of Louisville.

Dormitories were set up at the Fairgrounds to house some racing visitors.

1960s ‘Bug’ races

In 1960, 23-year-old race car driver Roger Penske of Richmond, Va. — heard of him? — took third place in his Porsche RSK in the fourth annual Whirlaway Cup, the featured race of National Road Races.

The winner was Robert Holbert, an auto dealer from suburban Philadelphia, in a $10,000 Porsche RS60.

A photo page on the race titled “The ‘Bug’ Races” — referring to the small size of the cars — said winning speeds averaged more than 70 mph.

The day’s “most freakish occurrence” happened when Dalton, Pa., driver Tim Mayer’s Lotus 400 “bolted off the course and came to a stop in one of the stalls of a horse show barn,” a Louisville Times story said. Mayer suffered only minor injuries.

The crowd was estimated at 6,000, and profits were to go to the Kiwanis Club’s fund for underprivileged children.

Hurricane Bay vs. Fairgrounds lake

While under construction in 1955, the $15.4 million complex was expected to become “the most up-to-date fairgrounds and sports center in the nation,” a C-J story said.

The same story contained a tantalizing reference to what might have been at the site: “There has been some discussion of a 5-acre lake for fishing or swimming.”

The “hub” of the complex was the spacious Fairgrounds Coliseum — soon to be named Freedom Hall — which would accommodate basketball, horse shows, boxing, ice shows, large variety shows, circuses, hockey and wrestling.

Old Fairgrounds

The state General Assembly authorized a Kentucky State Fair in 1902, and the first one, held at Churchill Downs, drew about 75,000 people, the Encyclopedia of Louisville says. Lexington and Owensboro also were early sites.

But in 1907 the state bought 150 acres at the end of Cecil Avenue, west of 38th Street in western Louisville, and the fair was held there in 1908, using a new livestock pavilion that was the largest in the state.

A Merchants and Manufacturers Building that opened in 1921 was touted as being larger than Madison Square Garden in New York City.

In 1956, when the new fairgrounds opened, the old fairgrounds site became Miles Park, a thoroughbred racetrack.

An existing racetrack had been enlarged at the site, after previously being used for harness racing. Called the Fairgrounds Speedway Trotting Track, it was owned by J. Fred Miles, an Ashland Oil Co. founder.

Miles Park was sold and operated briefly as Commonwealth Race Course, before being bought in 1975 by Whayne Supply Co., a century-old heavy equipment vendor that operates there today.

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061, melson@courier-journal.com and on Facebook. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

MORE ONLINE See more photos at www.courier-journal.com/retro.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/VbGIsR