BEGIN TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: This is Terry in Goshen, Kentucky. You're next. Great to have you here. Hello.

CALLER: Pleasure to speak with you, Rush.

RUSH: Thank you.

CALLER: I've listened to you since 1989 when we got married. Let me preface it, Rush, that I am a wife of a military man, and it's great that all the Republicans and all the conservative talking heads are in Trump's back pocket, and I won't say totally you, but truly I haven't heard a whole lot on your side, but I --

RUSH: Wait. They're not. Wait a minute. There's a whole bunch that are not in Trump's back pocket.

CALLER: Well, more so are in his pocket than not, and lately I include you, and I will say what is Donald Trump gonna do with all the married white women, and I friended about, let's see, about 30 or 35 within the last day or so, what is he gonna do with all the white married women and white women that are not gonna vote for Trump? In fact, you know, I'm thinking seriously of just doing a write-in and choosing my local candidates. And this is the very first time I will have done that. And here's why.

You know, every single day all is hear is about Vince Foster and high cheeks, high bones, and late-night talk show host who throws out these innuendos, calls people names. I'm tired of that. I want to hear his 100-day plan on what he's gonna do on geopolitics. What is he gonna do on Syria? Why isn't he discussing the 80-plus people who got killed in Syria within the last day or two? Why isn't he discussing our downsizing of the Navy? Why isn't he discussing, in the first hundred days he's gonna repeal Obamacare --

RUSH: No, no, no, no, wait just a second.

CALLER: Where's his plan? Where's his plan? Why isn't he talking about the Constitution? Why is he coached by conservative talking heads about the Constitution then redirects the conversation on Juanita Broaddrick? I don't give a darn about Juanita Broaddrick.

RUSH: Wait a minute, now. Take a breath. First place, he is talking rebuilding the military. He constantly talks about how it's been decimated by the Regime.

CALLER: Where are the details, Rush? Where are the details on Obamacare? Where are the details on returning programs to states? What programs is he gonna start, you know, returning to, what programs is he going to return back to the states?

RUSH: I'm not trying to argue with you. I'm trying to learn here. Terry, is there somebody who ran for office on the Republican side who did have detailed plans that you understood and agreed on how they were gonna get rid of Obamacare and how they were deal with Syria and how they were gonna rebuild the Navy?

CALLER: In this go around or the last go around?

RUSH: In this go around. I'm talking about this field of 17 candidates, is there anybody who had specifics on how they're gonna get rid of Obamacare, that you heard, that you liked, but they didn't win and now you're wishing they had, is there anybody?

CALLER: Yeah, there was Senator Cruz who talked about it during the Senate -- you know, he talked down about Senator Cruz doing his part and what he was going to do. He talked down about, you know, his limited ability in the Senate. He had his plan against McConnell, how to stop Obamacare, repeal it, and no one was on board. You know what? I'd rather side with someone who has chutzpah than one who just scurrilously talks about other candidates. Hillary, you know, I don't care for Hillary, I don't care for Bill, but I don't want to dredge up old things about all his pitiful affairs and Vince Foster. I want to talk about facts today. That's what I care about. You know what I want the federal government to do? One thing: Defend my country and get the hell out of my way.

RUSH: Get out of your way. Yeah.

CALLER: Right.

RUSH: Well, it doesn't sound like you're much of a Trumpster.

CALLER: And I won't be. Rush, really, I mean --

RUSH: Is it because -- your first complaint was -- or your first reference point was you want to see how in the world he's gonna deal and reach out to the women who don't want to hear about this or that and the other thing, so you obviously are a woman who's offended by Trump and whatever his manner is.

CALLER: Not so much that bothers me; I want details. What is he going to do in the first hundred days? I want details. I have been waiting since the first two months, and I was on board the first two months because I'm also a legal immigrant to this country. I was all on board with his illegal immigration thing. And then I got off when Hugh Hewitt asked --

RUSH: Terry, if you want to learn this stuff, I'm just telling you what you can do. You can accuse me of copping out, I'm not. But all of this stuff is spelled out at DonaldJTrump.com/issues. He's got a website where he's expressed all this stuff.

CALLER: I want him, when he is interviewed on television, I want for him to explain himself. I don't want him to be coached through an answer. He has no idea what the Constitution is about.

RUSH: And that's it. Now we've finally gotten, we've drilled down deep enough, I now know what it is. You don't think Trump knows anything.

CALLER: You got it.

RUSH: You don't think Trump's informed. You think Trump's winging it. He's throwing phrases out that a bunch of people are jingoistically attached to, but he doesn't know diddly-squat about what he's talking about. That's what you think.

CALLER: You put your finger on it. He's been listening to conservative talk show --

RUSH: Who?

CALLER: Trump. He knows all the talking points.

RUSH: Who is advising him? Who are these conservatives advising him? Everything I hear is he doesn't listen to anybody.

CALLER: Well, I think he's been listening to Fox News and all the talking heads about what we Tea Partiers are talking about, but ask him when's the last time he went to a meeting about Common Core? Does he understand Common Core? Does he understand what the Constitution is about? Does he? 'Cause he hasn't told me he does.

RUSH: Well, you're not alone. I mean, there are a lot of people who think that Trump is not. Frankly, some of them are attracted to him for this reason: That he's not wonkish; that he doesn't talk in all of these distracting, spellbinding, impossible-to-keep-up-with ways; that he's just a real guy. I understand your complaint. I hear it and have heard it throughout the campaign from a lot of people.

I'm not gonna try to talk you out of it. I'm not. That's not my point. I don't think I could, anyway. You sound like your mind is really made up. But I need to ask you one thing. You know, does it not faze you, for example, that Jeff Sessions -- who probably is everything you want in a candidate terms of being informed and being able to articulate it -- is a big Trump supporter. Does that not influence you at all?

CALLER: But, Rush, two days ago -- maybe three days ago -- the congressman said something. You know, he was talking through a CNN interview, and at the very end he said, "Yes, Donald Trump has to become better at talking about geopolitics." Well, I've been waiting since the very beginning, and I'm tired of waiting. And not only that, he'll state a policy issue one day, and on the very same day he'll be on the other side of it. So my trust factor is gone. I don't know which side he's coming on. He's sounding like Bill Clinton redux to me.

RUSH: All right. So you think a lot of people, then, have been really hoodwinked here? You think a lot of people supporting Trump are making a huge error?

CALLER: There are probably young people -- not young people. I would say some young people and those who are out of jobs --

RUSH: No. I'm talking about people like Jeff Sessions. Jeff Sessions is everything you claim to want, and he's a big Trump supporter, but it doesn't influence you.

CALLER: No, it does not, because I think these people have been bought. I think when he loses use of certain people, he lets them go.

RUSH: Jeff Sessions has been bought?

CALLER: Poor Carson. Ben Carson is gone. You know, he uses people and then he lets them go.

RUSH: Okay. Well, look, I'm out of time here. I appreciate it. I drilled down there. I found out what it is. She thinks Trump doesn't know anything. He's faking it. He's... (interruption) He's what? Oh. Let me ask. Terry, let me ask you something. Were you a full-fledged Ted Cruz supporter?

CALLER: Two months in. As I said, Rush, I am a legal immigrant who came here from Naples. I'm Italian.

RUSH: It's a yes-or-no question. Were you a big Cruz supporter or not, and is your my nose still out of joint 'cause he didn't win?

CALLER: Yes, somewhat. However, I want details. I want to understand that he understands the whole pot. I want a hundred-day plan. I want to know the details, and I have been asking that since day one.

RUSH: Okay.

CALLER: About a month in, I wanted details.

RUSH: I understand. Cruz supporters are... A lot of them are still very, very sad and disappointed. You need more courting, is what you need, Terry. You need to be wined and dined. Trump needs to reach out to you in a way that is almost personal to you. See if that can happen.