GAITHERSBURG, Md., June 4, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Utilizing CNSI's ProviderOne system technology, the state of Washington is now among the first in the country to update its Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) in compliance with federal mandates set by the Affordable Care Act requiring simplified and streamlined operating systems.

The Washington State Health Care Authority (HCA) announced that as of December 23, 2013, ProviderOne, the primary Medicaid provider payment system in the state, was made fully compliant with the mandated CORE (Committee on Operating Rules for Information Exchange) operating rule requirements. The Provider One system was built and is operated by CNSI.

"We partnered with Washington State HCA to develop and are now maintaining their cutting-edge MMIS, which supports the state's Medicaid program needs. We are proud to be part of the team that reached this extraordinary milestone," said B. Chatterjee, CEO of CNSI. "Our system is proving to be a valuable asset to the state by utilizing state-of-the-art technology that meets the needs of more than a million health care beneficiaries and their continuously changing demands."

"We are very pleased to be one of the leading states that is innovating to create not only a modern system, but a better value for Medicaid beneficiaries," said Cathie Ott, director of the Division of Program and Payment Integrity at the Health Care Authority. "CNSI has been a valuable partner throughout this process and we look forward to continuing to work together on this initiative."

The system updates make HCA a national leader amongst state Medicaid programs in adopting and implementing the Phase III CORE rules, which streamline Electronic Funds Transfer and Electronic Remittance Advice processes. The system promotes flexibility in adapting to ongoing changes in the health care field in accordance to new rules that seek to simplify administrative tasks for providers, allowing them to successfully manage exchanges with the state.

"This partnership represents a valuable opportunity to assist the State of Washington with their mission of providing the most efficient health care to their constituents while keeping them compliant with the most stringent and beneficial national health care standards," said Chatterjee. "We look forward to working with other states to repeat these successes and implement and operate streamlined Medicaid systems."

About CNSI

CNSI delivers a broad portfolio of information technology (IT) and business process outsourcing (BPO) solutions to a diverse base of federal, state and local government agencies, and commercial enterprises. The firm helps clients improve business performance and align IT with their mission and business objectives. CNSI has established strong domain expertise in prominent industries, including Health, Defense and National Security, Government IT and Enterprise Mobility. CNSI employs a world-class team of technologists, program managers, and subject matter experts, all of whom have experience with large scale mission-critical IT implementations. Formed in 1994, CNSI is headquartered in Gaithersburg, Maryland, with locations throughout the U.S. and India. CNSI's website is: http://www.cns-inc.com

SOURCE CNSI