Wisconsin cornerback Derrick Tindal is helped off the field after being injured Saturday. He was able to walk into the locker room at game’s end. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Madison— Wisconsin tailback Corey Clement was in uniform, for the first time since the season opener, hoping he would be able to help UW in any way he could Saturday against visiting Purdue.

Clement's day consisted of giving tips to UW running backs Dare Ogunbowale and Alec Ingold, who combined for three rushing touchdowns in UW's 24-7 victory.

Clement, recovering from surgery for a sports hernia, did not feel healthy enough to play and missed his sixth consecutive game.

"He is holding himself back," said Ogunbowale, who rushed 18 times for 56 yards and a touchdown. "It is all based on how he feels. He's not going to go out there if he's not 100%."

Clement was not available for comment after the game. However, when UW officials announced on Sept. 26 he would undergo surgery, Clement acknowledged he pushed himself through a painful groin injury to play in the opener against Alabama.

He was limited to eight carries for 16 yards and two catches for 19 yards in the 35-17 loss.

Clement sat out the next two games (Miami and Troy) with what was described as a groin injury. UW announced two days before the Hawaii game that Clement would undergo surgery to repair a sports hernia.

He flew to Germany the week of Sept. 27 and underwent the surgery. He returned to Madison on Oct. 4.

Quarterback Joel Stave understands Clement's dilemma. He wants to return and contribute but doesn't want to suffer another setback.

"The thing with running backs," Stave said, "is if you're not feeling completely healthy...he is good because he is strong, low to the ground and he can make really quick cuts.

"And for him personally, if he knows he's not making the cuts that he needs to be able to make to be the player he knows he is, then it is not worth it.

"I think he is just being smart with his body and trying to give our team the best shot. Because he knows if he is putting himself out there when he is not 100% healthy, it is not the best option for our team."

Did the sight of Clement in full pads on the sideline have players wondering whether he would play?

"You don't really worry about it," Stave said. "You roll with who you've got. You roll with who is in there.

"It will be fun when he gets back in. I know he is hungry to get back in and play. That wasn't this week."

More line shuffling: Redshirt freshman Michael Deiter, who started the first six games at left guard, opened at center in place of redshirt junior Dan Voltz (elbow).

Offensive coordinator Joe Rudolph moved redshirt freshman Micah Kapoi, who started the previous four games at right guard, to left guard. Walker Williams started at right guard.

"I give Deiter a lot of credit to be able to jump in," head coach Paul Chryst said. "We're talking about a freshman now that goes from playing left guard and now jumping in at center and didn't flinch."

The changes meant UW has used five starting combinations in seven games.

"We've got a lot of good players," Stave said, "and we've had a chance to use 'em all. I thought they've done a really good job just rolling with the punches, rolling with the injuries."

Tindal avoids major injury: UW reserve cornerback Derrick Tindal suffered what first appeared to be a significant knee injury covering a kickoff on the first play of the fourth quarter.

Tindal was in obvious pain and on the ground for several minutes before being helped to the sideline by the training staff.

However, he did not leave the sideline, rode a stationary bike for most of the quarter and walked into the locker room after the game.

"Walking him off the field, it seemed a lot better," Chryst said. "I talked to Derrick during the game, and he told me it was just kind of a bruise, he thought. So, hopefully, we're all right on that one."

Block party: UW kicker Rafael Gaglianone made 1 of 2 field-goal attempts Saturday, hitting from 28 yards and missing from 35. That dropped his season totals to 10 of 17. He made 19 of 22 attempts last season.

The miss was the result of a deflection by Purdue cornerback Anthony Brown, who penetrated over the left side of UW's formation.

"That guy hit the ball hard," said Gaglianone, who watched with holder Drew Meyer as the ball sailed wide left.

According to Gaglianone, the operation time of snap to kick was 1.3 seconds, his usual range.

"When you do this so many times we know by the sound of the ball whether it is going to be good," he said. "We look up and the guy is celebrating, and we look and the ball is like a duck."

Upon further review: UW appeared on the verge of losing cornerback Darius Hillary with 5 minutes, 1 second left in the first half after he was called for "targeting" on a hit against Purdue quarterback David Blough.

It appeared Hillary hit Blough in the chest/shoulder area and the replay official overturned the call.

Extra points: Stave became the first UW quarterback to post a 4-0 record against an opponent. Stave is also 3-0 against upcoming opponents Illinois and Minnesota. Stave completed 30 of 39 passes for 322 yards Saturday. In four games against the Boilermakers, Stave has completed 73 of 108 attempts (68%) for 877 yards....

Redshirt freshman D.J. Gillins has been moved to wide receiver from quarterback. Gillins did not play Saturday.