SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Senator Tom Cotton went directly after Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid from the floor of the Senate blasting Reid for more than two-minutes Wednesday morning.

Senator Cotton complained about listening to Reid’s “bitter, vulgar, incoherent ramblings,” and found a silver lining in a reduction in Senate work days because at least the Senate would be “cursed less with his [Reid’s] cancerous leadership.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“I am forced to listen to the bitter, vulgar, incoherent ramblings of the Minority Leader,” Senator Cotton started. “Normally, like every other American, I ignore them. I can’t ignore them today, however.”

Senator Cotton unloaded on Minority Leader Reid during discussion of a defense bill that passed unanimously Wednesday. The Arkansas Senator invoked some of Harry Reid’s greatest hits including the Nevada Senator’s comments in 2007 that the Iraq war was lost and Reid’s infamous passing of Obamacare on Christmas Eve.

Cotton mocked Reid and railed against him:

When was the last time the Minority Leader read a bill? It was probably an electricity bill. What about the claims that it was written in the dark of night? It’s been public for weeks. And this coming from a man who drafted Obamacare in his office and rammed it through this Senate at midnight on Christmas Eve on a straight party line vote? To say that he’s delaying this because he cares for the troops, a man who never served himself, a man who in April 2007 came to this very floor before the surge had even reached its peak and said the war is lost, when over 100 Americans were being killed in Iraq every month, when I was carrying their dead bodies off an airplane at Dover Air Force Base. It is an outrage to say that we had to delay this because he cares for the troops. We are delaying it for one reason and one reason only: to protect his own sad, sorry legacy.

Senator Cotton finished by insulting Senator Reid’s “cancerous leadership.”

“He now complains in the mornings that the Senate is not in session enough,” Cotton finished. “That our calendar is too short. Well, whatever you think about that, the happy byproduct of fewer days in session in the Senate is that this institution will be cursed less with his cancerous leadership. I yield the floor.”