LITTLE ROCK — The Arkansas Legislature’s fiscal session ground to a temporary halt Thursday, its second day, after the Senate rejected a bill to fund the state Medicaid program and the House rejected a bill that the Legislature is required to pass before it passes any other bills.

House and Senate leaders said those bodies would not convene again until Tuesday following Thursday’s failed votes, which grew out of clashes over whether to fund Gov. Asa Hutchinson’s Medicaid expansion plan, titled Arkansas Works.

A complicated attempt to save the funding for Arkansas Works by removing it from the appropriation bill for the overall Medicaid program also failed Thursday.

Senate Bill 121 by the Joint Budget Committee, which would fund the Department of Human Services’ Medical Services Division, received 25 votes in support and 10 votes against in the Senate. That was the same margin by which Arkansas Works passed during last week’s special session, but the appropriation bill requires a three-fourths majority vote for approval, or at least 27 votes in the 35-member Senate.

Arkansas Works would continue, with modifications, the state’s Medicaid expansion program, which has provided government-subsidized private health insurance to more than 267,000 Arkansans since its creation in 2013 as an alternative to the expansion of Medicaid rolls envisioned in the federal Affordable Care Act.

Hutchinson has said ending Medicaid expansion would create a hole of more than $100 million in the state budget. His plan is supported by Democratic legislators, but Republicans are divided on it.

Hutchinson said in a statement after Thursday’s vote, “The first vote in the senate fell short of the three-fourths vote required, but I’m pleased by the growing bipartisan recognition that the DHS Medical Services appropriation bill in the end will be fully funded. That is the responsibility of government and must be done. I’ll continue to work with both Democrats and Republicans to achieve a successful resolution.”

After SB 121 failed, the Senate sent it back to the Joint Budget Committee, where Sen. Jim Hendren, R-Gravette, who supports the governor’s plan, proposed an amendment to strip funding for Arkansas Works from the bill. He admitted that if the bill were to reach the governor’s desk with the amendment, Hutchinson likely would remove the language with a line-item veto, thus restoring the funding.

“This has to do with trying to find a path forward with regard to Arkansas Works,” said Hendren, the governor’s nephew.

Sen. Alan Clark, R-Lonsdale, who opposes Arkansas Works, said Hendren’s proposal would set a bad precedent.

“What we’re doing is we’re turning the power of the Legislature over to the executive branch,” he said.

Hendren replied, “I think what is a bad precedent is for us to continue to try to change policy during the appropriation process.”

Sen. Jason Rapert, R-Conway, who has been a supporter of Arkansas Works, said he was reconsidering his support after learning that the Medicaid expansion program includes insurance coverage for the so-called morning-after pill.

A motion to adopt the amendment failed in a 22-22 vote, with Democratic members mostly voting no, along with some Republicans. It needed 29 votes to pass.

“My constituents want Arkansas Works to be funded,” Sen. Linda Chesterfield, D-Little Rock, told reporters after the vote. “I don’t know what the governor’s scheme is. I’ve heard other people say (what it is), but I’m not sure what the scheme really is. All I know is that the people I represent are not going to appreciate me voting not to fund Arkansas Works.”

Hutchinson spokesman J.R. Davis said later, “The governor has made it clear to both Democrats and Republicans that if he receives a DHS Medical Services appropriation bill that defunds Arkansas Works, he will use the line-item veto.”

Hendren said he would try again with the amendment.

“We had a lot of people missing today. We’ll try to get there,” he said.

The House, meanwhile, voted down the General Appropriation Act, which contains funding for expenses of the judicial branch and expense reimbursements for legislators. The state constitution requires that it be the first bill passed by the Legislature during a session.

The bill failed in a 68-0 vote, falling short of the 75 votes needed for passage. Eleven members, all of them Democrats, voted “present,” an option that allows a legislator to vote neither for nor against a bill.

“Until we know where we’re going to go with the Medicaid services portion of this budget, everything else is in limbo,” House Minority Leader Michael John Gray, D-Augusta, said after the vote.

Senate President Pro Tem Jonathan Dismang, R-Beebe, said that while the House and Senate take the next four days off, “I hope to touch base with a number of members just to make sure we have a conversation about what the possibilities are, how to move forward.”

House Speaker Jeremy Gillam, R-Judsonia, said, “My hope, both from the House and Senate standpoint, is that everybody is able to go home, they’re able to interact with folks in their district over the weekend, get some rest, really kind of find out what their constituents really feel about these issues that we’re dealing with.”