Prudent people never discuss politics or religion in a bar or as a guest at somebody else’s dinner table.

This week’s events on the national and California political scenes provide object lessons in why that’s so.

When Texas Sen. Ted Cruz formally announced his presidential candidacy, the venue he chose — Jerry Falwell’s Liberty University, the world’s largest evangelical Christian school — was a clear signal that, for better or worse, religion again will be an active force in the upcoming general election.

In his address to one of the school’s thrice weekly mandatory “convocations,” Cruz checked all the religious right’s obligatory boxes, professing his opposition to same-sex marriage, immigration reform, gun control, the Affordable Care Act and the Common Core educational standards. Along the way, he also endorsed replacement of the progressive income tax with a flat tax and the abolition of the Internal Revenue Service.

Like other Republican hopefuls on the party’s right wing, the Texas lawmaker, whose Cuban-born father is a fire-breathing fundamentalist preacher, understands that the religious right’s support is virtually indispensable to a contemporary conservative candidacy. Meanwhile, a network of Protestant pastors and right-wing activists who cultivate so-called “values voters” already are trying to unite behind a single Republican candidate. To that end, they’ve already held meetings in Iowa, Oklahoma and, last month, at a five-star resort in Dana Point. Something of the tenor of these gatherings can be gleaned by one woman’s plea at the Iowa gathering that, instead of running against each other in the primaries, the “godly” hopefuls should come together to pray and fast so that one of them might “rise up and receive an anointing.”

The United States is the only country in the developed world in which this sort of faith-based babble is an unembarrassed part of national politics. Given that this is likely to remain true for the foreseeable future, it would be useful to arrive at a way to distinguish between those political interventions that reflect a religiously informed individual conscience and those that are simply an assertion of sectarian will.

As an example of that latter, let’s consider the issue currently roiling California — an obscure Huntington Beach lawyer’s demand that, having paid the requisite $200 fee, the state attorney general certify his proposition and allow him to gather signatures for a ballot measure he calls “The Sodomite Suppression Act.” Apart from excluding gay and lesbian people from any public office or receipt of any public benefit, the measure’s core proposal is “that any person who willingly touches another person of the same gender for purposes of sexual gratification be put to death by bullets to the head or by any other convenient method.” If the proposition passes and state officials decline to enforce it, the measure empowers ordinary Californians to shoot gays and lesbians dead without legal or civil penalty.

In his introduction to his proposed measure, Matthew McLaughlin — who does not return phone calls and appears to operate his law practice from a postal box in a Beach Boulevard strip mall — explains his rationale for the initiative thusly: “The abominable crime against nature known as buggery, called also sodomy, is a monstrous evil that Almighty God, giver of freedom and liberty, commands us to suppress on pain of our utter destruction even as he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. Seeing that it is better that offenders should die rather than that all of us should be killed by God’s just wrath against us for the folly of tolerating wickedness in our midst, the People of California wisely command, in the fear of God” that gays and lesbians be shot dead.

Advertisement

Putting aside the long-standing, but increasingly clear and urgent need to reform California’s absurdly out-of-control initiative process, Atty. Gen. Kamala Harris has asked a Sacramento court to relieve her of the obligation of certifying this initiative, but if the court declines her request, she’ll have no choice but to allow McLaughlin to gather signatures to put this abomination on the ballot. I have to say that in half a century of covering this state’s politics, “unconstitutional” doesn’t begin to describe this measure. It is surely the single most repellent, vile and evil intervention into our politics to have occurred in my lifetime. And yet, its author claims to be inspired by God and acting on his behalf.

Now, let’s turn to political activism informed by a religiously based individual conscience. In his weekly column, Los Angeles’ Roman Catholic Archbishop, Jose Gomez, argued that it’s time for California and the rest of the United States to abolish capital punishment. Among the arguments the prelate marshalled were these: “In recent years, there have been highly publicized incidents where executions have been mishandled. In one instance, a convicted murderer spent more than 40 minutes in agony after receiving a lethal injection that was supposed to kill him within minutes. There is also substantial evidence that the death penalty is imposed far more often on racial minorities and the poor. And sadly, in some cases we have seen that, due to judicial error, some of those sent to death row did not actually commit the crimes they were convicted of.”

The difference between McLaughlin’s ghastly, indecent proposal and Gomez’s sober analysis is crucial: Though both are faith-based, the former derives from an assertion of divine revelation and brooks no disagreement; the latter uses reasoned argument accessible to all to make its case, implicitly inviting those who differ to do the same.

In our politics, there must always be a place for conscience, but even faith-based propositions must meet the test of reason.