Topics: Ann Coulter, Editor's Picks, Soccer, Sports, World Cup, Life News

Like presidential elections or leap days in February, America’s love affair with soccer seems to happen once every four years. We feed heavy on the game for a summer month and then go into wintry, quadrennial hibernation: TV ratings spike. Newspapers and magazines fill with pre- and post-game analysis. Bars and cafes ring with spectators gasping and clapping and falling over one another to catch a glimpse of the action.

Our short-lived World Cup mania invites a basic incredulity: how is it that Americans everywhere, normally deaf, dumb and blind to the charms of the “beautiful game,” have suddenly taken so keen an interest in it? Will the country’s focus quickly shift from the soccer pitch to one of its other athletic divertissements, now that the World Cup has ended, and the smoke has cleared from Team U.S.A.? Or are we finally becoming a nation of full-time soccer fanatics?

As anyone who followed the World Cup punditry over the past month can attest, such questions tended to produce certain patterns of reaction: at one end of the spectrum were the soccer optimists, who viewed our embrace of the World Cup not as a passing flirtation, but as part of a sustained, ever-solidifying national romance with the game. Buttressed by data showing that soccer is growing in popularity among today’s youth and that — despite negligible television ratings — attendance at MLS games (America’s Professional Soccer League) is on the rise, they concluded that the sport’s stateside future has never looked brighter.

Then there were the agnostics who participated fully in our soccer jubilee, but questioned whether it would have the traction others hoped for and expected. These skeptics pointed to the obvious: for a majority of Americans, soccer spectatorship still begins and ends with the World Cup — or, at least, the U.S. national team’s entry into and customarily early exit from the tournament. And they doubted whether the game could ever find equal footing in our already sports-saturated country. (What with all the football and basketball and baseball teams we follow, and the fantasy teams when we’re not following those). Habits, they seemed to remind us, die hard. National sporting habits harder than most.

Finally, at the opposite end of the spectrum, were the game’s recalcitrant opponents, who tried to undercut our enthusiasms by insisting that soccer and America are mutually exclusive. Sounding the battle cry, Ann Coulter, the conservative polemicist, wrote a widely circulated piece denouncing America’s “soccer fetish.” Amidst reports of record-breaking ratings for the U.S.-Portugal group match, Coulter’s patience was apparently stretched beyond the breaking point: “Enough is enough. Any growing interest in soccer can only be a sign of the nation’s moral decay.” Among other sins, she warned us that soccer subverts and downplays “individual achievement” (translation: it’s socialism in cleats) and what she admiringly described as “threat of personal disgrace” (i.e., manliness). She called the game boring (too little violence; not enough scoring), and so maddeningly foreign that it reminded her of the “metric system.” Quelle horreur! According to Coulter, real Americans everywhere (the sort “whose great-grandfather was born here”) are being brainwashed and victimized by a bunch of sissy, left-wing soccer evangelists. But the true culprit behind all this recent soccerphilia? “Teddy Kennedy’s 1965 immigration law.”

*

As a display of special pleading and pandering illogic, Coulter’s broadside can hardly be improved upon. Yet there is one aspect of her opposition that may still have its explanatory uses: Coulter views the country’s burgeoning interest in soccer in relation to its ethical life — or, in her more pointed language, its “moral decay.” But her alarmism aside, the question of what our response to the World Cup says about the culture at large — not just what it portends for the future of soccer, which most commentators focused on — remains important and, if anything, overlooked.