Last week I wrote about the new effect of income on longevity, which in turn delivers yet more wealth to those who age more healthfully.

But medical attention, better nutrition and opportunities to exercise -- those essential building blocks of a long and fruitful life -- don't have to be the sole province of high-income elders. And on a local level, the Sarasota Housing Authority's resident council has been working hard to spread the wealth of health.

This week I got to attend the joyful opening of a new exercise studio at the city's McCown Tower/Annex Complex, a 175-unit building for low-income Sarasotans 62 and older, in the heart of the fast-reviving Rosemary District. Volunteer belly dance instructor Tasha Banat, 68, led residents and visitors -- including Mayor Willie Shaw -- through an exuberant approximation of her moves.







The spruced-up space is part of a two-year effort funded by a $186,000 grant from the Department of Housing and Urban Development, which volunteer grant writer Marcella Levin, a retired social worker, helped to secure for the complex.

The initiative, led by coordinator Renée Alexandrea, is introducing McCown residents to amenities like a walking club, movement classes taught by volunteers, diabetes prevention, blood pressure screenings and visits by a podiatrist and mobile eye clinic.

"We're working on a mobile dental clinic too," said Valerie Buchard, a commissioner on the Agency-Wide Resident Council. "And we have a garden we're putting together to encourage healthy eating for our seniors. We want to teach the residents what the different herbs are."

Alexandrea explained that the combination of health-enhancing opportunities grew out of a mission to help the McCown elders age in place.

"Many times, our people get to the point where they have to go into nursing homes," she said. "But people love to be at home, and we're trying to keep them healthy so they can stay here longer. Exercising fell right in line with that. But it's not just for the body; it's also the mind and the soul."

The new fitness space, along with a computer room and library, complements building-wide programs aimed at sustaining a healthy community, Burchard added.

"We have floor monitors who check on their neighbors and make sure they're doing all right," she said. "Hopefully, we can keep the grant and keep building."

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.