Rhonda Swan, 51, a former Palm Beach Post editorial writer, author, life coach and loving mother and grandmother, died Wednesday morning in Springfield, Mass., of complications from breast cancer, friends said.

Friends and former colleagues described her as a determined, independent woman with a brilliant smile, one who chose her path in life and toward death, on her own terms.

Around 2011, she went for a mammogram but forgot her prescription, so the hospital wouldn’t perform the procedure. She ended up not getting one for another year, then undergoing a mastectomy soon after she did because cancer was detected.

After her diagnosis with a return of breast cancer in 2014, she left The Post and moved to Costa Rica, where she pursued alternative treatments. She spent her last days at home with family in Springfield.

“I refuse to torture myself with coulda woulda shouldas,” she wrote in an article freelanced for the Post two months ago. “I opted against chemo and radiation after my mastectomy because that was the best choice for me at the time.”

+ ×

Despite the illness, she kept busy after leaving West Palm Beach, gaining certification as a life coach.

“I help breast cancer survivors find a new normal for their lives,” she wrote. “I also help women change the limiting beliefs that prevent them from pursuing their dreams and having the healthy relationships they deserve.”

Post Editorial Page Editor Rick Christie spoke Wednesday of Swan’s personal strength. “She was a strong woman. I have three daughters. She’s the kind of woman I want my daughters to look up to,” he said.

+ Tim Stepien Rhonda Swan Tim Stepien ×

She was an “unabashed and unapologetic liberal,” to the point where she would chastise even other liberals who waffled on an issue, he recalled.

“She was tough,” Randy Schultz, her boss before Christie, agreed. “She would bone up so well, especially on the subject of health care … Definitely one of the memorable moments during our editorial board meetings was when the governor came down,” said Schultz, a former Post editorial page editor.

It was October or November of 2011, Obamacare had been enacted, though it faced a Supreme Court challenge. Gov. Rick Scott, adamant in opposition to the Affordable Care Act, told the editorial board, “‘I don’t think it will ever be the law of the land,’” Schultz said.

+ Rhonda Swan (right) with her daughter, Amira Johnson. ×

“Rhonda looked at him and said: ‘Right now it is the law of the land.’ He was speechless.”

Swan leaves three adult children, Amira, Seneca and Stephon; and three grandchildren.

An author and award-winning journalist, she worked as an editorial writer, editor and reporter for the Post from 2005 to 2014. Prior to that she served as deputy city editor for The News Journal in Wilmington, Del.; and Family/Community Team editor at The Daily Press, in Williamsburg, Va.

Related See Rhonda Swan's past columns in The Post

Swan earned a bachelor’s degree in journalism with a minor in psychology from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.

Her book, “Dancing to the Rhythm of My Soul: A Sister’s Guide for Transforming Madness into Gladness,” was a memoir based on Swan’s spiritual journey that also served as a self-help guide. Swan wrote two novels, “I Saw Your Profile” and “Exposed: The Consequences of Truth.” She also published a volume of poetry, “Speaking My Mind … in Poetic Verse.”

“Rhonda was a beautiful writer and highly respected journalist, but her courage was her greatest gift,” said Tim Burke, publisher of The Post. “She decided to live her final years on her terms and cherish life’s special moments, grateful ‘for every sunrise my eyes behold.’”

That last phrase came from the article she wrote in the Post in October. Here are the final paragraphs from that piece, sharing the perspective of her final days:

“This year got off to a scary start but I’ve made every important occasion I feared I’d miss.

“I cheered from the stands as my daughter graduated college. I witnessed my granddaughter’s birth, a life-affirming experience that brought me to tears. I celebrated my grandson’s fourth birthday and my granddaughter’s first. Fred (her boyfriend) and I will take our first cruise together later this month.

“These are the moments that make life worth living. Not how much money you earn, the kind of car you drive or the size of the house you live in.

“I’m grateful for every sunrise my eyes behold, every breath I’m privileged to take and every laugh I get to share with the people I love.

“Every day is a reason to celebrate. Every day is a new opportunity to create the life we truly want.”

A funeral is scheduled for Jan. 2, 11 a.m., at the Spring of Hope Church, 35 Alden St., Springfield, Mass. Memorial contributions can be sent to the Rhonda Swan Scholarship Fund, c/o The Greater Springfield Credit Union, 1030 Wilbraham Road, Springfield, MA 01109.