Donald “Can’t Rape Your Spouse” Trump has built an entire campaign on taking core planks on the Republican platform and making them classier. And by classier, of course, I mean more explicit, more ironic and with the bigotry more clearly articulated.

Mass deportation of undocumented immigrants? Sure, but let’s not forget that Mexicans are, in general, rapists. And murderers.

Traditional one man/one woman marriage? Sure, but let’s not forget that I’ve been married three times and see nothing ironic about this, at all.

President Obama isn’t doing enough to fight the Islamic State? Sure, and let’s not forget that I have a secret plan to fight them. It’s massive. It’s brilliant. And I won’t tell you what it is until after I’m elected.

So it should have come as no surprise that Donald Trump’s health care agenda is pretty much the same as the rest of the Republican field’s, but with a little more flair:

Donald Trump just outlined his health care plan live on @CNN: "Repeal and replace with something terrific." — Chris Moody (@moody) July 29, 2015

Something terrific. Great. How had no one thought of that before?

Of course, where Trump may break with his Republican opponents is that, for him, “something terrific” may actually be more progressive than the health insurance law he says he wants to repeal and replace. As PolitiFact pointed out last week:

The billionaire’s 2000 book The America We Deserve makes a strong pitch for universal health care. “I’m a conservative on most issues but a liberal on this one,” Trump wrote. “We should not hear so many stories of families ruined by health care expenses. We must not allow citizens with medical problems to go untreated because of financial problems or red tape.” When he turned to how the country might achieve universal coverage, Trump focused like a laser beam on a Canadian-style, single-payer plan. He said it would eliminate many billions of dollars of overhead. “The Canadian plan also helps Canadians live longer and healthier than America,” he wrote. “We need, as a nation, to reexamine the single-payer plan, as many individual states are doing.”

It remains to be seen if the rest of the Republican candidates are able to break through the ahistorical bubble Trump has created and call him out for the Marxist, Stalinist, fascist that they’re supposed to think he is now. But I rather doubt it.