Dec. 22 -- 64 calls for service

Deputies responded to County Road 79 in Candler for a report of suspicious activity. The reporting party stated that people were out tagging posts and train cars in the area. Deputies were unable to locate anyone.

Deputies responded to 1500 block of Logan for a trespass. The reporting party stated that he believed someone was opening his mailbox at night. The reported party stated that nothing had been stolen.

Deputies responded to the sheriff's office lobby for a report of an assault.

Deputies responded to Ninth and Elm on a traffic accident. The reporting party stated that someone just crashed into the building pinning him against his desk. Medical personnel and Colorado State Patrol responded. The driver of the crashed vehicle, Mark Wellen, 61, was arrested for suspicion of DUI. CSP handled the accident portion.

Deputies responded to 1800 block of Cedar on a report of trespass. The reporting party stated that Chris Woolrey, 27, was refusing to leave and throwing and breaking things. Woolrey is wanted out of Cañon City Police Department.

Deputies responded to St. Thomas More Urgent care for a report of a dog bite. The reporting party stated while at Eco Park walking dogs, she and one of her dogs were attacked by a dog. The dog owner was contacted, and victim declined to prosecute.

Deputies responded to 300 block of I Street in Penrose, on an attempt to locate Cassandra Wireman, 29. Wireman is wanted two times, FTA on traffic and drugs. Deputies searched the house and Wireman was not located.

Advertisement

Deputies responded to the sheriff's office lobby on a report of an assault.

Jacob Bentley, 26, turned himself in on outstanding warrants.

Andrew Glaus, 28, turned himself in on outstanding warrants.

Deputies responded to 1000 block of West Fourth in Florence on a report of suspicious activity. The reporting party stated that people were taking wood that didn't belong to them. Deputies made contact with the people taking wood and they stated they would take the wood back..

Deputies made contact with a suspicious vehicle while doing a patrol watch at Pathfinder Park. Driver, Montana Seyler, 19, was arrested for suspicion of DUI.