Fewer Emergency Dept. Visits vs. Right Care at Right Time

An increase in emergency room visits doesn't mean a healthcare system is failing. Rather, policy makers are focused on the wrong thing, says the American College of Emergency Physicians.

A report from the American College of Emergency Physicians disputes the need to focus on reducing emergency department visits. A short online survey that captured the opinions of 2,009 emergency physicians (a 9% response rate of its membership) showed that ED physicians had seen increases in ED traffic over last year.

The sample size of the survey is small, but it reflects the reality of rising ED rates across the country.

Atlanta-based Grady Memorial Hospital, part of Grady Health System and one of the largest public health hospitals in the country, had a record number of 126,000 ED visits in 2013. The hospital is one of the largest public health hospitals in the country.

"Overall volume has gone up," says Hany Atallah, MD, chief of emergency medicine at Grady, noting that Grady's nearby walk-in clinic, which is within walking distance to the hospital's ED, has helped offload patients who don't have a true emergency. "We explain they'll get faster care," he says.

The urgent care clinic opened last year to coincide with the expected increase in patient volumes due to more people having access to health insurance through health insurance exchanges. The fact that the urgent care clinic hasn't made a significant dent in Grady's ED traffic is also indicated in ACEP's survey.



More than 40% of respondents reported that ED patient visits remained the same despite the availability of retail clinics and urgent care centers.

"We're a big believer in patients getting the right care at the right time," says Atallah.

35 Texas Counties Have Zero Physicians

Part of the reason that retail clinics and urgent care clinics may not be diverting ED traffic from large urban hospitals may be due to the fact that patients who use an ED for less acute needs are used to that particular care site.

Grady is trying to educate its patients, but for the 316,000 Georgians—and the 8 million who enrolled in health plans nationwide in 2014—navigating the healthcare system with insurance coverage is new. It's too high of an expectation to expect them to adopt new usage patterns, too.

Different Site, Same Story

Another Atlanta-area hospital that has seen its ED volume grow is WellStar Paulding Hospital, a 53-bed hospital (it will expand to a 112-bed hospital in 2016) that is part of the WellStar Health System, a nonprofit health system with five hospitals, seven urgent care centers, and a medical group practice.

Located in Hiram, GA, about 32 miles from Atlanta, Wellstar Paulding opened a new ED in 2014 that can accommodate 80,000 visits a year.

"We're tracking 70,000 now," says hospital president Mark Haney. "We expected we'd see 45,000 [patients] when we moved in [the first year]." Haney says the hospital has seen an increase in Medicare patients using its new ED.