Broncos receiver Emmanuel Sanders did enough to convince trainers he could play, but maybe he shouldn’t have. Sanders was visibly hobbled and limited by his ankle injury for much of the game against the Chiefs on Sunday. He was targeted four times, including on Peyton Manning’s second interception, and had no catches. On his last target, Sanders was hit hard by two Chiefs’ defenders before being removed from the game with a concussion.

No sympathy from Smith

Manning struggled so mightily against the Chiefs on Sunday, it would make any quarterback wince. But Kansas City’s Alex Smith did not feel sorry for him.

“Not much,” Smith said.

Smith wasn’t about to offer condolences.

“He’s hands down one of the greatest quarterbacks of all time, maybe the greatest,” Smith said. “But they’re the Denver Broncos. I’m not feeling sorry for them by any means. Any one of them.”

Paris tribute

Kickoff for Sunday’s game was pushed back four minutes to allow for a moment of silence in honor of the victims of Friday’s terrorist attack in Paris. Broncos safety Darian Stewart ran out of the tunnel with the French flag during pregame introductions. The flag also was shown on the videoboard at Sports Authority Field as fans, players, coaches and media paid their respects to the victims and their families.

Broncos firsts

Earlier in the week, Broncos coach Gary Kubiak said Cody Latimer’s time was coming. The second-year receiver had yet to see much playing time in backing up Emmanuel Sanders and Demaryius Thomas.

That time came Sunday when Latimer caught three passes on six targets for 30 yards, second on the team.

Tight end Vernon Davis, who played only nine snaps in his debut at Indianapolis, caught two of four targets for 19 yards.

Ward could face suspension

Broncos safety T.J. Ward groused last week about his $5,700 fine for having his jersey untucked against the Indianapolis Colts. Part of the issue was the inconsistent enforcement.

“I have worn it the same way for six years,” said Ward, who toiled in anonymity for five seasons in Cleveland.

Ward should avoid any fine for Sunday’s garb. Rather than sport a short jersey, Ward donned a longer fit with an orange undershirt to avoid the ire of the NFL’s fashion police.

However, he faces a possible suspension after punching Jeremy Maclin in the fourth quarter, leading to an ejection.

Marshall hurting

Broncos linebacker Brandon Marshall re-injured his knee. Marshall left the game briefly, but returned. He said his is worried about it being a long-term issue.

“It keeps lingering around. It’s something I got to fix, since game three or four,” Marshall said. “It’s a sprain. It’ll hurt, but then two plays I’ll be able to come back and I’m good and I won’t even feel it.”

Marshall said it’s an “in the moment injury,” but he doesn’t want it to get worse.

Footnotes

The Broncos attempted an onside kick on the opening kickoff of the second half. Kansas City recovered… Safety T.J. Ward (defense), receiver Demaryius Thomas (offense) and inside linebacker Todd Davis (special teams) were the Broncos’ gameday captains. … The game was the 100th regular-season game in the careers of both safety David Bruton and receiver Andre Caldwell… As bad as Manning was, the offensive line shared blame. Left tackle Ryan Harris struggled in the first half. At one point on Twitter former Broncos Pro Bowl guard Mark Schlereth said he would cut him at halftime. … Max Garcia replaced right guard Louis Vasquez on the first drive in the second half. He was called for holding. Officials flagged him for two penalties in the Broncos’ last home game as he spelled Evan Mathis.