FORT COLLINS — One of the potential perils for any college football team playing its final two regular-season games on the road is that they can seem anti- climactic after the emotional senior day ceremony in the last home game, especially if it was a win.

Colorado State improved to 5-5 overall and 3-3 in the Mountain West with a 49-35 victory over UNLV on Saturday night at Hughes Stadium. The Rams close the regular season with games at New Mexico on Saturday and at Fresno State on Nov. 28, needing one victory to become bowl eligible.

The victory over UNLV gave the Rams their first two-game winning streak of the season, and it came with the help of junior Rashard Higgins catching seven passes for 102 yards and three touchdowns and sophomore Dalyn Dawkins rushing for 151 yards on 19 carries.

“Just the blood, sweat and tears that we put into the field,” Higgins said of the Rams’ seniors. “Nobody knows the feeling except us. It’s a great feeling, and I’m glad they got the ‘dub’ on their senior night.”

Said first-year CSU coach Mike Bobo: “We wanted to come out and get a win for these seniors … a good group of guys that had played extremely hard. … I’m really proud of how they weathered the storm this year. It would have been easy to pack it in, but they keep fighting. They have a chance to do something special here, three straight bowl games. Talk about leaving a legacy.”

Bobo also challenged the seniors.

“I told them in the locker room: ‘We have to finish. We’re not done,’ ” Bobo said. “This isn’t the last game of the season. We have a lot of football left to play, and I expect them to continue to lead.”

New Mexico (6-4, 4-2) has made major progress in its fourth season with former Notre Dame coach Bob Davie. The Lobos are coming off a 31-24 road win over Boise State, the same Broncos who whipped CSU 41-10 in Fort Collins last month.

“I’ve watched them a couple of times, and they’re explosive and we have to be at our best,” Bobo said of the Lobos. “We all want to go to a bowl game. We all want to have a winning season. But we have to go earn the right to play in a bowl game. We have to earn a winning season.”

It’s expected that all FBS teams with at least six wins will receive a bowl berth. The Mountain West has eight bowl tie-ins, but it can’t send teams to both the Las Vegas and Hawaii Bowls, which also can take independent Brigham Young. Also, the Cactus Bowl would come into play only if either the Big 12 or the Pac-12 can’t fill its allotted slots.

The Mountain West tie-ins:

Dec. 19: New Mexico Bowl (Albuquerque), Las Vegas Bowl.

Dec. 22: Famous Idaho Potato Bowl (Boise).

Dec. 23: Poinsettia Bowl (San Diego).

Dec. 24: Hawaii Bowl (Honolulu).

Dec. 29: Armed Forces Bowl (Fort Worth, Texas), Arizona Bowl (Tucson).

Jan. 2: Cactus Bowl (Phoenix).

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei

Eye on… The Lobos

Colorado State at New Mexico, 3:30 p.m. Saturday, ROOT

For the record: The Bob Davie-coached Lobos (6-4, 4-2 Mountain West) are coming off a 31-24 victory at Boise State that made them bowl eligible.

Who’s hot: Senior running back Jhurell Pressley sparked the victory over Boise State, producing 132 yards rushing and a touchdown on only nine carries.

Who’s not: New Mexico’s defense had trouble getting off the field against the Broncos, who had 114 offensive plays.

Streaking: Sophomore wide receiver Delane Hart-Johnson has an 80-yard catch in back-to-back games.

Key stat: New Mexico’s defense has forced at least one turnover in 19 of the last 21 games.

FYI: The Lobos have bowl eligibility for the first time since 2007. Davie, a former Notre Dame coach, was 11-26 in his first three seasons with the Lobos. He is 6-5 in his last 11 conference games.

Irv Moss, The Denver Post