As you make your holiday shopping list, think about the deals your credit card companies are offering.

CardHub has put together a list of the special holiday deals that large credit card companies are promoting to existing cardholders. Even though most Americans are planning on using debit cards or cash in order to limit their spending or avoid building debt, it’s a good idea to check out these promotions before casting aside your credit cards for the entire holiday season. Most of the companies are offering cashback or other types of rewards if you shop at a specific retailer or spend a certain amount.

Related: 12 Best Credit Cards for Travelers

Below are the promotions that the largest credit card issuers are offering this holiday season:

American Express

Card members who enrolled in Membership Rewards can purchase an item worth at least $50 from Best Buy through the American Express Membership Rewards site; they’ll receive a Best Buy e-gift card. The value of the cards range from $15-$300 and depend on the purchase made.

Platinum and Centurion Carb Members can also use Membership Rewards points for Once in a Lifetime experiential rewards and various products thru the end of the year.

Also, for the first time, Amazon is allowing American Express customers to purchase Amazon products with AMEX points.

Capital One

Cardholders who are feeling the holiday spirit can use their rewards to donate to charities via Capital One’s Giving Site. Capital One covers the transaction costs for every gift, so 100 percent of the donation goes to the charity.

Any Uber rider that pays with a Capital One Quicksilver or QuicksilverOne card receives 20 percent back on all rides from now through April 20, 2016. Even though the deal isn’t holiday-specific, it’s a way to save money when getting around during the busy holiday season.

Chase

Up until Dec. 31, all Chase Freedom cardholders will earn five percent cash back on up to $1,500 in combined purchases at Amazon.com, Zappos.com, audible.com, and diapers.com.

Cardholders of Chase Amazon.com Rewards Visa earn three percent back at Amazon.com, two percent back at restaurants, gas stations and drugstores and one percent back on all other purchases.

Related: Why That Store Credit Card Could Cost You Dearly

Citi

After card members purchase an eligible item with their Citi Price Rewind card, they can register the item on citi.com/pricerewind. Citi will look for 60 days after a purchase for a lower price. If it finds a lower price, card members must submit a claim and receipt for approval. Once the claim is approved, card members will receive a statement credit for the difference in price up to $300 per item and $1,200 per year.

Discover

Up until the end of the year, enrolled card members can receive a 5 percent cashback bonus on up to $1,500 on combined purchases at Amazon.com, department stores and clothing stores. The bonus can be redeemed at any time for retail gift cards, a donation to a charity, a statement credit, an electronic deposit, or it can be used at a store checkout.

Wells Fargo

Wells Fargo Rewards customers can redeem points at the Earn Mall Mall and can earn up to 10 times bonus rewards if they buy goods there. Customers can choose between thousands of online, local, national and in-store retailers. Items can also be purchased online through the Earn More Mall using existing rewards. In addition, shoppers can also share, give and donate points to one another or to specific causes.