Diane Hoff attracts birds with heated bath, crabtrees and homemade suet

A piebald robin enjoys a heated bird bath in the yard of Diane Hoff of Loveland. Piebald is a relatively rare genetic pigmentation expression that eliminates some of the feathers' normal coloring. ( Diane Hoff )

Diane Hoff is a self-described bird lover and has the scrapbook to prove it. She and her husband Marv watch birds in their yard from a sunroom that faces a heated birdbath outside.

"They (the birds) love that birdbath; it has been worth every penny," she said.

And that's how Hoff caught her first glimpse of a small white bird with brown markings that area bird expert Kevin Cook identified as a piebald robin, Hoff said.

She attended her first bird talk at the Loveland Public Library on Tuesday. The Noontime Nature talks are given by Cook on a weekly basis and this week the discussion was on "Master of Mountains: Brown-Capped Rosy Finch."

"I really enjoyed it. He is really knowledgeable about birds," Hoff said. "I've never seen a rosy finch in my life."

She showed Cook a photo of the bird that arrived in the neighborhood around Nov. 2.

She has been feeding the creature raisins every morning. Cook said on Friday that the robin's coloring, which is called piebald, is a genetic condition that occurs in the egg.

The bird doesn't receive the normally programmed pigmentation so it only receives some of its coloring, leaving the other feathers white. Piebald is relatively rare but can occur in any animal. Black and white Holstein cattle are a good example, Cook said.

In March, Hoff spotted another piebald bird in the yard, a white robin speckled with black spots. It was identified by an expert in another Reporter-Herald article published March 22 as having a rare pigmentation called leucism. Cook believes that bird was also a piebald, rather than leucistic.

Advertisement

"That's a common misinterpretation," Cook said. In leucism, birds receive the correct pattern of color, but the pigment is less than normal, which produces a faded look. In piebald, the color is nonexistent where it should have pigment.

Hoff has crabtrees in the yard with berries, and homemade suet in a cage near the birdbath, so there are always birds to admire and new anomalies to question and look up, she said.

Email kevin@wildlifewindow.com to find out more details about outdoor life.

Jessica Benes can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 530, or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaBenes. Read her blog at jessicabenes.com.