Third-ranked American offers strategies to local students

Immanuel Lutheran student Aaron Koso, 10, listens as chess master Timur Garevv gives pointers during a chess class Wednesday at the school in Loveland. ( Jenny Sparks )

Sixteen Immanuel Lutheran Church students sat across from empty chairs waiting for world-renowned chess grandmaster Timur Gareev to make a move, then go on to the next game.

Gareev, 25, looped around the room, winning six games and nearly winning the other two in 20 minutes before the bell rang for Brad Lundstrom's chess class.

"This guy's like a superstar," Lundstrom said about Gareev, who was born in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, and lives in San Diego.

Prior to the simultaneous games, Gareev gave a lesson on strategies of chess, using an upright demonstration board with slots to hold the flat, plastic-covered pieces.

Chess, is not a team sport, but it does involve a team, said Gareev, who is ranked third in the nation for the game and has been a grandmaster since age 15. He is one of 1,400 grandmasters worldwide.

"The team is your pieces. You're the team manager," he said.

Gareev demonstrated a few tactical moves and advised the students to try to keep as much open space on their boards. He concluded his lesson with a challenge.

"You're not going to beat me," he said, holding out his arms. "You can try your best."

That best is how well students move their pieces and keep their pieces engaged, so all the "teammates" work together, he said. He told the students to sit up straight and to stay focused, because checkmates happen when players get distracted, he said.

"It's fun that I can play versus a grandmaster. I haven't played anyone as good as him," said fourth-grader Aaron Koso, 10, who partnered with Christopher Walton, 7, a third-grader, for the match.

The two lost to Gareev, but Christopher cheered about calling "check," which lasted for one second, he said.

"It's better than nothing," he said.

Chess master Timur Garevv talks to Immanuel Lutheran School students about strategies during a chess class Wednesday at the school in Loveland.

Lundstrom, a candidate chess grandmaster and vice president of the Colorado State Chess Association, started the multiple-grade chess class at the school this fall, he said. He and his business partner, Zach Bekkedahl, of Chessmates teach chess in Loveland, Fort Collins and Greeley.

"It's a science. It's an art. It's definitely a sport," Lundstrom said. "Every game is a new adventure. You never know what's going to happen."

Lundstrom, who wants to mainstream chess in public schools, teaches his students the rules of the game, strategies and moves. He says there are more chess moves than atoms in the universe.

"You have to make decisions quick," Gareev said about the game, adding that you also have to create a plan. "If you get better, the things get more complex."

Gareev's specialty is playing multiple games blindfolded, using verbal cues and his memory of the board to make his moves. He wants to set a world record in 2015 and play 50 simultaneous blindfold games in Seattle, breaking the record of 47, he said.

"The genius of it, it's hard to believe," Lundstrom said.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.