Attendance on Demand Attendance on Demand can help remove the burden of PBJ reporting. It also automates status determination and reporting for the Affordable Care Act (ACA), another hardship for LTC facilities.

Attendance on Demand, Inc. is pleased to announce a new feature for Payroll-Based Journal (PBJ) reporting. It produces a PBJ file that reports hours by calendar day, automatically splitting night-shift hours between days for facilities that normally allocate the whole shift to a single day.

Beginning in July 2016, long-term care (LTC) facilities are required to report daily staffing and census information for each fiscal quarter through the online PBJ system to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). In addition to census data, CMS expects detailed accounts of each employee’s service, including job title, services performed, and daily number of hours worked. CMS also requires hours to be reported by calendar day – midnight to midnight – not the way many facilities track time.

Hours for shifts that cross midnight have to be split for PBJ reporting. Attendance on Demand’s newest PBJ reporting feature does this automatically without changing the way the facility’s operational reports or employee time cards display time.

“The deadline is quickly approaching and many facilities are still unclear about their PBJ reporting strategy,” said Beth Baerman, Director of Communications at Attendance on Demand, Inc. “Attendance on Demand can help remove the burden of PBJ reporting. It also automates status determination and reporting for the Affordable Care Act (ACA), another hardship for LTC facilities.”

About Attendance on Demand

Attendance on Demand supports the labor management needs of thousands of companies and more than three-quarters of a million employees across North America. Launched in 2006, Attendance on Demand is a rapidly deployed, cloud-based solution that minimizes a company's risk and technology investment while providing advanced features for securely managing labor data—calculating pay rules, scheduling employees, budgeting labor, automating recordkeeping for labor law compliance and managing employee status and reporting for the Affordable Care Act. With standard uptime over the industry average of 99.995% and above average customer retention rates, Attendance on Demand removes the worry of maintaining expensive infrastructure. An extensive North American distribution network helps organizations use Attendance on Demand to reduce labor expenses and improve decision making.

http://www.attendanceondemand.com

800-465-9980