Transcript for Scott Walker Says He's Not Seeking to Repeal 14th Amendment

Okay, let's give Scott walker a chance to respond. Right now he joins us this morning from Alabama. Governor, thanks for joining us this morning. You heard Donald Trump say Wisconsin is not performing. Your response? Well, he's using the talking points of the democrats. Those talking points haven't worked in the past 4 1/2 years as we won three elections in four years, not just with republican support but with a huge margin amongst independents and even some discerning democrats, why, because we took a $3.6 billion budget deficit and fixed it and did it while cutting taxes by billions of dollars. Our roads are better and our schools are better. Our state is better. Those are the same talking points the democrats used and didn't work in the past. They won't work now but the one thing I do want to clarify is I do think that there is some real frustration out there. It's why you not only see his Numbers up you see some of the other candidates who have not run for office before they're angry at Washington. Heck, I'm angry at Washington and angry at my own party leadership who told us they would repeal obamacare and don't see a bill on the desk of the president. I think that's where the real frustration is. In the end if people want someone to fight but not just fight but win and get results and do it without compromising commonsense conservative principles, I'm the candidate. It sounds like you're following through on what "The Washington post" reported had week. They reported on a conference call with your fund-raisers who said you had to do better in protest, policy and passion. Is that right? Yeah, I think there's no doubt about it and want to see what they saw at the Iowa state fair. We had protesters, one who tried to come up on the stage and I said, I'm not intimidated by you or the left or not intimidated by the special interests in Washington and I'm certainly not intimidated by the big government union bosses but early on our state assembly was great but a few of our state senators, some of whom had been in leadership did not want to do the big, bold reforms we did and I'll take anybody on including the leadership of my own party in Washington if that's what it takes to do what is right for the American people. Also been taking on this question of birthright citizenship and the 14th amendment. Let me put the first sentence of the 14th amend moment up on the screen right now. "All persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof are citizens of the United States and of the state wherein they reside." Do you support the first line of the 14th amendment? Well, George, let me step back for a second and tell you an interesting story. Last month I was in a small town in Iowa called plainville. In fact, I lived there for awhile as a kid, and a family came from waukesha to confront me. The father was upset I was 1 of the 25 governors that went to court and stopped the president and I told that father, in a very tense situation with the media all around including some from ABC news and others out there, I told that father I felt bad for him and his family. I feel bad for families like that but I told them that this president had said I believe some 22 times, 22 times before he did what he did last November that he couldn't do it. He said that he was the president, not the emperor. That he wasn't above the law, and then he went out and changed the law by his actions. It took me and 25 or, excuse me, 24 other governors to stop him in court. The problem here, we need to address the root problem, the issue, which is we need a president who is going to secure the borders, not just give lip service to it like we've seen over the past couple of decades. Secure the border and enforce the laws. My point all week has been and continues to be as it was last month, until we address those core problems we'll -- we're not addressing the real issue and Americans are right to be upset. I understand that's what you feel we have to address but this is a simple yes or no question. Do you support that line of the 14th amendment? Well, I said the law is there and we need to enforce the laws including those that are in the constitution. My point is having this debate about anything else when we don't have politicians who are committed to actually securing the border and enforcing the laws, which means very simply in our country e-verify. Making sure that every employer ensures that the people working for them are legal to work in this state -- in this country. That will resolve the problem we're talking about and that's what I've been talking about this week. So, you're not seeking to repeal or alter the 14th amendment? No, my point is any discussion that goes beyond securing the border and enforcing laws are things that should be a red flag to voters out there who for years have heard lip service from politicians and are understandably angry because those politicians haven't been committed to following through on those promises. I hope the one thing people see in my state, I had 100,000 protesters on a different issue and had all sorts of death threats and all sorts of other abuse. People in my state will tell you whether they agree or disagree. One thing I do when I make a promise I follow through on it. My promise is to truly secure the border and enforce the laws of this great country. Let's talk about health care and you put out a plan calling for the replacement of obamacare with a series of tax credits for everyone who would be escalating over age. This is what one of your rivals, governor bobby jindal had to say about this. Scott walker's plan does create a new entitlement program and guarantees universal coverage for every American, one estimate this week says it would cost over a trillion dollars. And he doesn't tell us how he would pay for this plan. So how much will your plan cost, and how will you pay for it? Well, he's just wrong on that, in fact, conservative commentator after commentator from "The Wall Street journal" and the "National review" and others said it's the best plan out there and, in fact, it's one of the only plans out there about freedom and giving patients and families the control of their own money. We repeal obamacare immediately. On day one we send the bill up to congress and day one we get rid of the special provisions for congress, their families, staff and everyone else to make sure they repeal it entirely immediately and give people a tax credit for those who don't have health insurance from their employer. If you get it from your employer it won't be touched. If anything your premiums will go down because putting in place reforms will help lower health care cost, not raise them as we saw under obamacare but give people a tax credit and goes up by age because before obamacare that's what happened. Your health care costs go up over age. The credit goes up over age. We allow people to apply that to the health care plan they want or not buy health care insurance if they don't want but we put the freedom back in the hands of the American people and for us it's a simple way to do it that's cost neutral, repeals all of the trillions worth of tax increases you see under obamacare and gives us one of the biggest tax cuts we've had in the past 40 some years, one of the most pro-growth systems, and we do it by making sure we have a tax system that appropriately acknowledges some of the top tier health insurance plans by giving medicaid back to the states where there's real reform. That mays it cost neutral. Finally, you heard Donald Trump say he doesn't think Hillary can overcome this e-mail issue. Do you agree with that, and and will it still be an issue in the general election? Well, I think she has all sorts of problems when it comes to health care. Hillary cares more about the ruling class than the middle class and trying to give special breaks or talking about giving special breaks to some of her biggest supporters while the rest of us are stuck with it. When it comes to e-mail I don't think Americans can trust her. Every day we see more information about e-mails, they're not about e-mails but national security and put my national security at risk and put your national security at risk and put the American people's national security at risk. Hillary Clinton would be a pretty good deceiver in chief. But I don't think we can trust her as commander in chief. Sounds like you are ready to make it an issue if you get the nomination. Scott walker, thanks for your time this morning. Thank you, George. When we come back those,

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.