The federal government hit 79 percent of Florida hospitals with a penalty on future Medicare payments with one local facility being penalized the most in the state.

St. Vincent’s Medical Center Southside won’t receive full payment for treatment of Medicare patients as too many of its patients returned to the Jacksonville hospital for additional care before 30 days after being admitted to the facility.

The penalty is 2.86 percent of any reimbursement from the federally funded Medicare program from October 2014 through September 2015, according to information released by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

For a 15,000 procedure — say a kidney surgery — performed at St. Vincent’s Southside that is billed to the Medicare program, the hospital will receive $14,571 — a penalty of $429.

The average penalty for the 148 Florida hospitals affected is a reduction of .58 percent of future reimbursements, according to Kaiser Health News.

The program that allows Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to penalize hospitals aims to reduce costly, preventable readmissions after initial treatment and is in its third year of implementation after being passed into law with the Affordable Care Act.

The maximum penalty the center can access is 3 percent of Medicare reimbursement.

St. Vincent’s Southside was penalized near the maximum allowed, but in the previous two years the hospital received penalties of .14 percent and .15 percent.

Officials there said a change in how the penalty is calculated that takes into account data from as far back as 2010 caused the poor performance and the stiff penalty.

In previous years, the penalty was determined by three conditions — heart failure, heart attack and pneumonia. This year Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services included chronic lung problems and elective hip and knee replacements.

In 2010 St. Vincent’s joint-replacement program had recently been created and was “growing rapidly,” Kyle Sanders, president St. Vincent’s Southside, said in an email.

“We feel this may have contributed to some elevated months early on; rates have improved as the program has matured,” Sanders said.

He said readmission rates in the early part of 2014 were well below the national average.

All other hospitals in surrounding counties were penalized below 1 percent.

Derek Gilliam: (904) 359-4619