MGN Online

Icy roads are to blame for numerous accidents and one fatality in the Wichita area.

Emergency crews have been busy responding to a slew of slideoffs, crashes and pile-ups, one of which killed a 48-year-old Andover man.

That rollover accident happened just before 3 a.m. along the Kansas Turnpike, about a mile north of the Haysville exit.

The Kansas Turnpike Authority said Stephen Dewald was heading north when he attempted to pass another vehicle, lost control on the ice and overturned. Dewald was ejected from his 2001 Dodge Ram and pronounced dead a short time later. Reports state he was not wearing a seatbelt.

A 27-year-old man suffered potentially critical injuries after the car he was riding in lost control and hit a light pole around 3:30 this morning on I-235 just north of K-42. Troopers say Patrick Maples of Wichita was taken to Via Christi-St. Francis Hospital for treatment. The driver was not seriously hurt.

Traffic was backed up for several hours on east Kellogg after a multi-car pile-up near Hillside. That accident happened around 2:30 a.m. No serious injuries were reported.

At around 2:15 a.m., troopers say a 50-year-old man was hospitalized after his vehicle overturned in the median on northbound I-235 near Meridian. His current condition is not known.

The most recent accident happened around 8:30 a.m. near 47th Street South and Rock Road. Deputies say a man was taken to the hospital with minor injuries after rolling his vehicle. Officers say Rock Road is "very slick" between 31st Street South and Derby.

In McPherson County, one person was hurt in an accident around 12:30 a.m. on I-135 about 7 miles south of McPherson.

Dispatchers in Cowley and Sumner counties say roads near the Oklahoma border are very icy. Between 9:30 and 10:10 a.m., Ark City got one-eighth of an inch of ice.

Authorities are urging motorists to stay off the highways and elevated roadways. The Emergency Accident Reporting Plan is not currently in effect in Sedgwick County. Check back for updates throughout the weekend.