Maui Economic Development Board will offer a workshop, “Getting Started For Startups: The Basics of Sound Human Resources Management,” as part of their Technical Assistance Series on Wednesday, March 2, 2016. The workshop will look at the basics of human resource management for business startups.

+ SWIPE LEFT OR RIGHT SWIPE LEFT OR RIGHT

“All new entrepreneurs must navigate an often bewildering maze of tasks, rules, and regulations to get going,” said Frank De Rego Jr., Director of Business Development Projects at Maui Economic Development Board. “The goal of this interactive workshop is to set you on a path to success as you bring on and nurture one of your most vital strengths – your employees,” said De Rego Jr.

The workshop will be held from 8:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. at MEDB’s Malcolm Center located at 1305 North Holopono Street, Suite 5 in Kīhei. The schedule includes: registration from 8:30 to 9 a.m.; seminar from 9 to 11:15 a.m.; lunch and networking at 11:15 a.m. to 12 p.m.; and breakout sessions at 12 to 1:30 p.m.

Attendees will learn the following basics:

Payroll Basics: Must-follow regulations, tax liabilities, withholdings, and an explanation of FICA-FUTA-SUTA.

Must-follow regulations, tax liabilities, withholdings, and an explanation of FICA-FUTA-SUTA. Health Care Basics: The Affordable Care Act, explanation of group versus individual health care plans, and the ins and outs of Prepaid Health options.

The Affordable Care Act, explanation of group versus individual health care plans, and the ins and outs of Prepaid Health options. Human Resource Basics: Recruiting, hiring, and terminating an employee, the effect of TDI and Workers Compensation.

Recruiting, hiring, and terminating an employee, the effect of TDI and Workers Compensation. Labor Law Basics: Best practices to avoid lawsuits, dealing with wage and hour issues such as minimum wage and overtime, insurance requirements, and how new labor law legislation will impact your business.

Breakout Sessions:

Following the seminar, attendees can participate in the following small group breakout sessions.

Starting Up Your Payroll: Understanding regulations, tax liabilities, and withholding requirements.

Understanding regulations, tax liabilities, and withholding requirements. Health Care and Your New Business: The Affordable Care Act, exploring health care plans and options.

The Affordable Care Act, exploring health care plans and options. Building Your Employment Culture: Employee recruitment to retirement and everything in between.

Employee recruitment to retirement and everything in between. Following the Law: Best practices in implementing labor law requirements.

ADVERTISEMENT

Workshop Speakers:

Gregory Sato is a partner in the Kobayashi Sugita & Goda law firm who specializes in representing employers.

is a partner in the Kobayashi Sugita & Goda law firm who specializes in representing employers. Donna Jones is the Director of External HR for ProService Hawaii. Donna is an active member of Society of Human Resource Managers, and holds a Senior Professional in Human Resources Certification.

is the Director of External HR for ProService Hawaii. Donna is an active member of Society of Human Resource Managers, and holds a Senior Professional in Human Resources Certification. Peggy Maxwell-Luke is the Business Relationship Manager for Ceridian HCM, Hawaii’s leading payroll provider. She has over 24 years of payroll, tax filing and HRIS experience.

is the Business Relationship Manager for Ceridian HCM, Hawaii’s leading payroll provider. She has over 24 years of payroll, tax filing and HRIS experience. David Yarbrough is the Senior Business Development Manager at ProService Hawaii, a Maui-based company that specializes in helping small businesses increase their profitability and decrease their liability in the workplace.

is the Senior Business Development Manager at ProService Hawaii, a Maui-based company that specializes in helping small businesses increase their profitability and decrease their liability in the workplace. Lauraine Bifulco is CEO and President of VantaggioHR, a human resource consulting company that provides solutions to businesses of all sizes, across all industries. Lauraine is a veteran HR executive and entrepreneur with 25 years of international, corporate, and consulting experience.

Admission is $25 per person, cost includes lunch. Advanced reservations are required, space is limited. For more information and to register online, visit http://www.medb.org/gsfs/ or contact Frank De Rego Jr. by email at frank@medb.org.

The workshop is part of MEDB’s Technical Assistance Series, a grassroots effort to help small businesses establish strong systems, processes, tools, and best practices to build a solid foundation for success.

The “Getting Started For Startups: The Basics of Sound Human Resources Management” workshop is sponsored by the County of Maui, Maui Economic Development Board, Ceridian, Kobayashi Sugita & Goda, ProService Hawaiʻi, and VantaggioHR.