Topics: Charter schools, Editor's Picks, Education, Koch Brothers, nashville, News

“We know we need to do something about students who are not achieving in our schools.”

That anxious appeal – along with its many variations – has become the refrain now firmly embedded in speeches and opinion columns about American public education.

Yes! Do something. About those kids.

Only this time, the anxious appeal is coming from Jai Sanders, an African-American parent in Nashville, Tennessee, who has a stake in the matter: The something about to be done is aimed squarely at him and his children.

Sanders, pausing briefly before assembling a bagel with lox and cream cheese, explains, “But what we’re currently doing is throwing solutions at the wall to see what sticks, without any research or any consultation with the people who are affected the most.”

His tone of voice doesn’t carry a trace of the anger or resentment that could be inferred from what he just said. Actually, Sanders exudes affability. With a green ball cap tipped slightly back from his cherubic face, he gestures broadly and smiles incessantly. His impossibly well-behaved 3-year-old daughter seated beside him only occasionally diverts him as she carefully navigates her bagel.

They live with mom and the rest of the family in the same house where Jai grew up – the third generation of Sanders to live in their home in East Nashville.

Sanders, who attended both public and private schools while growing up in East Nashville, has chosen, along with his wife, to send their children to their neighborhood public school, Inglewood Elementary. Inglewood was “the default for us,” he says.

An older daughter who attends the school has been identified gifted and talented which has enabled her to be included in a program where she is provided with an Individual Education Plan so she receives specific attention to her abilities.

Yet now Sanders finds himself and his family swept into a raging Music City controversy. Conversations about public education – where you send your kid to school, where other parents send their kids, and who gets to decide – have exploded into acrimonious bickering, full of charges and counter-charges.

The debate pits parents against parents, schools against schools, and communities against communities. School board meetings have turned into raucous events that sometimes descend into boisterous demonstrations. And public officials swipe at each other in social media and opinion columns, accusing one another of having ulterior motives.

“None of this was in the “dad manual” when I started a family,” Sanders explains, making quote marks in the air. “I’d much rather go back to being a PTO dad planning the Christmas party rather than going to meetings and shouting my head off to save our school.”

“We love Inglewood Elementary,” Sanders says, although he admits, “not all parents agree with me.”

Apparently, neither does the state of Tennessee.

We’ve Made Your School a “Priority”

As state media outlet The Tennessean reported recently, low scores on student standardized tests and other indicators led the state to designate 15 Metro Nashville Public Schools, including Inglewood, as “Priority Schools.”

“Priority Schools are the lowest-performing 5 percent of schools in Tennessee,” according to the state’s education department, making them “eligible for inclusion in the Achievement School District or in district Innovation Zones. They may also plan and adopt turnaround models for school improvement.”

The plain English translation of that benign bureaucratic speak is that Inglewood has been labeled a failure by the state, which gives the state or district power to do something to it. Often, the something that gets done to a Priority School in Tennessee is to fire the school’s principal or teachers, hand the school over to a charter school management organization, or a mixture of the above.

One of the potential options the district has chosen for Inglewood is for the school to be taken over by the KIPP nationwide charter school management organization. The outgoing district superintendent, Jesse Register, has already disclosed the district has signed a contract with KIPP, only he won’t say which school KIPP is destined to take over.

Sanders is not the only Nashville parent dreading the fate that could befall a local school.

“Not In Favor Of Chaos”

Across town, Ruth Stewart shares a similar perspective about the fate of a different Nashville elementary school.

Like Inglewood, Kirkpatrick Elementary has also been designated a Priority School and potentially targeted for a charter takeover. Superintendent Register has promised to announce soon which of the two schools – Inglewood or Kirkpatrick – will be turned over first.

Also like Inglewood, Kirkpatrick serves a disproportionate percentage of children from low-income African-American and Hispanic households. Although Stewart does not have a child attending Kirkpatrick, she speaks admiringly of its teachers, describing how they “take on the duties of social workers – make sure kids get home okay, make sure they have warm coats to wear in the winter.”

Stewart, who is white but has an adopted African-American child, says, “Kids at Kirkpatrick don’t get the privileges my kids have gotten. So why aren’t we divvying up resources equitably to help solve that?”

At a lunch spot in West Nashville known for serving healthful fare, she speaks about her situation in Metro Nashville Public Schools. Between forkfuls of a salad of chicken and mixed greens she describes the “chaotic” situation in Nashville, contrasting it often to what she is familiar with in the practice of medicine. She is a physician.

“Nothing has been transparent about the current agenda. This sows anxiety and division in the community,” she says.

Stewart sees the consequences of new education policies in Tennessee as having a “negative impact on people’s feelings that schools are part of the community … I’m not sure what to do, but I’m not in favor of chaos.”

Nashville has two middle schools facing a similar fate. The two schools, Neely’s Bend Middle Prep and Madison Middle Prep, have both been placed on the state’s Priority list, removed from the oversight of the Nashville district, and grouped with other troubled Tennessee schools in the state’s Achievement School District.

The ASD was founded as part of Tennessee’s effort to qualify for the Obama administration’s Race to the Top grant.

What state takeover means to the students, parents and teachers of Neely’s Bend and Madison is that one of their schools – again, to be announced at a later date – will be handed over to a charter management operation.

Because the ASD is a charter authorizer, it can designate any of its schools for charter takeover, and indeed has done so numerous times. In fact, the superintendent of the ASD, Chris Barbic, is the founder and ex-CEO of the Yes Prep chain of charter schools. When the ASD rolled into Memphis, another troubled Tennessee school district, the ASD immediately began targeting the district’s schools for takeover by charter operations, as a 2013 report from The Atlantic recounted.

Enforced charter takeovers like the ones being carried out in Tennessee are happening across the country.

We’re All Nashville Now

The debate in Nashville echoes themes the nation has heard from New York City and Los Angeles where students, teachers and parents have engaged in prolonged battles over decisions to co-locate charter schools in public school buildings.

In Newark, New Jersey, a state-imposed plan enacted this year intends to move charter schools into the district’s facilities. In Detroit, the state agency in charge of that city’s schools has a new plan to convert over 30 percent of the districts into charter schools. In Wisconsin, a bill has been introduced in the state legislature that would make all public schools deemed to be “failures” become charter schools.

Most recently, the school district of York, Pennsylvania, made national headlines when the state announced the city’s schools would be turned into an “all charter” district. As a report at The Daily Caller explained, a legal path has been cleared for a state “recovery officer” to proceed with “a plan to place all of the city’s public schools under the control of Charter Schools USA, a for-profit school management company.”

The idea of an “all charter” school district has been tried before, in Muskegon Heights, Michigan. The results were disastrous as the charter operator promptly alienated most of the teachers and then backed out of the deal. But that seems to deter no one directing these efforts.

In every one of these charter takeover cases, there have been large numbers of students, parents and teachers who have spoken out in opposition.

And although takeovers of “failed” schools are often justified as rational responses to “urban decay” or “underutilization,” none of these arguments apply to Nashville. Nashville is a city that is experiencing strong growth in population and employment, and public schools are experiencing problems with overcrowding because of high demand for their services. Nashville is a neither a union bastion nor a hardened, bitter battleground of Big City politics. So it’s not hard to imagine that if a fight like this can break out here, it could break out anywhere.

What policy leaders and charter advocates contend, in nearly every one of these takeover cases, is that they are following the reform model from Louisiana’s state-operated Recovery School District, which took over most of New Orleans’ public schools after Hurricane Katrina.

Thing is, there hasn’t been another Katrina. Instead, there’s been a manmade disaster.

Due to the influence of federal policies, such as Race to the Top, and relentless marketing by charter school advocates, virtually every state has a methodology for designating “low performing” schools as Priority and targeting them for radical solutions like charter school takeover.

Accountability Gone Awry

Back when these plans for targeting the nation’s “low performing” schools were unveiled by the Obama administration, the National Center for Education Policy, an education policy research think tank affiliated with the University of Colorado, Boulder, warned in a brief that the Obama plans’s accountability system, “which determines how schools will be evaluated” is not substantiated by any legitimate research, and that the “intervention models for low-scoring schools is not developed, much less supported in the research.”

Indeed, the notion that education performance of public schools can be turned around by taking them over and converting them to charter schools or co-locating charters in their buildings is particularly unproven.

Even in New Orleans, mass charter conversion has been “disastrous,” writes Kristen Buras for The Progressive. After the charter takeover of NOLA public schools post Katrina, the state began issuing letter grades for all schools in 2011, and 79 percent of charter schools in the New Orleans district received a “D” or “F.” In 2014, RSD-New Orleans schools are still performing below the vast majority of the state’s other districts at the fourth and eighth grades in subjects tested by the Louisiana Educational Assessment Program, including English language arts, math and science.

In Tennessee, state takeovers of public schools have so far yielded mostly disappointing results too, according to math teacher and statistical whiz Gary Rubenstein. “They are still in the bottom 5 percent, dead last with the second to last district not even close to them,” he writes.

Despite these troubling results, there are powerful advocates for continuing charter takeovers of public schools. Takeovers and other methods of proliferating charters, such as vouchers, have helped push the number of charter schools in America over the 6,400 mark in 2013-14, with more than 2.5 million students enrolled, according to The National Alliance for Public Charter Schools. Charters are now the fastest growing segment of our public education system.

Doing the Math

In Nashville, charter school performance varies widely, with some performing significantly better than the rest of the state and better than Nashville public schools, while others are at the bottom of state rankings.

But academic performance doesn’t seem to be the most important factor in selecting which schools are targeted for charter takeover and which are not, at least not in Nashville. As Nashville school board members Amy Frogge and Jill Speering point out in a recent op ed, one of the middle schools targeted for state takeover, Neely’s Bend, performs better on state assessments than many other Nashville schools do – and better than schools already taken over by the state.

Also, charter schools may pose a drain on public school finances. According to a recent study conducted by the Florida-based research firm MGT of America, growth of charters will harm Nashville public schools overall. “The loss of even a single student will reduce the revenue received,” the report states, because “the reduction of a single student in a classroom will not alleviate the need to have a teacher in that classroom … In fact, the per-pupil cost for that classroom or school would increase because the fixed expenses would remain, but the revenue to support them would be decreased.”

The report estimates that the net negative fiscal impact of charter school growth on the district’s public schools would be more than $300 million in direct costs over a five-year period. This figure is likely an under-estimate, the report contends, as there are “other indirect costs” of charter schools related to administration that are “not easily identified.” Meanwhile, there are no new revenue sources being considered to offset the additional costs. “There appears to be an assumption,” the report notes, “that the central organizations supporting the charter schools can continue to do so within existing resources.”

The MGT report is mostly supportive of the idea of charters and recommends ways to ensure their success without harming public schools. Nevertheless, it concludes, “New charter schools will, with nearly 100 percent certainty, have a negative fiscal impact” on the school district.” (emphasis added)

When It’s Your Kid

The numbers arguments don’t even begin to capture what’s driving a lot of parent anxiety in Nashville.

“I’m not anti-charter,” Jai Sanders declares. “I don’t advocate closing any East Nashville charters.” But he does have specific reservations about turning Inglewood into a KIPP charter school.

He strongly objects to the heavy handed, top-down way Nashville Metro school leaders have gone about the process of pushing charter governance on neighborhood schools. For instance, he is worried about the principal of his child’s school, who he is happy with, being forced out.

Sanders says the district has enough charter schools as it is. “Charter schools should be something on the periphery. They were originally supposed to be incubators of ideas and not the standard for schools in the community.”

Sanders also has “philosophical problems” with the way some charter schools “go about their business,” specifically how they are governed by boards of directors rather than school boards. “This way of doing education doesn’t seem like education to me.”

Sanders mentions KIPP charter schools in particular, as a model of education he has “reservations” about. KIPP is known for practicing an approach to schooling loosely labeled as “No Excuse,” which relies on strict behavioral controls of students. He describes KIPP’s approach as a “military school for civilians, with the extreme tracking of students, requiring SLANT, and no excuses.” SLANT is a foundational practice in KIPP schools that dictates students must Sit up, Listen, Ask and answer questions, Nod and Track the teachers’ movements. There have been numerous, verified reports of KIPP and other charter schools practicing the No Excuse approach, using very harsh disciplinary practices, including high rates of suspensions and expulsions, on students.

Ruth Stewart – who describes herself as “anti-charter” but “willing to work with my pro-charter colleagues to have an outcome we all can live with” – also expresses reservations with the charter school she visited, Liberty Collegiate Academy in the RePublic School charter chain. “Not for my kid,” she states. “It was very tightly controlled … eye contact, hand clapping, too controlling.”

She contrasts the “controlling” environment of No Excuse charter schools to what she has observed in public schools, where she has experienced “a much more nurturing learning environment.”

“I understand some parents would choose KIPP and the No Excuse approach,” she says. “But something leaves me very uneasy about that kind of control exerted on children of color. So all white kids get to go to a school with a Montessori approach while children of color get eye control?

“What we all want are children who are autonomous, responsible and intrinsically motivated. But I’m not sure these types of charter schools get us where we want to go.”

[Editorial note: A pro-charter Nashville parent contacted for this article declined to be quoted on record.]

Another oft-stated reservation with charter schools is their unquestionable link to increased segregation of students based on race and income.

“Studies in a number of different states and school districts in the U.S. show that charter schools often lead to increased school segregation,” writes Iris C. Rotberg, a research professor of education policy at The George Washington University’s Graduate School of Education and Human Development, in Education Week.

“Even schools that employ a seemingly randomized under lottery system for enrolling students,” Rotberg explains, “also choose – sometimes explicitly and sometimes indirectly – and increase the probability of segregation. They limit the services they provide, thereby excluding certain students, or offer programs that appeal only to a limited group of families.”

Rotberg cites studies showing, “In some communities, charter schools have a higher concentration of minority students than traditional public schools,” while “In others, charter schools serve as a vehicle for ‘white flight.’ … School segregation increases in both cases.”

Some Nashville parents also feel charter school proliferation has led to increased racial segregation of students. “A lot of charter school rationale is based on racial diversity, but it seems to me we’re getting less diverse due to charters,” Stewart states.

Stewart’s observations may or not be accurate. That would require statistical analysis. But parent perceptions are often stronger influencers of public opinion than statistics.

Charter school advocates understand that all too well.

Evolution of a Movement that Is “Bad for Kids”

Indeed, the rhetoric driving charter school advocacy has changed dramatically over the years as proponents of charter schools condition public perceptions to accept the expansion of these schools.

That evolution has been documented extensively in the recently published book “A Smarter Charter: Finding What Works for Charter Schools and Public Education,” by Richard D. Kahlenberg and Halley Potter.

The original vision of charter schools, the book contends, was to provide “laboratory schools” to “experiment” with different approaches that could eventually be considered for adopting on a much larger scale. Two foundational tenets to these experimental schools, the authors maintain, were for teachers to have a stronger voice in determining the management of the school and for the student body to have higher degrees of economic and racial diversity than traditional public schools.

However, as states began enacting legislation to create and spread charter schools – beginning with Minnesota in 1991, then ramping up significantly under the presidential administration of Bill Clinton – there was a “more conservative vision” repeated again and again that reinforced charter schools as “competitors” to the public school system – even to the extent of replacing public schools, some argued.

“The public policy rhetoric changed from an emphasis on how charters could best serve as laboratory partners to public schools to whether charters as a group are ‘better’ or ‘worse,'” the book argues. And “over time, the market metaphor came to replace the laboratory metaphor.”

Desires to break public school teachers’ unions crept into arguments for the spread of charters as well, as “conservative charter school advocates argued that having a nonunion environment was a key advantage – perhaps the defining advantage – over regular public schools,” and influential voices in public school policy, such as former Assistant Secretary of Education Chester Finn, who had been initially skeptical of charter schools, gradually became strong advocates for creating more of them.