Blue Cross changes clear sign of corporate greed

If you are an Anthem Blue Cross subscriber for your health insurance, you recently received a letter in the mail stating that if you need physical therapy, Blue Cross has hired Orthonet, a review company, to determine if therapy is really needed and to tell your doctor and therapist if it is “medically necessary.” As a physical therapist specializing in orthopedic problems, and your doctor who is medically trained, it appears that we are not truly qualified to determine your need based on our exam. Effective Nov. 1, 2015.

Well, here we go again with the insurances companies. In 2010, Blue Cross reduced the reimbursement to physical and occupational therapy by 30 percent. As your cost and deductible for your BC policy increased at least 30 percent over the past years. All of us in medical care have had all of our costs increase: rent, supplies, employee costs, etc., as Blue Cross payment decreases, while Blue Cross makes record profits. And by the way, Anthem’s profit since Obamacare, first-quarter revenue increase of $160 million over last year’s first quarter. More corporate medical greed.

— Bud Ferrante, Carmel

The bottom line is, we don’t need fracking

While reading Mr. Eisenhammer’s well written and articulate editorial on Sunday, I was hit with the realization that, regardless of how many statistics, research data bytes, opinions and, unfortunately, rhetoric that we can put on the discussion table, the bottom line is left out of the discourse. We don’t need fossil fuels. We don’t need to frack, or otherwise extract petroleum byproducts — for any reason. This is a false narrative. I am not a frackivist; I am a father of children and grandchildren who deserve to inherit a planet that is livable from us.

For the sake of all living things on our beautiful planet, please stop listening to the powers that be and the special interests who tell us (lie) that we must continue the status quo in order to survive. They are wrong, and they are lying to us. Listen to the scientists who speak the truth, that we cannot afford to extract any more fossil fuels without permanently ruining any chance of a sustainable future and livable planet. The technology is here now. Let’s get on with it and put millions to work: going solar, utilizing wind power, developing sensible water conservation protocols, and the many other practical solutions that are available to us that make sense.

Advertisement

— Michael Heller, Prunedale

Afghanistan, hospital attack beg questions

“Afghanistan mission extended” reads The Herald headline on Oct. 16. President Obama now pledges to keep thousands of troops until yet another president inherits this heartache of a war. But what’s the “mission” he speaks of? No one seems to know.

In 2001, in the wake of the 9/11 attack, President George W. Bush asserted that the U.S. went to war to capture bin Laden and disrupt al Qaida. Both goals were achieved long ago. Now the administration is fighting the Taliban, an assortment of misguided fundamentalists but no threat to the U.S. mainland.

Have most Americans learned anything from 14 years of war in Afghanistan? Apparently not. U.S. bombers just destroyed a functioning Doctors without Borders hospital on Oct. 3, killing 22 doctors, nurses and patients. The president apologized publicly but no one within the U.S. government seems to know what happened — or, more precisely, no one yet admits knowing.

But the media, if they do their job, could launch an even better investigation. How about, while they are at it, asking presidential candidates, Democrat and Republican, some probing questions?

— David R. Henderson, Pacific Grove

Praising MPUSD for integrating arts

The Lyceum of Monterey County would like to commend MPUSD for adding Arts to their STEM curriculum. (Monterey Herald, “New class puts arts in STEM.”) The Lyceum has long been an advocate of integrating arts, science, technology and math.

In a Slate article dated June 2014, “Why We Need to Put the Arts into STEM Education,” author Anna Feldman says, “ … the STEAM movement isn’t about spending 20 percent less time on science, technology, engineering, and math to make room for art. It’s about sparking students’ imagination and helping students innovate through hands-on STEM projects. And perhaps most importantly, it’s about applying creative thinking and design skills to these STEM projects so that students can imagine a variety of ways to use STEM skills into adulthood … In STEAM, creativity is the central tenet. It not only revives and modernizes STEM, it actually addresses, through real-world projects, why the STEM subjects should matter to everyone. And that’s how we should all be learning.”

— Sharon Nelson, Arts Coordinator of Lyceum of Monterey County