A woman smashed a window so she could save a toddler locked inside a hot car on Saturday. The incident happened in Merriam, Kansas, in a parking lot at Famous Footwear.

KFOR 4 reports that a stranger who witnessed a young girl locked inside a hot car didn’t hesitate in trying to rescue her. Sarah Oropeza, the manager of the store, saw the child sweating inside the vehicle and grabbed whatever she could to break into the car. An employee tried breaking the driver’s side window, but it didn’t crack.

Oropeza spoke with KCTV about her decision to break into the car and rescue the toddler locked inside the hot car.

“The windows were totally rolled up, all the doors were locked. She was covered in sweat. When I looked in the back window, she was covered in sweat. She had pulled her hair back and sweat was just dripping.”

In the midst of all the chaos, another woman attempted trying getting into the car with a screwdriver, but it had no impact on the window. Finally, Oropeza found a tire iron and hit the window as hard as she could, which is seen in the video above. That, and a truck hitch that another woman found, did the trick.

Oropeza said she was praying because she knew the window had to break or the toddler in the hot car was going to die.

In the end, the little girl was saved. Oropeza shares what happened after they got the child to safety.

“She was crying, and she was drenched in sweat, like her shoes were wet, her socks were wet. She was so drenched in sweat. I just started crying.”

Fortunately, a nurse was at the scene and gave the child medical attention until paramedics arrived. In all, at least four women took part in trying to save the toddler that was trapped inside the hot car.

As for the guardians of the child, Oropeza was infuriated when a couple claiming to be the child’s aunt and uncle arrived at the shoe store and asked to get her back. According to Oropeza, there was no emotion shown whatsoever by the couple. The only question they had for police was whether insurance would cover the broken window.

Police gave the couple a ticket for child endangerment, and the case is headed to the Johnson County District Attorney, according to the report.

[Photo Credit: KCTV screenshot]