click to enlarge Random House

Despite his best efforts, Texas Republican Ted Cruz's 21-hour sort-of filibuster has ended with the Senate voting 100-0 to keep the government open for business and, probably, to keep Obamacare funded. What a bummer.

But Cruz did leave the nation with the incredible moment of him reading Dr. Seuss' Green Eggs and Ham to his daughters who were watching their daddy on C-SPAN during their bedtime. For Missouri Democrat Claire McCaskill, what's even more incredible is that Cruz apparently didn't see the irony in using a story about accepting new things within his tirade against Obamacare, a program that hasn't even started yet.

"I thought it was interesting that Ted Cruz used Green Eggs and Ham," McCaskill said on MSNBC's Morning Joe on Wednesday. "My daughter texted me this morning and said 'Mom, does he not know the point of the story?' It's that you can't knock things until you try it."

See Also: Claire McCaskill Responds to WSJ's James Taranto: "There Is No War on Men"

After he finished reading the beloved children's story, Cruz remarked:

"Green Eggs and Ham has some applicability, as curious as it may sound, to the Obamcare debate," adding that Americans "did not like green eggs and ham, and they did not like Obamacare either."

He went on: "They did not like Obamacare in a box, with a fox, in a house, with a mouse."

Here's McCaskill on Morning Joe:

Cruz could have learned a thing or two from U.S. District Court Judge James Muirhead who, back in 2007, penned a judgement in Seussian verse, ordering that an egg mailed to him by a dissatisfied inmate be destroyed. It's too good not to revisit:

I do not like eggs in the file. I do not like them in any style. I will not take them fried or boiled. I will not take them poached or broiled. I will not take them soft or scrambled, Despite an argument well-rambled. No fan I am of the egg at hand. Destroy that egg! Today! Today! Today I say! Without delay!

Follow Daniel Wicentowski on Twitter at @D_Towski. E-mail the author at Danny.Wicentowski@RiverfrontTimes.com.