Stephen and Nykolas are engaged to be married. With the U.S. Supreme Court ruling on gay marriage they will soon be able to do so. Before the ruling, the two were worried because they wanted to stay here in Meridian.

“We were like, ‘I don’t know where can we drive to?’ Where do we want to start a new life? What place is going to support our way of living?” Stephen Thomas says.

Some disagree with gay marriage because they say homosexuality is recognized as a sin in the Bible. They believe the church should never perform a same-sex marriage ceremony or accept a homosexual couple as members. But one pastor says his disagreement is not about hatred toward gay couples.

“I can still love you and disagree with your lifestyle. That carries itself through a lot of what the Bible would call sin,” pastor Corey Fontan.

The leader of a local Episcopal Church says they will recognize a same-sex marriage ceremony as a blessing of a civil union without signing legal documents. He says there are so many things that are more important for us to worry about than who loves who - like poverty, hunger and crime.

“If you want to take one thing out of the Bible and hold it up above everything else, you run the risk of ignoring that people are people and they deserve to be treated that way. It’s easy to nitpick,” Priest Joshua Messick says.

Fontan says, for his church, it comes down to this:

“How can we still value and protect the dignity and the integrity of every individual human being born and created in the image of God but still maintain from a spiritual and religious perspective, what the gospel and scripture teach us about marriage, which is man and woman for life,” Fontan says.

“If we’re going to look at what we believe in the Bible, we can take all of the Old Testament, or we can look at the last two commandments: love God, love your neighbor,” Messick says.

As far as Stephen and Nykolas are concerned, they say people in Meridian have been very supportive of them.

Luckily, we are in a community where a lot of people support us. We don’t have to really deal with a lot of prejudice. We have a lot of people who love us,” Thomas says.