Jose Zamora was having trouble getting a job and decided to change his name to Joe on his resume. Within a week, he was getting callbacks from employers.

Jose Zamora was having trouble getting a job and decided to change his name to Joe on his resume. Within a week, he was getting callbacks from employers. Screenshot "José vs Joe: Who Gets A Job?"

Having trouble getting jobs? It might be your name that’s hindering you. At least that’s what happened to Jose Zamora. All he did was take the “s” out of his first name, and a week later his inbox was flooded with responses, The Huffington Post reported.

Zamora was searching for work for months. He sent out an impressive 50 to 100 resumes daily, but to his disappointment, no one was getting back to him. He felt qualified for all the jobs he applied for and just couldn’t understand why he wasn’t getting any callbacks, he said in a BuzzFeed video.

Zamora decided to change his name on his resumes and apply to the same jobs. He only changed the one letter in his name and left the rest of his resume the same before resubmitting applications. When Jose Zamora became Joe Zamora, the job market suddenly opened up. Just seven days after changing his name to Joe on his applications, Jose was getting emails about interviews.

"Sometimes I don't even think people know or are conscious or aware that they're judging — even if it's by name — but I think we all do it all the time," Zamora said. Discrimination against Latino and black names is not new when it comes to the workforce. Blacks are altering their resumes to lessen the "blackness" of them, The New York Times reported.

Instead of mentioning their historically black colleges, some only list their predominately white educational experiences. They are taking off affiliations with anything related to the black community just to get a job. One study showed that people with white-sounding names got 50 percent more callbacks. The struggle to get a job is real, and unfortunately from reported personal experiences and studies, we can conclude that names really do matter.