Achievement: Sophia Biagi and Brian Schweinhart are the Oldham County and Jefferson County winners, respectively, in the writing division of the 2013 Jim Claypool Art and Conservation Writing Contests.

Background: The purpose of the contests, sponsored by the Kentucky Farm Bureau Federation and Kentucky Association of Conservation Districts, is to help students learn more about soil, water, forestry and wildlife conservation. This year’s theme was “Mission H2O.”

Why they entered: Sophia’s teacher showed her class videos that introduced environmental and conservation topics, including one on mountaintop removal. “I saw the devastation and chose it for my topic,” she said. She then read “about the impact” and created her essay from various points of view that she read about in her research.

Brian became concerned about pollution on a canoe trip on Elkhorn Creek with his Boy Scout troop. “We wound up cleaning up the creek,” he said, mentioning “a set of tires, pieces of a plastic playhouse, and a toilet seat” as among the items they removed from the creek that day.

In his research Brian identified two main causes for poor water conditions in Kentucky: the coal mining industries and everyday choices made by ordinary people. “Factories release chemicals into the air, which become toxic rain, which ends up in the waterways,” he said.

Their messages: Sophia hopes that after reading her essay, people will “think twice about using electricity, and the different ways they use it. Turning on a switch means more coal is used and more mountaintop removal.”

Brian agrees that everyday choices — such as choosing whether to throw a soda bottle out a window or disposing of it properly, or driving “all across town instead of making efficient trips” — can have an impact on water quality and the environment.

Why they like to write: Sophia said, “I read a lot of books, and I love getting into stories, characters, and plots. The authors inspired me to write, and I want to inspire other as they have inspired me.”

Brian said he likes to write personal narrative and stories, adding that when he is writing he can “think about it and perfect the way I express a point. And I can put my personality into it.”

Sophia’s home life: Sophia lives in Shelby County with her parents, Tricia and David Biagi, and her younger brother Leo.

Brian’s home life: Brian lives in the small city Westwood off Westport Road with his parents, Eileen and Bruce Schweinhart, and his younger sister Kimberly. His older brother is a junior at the University of Louisville.

Future plans: Sophia is considering careers that involve writing, science, and design. Brian plans to study aerospace engineering.

They enjoy: Sophia likes cross country, golf, tennis, hiking, spending time in nature and reading. Brian likes soccer, participating on the Science Olympiad team, model rocketry, piano and camping with his Boy Scout troop.

Sophia Biagi

Age: 13

Grade: 7

School: St. Aloysius School

Brian Schweinhart

Age: 17

Grade: 11

School: Manual High School

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1ncaIgQ