If Amendment 69 were to pass this November, it would put into place a taxpayer-funded universal health care system for Colorado that proponents say would insure about 83 percent of the state’s population while generating revenues that rival or exceed some of the nation’s most well-known companies, according to a recently released report.

The Colorado Health Institute this month issued an independent analysis detailing this and other information related to the constitutional amendment, the first in what the CHI said will be a series of documents exploring the ballot measure. The full report is available at coloradohealthinstitute.org.

With an estimated $38 billion annual budget, ColoradoCare would rank “ahead of well-known companies such as American Express,” Nike and McDonald’s. It would be financed by a combination of new taxes — a 3.33 percent payroll deduction for employees and a 6.67 percent payroll tax for employers — as well as federal and state money that currently pays for health coverage, the report stated.

While the full report may clear up some questions on paper, politicians, health care providers and Colorado residents remain divided or confused on how the measure — which would replace the Affordable Care Act in the state, terminating its mandates and subsidies — would work on the ground.

An administrator with Telluride Medical Center said it’s unclear how universal health care would affect the organization. Workers at Tri-County Health also said it’s not certain what the system would look like for their organization if implemented.

“Our role might increase because everyone would need help getting on ColoradoCare … or perhaps it might not be needed at all,” said Erich Lange, a community engagement specialist with Tri-County Health who works in enrollment services in Telluride and the West End.

He added that any program that reduces the complexities of applying for health insurance would be beneficial.

Locally, some politicians, including San Miguel County Commissioner Joan May, have expressed support and contributed to the cause by helping to gather the signatures needed to put the measure to a vote.

“The big thing for our county is that healthcare is very expensive here because of the distance for major providers and the cost for providing healthcare. Even with Obamacare, health insurance is very expensive in rural areas. I think that’s why we in those rural areas are even more invested in getting affordable care, which I think (Amendment 69) will provide,” May said in an earlier interview.

But Club 20 — one group that represents and advocates for Western Slope communities — has voiced opposition to the amendment, saying it will force the county’s “best and brightest” health care providers out of state.

Both May and Brian Ahern, the alternate voting member for San Miguel County on the Club 20 board of directors, are Democrats.

Opinions don’t appear to fall cleanly along party lines at the state level, either: Gov. John Hickenlooper, a Democrat, opposes the amendment, along with State Treasurer Walker Stapleton. High-profile backers include Sen. Irene Aguilar, D-Denver.

A spokeswoman for Hickenlooper did not reply to The Planet’s emailed requests for comment Tuesday, and the governor’s web site did not contain a statement on the reasons behind his opposition.

Read all of The Daily Planet’s 2016 election coverage at

bit.ly/tridevotes2016.