MIAMI BEACH, Fla.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Project Management Institute, the world’s largest association for project managers, announces that WellPoint Inc., the Indiana, USA-based insurance provider, has taken top honors as the 2014 Project Management Office (PMO) of the Year winner. The annual award, which was bestowed this week during PMI’s 2014 PMO Symposium, recognizes PMOs that have had a positive and clear impact on an organization’s strategic goals and business results.

WellPoint’s stated vision is to be America’s valued health partner and the company’s purpose is to “transform health care with trusted and caring solutions.” As one of the largest health benefits companies in the United States, the company delivers a number of leading health insurance benefit solutions through a broad portfolio of integrated health care insurance plans and related services, along with a wide range of specialty insurance products, serving nearly 67 million people.

WellPoint has encountered a non-stop barrage of change over the past three years, especially in the government-sponsored healthcare sector. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) incentivized states to expand the number of residents qualifying for Medicaid; at the same time, the recession increased the number of low-income people qualifying for existing Medicaid plans. At the same time, enrollment in Medicare, the federal healthcare program for the people 65 or older, began surging as an aging population of “Baby Boomers” became eligible.

The solution for managing such massive change: the PMO that WellPoint, Inc. secured as part of its purchase of Amerigroup in 2012. WellPoint executives charged it with implementing strategy through the organization’s newly created government business division (GBD). The team overhauled its approach to align it with PMI’s A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide), mapping 100 percent of activities to one of the five process groups of project management. Any activity that wasn’t aligned was discontinued.

What emerged now serves as the bedrock for the PMO’s success: scalable, repeatable frameworks for project execution. As the PMO grew, its standardized approach helped project teams working across the organization. Just two years later, the division manages manage a US$4 billion portfolio of 38 projects. This includes healthcare for 7.4 million Medicaid and Medicare members spread across 26 states, and it accounts for 45 percent of WellPoint’s overall annual revenue. Tasked with delivering 40 percent annual revenue growth in 2012 and 2013, the PMO delivered—cementing its standing at the company.

“WellPoint, Inc. achieved the monumental accomplishment of delivering healthcare solutions amid a restructured marketplace, economic and social trends that caused massive change, an acquisition, and a portfolio that doubled in size – all in less than three years,” said Mark A. Langley, president and CEO of PMI. “The team is well deserving of the PMO of the Year Award, and clearly illustrates how projects and programs are the true engines of change and organizational success.”

2015 PMI Professional Awards Call for Nominations

The call for nominations for 2015 PMI Project of the Year, and other PMI Professional Awards, opens on 1 November, 2014. Visit www.PMI.org/Awards to apply and access complete award information, including nomination guidelines and FAQs.

About Project Management Institute (PMI)

Project Management Institute is the world's leading not-for-profit professional membership association for the project, program and portfolio management profession. Founded in 1969, PMI delivers value for more than 2.9 million professionals working in nearly every country in the world through global advocacy, collaboration, education and research. PMI advances careers, improves organizational success and further matures the profession of project management through its globally recognized standards, certifications, resources, tools academic research, publications, professional development courses, and networking opportunities. As part of the PMI family, Human Systems International (HSI) provides organizational assessment and benchmarking services to leading businesses and government, while ProjectManagement.com and ProjectsAtWork.com create online global communities that deliver more resources, better tools, larger networks and broader perspectives. Visit us at www.PMI.org, www.facebook.com/PMInstitute and on Twitter @PMInstitute.