Share This Story 666 Tweet Share Email

SPRUCE PINE – Dr. Chad Smoker was disappointed when Mission Health System moved the CEO of Blue Ridge Regional Hospital to a job at headquarters early last year.

Oscar Weinmeister had long been a champion of the hospital were Smoker had served for a dozen years. Weinmeister, he felt, understood rural medicine and moving him out was a bad decision.

Smoker let it sit for a few days and felt better.

But he decided to step down from the hospital board anyway, and from positions as medical director of ambulatory and cardiopulmonary services. He agreed to stay on as credentials chair for six months, and maybe longer, if he felt management was improving at the hospital.

By April, he says, a majority of the local hospital leaders either had been moved to other jobs or fired.

“This is not how business in a rural community should be handled.” Dr. Chad Smoker

"This has been an aggressive corporate takeover," he wrote in a memo to Mission officials.

"This is not how business in a rural community should be handled."

He told Mission to shred his hospital contracts.

The company did just that. It also told his young partner, Dr. Brie Folkner, that her contract with the hospital would end, too, despite Smoker's request that it not be touched.

Hospital contracts have long been a way to help new doctors get established in rural Mitchell County. Mission gave Folkner, who was four months pregnant at the time, the choice between staying with Smoker or going to a Mission Medical Associates practice.

She would lose her company health insurance if she stayed with Smoker. She had planned on having it through her pregnancy.

It was a tough call but she decided to stay with him.

She got on her husband's insurance, rushed through the government and private-payer credentialing process, became a private doctor on Aug. 1 and had her baby in September. She took eight weeks of maternity leave instead of the 12 she had wanted.

The clash between doctors in rural Spruce Pine and Mission Health System highlights a problem the company faces as it expands.

The Blue Ridge Regional Hospital in Spruce Pine.

(Photo: William Woody / wwoody@citizen-times.com / Special to the Citizen-Times)

When doctors and hospitals partner with the company, they must play by its rules. Some doctors say those rules, potentially, are bad for patients. They also say Mission, as a company, doesn't tolerate dissent.

“They certainly were not thinking about the good of people and patients in this community given their actions.” Dr. Brie Folkner

"From a first-hand perspective, I know how far the leaders of Mission will go to crush those who speak up about their concerns," Folkner said. "When Chad voiced his concerns, they lashed out at me to get back at him. I do believe they wanted me to leave my practice so that Chad's practice would be devastated. They did not care that this would have also hurt many of his employees and all of my patients. They certainly were not thinking about the good of people and patients in this community given their actions."

Mission CEO Ron Paulus disagrees.

He says the move was not retaliatory. The company gave Folkner a choice, he said. She could have stayed under contract with the hospital at a company-owned practice.

"She had every degree of freedom that was available and the issue was only what did she want," he said. "She could have stayed and gone later. My goal was to protect her from the consequences of the request that was made."

Public criticism of Mission from doctors is rare in Western North Carolina though there has been internal conflict as the company has expanded in recent years.

Most doctors who have concerns do not want to be on the record and quoted in newspaper stories for fear it could hurt their businesses. Mission controls 44 percent of the hospital beds in the region.

Former Mission employees must sign pledges not to speak poorly of the company if they are to get severance pay.

Blue Ridge Regional Hospital's president, Becky Carter, alerted staff this week that this article might be published and offered meetings to talk about any concerns. She said some staffers might be uncomfortable seeing "our conflicts aired in a newspaper."

Smoker, Folkner and Dr. Dorothy DeGuzman, who practices in Burnsville, came forward after reading a series of stories about Mission in the Asheville Citizen-Times.

Their concerns have been simmering for a year.

Simmering dissent Doctors in Spruce Pine cite other side to alignment

The three doctors, and others, are working with Mission officials to address concerns in Yancey and Mitchell counties. They also say they support local leaders at Blue Ridge Regional and will continue to work with them to maintain the quality services their patients have come to expect.

But they felt the public should hear about their concerns in light of the newspaper series.

The series has focused on how Mission handles a patient population that is 75 percent Medicare and Medicaid — programs that do not cover the cost of many procedures. It provides tens of millions of dollars in free care every year.

Mission, as a company, has expanded into outpatient care to be ready for a shift in how health care is paid for. The federal Affordable Care Act, and the powerful Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, are moving the system to payment based on quality outcomes instead of fees charged for each service.

Mission Hospital faces $350 million in federal payment reductions over the next decade under this system and other federal program changes.

Mission has grown at a fast rate in recent years, partnering with small hospitals across Western North Carolina and absorbing private practices.

Mission Medical Associates, the company's physician group, today has 345 providers and sees 40,000 patients a month. That's up from 225 providers in 2012.

Doctors find partnering with Mission attractive because it allows them to get out of the business of medicine in an increasingly uncertain time in the industry.

Family doctors have been hit especially hard as reimbursements from the federal government decline and patients become older and sicker.

But the doctors who came forward in Spruce Pine say there's another side to alignment that patients need to know about.

Services, they say, have been cut or are not as high quality as they have been in the past at Blue Ridge Regional Hospital.

Staffing issues are DeGuzman's biggest concerns. She's a family doctor trained in high-risk obstetrics. She has Caesarean section privileges, which is rare for a rural family physician.

Burnsville Dr. Dorothy DeGuzman worries Mission leaders don’t have enough rural perspective to make the best decision for Blue Ridge Regional Hospital and its patients.

(Photo: William Woody / wwoody@citizen-times.com / Special to the Citizen-Times)

She said the problem is a combination of cuts and people leaving because they have lost faith in the hospital.

There are only two operating room technicians today and there are gaps in the schedule. The OR nurse manager is filling in but that's not sustainable, she said.

And, she said, losing longtime staffers means losing knowledge that can't be easily replaced.

“What you need to do to prepare for an emergency in a rural hospital is completely different than a large hospital. ” Dr. Dorothy DeGuzman

"You lose the knowledge of how a rural hospital functions," she said. "What you need to do to prepare for an emergency in a rural hospital is completely different than a large hospital."

She said a recent case of a woman in labor with twins who came in pre-term and pre-eclamptic is a good example. Pre-eclampsia is potentially deadly.

Ideally the patient would have been transferred to a bigger hospital but she could not be moved safely in this case.

The longtime nurse anesthetist, who has since left, told the team it needed to call in more people to handle the three patients. The anesthesiologist, DeGuzman recalled, disagreed and said the staffing level was adequate.

The nurse called in reinforcements anyway.

"And thank God he did because every person who was in that OR was needed," she said.

The patient had a seizure and went into cardiac arrest after the delivery. Medical staff did chest compressions on her and one of her babies while they were closing the C-section, DeGuzman said.

The mother and babies lived. They were transferred to Mission.

The staff at Blue Ridge received accolades for how well it handled the crisis.

The family practice of Dr. Brie Folkner and Dr. Chad Smoker next to Blue Ridge Regional Hospital in Spruce Pine.

(Photo: William Woody / wwoody@citizen-times.com / Special to the Citizen-Times)

But it only worked because one seasoned nurse anesthetist made a call based on his experience level despite a disagreement from a doctor.

DeGuzman worries Mission leaders don't have enough rural perspective to make the best decision for Blue Ridge Regional Hospital and its patients.

“We need more voice. Now. ” Dr. Dorothy DeGuzman

"We need more voice," she said. "Now."

Paulus disputes that claim.

He said Mission Health System's councils on pharmacy, laboratory services and chiefs of staff help get the voices of rural hospitals up to administration.

The company also has local and centralized quality and safety staff though the quality position is vacant right now at Blue Ridge Regional.

And it has a regional health committee of the board of directors made up of the chair and the chiefs of the medical staffs of each rural hospital.

Anyone, Paulus says, can get time to speak to the board of directors.

"There's a very big voice," he said.

Whether the voice is being heard during Mission's fast-paced growth is a genuine debate.

Clash of standards Hospital has to follow Mission standards even if not proven to mean better care

The Spruce Pine doctors say Mission is not all bad.

The company provides desperately needed care in a difficult market. The amount of charity care, Smoker said, is incredible.

Mission-employed specialist and hospital doctors are willing to take difficult cases from Blue Ridge. They are also willing to help rural doctors out over the phone, Folkner and Smoker say.

Mission has kept Blue Ridge Regional Hospital open. Some rural hospitals in North Carolina have closed. Most are affiliated with a larger health system today.

The new Mission Health Mauzy-Phillips Medical Center next to the Blue Ridge Regional Hospital is nearing completion in Spruce Pine.

(Photo: William Woody / wwoody@citizen-times.com / Special to the Citizen-Times)

Rural hospitals nationally have struggled as reimbursement rates have declined and patients have become older and sicker.

But, Smoker said, Blue Ridge today offers fewer services and the staff is smaller.

The hospital has had to follow Mission's standards, he and others say, even if the standards have not been proven to mean better care.

In one example, the company required Blue Ridge to go to an anesthesia program supervised by an anesthesiologist instead of the longstanding program of a general surgeon supervising nurse anesthetists.

The change came after an internal study showed the nurse anesthetist program was just as good, he said. Mission, Smoker said, decided to contract with another company for doctors anyway.

The hospital's busiest surgeon soon left and surgery volume dropped.

Eventually, four nursing jobs were cut though only one part-time worker was laid off because the others took new jobs with the company or retired.

Paulus disputes Smoker's characterization of the internal study.

He said Mission listened to local concerns. The internal study, which included reviews of programs at five health systems and the VA, was inconclusive as to which system was better, he said.

Blue Ridge was the only hospital in the Mission system that did not have a doctor-supervised anesthesia program.

Paulus decided to implement the system's standards. He hired contractor AllCare to provide the service.

Standardization has been a hallmark of his tenure at Mission. It has saved 500 lives a year through increased safety and reduced errors, he says. It has also meant lower costs.

Standardization has been a hallmark of Paulus' tenure at Mission.

The move to AllCare created a more reliable system at Blue Ridge, Paulus said.

The two nurse anesthetists at Blue Ridge were excellent, Paulus said. But, the system was "one change away from a crisis."

If one of the nurses quit, or could not work, the hospital would have been in trouble.

AllCare, he says, has 34 anesthesiologists and 120 nurses, among other staff.

Paulus said he would make the same decision today.

“What guides my choices are what's in the best interest of the patient, paramount. ” CEO Ron Paulus

"There are times you've done most everything you can, or know how to do, and there's just a difference of opinion," he said. "At that point, as the CEO of the system, I have to decide. And what guides my choices are what's in the best interest of the patients, paramount. And I will acknowledge that I will trade off doctor, or nurse, or executive, or CEO convenience, or preference, if what's in the best interest of the patient is going to be compromised otherwise."

Paulus wants the same quality of care at rural hospitals as patients get in Asheville.

Part of the clash around growth comes from the lack of competition in WNC, Paulus said. Customers and medical providers, in many places, interact only with Mission.

That means they perceive changes in the industry to be Mission's doing because they don't see other health systems making the same changes.

The perception is understandable but false, Paulus said.

Mission, he said, is changing because the industry is changing.

Keeping a hometown feel in a highly standardized system is possible as long as it's good for patients, he said.

"There's plenty of room for local culture and nuances but I don't think we can trade off (quality)," he said.

The doctors in Spruce Pine worry that quality and local culture in rural areas will suffer as Mission grows.

More growth coming Lawmakers may let Mission out of agreement capping expansion

Choices for patients are likely to become fewer in WNC, where Mission is poised to become an even bigger company.

Lawmakers this year are considering letting Mission out of the unusual regulatory agreement that caps its growth in some places.

Paulus agrees with that move. He says it is time for the company to get out of the certificate of public advantage that shielded it from a federal anti-trust case when Mission merged with St. Joseph's Hospital in 1995.

If the company is allowed out of the regulatory agreement, it could employ as many doctors as it wants to.

Lawmakers are also considering ending the state's oversight of new surgical centers and the deployment of new medical machinery like MRIs — something Paulus and the state hospital association have reservations about.

Ending the oversight could mean standalone surgery centers that might compete with Mission and siphon off profitable services the company uses to fund services that don't make money.

Smoker said he's worried about Mission's "utter monopoly in Western North Carolina."

"I feel a healthy and vibrant medical community requires a variety of different care models for patients to choose from," he said.

Folkner says people in the region should be concerned by Mission's growth.

“Mission is on a path to ultimate control over all aspects of health care in WNC.” Dr. Brie Folkner

"Mission is on a path to ultimate control over all aspects of health care in WNC," she said. "They do want to be 'the doctor, the hospital, and the insurer.' Who will regulate them? Will any of us on the front line of providing direct patient care have any input into how this care is to be delivered? Will we be treated with respect and be able to voice our concerns without fear of retribution?"

DeGuzman, who is from the Atlanta area and trained in Boston, enjoys living and working in rural WNC.

"You put your heart into this place so I think that's why we are all so worried," she said. "You wouldn't come here, and take all the call we do for the pay we get, if your heart wasn't in it."