FILE - In this Saturday, July 5, 2014 file photo Kate, Duchess of Cambridge and Prince William watch the podium ceremony of the first stage of the Tour de France cycling race in Harrogate, England. Kensington Palace announced on Saturday May 2, 2015 that the Duchess of Cambridge has been admitted to hospital in the early stages of labor (AP Photo/Laurent Cipriani, File) (Photo: AP)

Kate, the Duchess of Cambridge, has given birth to a baby, royal officials said Saturday.

Kensington Palace said in a brief statement that Prince William's wife "was safely delivered of a daughter" at 8:34 a.m. London time (0734 GMT), less than three hours after she was admitted to central London's St. Mary's Hospital.

Prince William, Kate expecting second child

The announcement was greeted by cheers outside the hospital, where die-hard royal fans dressed in patriotic Union Jack gear have been camping out on the sidewalk, eagerly awaiting news. A town crier in elaborate costume loudly declared the news at the hospital's door, clanging his bell to welcome the new royal.

The baby weighs 8 pounds 3 ounces (3.7 kg). The palace added that Kate, 33, and her child are both doing well, and that Prince William was present for the birth.

The princess is fourth in line to the throne and the fifth great-grandchild of Queen Elizabeth II.

Tony Appleton, a town crier, announces the birth of the royal baby outside the Lindo Wing, St. Mary's Hospital, London, Saturday, May 2, 2015. Kate, the Duchess of Cambridge, has given birth to a baby girl, royal officials said Saturday. (John Stillwell/PA via AP) UNITED KINGDOM OUT, NO SALES, NO ARCHIVE (Photo: AP)

Prince William, Princess Kate begin 3-day visit in US

The statement said that senior royals have been informed, and "are delighted with the news."

Kate, who wed William in April 2011, gave birth to Prince George at the same hospital in July 2013.

The name of the newborn wasn't expected to be announced immediately. When George was born, officials waited two days before announcing his name.

Betting had for weeks ran heavily in favor of the child being a girl, despite any apparent evidence to back that up.

Royal couple: Obama visit, child development tour

All the top bets for the baby's name are for girls. Alice and Charlotte are the clear favorites, followed by Elizabeth, Victoria and Diana — all names with strong connections to royal tradition.

Prince Charles has signaled — twice — that he's hoping for a granddaughter, which led some to speculate that Charles had some inside information.

The monarchy has not welcomed a princess born this high up the line of succession since Princess Anne, the queen's second child, was born in 1950.

New York City readies for royal visit

Princesses Beatrice and Eugenie, the daughters of Prince Andrew and Sarah Ferguson, were fifth and sixth in line at the time of their birth.

At 21 months, George is currently third in line to the throne, after his grandfather Prince Charles and William. The newborn becomes the fourth in line, bumping Uncle Harry to fifth place.

Copyright 2015 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1zCcwLe