When Bethlehem Area School District teachers agreed to a new contract this year, they took on higher health care costs and put off raises.

But the contract saved the district $1.7 million in health care costs annually and solved major structural issues with the salary schedule that were costing the district.

Teachers agreed to no raise this year, 3.13 percent in 2015-16 and 2.99 percent in 2016-17.

The contract boosts the starting salary from $44,355 to $47,076 by the start of the contract -- something that was important to the board to stay competitive.

"That's one thing I think we have lagged at for awhile, the starting salary for new teachers. We've increased that," school board President Michael Faccinetto said.

The top salary for a teacher holding a doctorate maxes out at $88,157 but teachers can earn higher pay for taking on extra duties and for their tenure in the district. The top-paid teacher in the district in 2013-14 earned $103,158.

Bethlehem teachers handle one of the region's largest student populations, but they aren't the region's top-paid overall.

"Bethlehem has always been the middle of the pack," Bethlehem Education Association President Jolene Vitalos said. "We are not the highest paid. We are not the lowest paid."

Teachers have been afforded great benefits, some not seen in other districts, and that is what they sought to protect in the latest negotiations.

"Their benefits have been a great value to them and they identified that early on (in negotiations) as a priority to them," Faccinetto said.

Bethlehem by the numbers

The district's 22 schools span several municipalities, enrolling almost 14,000 students this school year.

Superintendent Joseph Roy leads a massive workforce that includes almost 1,100 teachers, plus administrators, paraprofessionals, coaches, bus drivers and other employees.

Not surprisingly, Roy was the top-paid district official with a salary of $174,200 in 2013-14.

The average teacher salary that year was $65,451. The average administrative salary was $82,568.

Bethlehem teachers are quite educated and experienced. There are more than 800 educators holding a master's degree or higher. And about 450 teachers in the group are on the top step of the schedule.

Bethlehem's salary schedule doesn't offer huge pay bumps for earning advanced degrees. The association is excited that now both Lehigh University and Moravian College are charging educators the state university tuition rate.

Both sides came out of negotiations feeling like teachers are making a reasonable wage.

"I think it's fair. It would be nice to give more," Faccinetto said. "But I think it's a fair compensation. Nobody is getting rich and having a one-income household off of us. They put in a lot of work."

Vitalos and Faccinetto said they are both proud of all they accomplished in just over a year of negotiations.

"I think it was a very realistic approach to strategic compensation for folks that are working hard and understand that there is a limited amount of money coming in to fund our schools," Vitalos said.

What the contract accomplished

The school board has a strong working relationship with its teachers. But it hasn't always been that way. The district went through a bitter strike in the early 1990s.

Before the new contract, the post-strike contract was the last time teachers and the board engaged in full negotiations where everything was on the table.

Memorandum of understanding after memorandum of understanding attached to each subsequent contract filled a two-inch-thick binder, Faccinetto recalls. This piecemeal approach meant that the salary schedule no longer worked.

Bethlehem teachers recognize the outside financial pressures the district is facing, Vitalos said. Pension costs are skyrocketing, state funding has been cut and charters are diverting more and more funds away from district schools.

Teachers know there isn't a bottomless supply of money, Vitalos said. They agreed to concessions so their colleagues didn't lose jobs and their students didn't lose educational opportunities, she said.

The salary schedule had become unsustainable.

"We would've had layoffs," Vitalos said.

Teachers earn annual raises plus pay bumps for years of service and educational attainment. Simply moving teachers over for working another year was eating up all of the available money because large batches of teachers were seeing huge raises.

If nothing changed it would've cost $2 million, Vitalos said. Instead, that will be down to $700,000 by the third year of the contract, she said.

The new salary schedule makes raises more uniform across the board, rather than making folks wait years and then seeing a big pay bump.

"It was really money that should have been brought to people sooner," Vitalos said.

While the last contract carried a 3.9 percent average raise, less than 1.12 percent of that money was an actual merit raise, Faccinetto said.

The new contract slows the rate of those raises by inserting more steps. Teachers will still get the raises they expected but it will take then longer to get there, Vitalos said. The contract carries a 1 percent cost to move folks annually through the schedule.

"We aren't spending our new money, just moving people through the steps," Faccinetto said.

Staff sacrifices

Overhauling the pay schedule meant real sacrifices to a chunk of the staff, Vitalos explained. Expected raises were reduced and postponed while higher health care costs were introduced.

"There is a huge portion of our bargaining unit that voted 'yes' on this but wasn't happy," Vitalos said. "It will take them longer to get to that maximum salary."

But the sacrifices now mean that in the next contract negotiations the salary schedule is smoothed out and the percentage raises from box to box are equalized.

The Affordable Care Act meant the district was potentially facing a $4 million so-called Cadillac tax on its cushy health insurance plan, although it's debatable if Bethlehem would've had to pay the tax, Faccinetto said.

While Bethlehem teachers may not be the best-paid in the Lehigh Valley, their contracts carry nice perks. They had great health care coverage, were one of the last unions in the region to start paying a deductible and they can buy retirement health care with unused sick days, Faccinetto said.

Deductibles were key to lowering the district's health insurance costs. Bethlehem held information sessions for teachers with the insurance provider to explain how new plans would work.

That understanding was key to getting teachers on board with the new plans, Faccinetto said.

Sara K. Satullo may be reached at ssatullo@express-times.com. Follow her on Twitter @sarasatullo. Find Bethlehem news on Facebook.