South Patrick Shores woman drops $6,000 on emergency vet visits and treatments to keep her beloved Annie Baby

Buy Photo Kay Lawler of South Patrick Shores has had some serious vet bills for Annie Baby, the Lhatese (mix of a Lhasa Apso and Maltese) puppy she bought a year ago. The dog's body was not producing red blood cells, and her vet and lab costs are close to $6,000 in the last year. (Photo: MALCOLM DENEMARK/FLORIDA TODAY )Buy Photo

Pets present us with many philosophical questions.

It doesn't help that they have faces so compelling and mannerisms so human-like, they can turn a human heart seemingly made of cinder block into the consistency of a strawberry smoothie.

Which brings me to Kay Lawler of South Patrick Shores.

She called a few weeks ago seeking a business reporter to look into the costs of veterinary care. She laid out the expenses for her Lhatese — a mix of a Lhasa Apso and Maltese — Annie Baby, whom she purchased in October 2013 at a Melbourne pet store. So far this year, she has dropped about $6,000 on emergency care and vet bills. Annie Baby's body is not producing enough red blood cells; she has needed transfusions and costly medicine.

RELATED: See other stories from Wayne Price

There was an initial $530 bill when Lawler brought Annie Baby to her vet because the dog was acting sluggish. The vet saw Annie Baby's gums were ghost white. Lawler was sent to an emergency clinic for Annie Baby to get a blood transfusion that cost $1,609. Two weeks later Annie Baby needed another transfusion at a cost of $1,231. Two weeks later, she was sent to another animal specialist who told her Annie Baby needed a six-hour globulin injection.

Buy Photo Kay Lawler of South Patrick Shores has had some serious vet bills for Annie Baby, the Lhatese (mix of a Lhasa Apso and Maltese) puppy she bought a year ago. The dog's body was not producing red blood cells, and her vet and lab costs are close to $6,000 in the last year. (Photo: MALCOLM DENEMARK/FLORIDA TODAY )

"That was $2,000," said the 76-year-old Lawler.

Then there was $160 every two weeks for medications.

It's those bills that are making Lawler angry. She thinks she is getting milked by an industry that knows how emotionally attached we are to our pets.

"They keep draining me and draining me and draining me," Lawler said.

Well, that is a lot of money, I told her, wondering how delicately to bring up the question I know a lot of people would wonder.

"I love dogs as much as anybody," I told her, "but I may have made a hard decision a little earlier."

"That is what people keep telling me," she said. "They say 'Why don't you just put her down?' I never thought about putting her down. As long as I was getting care for her, I'm willing to put out the money. Listen, I'm a widow and I'm a fixed income but I think they take advantage of pet owners. They know you love your pet."

I liked Lawler immediately, if nothing else for her passion for her dog. We swapped stories about growing up with dogs and talked about our favorite pets and what made them special. But we agreed to disagree on vet costs.

I'm friends with a few vets and the ones I've met didn't get into into the profession to make money. They became vets because they're lifelong animal lovers. Not simply pet owners, like me, but individuals who care deeply about animals' health and well being.

Vet schools are extremely hard to get into and expensive. Veterinarians walk away with an incredible amount of student loan debt, on average more than $140,000, according to the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association.

And a vet's annual starting salary is about $45,575 a year, according to the AVMA.

Then there is this to consider: while there are pet insurance plans — vastly underutilized in the U.S., vets say — there's no Obamacare for dogs and cats. There have been major advancements in treating pets and prolonging their lives with us. We're talking machines, medications and specialized procedures. But those advancements come with a price. And there isn't always a way to offset those costs to the consumer.

"It's a touchy topic," said Dr. Sandy Helping, a partner at the Viera East Veterinary Center, "because as veterinarians we are put in the category that we love animals so much that we should do everything for free, which I would love to do. But unfortunately, we're a business and we have to be able to afford the business, the equipment and the employees and everything that's associated with the cost of a business."

Helping noted the fine line between how much compassion vets "want to have and how much we're able to have."

"My job is to speak for the pet," she said. "And I try not to make judgments on what people can and can't afford. I'm going to present the best option for the pet. Then if someone cannot afford it, we're going to go to plan B."

Here's why I feel for Lawler.

Buy Photo Kay Lawler of South Patrick Shores has had some serious vet bills for Annie Baby, the Lhatese (mix of a Lhasa Apso and Maltese) puppy she bought a year ago. The dog's body was not producing red blood cells, and her vet and lab costs are close to $6,000 in the last year. (Photo: MALCOLM DENEMARK/FLORIDA TODAY )

In 2004, I had to put down a beloved golden Labrador retriever I had owned since he was a puppy. Ike had a tumor on his prostate and while the tumor probably could have been removed, along with the prostate gland, where would that leave us? His life diminished and cut short, and with no control of his bodily functions. Plus, I was already several hundred dollars into treatment.

The team at Suntree Animal Clinic walked me through the options about the quality of life Ike would have without a prostate, and the expense and frustrations I would face.

I didn't want Ike to suffer and I didn't want to drain my bank account just because I couldn't handle a gut check.

That night I took him to the clinic where we sat on a tile floor and the vet prepared a syringe. I held Ike in my arms. He turned his big yellow head and stared at me. In pain. In fear. In love. Probably all three.

The vet injected him with a high concentration of medication that would stop his heart. Several seconds later, she said, "He's gone."

I'm getting teary eyed just writing about it and that was a decade ago. Can't imagine the process ever gets any easier.

Anyway, I spoke with Lawler last week and she told me Annie Baby is now off the expensive medication and a vet adjusted her diet. Lawler said she seems to be doing better and even gained two pounds.

Maybe Lawler made the right call.

Price is business editor at FLORIDA TODAY. You can reach him at 321-242-3658 or wprice@floridatoday.com. You can also follow him on Twittter @Fla2dayBiz.

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1x8tfzW