WASHINGTON–Sen. Ted Cruz on Thursday accused the Treasury Department of meddling with an IRS interpretation of the Affordable Care Act to make sure low-income Americans could still get subsidized health insurance through federal exchanges.

“The Obama administration is trying to impose…thousands of dollars in penalties that are contrary to law,” said Cruz, who suggested the IRS knew how to enforce the law before “political operatives” from the Treasury overruled them.

Cruz, a Republican presidential candidate, convened a Senate Judiciary subcommittee hearing on how the administration created Obamacare subsidy rules. Republicans praised it as a sorely needed investigation and Democrats dismissed it as political theater.

“We are in a so-called hearing about the rule-making process with witnesses that have nothing to do with the rule making process,” said Delaware Sen. Chris Coons, the subcommittee’s chief Democrat.

The Treasury Department refused to let officials testify, citing pending litigation, and Cruz threatened to subpoena them, as he did in a May 27 letter to Treasury Secretary Jack Lew.

Although the Treasury told Cruz those officials wouldn’t appear, the packed hearing room was set up for their testimony. On the witness table, name cards were in place for the absent officials. Cruz called the empty table a symbol of the Obama administration’s “contempt for Congress” and “the height of arrogance.”

Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., said he didn’t “want to suggest the empty table was used as a prop,” but implied Cruz was grandstanding.

The hearing comes as the Supreme Court decides whether insurance purchased through the federally-run state healthcare exchanges is eligible for federal subsidies.

A section of the ACA provides subsidies for policies purchased through exchanges “established by the state.” Since 36 states refused to set up their own, the Supreme Court will rule in King v. Burwell if that applies to the federal exchanges and could leave more than 7 million Americans without subsidized insurance.

Democrats said Cruz should have held off on the hearing until after the Supreme Court rules, at which point Treasury officials would testify. Cruz rejected the idea that officials can’t testify while Obamacare litigation is pending, noting that Treasury provided House testimony in 2013 even as similar cases were in court.

Another panel of witnesses argued over the legal implications of “established by the states.” Michael Carvin, who represents the plaintiffs in King v. Burwell, said that phrase means the federal exchanges aren’t eligible for subsidies. Michael Cannon, director of health policy studies for the libertarian Cato Institute, said House investigators had turned up evidence that supports Cruz’s accusation of the Treasury interference at the IRS.

Robert Weiner, who helped craft the ACA, and Elizabeth Wydra, a self-described progressive and chief council at the Constitutional Accountability Center, said no one in Congress thought the law should be undermined by “established by the states,” which critics are taking out of context.