The Bohn Farm Cohousing Community project is moving forward, with 17 people signed on so far and developers hoping to buy the land in the next year.

About a dozen people interested in the co-housing project got together Sunday to talk and hear an update on the project's status.

"I want it started tomorrow," said Longmont's Sue Broidy, who's committed to being a future resident. "It's a concept of building relationships with your neighbors. It will be like a homeowners association with a soul."

The co-housing project is a long-planned residential development to be built on six acres on the historic Bohn Farm property north of First Avenue and between Francis and Grant Streets in the Bohn Farm neighborhood southwest of downtown Longmont.

The six acres sit empty today save for the home that dairy farmer Bob Bohn once lived in, which he had moved from Main Street to the property in 1928, when he was starting his dairy farm on what used to be the Donovan Brickyards.

The idea of a cohousing community on the property dates back to the middle of the last decade. Recently, Boulder-based Wonderland Hill Development Co. decided that the time was ripe to revive the idea.

Wonderland Hill has built 23 cohousing developments in Colorado and other states, one of its most recent being Washington Village in Boulder. Wonderland plans to partner with the newly formed Colorado Cohousing Development Company to develop the Bohn property.

Advertisement

Peter Spaulding, the project manager on the Bohn Farm Cohousing Community, said delays in the Washington Village project meant the Longmont project didn't move forward quite as fast as anticipated.

But, he said, the project is now his top priority.

"In just the last month, we've made a lot of headway," he said.

He plans to submit a pre-application for rezoning to add commercial uses to the Longmont Planning Commission on Friday and is working on an agreement with the property owner that would "lock in" a price the property, giving the developers a year to secure commitments from residents and figure out the financing.

"It's all about getting all the finances together," he said.

He said that the project will likely end up with about 36 units, with a mix of housing types ranging from 650-square-foot multi-family units to single family homes that are up to 4,000-square-feet.

He said the plan is for an intergenerational development, from seniors to young couples and families, that's built as green as possible.

In co-housing, residents own their own living space, but everything else is owned collectively by the community. Community gardens, a laundry facility and a clubhouse are all common amenities in cohousing, Spaulding said.

He said he's also working on a business model for a CSA, or community-supported agriculture. Running a CSA on the property would allow the residents to significantly reduce their homeowner's dues, making living there more affordable, he said.

Longmont's Karen Dike, who came to Sunday's meeting to learn more, said the development's appeal includes a sustainable design and a community of like minded people.

"I like the idea of a community built around the needs of the people," she said. "And a place to garden - how fun would that be?"

Mary Callahan, who lives in a house in Longmont with her husband, said they're exploring their options for places to live that don't involve a lot of upkeep. When comparing co-housing to assisted living, she said, she likes that co-housing offers more of a community feel.

"We're looking for the last place we'll ever live," she said. "I like the idea of everybody looking out for everybody else."

More community meetings on the Bohn community are planned for Jan. 25 and Feb. 22.

For more information, send an email to peter@whdc.com or go to www.bfcc.me.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa