The last time I interviewed Ted Cruz, the freshman senator from Texas, was in October, about a week after the end of the federal government shutdown. Official Washington was just getting back to business as usual, and a clutch of woolly-looking protesters were chanting outside Cruz’s office in the Dirksen Senate Office Building. Cruz himself was running a little late that morning, and when I was finally ushered into his office, he warned me that he might be grumpy, because he was sick. It was the day before Halloween, and as I set up my recorder, I tried to make small talk—which was, as always, a thankless exercise..

“Do you have a costume?” I asked.

Story Continued Below

“No,” Cruz said. “I have in past years,” he added, gamely. “But I don’t...” he trailed off.

“What was your best costume of all time?”

“I’ve done Zorro,” Cruz said, and sighed. “Zorro wasn’t bad. I’ve done Phantom of the Opera.” He paused, apparently looking for something else to say. “They’re certainly similar.”

This was typical of my experience. I had spent hours with Cruz last year, interviewing him for a long profile in Texas Monthly. We talked in Washington in July, when he wasn’t considered much more than a Tea Party pest, newly elected and quoting Ludwig von Mises; in Waco in August, while he was traveling around Texas promoting the effort to defund the Affordable Care Act; in Houston in October, shortly after the end of the shutdown that he had arguably helped start; and several other times. Regardless of the circumstances, each time I tried to make small talk with him, it was boring. I was bored. And he seemed bored too, as he dutifully fielded my questions, trying and often failing to turn up interesting answers.

In this respect Cruz, in person, proved to be quite different from the Cruz we’ve seen on the national stage, the polarizing phenomenon most famous for his 21-hour stop-Obamacare-or-else pseudo-filibuster last fall. I found him to be pleasant, buttoned-up and even a little bland. It was only when asked about politics, policy or the law that he came to life: ferociously smart, talkative, engaged. Critics see the senator as a loudmouth, a firebrand and a loose cannon—which is not surprising given that Cruz spent much of his first year in the Senate offending his colleagues, Republican and Democrat alike, in battles over gun control (“I am not a sixth grader,” Sen. Dianne Feinstein snapped at him), immigration reform, Chuck Hagel’s nomination for secretary of defense and, of course, Obamacare.

Just last week, Cruz picked another fight with his own caucus. Although Democrats control the Senate, he announced, they would have to convince at least five Republicans to join them in supporting a bill to raise the debt ceiling or else he would delay the bill by filibustering. In doing so, he raised the ire of colleagues like Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, who was forced to vote to forestall the filibuster—and might take some heat back home for doing so.

Fightin’ Words Cruz has never gone easy on his fellow Republicans. On the debt ceiling vote: "Today's vote is yet another example that establishment politicians from both parties are simply not listening to the American people. … Some members of Congress care so much about being praised by the Washington media that they're willing to mortgage our children's future.” — Feb. 12, 2014 On his threatening to filibuster Democratic gun legislation: “We’ve had probably five or six lunches with a bunch of Republican senators standing up and looking at Rand [Paul] and Mike [Lee] and me and yelling at us at the top of their lungs … ‘Look, why did you do this? As a result of what you did, when I go home, my constituents are yelling at me that I’ve got to stand on principle.’ … There are a lot of people that don’t like to be held accountable. … They said: ‘Listen, before you did this, the politics of it were great. The Dems were the bad guys. The Republicans were the good guys. Now we all look like a bunch of squishes.’ Well there is an alternative. You could just not be a bunch of squishes.” — April 26, 2013 On whether Mitch McConnell should continue to be Senate Minority Leader: “That is ultimately a decision … for the voters of Kentucky to make. … Each senator, each representative makes a decision about how he or she will vote, and when those votes are clear to their constituents, democracy works far better.” — Feb. 12, 2014 On colleagues who didn’t join his filibuster of Obamacare: “Senators should not be asleep when the nation is undergoing a nightmare.” — Sept. 24, 2013 On the Republican plan to defund Obamacare: “My observations right now that there are some Republicans that would like a symbolic vote and would like to lose so that they don’t have any risk of it actually being defunded, I promise you those comments are not getting me invited to any cocktail parties in Washington anytime soon. And that’s perfectly fine. I don’t particularly enjoy cocktail parties anyway.” — Sept. 24, 2013

It was a contentious, divisive, even obnoxious thing for Cruz to do, and it didn’t make any sense, which is perhaps the most confounding thing about Ted Cruz: He’s clearly smart, and he thinks a lot about strategy. He has no known demons that would drive him to self-sabotage. Yet since being sworn in last year, he has fallen on his sword several times for highly dubious reasons.

So, why do it?

I keep coming back to my conversations with him last fall. Although he hadn’t had much appetite for small talk, he always perked up when my questions turned to fiscal matters and budget cutting—and the subject of whether his fellow Republicans really got it.

One particular exchange seemed telling: When we met in his Hill office last October, he was giving an impassioned take on his plans for fiscal discipline when he mentioned the need for entitlement reform, saying that he wanted to ensure the viability of Social Security and Medicare over the long term, rather than whittling away at them.

“Why do you think President Bush’s effort to reform Social Security got so little traction?” I asked.

“Because Congressional Republicans ran for the hills,” Cruz said. “It was one of the most courageous things President Bush did in his second term, was taking on Social Security. He was right to do it, and unfortunately, on Capitol Hill he had virtually no allies.”

“Why did they run for the hills?”

“Because the dominant instinct in Congress is risk aversion,” he said.

His attitude was placid, as if he were again observing that Zorro and the Phantom wear similar masks, as if he either didn’t realize or didn’t care that this was a pretty cutting thing to say, that it was exactly the kind of comment that might irritate his colleagues.

Cruz was, at that point, aware of the criticisms that had been directed at him during the effort to defund Obamacare, and defiant about them: Although he acknowledged that the defunding strategy wasn’t likely to succeed, he insisted that it had a chance to do so—and that other Republicans hadn’t offered a better strategy for stopping the law before it took effect, on Oct. 1 of last year.

But even prior to the defunding campaign, he had been casually critical of his party on many occasions. During that first interview, in July, he went out of his way to tweak fellow Republicans. “For a long time, the federal government, I believe, has spent too much, taxed too much, regulated too much and borrowed too much,” he said. “And that has been a bipartisan affliction—an awful lot of Republicans were complicit in exploding the size, power and spending of the federal government.” As political rhetoric goes, it was benign enough. It certainly wasn’t as aggressive as when he implied, in July, as he was starting to talk about the defunding strategy, that moderate Republicans in the Senate can be summarized as a “surrender caucus,” for example.

But Cruz has a pattern of making such comments, and of acting on them, as he did last week. Both his debt-ceiling gambit and the defunding campaign were practically guaranteed to fail, and to annoy his colleagues in the process. And that being the case, for Cruz’s many critics, last week’s stunt probably seemed like pointless, annoying grandstanding—and odd, given that Cruz could use some allies in Congress if he has any aspirations for higher office, which he presumably does. (Cruz, who is 43, said several things during our interviews that gave me the impression he has already considered how he might justify running for president at such a relatively young age and with less than a full term under his belt—that the country doesn’t have forever to address its fiscal and economic issues, and so on. And although some of Cruz’s more ardent supporters have harrumphed that he should abandon the surrender caucus and lead a new party, I found no indication that he wants to leave the Republican fold. “I am not a fan of third parties,” he told me, when I pressed him on that question.)

There was, however, one difference between the defund-Obamacare campaign and the debt- ceiling stunt—and it’s a difference that may illuminate a politician who can seem inexplicable. With regard to the defunding campaign, Cruz had insisted to me on several occasions that there was a plausible, if unlikely, objective: that if Senate Republicans stood together, a handful of Democrats—red-state Democrats facing reelection in 2014, to start—might be moved to join them. Last week, though, there wasn’t even a theoretical policy goal.