AP Photo/Steve Helber, File

With Republicans retaining control of Virginia's House and Senate, Gov. Terry McAuliffe's efforts to expand Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act might seem out of reach. But he appears to be trying to find other ways to help fund health care for the poor.

It's called the bed tax. The idea is that hospitals and nursing homes would be charged a percentage of their revenue, a calculation that could be based on the number of beds at a facility. That amount would be matched by the federal government through Medicaid, and the money would be returned to hospitals to help cover costs.

After years of opposing the idea, the Virginia Hospital and Healthcare Association is shifting its position as the governor prepares a two-year budget to present to lawmakers on Dec. 17. Even though McAuliffe may be unable to expand Medicaid to 400,000 Virginians who don't have health insurance, he might be able to help hospitals pay for the care they deliver to patients who don't have coverage. He'll need help from Republicans in the General Assembly.

"Something that once was an idea that was strenuously and vigorously opposed is now something that hospitals are considering," says Julian Walker, vice president of communications at the association. "Think about any business of any sort in any industry. If government were telling that business you have to give away X percentage of free or discounted care, you can imagine how that would create some financial hardship and difficulty."

McAuliffe is working behind the scenes to put together a budget that will fund his priorities after he leaves office in 2017.

"I'm sure that the hospitals are involved in whatever discussions are taking place, and I seriously doubt that the governor is going to propose something that the hospitals don't agree to," says Sen. George Barker (D-39). "For every Medicaid patient they take care of, the hospitals lose about a third of what it costs them to care for the patient."

But will Republicans agree to a new tax?

"They're not going to go out there and say we need to tax these hospitals," says Barker. "But if the hospitals come to them and say please tax us, they're going to listen."

Despite the high-profile conflict between McAuliffe and the GOP-led General Assembly over expanding Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act, the two sides were able to find some common ground during the last budget cycle. They ended up cutting a deal to expand benefits to the mentally ill, and they worked together to close a $2.4 million shortfall. But that doesn't necessarily mean that Republicans will accept a bed tax, especially if it's perceived as expanding Medicaid.

Del. Dave Albo (R-42) says that support from the hospitals won't necessarily turn the tide.

"Gas stations used to support a gas tax increase," says Albo. "And that didn't go anywhere."

For now, the idea is just a concept, one that could help hospitals take in more money for patients they are already seeing. Once the governor issues an actual proposal, though, lawmakers could start debating whether a bed tax is a clever alternative to the Affordable Care Act or an end run around opposition to it.