Rep. Jeremy Durham (Photo: Submitted)

A recorded phone message going to Williamson County residents calls for an embattled Republican lawmaker to step down or GOP leadership should ask for his resignation.

The Tennessean obtained several copies of the call targeting House Majority Whip Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin. The person speaking on the call — who identifies herself as "Carol, concerned conservative parent" — notes Durham was the subject of a prescription fraud investigation and wrote a character reference for a youth pastor convicted on child pornography charges.

Durham was not charged or convicted in connection to the fraud probe, and accused the "liberal media" of being on a "witch hunt" in asking about the character reference. But the call, known as a robocall, says his actions are unbecoming of a lawmaker representing Williamson County.

"As a mother of three, I find this to be offensive and dangerous. It is not the kind of leadership and values we need representing our families in Nashville," the robocall states.

"I think it's time for Mr. Durham to step down or party leadership call for his resignation. Thank you."

Durham on Sunday said he finds it unlikely Republican leadership would take action against him.

"I find it interesting that The Tennessean runs an article about an anonymous robocall repeating the same outdated non-stories that ran in their liberal newspaper for three days," he said in a statement. Durham asked that his comments only appear if they included his criticism of the news organization.

"I find it unlikely that Republican leadership would take action against someone who was fully exonerated for something they didn't do more than two years ago when the Democrats haven't taken action against a leadership member who is currently under federal indictment," Durham said.

He referenced the indictment and investigation into Rep. Joe Armstrong, D-Knoxville, on federal fraud and tax evasion charges. Armstrong has denied wrongdoing.

The call accuses Durham of helping Joseph Todd Neill, a youth pastor convicted of possessing dozens of child porn images, receive a lighter sentence. On Friday, Durham said he only wrote about parts of Neill's life as a pastor in the letter and never condoned his actions.

Durham on Sunday said he "fully understood the political consequences of writing the letter but it's something I prayed about and still felt called to write."

"Leadership is about making tough decisions," he said.

Apart from providing a first name in the call, none of the copies of the robocall obtained by The Tennessean included reference to any source of funding for the call or contact information. Tennessee law requires non-commercial robocalls to identify the person or entity responsible at the start of the message and provide a number or address where people can request to be removed from the call list.

But it is not uncommon for calls to go out that do not identify the source of their funding. Calls that didn't identify their funding source became an issue in the recent Nashville mayoral election.

House Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville, and Tennessee Republican Party Chairman Ryan Haynes have said the fraud investigation is concerning. And on Friday Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey said writing the letter was "poor judgment."

On Sunday, House Majority Leader Gerald McCormick, R-Chattanooga, said that he was unaware of the robocall, but that the issues it raised were serious.

"I'm very concerned with Representative Durham's decision to use his official position to advocate for a convicted sex offender," he said in an emailed statement.

And while McCormick said that Durham's decision to continue serving as a legislator is "between him, his family, and his constituents," his service as a House Republican Caucus leader is "at the pleasure of the entire Caucus and any decision about Representative Durham's status within Leadership would need to be made by the Caucus."

On Sunday, Franklin Mayor Ken Moore agreed that the letter showed questionable judgment, which doesn't reflect well on the community Durham represents.

"I don't know the context of when Rep. Durham wrote the letter, what the pressures were," Moore said. "But the end result wasn't good judgment, in my opinion."

Still, Moore said he doesn't believe robocalls — particularly ones that don't identify their funding source — are a productive way of addressing the situation.

"I think it's up to the public to decide what they want to do and also the leadership of the Republican Party," he said. "I think it seems like there's a movement to unseat (Durham) and I haven't personally heard any of it, but I think a robocall is not the way to approach the situation."

Williamson County Democratic Party Chairman Chris Polk said on Sunday that the call could signal dissatisfaction with Durham's representation among members of his own party.

Polk said he hadn't received the call himself, but that it had been forwarded to him.

"Anyone with a database can send out robocalls,' he said. "It could just be an angry constituent who's doing this."

Polk said he has heard from "a lot of lifelong Franklin residents who lean right" asking him to help find a challenger to Durham because of the lawmaker's position on key issues.

Polk cited Durham's stance against Insure Tennessee, which would have given hundreds of thousands of uninsured Tennesseans access to health care using federal funding made available through the Affordable Care Act.

But Williamson County GOP Chairman Julie Hannah Taleghani said on Sunday that she was "very, very surprised," to hear about the robocall. She said that she hadn't heard any discussion in the community about the issue and that the concerns are a distraction from Durham's efforts in the legislature.

"Rep. Durham is out working on important issues ... he’s been out in the district with voters all weekend," she said. "I’m in shock."

Harwell, Haynes, Gov. Bill Haslam and other state Republican leaders didn't immediately respond to requests for comment on Sunday.

Reach Dave Boucher at 615-259-8892 and on Twitter @Dave_Boucher1. Reach Jill Cowan on Twitter @jillcowan.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1QEURbj