Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

It’s the beginning of the end for “Mad Men.” As the second half of the series’ final season begins at 10 p.m. EDT on AMC, here’s a refresher on how previous seasons ended:

—Season 1 Finale (aired October 2007): Shocking! Peggy Olson gave birth to a child fathered by her married colleague Pete Campbell — never having realized she was pregnant. Don Draper learned of the suicide of the brother he had cruelly turned away. And he delivered one of his all-time most affecting advertising pitches, for Kodak’s Carousel slide projector — which Don dubs “a time machine” — as he rhapsodizes about consumers creating a deep, sentimental bond with this product. Not a dry eye in the conference room.

—Season 2 Finale (aired October 2008):

Don returned from a long and emotionally taxing trip to California with the Cuban Missile Crisis keeping everyone from coast to coast on edge. Pete, despite being wed, told Peggy that he loved her, whereupon she let him know about his having fathered a child with her and that she had given it away: “I could have had you in my life forever if I wanted to,” she told him crushingly. “But I didn’t want to.” Then Don’s wife Betty told him she was pregnant. Neither looked happy at the news.

—Season 3 Finale (aired November 2009): Sterling Cooper was about to be sold from under them, but Don, Roger Sterling, Bert Cooper and Lane Pryce roared back with a plan to make a fast exit and form their own new agency, initially basing their new shop — Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce — in a hotel suite. Meanwhile, Betty and Don began divorce proceedings, and Betty, along with their new baby and about-to-be-new-husband Henry Francis, were seen on board a plane for Reno, Nevada.

—Season 4 Finale (aired October 2010): Don invited Megan, his sexy secretary, to accompany him and his children to California where she would take care of the kids. Romance bloomed in the Golden State, and before the episode was over they were engaged. Back in New York, Peggy signed an important new client, but that good news was one-upped by Don and Megan’s announcement. And there was one unpleasant loose end for Don: breaking the news to Faye Miller, on whom he had been cheating. Referring to Don’s betrothed, Faye snapped at him, “I hope she knows you only like the beginnings of things.”