Powell, Lindsay carry load with Adkins, Carr hurt

DENVER — — It's no secret that the Colorado Buffaloes have four tailbacks they really like.

On Saturday, though, the Buffs had to figure out a way to get it done with only two of them at the end.

Michael Adkins and Patrick Carr both went down with injuries early in Saturday's 27-24 overtime win against Colorado State, but CU managed to get just enough out of Christian Powell and Phillip Lindsay.

"We're down to CP and had (walk-on) Kyle Evans ready to go," MacIntyre said. "We were kind of limited a little bit there, but CP and those guys kept battling."

A week after rushing for 390 yards - their highest total in 13 years - the Buffs were held to 125 yards against the Rams, but they were, at times, much-needed yards.

"They knew going into the game we'd be running a lot," said Lindsay, who had 22 yards on eight carries. "They were stacking the box and really keying on us with the run."

Adkins, who had a team-high 209 yards in the first two games, injured his left hamstring on his first carry, and he didn't return. Carr ran just once for a 2-yard loss and he didn't return.

Lindsay hurt his ribs, but kept playing. Powell finished with 58 yards on 15 carries.

MacIntyre said it's too early to tell the severity of the injuries to Adkins and Carr.

Gillam out

Buffs linebacker Addison Gillam missed the game with a knee injury. The junior was injured during the Sept. 12 game against Massachusetts, and the Buffs expect him to miss at least one more game.

Advertisement

"We're shooting for Arizona State (on Oct. 10) or Oregon (on Oct. 3)," MacIntyre said of Gillam's potential return. "He had his knee scoped and hopefully he'll be back in two more weeks."

Although Gillam dealt with some minor injuries in 2014, this is just the second time in his career he's missed a game, and the first he missed because of injury. He missed one game last year with an illness.

First TD

Receiver Devin Ross got the first touchdown of his career, catching a 24-yard pass from quarterback Sefo Liufau early in the third quarter.

"It was only one of the best feelings of my life. For real," Ross said. "I really loved that moment and wish I could relive it again right now. It was just so amazing. I'm just glad we got that win. It was the best game I've ever played in my life. It was just fun and exciting."

Notable

CU improved to 6-7 all-time in overtime games and snapped a three-game skid in overtime games. CU is 2-0 against CSU in overtime. ... CU's 14-point comeback was its largest ever against the Rams, topping the 13-point comeback they had in 1988. ... For the second game in a row, CU did not commit a turnover or give up a second. It's only the 18th time that's ever happened in CU history (CU is 16-2 in those games). ... Receiver Donovan Lee and backup quarterback Cade Apsay both returned after serving two-game suspensions to start the year. ... Saturday was the 20th birthday for Buffs linebacker Kenneth Olugbode. ... CU's captains on Saturday were: Chidobe Awuzie, Lindsay, Derek McCartney and Jordan Murphy.

Contact staff writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/BrianHowell33.