It’s all about the teamwork. That’s what the players, coaches and parents say led to the success of this year’s Michiana Pop Warner Junior Pee Wee football team.

The Bulldogs became contenders for a regional title after beating Valparaiso, 20-0, to win the Northern Indiana Pop Warner Little Scholars state championship earlier this month. The team remained undefeated heading into Saturday’s scheduled game in Michigan City against Fox Valley Pop Warner of Appleton, Wis.

The Junior Pee Wee team is composed of boys age 8 to 11 from South Bend, Elkhart and Granger. They are coached by Dan Brassell and about a half dozen assistants, mostly fathers.

The state championship placed the team at 11-0 for the season, Brassell said, averaging more than 30 points per game and allowing opponents to score just 40 points in all the games combined.

“It’s an amazing streak,” said Zach Jellison, an assistant coach whose 9-year-old son, Brayden, plays on the 24-member team. For Brayden, winning the championship “felt cool.” He said he and his friends jumped and cheered a lot.

Brassell credits the team’s success to having a lot of veteran players, including six 11-year-olds.

“They listen good, they’re committed, and they show up and practice,” he said.

“The players are good friends on and off the field,” said assistant coach Jonathan Thomas, father of Jalen Thomas, 9, referring to all of the boys who played either with or against each other in prior years.

Pop Warner football has a variety of divisions based on age and weight. There is also a scholastic requirement players must meet (a 2.0 GPA on a 4.0 scale). Junior Pee Wee players have a maximum weight of 105 pounds for 8-, 9- and 10-year-olds. Eleven-year-olds weighing less than 85 pounds also can be on the team.

To celebrate the championship, the team had a pizza party at Barnaby’s in South Bend that was attended by more than 100 people, counting team members and their families, said Elisabeth Rutten, team mom. The players wore their team jerseys and championship hats and showed off the big trophy they received.

The players were still excited about the trophy at a recent practice at O’Brien Park. “It felt great,” 11-year-old Kobe Luuga said of winning. The son of assistant coach Seabe Luuga has played five years and said he wasn’t surprised to win because he and his teammates “give 100 percent at every practice.”

Joseph Gomez, 11, a three-year player, said, “We shouted we were so happy.”

“The boys on this team have completely taken the idea of team play to heart, always encouraging and cheering for each other,” Rutten said. “It has been something awesome to watch and their good attitudes are a credit to the coaches and the families.”

“My job (as team mom) has been easy because of the tremendous support by the parents. And they are positive with the players while watching the games,” said Rutten, a contrast to some parents she’s observed from other teams.

“It’s a great team,” said 11-year-old Robert Saunders, whose nickname is “SpongeBob.” “We work as a team, not as one person.”

To assistant coach Leo Koley, who grew up playing Pop Warner football in Chicago, winning the championship “is a beautiful thing I can share with my son (Anthony Figueroa, 11,) for the rest of my life.”

Liz Vervaet has 10-year-old twin sons, Jakobe and Jay Luster, who have played five years. Pop Warner is a family affair with the boys’ father and stepfather serving as assistant coaches and grandmother, Linda Vervaet, on the sidelines for most practices and games.

“It’s a great group. Good boys and nice families,” Liz Vervaet said. “To win a championship the first time many were eligible to play for it is a nice reward for all the hard work, commitment and dedication by the players.”

Practice started Aug. 1 and will continue as long as they win, even in cold weather. Some boys, like hers, now play basketball so have back-to-back practices.

A coach for 11 years, Brassell has no kids on the team, but thoroughly enjoys his role. Looking at his teams as poker hands, he said, “This year just clicked. Like we got a royal flush.”

The Bulldogs were slated to play a team from Genesee County, Mich., on Nov. 17, but that team forfeited, leading the local team to the semifinal game Saturday, Brassell said.

Parents and coaches praised the excellent support from the Junior Pee Wee cheerleading squad that keeps spirits high at games. The squad placed second at state, and then earned a first place in the Mid-American Regional to qualify to go Disney World in Florida in December to compete in the national championship.

Altogether, the Michiana Pop Warner program serves some 250 area students through football teams and cheer squads, said Arnez Lee, league president. For more information, email mpwfootball@gmail.com or call 574-440-6644.