Everyone is looking to save some money, and you can start in your own kitchen. It's as simple as making a few easy changes to your grocery shopping methods and cooking habits; your wallet will thank you.

Start by taking a look at your current grocery, meal-planning, and eating habits. How often do you eat out? If it's more than once or twice a week, you're likely to put yourself over budget. Not only is eating out more expensive than making food yourself, it's usually not as healthy as the food you make for yourself.

Be vigilant when you go to the grocery store; you can save money without coupons. It may take an extra minute or two, but comparison shopping can save you significantly. The best way to save money at the grocery store is to not over-shop. Go in with a full stomach and a shopping list to avoid making spur-of-the-moment purchases.

There are some pantry items that you can make yourself, like spice mixes, which are often overpriced at the grocery store. Use cheaper cuts of meat like beef sirloin and ground beef, and don't forget about chicken thighs and pork chops, which are affordable and flavorful. If you are using coupons, you may be able to use store coupons and manufacturers' coupons on the same product for an extra discount.

The average household loses between $1,350 and $2,275 a year in food waste, which is where you can save the most money. Before you throw anything out, take a second to think about what else you can use it for. If it's carrot ends or parsley stems, save them in the freezer and use as aromatics for a water-based soup. Using these and a few other tricks, you can save a significant amount of money each year.

-Julie Ruggirello, The Daily Meal

More Content from The Daily Meal:

15 Ways To Save On Eating Out

15 Ways To Save On Eating Out

1 of 15 Buy Cheap Gift Certificates Restaurant.com sells $25 gift certificates for $10 or $50 gift certificates for $20. The site also has sales throughout the year, and I've snagged $25 gift certificates for $5. I keep a stack of these things in my wallet at all times. Most places have a minimum purchase requirement (from $35 and up) but you can generally use the gift certificates any time. But there are drawbacks : They're for dine-in only, they're nonrefundable, and they can only be redeemed once per month per restaurant. Still, the site has become so popular that you can double dip - buying Restaurant.com certificates through an airline's shopping portal in order to earn frequent flier miles, for instance. Share this slide:

Flickr: Robert S. Donovan

Follow The Daily Meal on Twitter: www.twitter.com/thedailymeal