In the latest shift at GlaxoSmithKline, Deirdre Connelly, who has run the North American pharmaceuticals business for nearly six years, is retiring, according to a memo distributed yesterday to employees. She will be replaced by Jack Bailey, who most recently headed government affairs, managed markets and the vaccines business in the U.S., according to the memo.

The move comes amid an ongoing reorganization at Glaxo, which has promised to cut expenses by $1.6 billion annually through 2017. The drug maker is struggling with declining sales in its key respiratory franchise and an overall sales drop in the U.S., which is its most important market and accounts for roughly one-third of companywide revenue.

“The U.S. healthcare environment is extremely challenging. We are making good progress with payers and early signals are encouraging, but there remains a lot to deliver,’ Abbas Hussain, the president of the Glaxo global pharmaceuticals business, wrote in the e-mail to employees. The memo was first reported by Bloomberg News.

“With Jack heading the U.S. business, I feel confident that we have the right experience to steer us through the current environment and deliver our strategy. I’d also like to thank Deirdre for her leadership of the U.S. business these last six years – she is a great leader and a good friend. I’m incredibly grateful for everything she has done to reshape the U.S. business.”

The change comes after a management reshuffling last year in which Connelly, who arrived from Eli Lilly, began reporting to Abbas. Previously, she reported directly to Glaxo chief executive Andrew Witty, who has been under pressure to engineer a rebound not only from declining sales, but also a bribery scandal in China.

During her tenure, Connelly, 54, attempted to steer Glaxo through a turbulent period. Last year, sales of respiratory medicines fell 18% in the U.S., due to both lower volume and price reductions. This reflected a 25% drop in Advair, one of its most important medicines (see here). Two newer products have so far not generated anywhere near the needed sales levels. The Abbas e-mail also noted that Jorge Bartolome, a senior vice president for the respiratory and medical centre unit, is leaving.

Besides the challenges of growing sales, however, Connelly also implemented a new and closely watched marketing program for sales reps called Patient First. Begun in 2011, this was designed in 2011, before the drug maker paid a $3 billion fine to the U.S. government to settle allegations of improper drug marketing to physicians, among other things.

The program was seen as ground breaking because reps are not paid bonuses based on the volume of prescriptions written by doctors. Instead, bonuses have been based on product knowledge, business acumen and understanding needs of patients and physicians, which were assessed in written tests and simulations conducted by third parties. Supervisory observations are also used (details are here).

The idea was to remove the pressure reps may feel to persuade doctors to write prescriptions, which federal authorities charged sometimes led to inappropriate marketing practices. Sales reps, however, complain the program contributed to sales declines, because there was less incentive to promote prescriptions, even though managers sometimes emphasized prescriptions, anyway.

“The company put a lot of faith and effort in this system working and we are putting patients first,” says a Glaxo sales rep who asked not to be named. “But you wouldn’t go to a car salesman, who just sold some cars, and pay him based on his knowledge of the auto industry instead of commission. Salespeople are in it for sales and they’ve been seeing declines because the motivation isn’t there.”

A Glaxo spokeswoman tells us the drug maker remains “resolutely committed” to “focusing on the quality of the information shared with health care providers and overall business performance, rather than individual sales targets.” As evidence this approach is working, she cites a survey of more than 10,000 physicians indicating Glaxo was ranked first among large drug makers on value provided.

And she adds that changes are being made this year to the bonus program for reps. As an example, she says that written exams will no longer be used to assess scientific knowledge, business acumen or customer engagement, although simulations will still be used. “This is part of our effort to continuously improve the program.”

Here is the memo that was distributed to Glaxo employees yesterday…