By David Owens, The Hartford Courant McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

June 20 -- HARTFORD -- Allegations of sexual assault by nine women against an Avon doctor are consistent in several respects, according to arrest warrants made available Thursday.

The women alleged similar conduct by Dr. Khosro Pourkavoos -- fondling of their breasts during purported breast examinations, surprise rectal and vaginal examinations during which Pourkavoos did not wear gloves, and sudden removal of bras and underwear by Pourkavoos, according to the warrants.

The women in most cases said they went to Pourkavoos because he was the only local doctor to accept state-based health insurance, or they were referred to him by the Husky insurance program, according to the warrants.

Pourkavoos has pleaded not guilty to the allegations against him and is due is scheduled to be back in Superior Court in Hartford on July 18 .

Pourkavoos was arraigned Wednesday on nine new cases charging him with seven counts of second-degree sexual assault three counts of fourth-degree sexual assault.

Pourkavoos was charged on Jan. 22 with three counts of fourth-degree sexual assault and one count of second-degree sexual assault for incidents related to two former patients. The nine women in the new cases came forward after learning of the January allegations, Avon police said. Sixteen women made allegations against Pourkavoos, although not all of the incidents could be prosecuted because of the statute of limitations, according to the warrants.

Some of the women told police they did not initially come forward out of fear no one would believe them.

One of the women did file a complaint with Husky program, and then received a response from Husky that her complaint was unfounded, according to the warrants.

Avon Det . Edward Espinoza contacted Community Health Network of Connecticut about its investigation of the woman's complaint. Pourkavoos, according to the Community Health Network records cited in the arrest warrants, denied the accusations and told the investigator the women suffered from a substantial mental illness.

___

(c)2014 The Hartford Courant (Hartford, Conn.)

Visit The Hartford Courant (Hartford, Conn.) at www.courant.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 337

[jetpack-related-posts]