By Melissa Phy / For the Love of Food

For some reason, things are just cuter when they’re smaller: children, bills, bugs.

Oh, and frittatas.

It’s strange, but whenever I make frittatas in my favorite cast-iron skillet (like this other meatless one), they never get finished. So I decided to try my hand at mini-versions, because we seem more inclined to go back for seconds (and thirds, and fourths) when the item is smaller. And l get offended at leftovers.

These mini frittatas — or crustless quiches — are satisfying for lunch, dinner or pre-curser to a large meal. With frittatas, you can add anything in and they’d be delicious. I paired goat cheese with spinach and sun-dried tomatoes, sautéing the spinach with some garlic first to enhance the umami of the dish. Simple ingredients that don’t require much preparation.

Disclaimer: I made 12 of these with the recipe provided below, but after careful consideration, I think you can make 24 by filling the muffin tins half full instead of two-thirds. Either way, you’re going to end up with something deliciously satisfying.

Sun-dried Tomato, Spinach and Goat Cheese Mini Frittatas

Makes 12

Gather These Up

8 eggs

1 cup of milk

12 oz spinach

2 cloves garlic, minced

1 Tbsp. EVOO

3 Tbsp. sun-dried tomatoes, chopped

3 oz goat cheese, divided

Baking spray, such as Pam

Salt and pepper, to taste

Whisk Them Together

Heat the oven to 350 degrees. Spray a muffin tin generously with the baking spray of your choice. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs and milk. Season generously with salt and pepper. Divide the mixture evenly among the muffin tin cups. In a large skillet, heat a heavy-bottomed pan over medium hear with the olive oil. Add the chopped garlic and cook for three minutes. Add the spinach and toss, cooking until wilted — about 6 minutes. Drain the spinach once it’s wilted, squeezing out any excess moisture. Divide the cooked spinach among the egg-filled muffin tin. You may have some leftover, which I encourage to snack on while these guys bake. Divide the chopped sun-dried tomatoes evenly among the cups. Divide the goat cheese in big crumbles among the cups. Bake at 350 degrees for about 25 minutes. Let cool for 5 minutes before cutting around the edges to help release the frittatas. Serve, savor, sigh.

Tips and Variations