A worker removes oil from the beach at Refugio State Beach, north of Goleta, Calif., on Thursday. More than 7,700 gallons of oil has been raked, skimmed and vacuumed from a spill that stretched across 9 miles of California coast, just a fraction of the sticky, stinking goo that escaped from a broken pipeline, officials said. The Associated Press

TGIF, the 141st day of 2015 and the day after President Barack Obama's big win on a procedural vote for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a massive, 11-nation trade deal that created an odd Senate dynamic: a dozen or so Democrats voted with nearly all Republicans, and some of Obama's liberal allies harshed on him for twisting arms to get the deal through. But it also had critics who've actually read the top-secret, behind-closed-doors-negotiated trade pact pointing out a Catch-22 Obama's already used: anyone with proper security clearance can read the deal but can't publicly discuss in detail, giving Obama an opening to criticize them for not being specific. Here is your Three-Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less, hand-crafted right here in America:

Not Easy Being Green: In 1969, a massive oil spill off the California coast horrified the nation and essentially gave birth to the modern environmental movement. Could the oil slick that's now fouling nine miles of the Golden State's coastline rally the nation's Greens? Naaah, writes Vox: Unlike the '60s, images of oil-soaked birds and brown ocean waves aren't shocking anymore; neither are explosions, fires or public anxiety (just ask President Barack Obama, who four years ago had to manage the nation's largest oil disaster ever, yet just approved drilling in one of the most sensitive environments on the planet).

A List, B Team: In considering what's likely to be a supersized Republican presidential field, one question has been how to conduct debates with 20 or more presidential candidates. Now that the limits have been defined -- only those registering a pulse in the polls get invited -- FiveThirtyEight.com has come up with probabilities on who's likely to make the cut (yeah, there's data for that). That could mean unless things change, it's likely Carly Fiorina and maybe Bobby Jindal can go grab dinner or see a friend while the debates are going on.

Penalty for Withdrawal: First, a ban on using food stamps to buymiddle-class food; then, restricting the poor from having fun on government aid. Now, the Republican-controlled Kansas state legislature has passed a bill capping cash withdrawals at $25 a day for state-controlled welfare debit cards, effectively reducing benefits overall (when did ATMs last dispense $5 bills? Bill Clinton's first term?) Gov. Sam Brownback will probably put his John Hancock on this one, too, in the name of encouraging self-sufficiency.

Your Morning Video: "That state is cray!"



Fall with Paul: His 2013 filibuster, protesting drone warfare, was a smash, putting him into the political equivalent of heavy-rotation airplay. So when Rand Paul hit the Senate floor Tuesday, eager fans who'd waited two years for his follow-up act breathlessly tuned in to his marathon Senate talking session against NSA spying. But critics concluded that Paul Unplugged 2.0 was a bust: the senator's team ran fundraising tweets, there was little at stake and the media yawned. Meanwhile, Jeb Bush told reporters Thursday there was "not a shred of evidence" that the spying program had violated anyone's civil liberties. Spoken like a man who has his own private home-brew computer network to fall back on.

Today in Obama: The president heads to Adas Israel Congregation, one of the largest congregations in the Washington, DC metropolitan area, to celebrate Jewish American Heritage Month. Later, he and first lady Michelle Obama host the Diplomatic Corps Reception for foreign diplomatic corps in the East Room.

Tweet of the Morning:

Right, Josh Duggar has no ties to the mainstream family values GOP. pic.twitter.com/tbocSYiMRg — Gabe Ortíz (@TUSK81) May 22, 2015

(What's all the fuss about Josh Dugger? Here you go.)



Stat of the Day: Portion of U.S. firefighters who are overweight or obese: 4 of 5 (courtesy of Harper's Index).

Duly Noted: In 1860, the United States and Japan exchanged ratifications of the Treaty of Amity and Commerce during a ceremony in Washington. In 1935, President Franklin D. Roosevelt appeared before Congress to explain his decision to veto a bill that would have allowed World War I veterans to cash in bonus certificates before their 1945 due date. In 1968, the nuclear-powered submarine USS Scorpion, with 99 men aboard, sank in the Atlantic Ocean. (The remains of the sub were later found on the ocean floor 400 miles southwest of the Azores.) In 1969, the lunar module of Apollo 10, with Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene Cernan aboard, flew to within nine miles of the moon's surface in a dress rehearsal for the first lunar landing. In 1972, President Richard Nixon began a visit to the Soviet Union, during which he and Kremlin leaders signed the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.