Kyra Seeley, a Middlesex High School senior, launched the “Smiles for Soldiers” campaign, where she sends cards to deployed soldiers as part of dosomething.org’s seven-day service marathon, “The Hunt.” (Photo: Courtesy of Kyra Seeley) Story Highlights dosomething.org is the largest organization for young volunteering opportunities and social change in the U.S.

The organization is sponsoring Kyra Seeley's idea of making and sending hand-made cards to U.S. soldiers.

The idea occurred to Seeley in the summer when she participated in dosomething.org's "The Hunt," a seven-day service marathon.

"As a community we could give more thanks to the men and women who serve our country," Seeley said.

Nearly 20 percent of military service men and women suffer from stress, depression or anxiety during deployment, Kyra Seeley said. That statistic inspired Seeley, a Middlesex High School senior, to create Smiles for Soldiers, a campaign sponsored by dosomething.org, the largest organization for young volunteering opportunities and social change in the U.S.

The idea of sending hand-made cards to United States soldiers occurred to Seeley in the summer when she participated in dosomething.org's "The Hunt," a seven-day service marathon sponsored by Toyota. Out of 900 applicants that submitted a campaign proposal, she was one of the seven finalists and received $500 in grant money to implement the Smiles for Soldiers campaign, and a $1,000 scholarship, she said.

"I thought, you know, as a community we could give more thanks to the men and women who serve our country," she said.

As a longtime member of dosomething.org, she found inspiration for Smiles for Soldiers from the organization's Birthday Mail campaign that she participated in during 2014.

Participants folded, cut, drew, painted, stamped and stenciled unique birthday cards for homeless youth as part of the Birthday Mail campaign and then drove to a shelter to distribute the finished products to residents on their birthdays, she said.

"I was actually able to deliver a birthday card to a child in a homeless shelter and I saw the joy she received in having that card," she recalled. "So I kind of put the two things together and I thought, you know, these men and women that are serving their country — I'm sure a thank you card would make them very appreciated and a lot better if they are going through anything."

Read more student and education news

The campaign is currently running online nationally, she said, along with other campaigns such as "Teens for Jeans" and "Cell Phones for Survivors."

Smiles for Soldiers is still in the process of taking off, Seeley said. Part of her work right now is handling the grant money to organize the first-ever smiles for Soldiers card-making event, which is scheduled to run from 3:30 to 5:30 p.m. Saturday, March 7, at the Middlesex Recreation Department, 1200 Mountain. Any interested community member is invited to attend; for more information, contact caringcards@yahoo.com.

"It's in its beginning phase," Seeley said, "but all the cards are being sent to Operation Gratitude," a California-based non-profit which sends care packages to newly deployed military personnel overseas.

The Smiles for Soldiers campaign is a cause that resonates with dosomething.org members, said Colleen Wormsley, public relations and talent associate for dosomething.org.

"First of all, it's accessible and something easy that all young people can do, and we know that young people love doing arts and crafts," Wormsley said. "And we love plugging in what young people are interested in to social change actions."

As Seeley organizes future mass card-making events and promotes Smiles for Soldiers on social media platforms, she is also considering where to attend college — Rutgers and Rider University are some of her choices.

She is also preparing to compete in a local Miss New Jersey pageant in a number of weeks, where she said she will "undoubtedly" mention Smiles for Soldiers.

Before college starts, Seeley hopes to intern at dosomething.org. And eventually, she has plans to work at a non-profit organization that promotes volunteerism. Until then, she will focus on "Smiles for Soldiers."

"Seeing everyone participating and giving thanks back to our service members has definitely been the best part," she said.

Take action

Go to dosomething.org and search Smiles for Soldiers to sign up for Kyra Seeley's card-making program, or email caringcards@yahoo.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1CT14JU