New paramedics programs work to keep patients at home

In new programs being tested throughout Southeast Michigan, the paramedics come to keep patients out of the hospital.

The practice, known as community paramedicine, is expanding in the region as more ambulance companies join Southfield-based Community EMS in helping hospitals reduce readmissions and unnecessary emergency department visits.

The idea is for paramedics to visit people at home with chronic diseases before they wind up in the hospital, or to do follow-up with patients recently discharged from the hospital to keep them from coming back.

Last year, Community EMS began a mobile health pilot program with Botsford Hospital in Farmington Hills to use paramedics and telemedicine to assess the health of chronic-disease patients who develop non-emergency health problems.

Huron Valley Ambulance and Livingston County EMS joined with St. Joseph Mercy Health System and the University of Michigan Health System, both in Ann Arbor, to launch in August a three-year community paramedic pilot project to make house calls and try to keep non-acute patients at home rather than them taking an ambulance to the hospital.

In Macomb County, Medstar Ambulance also has begun a community paramedicine program to help recently discharged heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients from McLaren Macomb and Henry Ford Macomb hospitals stay at home.

Community paramedicine programs are just one way hospitals are working with nursing homes, home health agencies, medical groups, admitting physicians and other organizations to reduce readmission rates and health care costs.

Nationally, hospitals are struggling to reduce readmissions because they are financially penalized under the 3-year-old Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program, which was mandated under the Affordable Care Act.

More than half of Michigan's hospitals — 71 of them — were fined this year a total of $25 million for having too many non-managed care Medicare patients readmitted for heart attack, heart failure, pneumonia and two new categories — knee or hip replacements and chronic bronchitis and emphysema.

Medstar CEO Kolby Miller said its mobile health paramedic program is an "extension of the health system, with its purpose being to extend the care and attention the patients receive in the hospital."

For up to one month after discharge, Medstar paramedics make regular house calls nearly every day for the first two weeks, then every other day for the next two weeks.

Paramedics conduct examinations, review medication compliance and report back to the patient's primary care physician, Miller said.

"By visiting patients immediately and regularly, we can keep them on track and communicate directly with their physicians if something has changed with the patient or other concerns," Miller said.

The six-month program, which began in August, has been approved as a pilot program by the Macomb County EMS Medical Control Authority and the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services' EMS Division.

Miller said the state requires a special study to be conducted on the program because there are no specific regulations that allow paramedics to act as physician extenders. They are licensed as first responders, he said.

At the end of six months, Miller said, Medstar will submit data on patient quality and cost savings. If McLaren and Henry Ford want to continue the program, Medstar will apply for permanent program status.

Over the next year, Miller said, Medstar expects to enroll at least 75 percent of the 1,000 annual heart failure patients admitted to the two hospitals.

Savings on heart failure patients alone could total $3.1 million by reducing readmissions of about 180 patients, he said. On average, 24 percent of all heart failure patients are readmitted to hospitals within 30 days after discharge. An average hospital stay for heart failure patients is $17,000.

Miller said the main reason heart failure patients are readmitted is because they fail to follow up with their doctor after discharge.

Medstar has made 164 visits to 27 heart failure patients discharged from Henry Ford Macomb or McLaren Macomb, many of whom do not have primary care doctors. Only one patient has been readmitted, he said.

"We visited a patient at home last week. She was prescribed with a common blood thinner, but the patient already had one at home, at a significantly higher dose," Miller said. "She didn't know which one to take, one or the other, or both."

Average monthly costs for the home visits are about $500, with patients averaging about three visits per week, Kolby said. Additional visits include transportation to doctor's offices and prescription drug pickups, he said.

Miller said paramedics sorted out the medications with the help of the hospital and primary care physician.

"If the patient took both, it would have caused her blood to be as thin as hot water," he said.

Medstar does not charge the patient for the visit. Medstar is reimbursed by McLaren Health Care Corp. and Henry Ford Health System, which co-own Medstar and benefit by avoiding readmission financial penalties.

Currently, health insurers do not cover these types of home visits by paramedics. Minnesota recently approved a paramedicine program for its Medicaid program, and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is studying a program in Oklahoma.

Miller said Medstar hopes to expand to other chronic conditions based on the wishes of the hospitals.

"We all recognize that many of our treatment decisions and instructions may not be understood or followed. This program directly addresses those issues," said Andrea Phillips, chief nursing officer with McLaren Macomb.

Huron Valley/ Livingston County EMS program

The Huron Valley and Livingston County EMS program, which began in August, uses community paramedics with six months of additional training to respond to non-acute 911 calls when people need medical care but have no life-threatening symptoms.

The paramedics provide primary care for minor illnesses, including antibiotics, instead of a transport by ambulance to the emergency department. They also can schedule a follow-up visit or phone call and can arrange for a primary care physician appointment.

Dale Berry, CEO of Huron Valley Ambulance, said non-emergency calls have skyrocketed over the last 24 years, increasing to 49 percent of the total from 38 percent.

"Calling 911 is not the best solution for someone who has a minor medical problem and can get to their doctor," Berry said. "A 911 response, ambulance transport, and emergency room visit is a very costly way to take care of a minor, nonacute illness."

If a patient needs treatment, the paramedics also use a telemedicine video and audio link with an emergency physician, said Kennan Bora, M.D., medical director for patient safety at Emergency Physician Medical Group in Ann Arbor, which is working on the program.

"We can perform surrogate exams with videoconferencing and get a sense remotely how patients are doing," Bora said. "Doctors who have had patient interactions like this think it is fabulous. It allows us to treat the right patient at the right place with right supervision."

Bora said it doesn't replace the emergency department or primary care doctor. "It allows treatment for patients with unscheduled visits," he said.

During the first two months, Huron Valley Ambulance's community paramedics responded to 83 calls with 43 patients treated at home, or 52 percent, avoiding an ambulance ride to the ER and an estimated $107,500 in ER and ambulance ride costs.

Berry said paramedics have provided assistance for wound infections, urinary tract infections, flu-like symptoms and medical equipment malfunctions.

"We have special state permission to transport patients to the doctor's office," he said.

While there currently is no charge to patients for the service, Berry said the program is looking at charging $180 for each community paramedic visit.

So far, costs to train and staff the 21 paramedics have been $500,000. A $98,000 grant from the Washtenaw County Board of Commissioners is supplementing a $1.1 million budget from Emergent Health Partners, HVA's parent organization.

Costs to HVA for the CP unit totaled $73,500, or about $1,500 per day, less than the estimated $2,500 cost if the patient had been brought to the ER. If that patient is admitted or readmitted, savings could be greater than $10,000 per patient.

The program will last two to three years before state approval is sought to make it permanent, Berry said. Huron Valley will then seek reimbursement from health insurers and other organizations that benefit from the program.

Community EMS/ Botsford program

Over the past year, Kevin Bersche, director of operations with Community EMS, said the community paramedicine program with Botsford Hospital and its nursing home has been in the data collection phase with the state of Michigan.

"We created the study to quantify the savings realized when mobile health is used instead of transporting to the hospital," Bersche said.

Botsford Hospital, which owns Community EMS, is now part of eight-hospital Beaumont Health. Beaumont is studying whether to expand the telemedicine program to its hospitals, Bersche said.

"We have created this study (with Botsford's institutional review board) to demonstrate treatment intervention does not compromise patient safety and to quantify the dollars saved to the health system," he said.

Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325. Twitter: @jaybgreene