Update Dec. 19, 9:30:

Farenthold spokesman Kurt Bardella issued the following statement in response to Hailer’s comments:

“It’s disappointing and an incredible act of hypocrisy for a former Clinton campaign hand to rush to judgement in a callous effort to score some cheap political points without knowing the facts. Clearly, the Texas Democratic Party doesn’t have anything to say about the rising costs of ObamaCare, the President’s executive amnesty over-reach – instead – they’d rather embrace the kind of politics that people in the real world are just sick and tired of.”

WASHINGTON – Will Hailer, Executive Director of the Texas Democratic Party, spoke out against Rep. Blake Farenthold today, condemning the Corpus Christi Republican’s actions.

Farenthold is facing a lawsuit from a former staffer who claims that the congressman repeatedly made sexual comments towards her and created a hostile work environment.

“Every day, thousands of young minds go to the capital to serve the people of the United States,” Hailer said. “They do so on the hopes of building a better tomorrow for their friends, families, loved ones, and people they’ve never met. Congressman Farenthold’s actions are unbecoming of an elected official.”

Lauren Greene, a former Farenthold spokeswoman, filed the suit in a Washington D.C. federal court on Friday, Dec. 12. She filed on the grounds that Farenthold violated the Congressional Accountability Act through gender discrimination and creating a hostile work environment.

In the suit, which was first reported by the National Law Journal, Greene alleged that Farenthold “regularly made comments designed to gauge whether [Greene] was interested in a sexual relationship.”

Greene alleged that Farenthold said that “he was estranged from his wife and that he had not had sex with her in years.”

Farenthold made other sexual remarks, drank to excess, and confided in another staffer that he had “sexual fantasies” about Greene, according to the suit.

Greene also alleged that Farenthold’s Chief of Staff, Bob Haueter, made her “professional life unbearable” by belittling and humiliating Greene. She brought her concerns to Farenthold, who “failed to take any action regarding Haueter’s conduct,” according to the suit.

Farenthold spokesman Kurt Bardella, the CEO of Endeavor Strategic Communications issued a statement on the allegations to multiple news outlets yesterday:

“As is the case with any pending legal situation, the congressman cannot comment on the specifics of the complaint, however, it goes without saying that both the congressman and the members of his staff who are included in this complaint have a very different view of the allegations than Ms. Greene. For the record, the office did not and does not discriminate based on sex or any other unlawful factor,” Bardella said.

According to the Houston Chronicle, a source close to Farenthold said Greene is seeking monetary damages upwards of $100,000.