There are three candidates, two Republican and one Democrat, for the Arkansas State House of Representatives District 81 seat.

Bruce Coleman, 73, of Mountainburg and Derek Goodlin, 46, of Rudy are the Republican candidates for the two-county area with 29,031 people from Alma to east Fayetteville.

The winners of the Republican primary election beginning March 1 will face Democrat Sharon McCaguhey in the general election Nov. 8. Early voting for the primary began Tuesday. The seat is being vacated by state Rep. Justin Harris, who announced in June he would bow out after his third term at the end of this year.

As of 2015, members of the Arkansas State Legislature are paid $39,400 per year. They are also given a per diem of $150 per day in voucher form, plus mileage tied to the federal rate.

Both Coleman and Goodlin are local business owners with graduate degrees and experience in public service.

Coleman is the retired co-owner of Coleman Butane Gas Co. at Mountainburg and holder of a doctorate in nutritional biochemistry from the University of Wisconsin. He serves as chair of the Crawford County Extension Council, is on the Mountainburg School Board and operates a cow-calf farm near Mountainburg. He graduated from the University of Arkansas with bachelor’s and master’s degrees in animal science and animal nutrition.

Coleman has been active in local politics as Crawford County Election Commissioner for 10 years and as chairman of the Crawford County Republican Committee for six years. Volunteering as a first responder and instructor for Mountainburg and District 3 fire departments, Coleman is also a member of the Church of Christ with his wife of 51 years, Mabel Rogers Coleman. They have three daughters who are teachers — Robin Willroth and Shari Moxley of Mountainburg and Jennifer Fortenberry of Springdale — eight grandchildren and one great-grandson.

Goodlin is president of Stein LTC, a health-care management company focused on longterm care, with previous experience as director of operations for a Sallisaw-based automobile products manufacturer. He earned a bachelor’s degree in industrial engineering from Pennsylvania State University and a master’s of business administration from the College of William & Mary in Williamsburg, Va.

Goodlin has two other small businesses in real estate property management and home health patients. He has been on the board of directors for the River Valley Pregnancy Medical Center in Fort Smith for four years and currently serves as treasurer and vice-chairman. He is also head coach of the Minutemen Youth Trap Team, an Arkansas Game & Fish Commission affiliated program, and an NRA Lifetime member. He is a father of seven children ranging in age of 3 to 16 and has been married to Janice Goodlin for 18 years.

Why are you running?

Coleman: I am running as a conservative Republican for state representative because I believe we are overtaxed and overregulated and that this is the most opportune time in Arkansas history to reduce taxes and overregulation. I feel the people living in this district should be represented by someone who has Arkansas heritage and values. I live three miles from where I was born. Because I have served the people in the area, I can best represent the people in District 81. I want to do my best to secure the future of my children and grandchildren and those of the rest of the district.

Goodlin: I want to make a difference for our area. I love our state and believe we are facing some tough decisions that will set us on a course of prosperity or financial failure. I want to use my experience and conservative policy ideas to help ensure we stay focused on what will make a positive impact on us for generations to come. I will spend my time in office protecting family values, encouraging job growth, and applying common sense to the issues that come before the legislature.

What are the most important topics for District 81 that you would like to see solved?

Coleman: Schools are the largest entities in each town in District 81. They serve to make strong communities, provide opportunities for our young people and provide employment. I want to strengthen educational programs and facilities with more local control involving parents, teachers and local administrators in the curriculum and activities.

Health-care costs and programs to provide health-care insurance are critical issues for our district. Obamacare is an onerous federally mandated program. Arkansans should do everything we can to control our destiny and retain control and influence over our health-care dollars. The Health Reform Legislative Task Force has been innovative in attempting to deal with this Federal overreach.

Volunteer programs need to be strengthened for Fire Protection, Senior Citizens, Libraries and Youth Sports activities.

Goodlin: Health care costs. Obamacare has caused the cost of health care to go up for both consumers and government, which of course gets passed on to taxpayers. As someone with a background in health care, I believe the best long-term solution is creating an accountable pathway to employment. Statistics show that as people find better employment they tend to live healthier life styles. In addition, we will be able to transfer people from government insurance onto employer policies, which will save the state money.

What is your philosophy on economic development?

Coleman: Economic development to produce needed goods and services can only occur when we have a trained workforce with freedom from over taxation and burdensome regulations. Unselfish development of infrastructure and resources provide an economic advantage to everyone in the surrounding area!

People need to keep more of what they earn and I hope to support small businesses through reduction of unnecessary regulations, paperwork and taxes. I will look for programs that give incentives to work and provide education for jobs in new and expanding technologies.

New jobs, businesses moving to the area, and expansion of current businesses all depend on having education and training for the workforce.”

Goodlin: I believe infrastructure is an important role of government as it is vital to economic growth. In addition to funding parts of infrastructure, I believe we should be looking at how to make highway construction and upkeep more cost efficient by reducing waste. I also believe government can encourage economic development by creating a tax structure that incentivizes companies to want to locate to Arkansas.