An Amarillo organization designed to improve care and lower Medicare costs has reported $5 million in savings during its first year.

Amarillo Legacy Medical Accountable Care Organization, or ALMA, will receive almost half of those savings — $2.3 million — as an incentive to remain in the ACO program, which was created as part of the Affordable Care Act, said ALMA CEO Dr. William C. Biggs.

“Here in Amarillo, we’ve demonstrated that patients can get better care and at lower cost, so I think everyone agrees that’s a good idea and we need to make it work,” he said.

ALMA entered into a three-year contract with Medicare last year to form an ACO that coordinates care among its five medical groups and created a health information exchange that allows physicians to share patient records. The group serves 10,876 Medicare patients in the area, with average annual cost of $8,183 per patient.

The Affordable Care Act established ACOs as a way to identify gaps in care, community trends and reduce waste and duplication of services, according to the U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services.

About $940 million in government savings through the program were predicted last year, and ACOs have saved $372 million so far, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Under their contracts with Medicare, ACOs receive about 50 percent of their savings that fall above the minimum Medicare savings rate.

Those funds will go toward physician bonuses, the health information exchange, ALMA care managers and back into the organization, he said.

Only a quarter of ACOs have reported savings during their first year, and those that lose money must pay that back to Medicare, Biggs said.

The program can be risky, as start-up costs can be expensive.

ACOs must invest in

infrastructure and other resources, according to health care consulting company Premier Inc. Those costs can make medical groups leery of the programs, and a recent Premier poll showed about a quarter of health care providers surveyed don’t plan to participate in an ACO in the future.

“That’s a very scary thing for a lot of the ACOs out there, particularly the ones that aren’t saving money to begin with,” Biggs said. “They may not stay in the program because of that.”

But ALMA physicians, such as Dr. Ako D. Bradford of Amarillo Medical Specialists, are optimistic about the program. Bradford is new to outpatient care, and he’s seeing what it takes to prevent hospitalizations.

“That’s one of the things the ACO brings to bare,” he said. “It’s not just passing medications or writing diagnoses, but it’s educating patients so they are stronger and so we can reduce hospitalizations and help people live better lives.”

During ALMA’s first year, the organization has found that preventative care reduces illnesses and costs to the system, Biggs said.

The health records exchange also is leading to fewer duplicated services and better error prevention, ALMA members said. That process results in better collaboration between health care providers, who can review their patients’ test results from other doctors and better gauge the next step for care.

“The patient feels better, because they know that as physicians, we’re all trying to sing from the same sheet of music,” Bradford said. “As physicians, we feel better, because we know that we can trust our colleagues to order certain things, and if the test is there, the lab result is there, we know we can trust it, and we don’t have to do it a second or third time.”

And lowering the amount of lab work saves money.

“The waste that has been reduced has been an impactful situation for us, so our patients don’t have to get stuck for the same blood test,” said Michael Smith, vice president of operations at Family Medicine Center. “They can have one test and multiple physicians have access to that to see what the results are.”