LANSING, MI — At least 11 employees in Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder’s executive office are running for precinct delegate posts in Tuesday’s Republican primary and, if elected, could be in position to help Lt. Gov. Brian Calley keep his spot on the general election ticket.

Snyder wants to retain Calley as his running mate for the general election, but Michigan Republican Party rules will allow delegates to pick the nominee at an August 23rd convention.

Tea party leader Wes Nakagiri is challenging Calley for the spot.

Snyder senior adviser Dick Posthumus of Alto, the Republican nominee for governor in 2002, and “transformation manager” Rich Baird of Bath are among executive office employees running for precinct delegate positions, according to county clerk candidate lists reviewed by MLive.com.

Senior strategy advisor Dennis Schornack of Williamston, director of administrative services Marsha Quebbeman of Lansing and Calley chief of staff Nathaniel Forstner of Lansing are also listed as precinct delegate candidates.

Snyder administration spokesperson Sara Wurfel declined to respond Monday when asked if staff was encouraged to run for the posts (update: she later said there was no directive), instead deferring questions to the governor's re-election campaign team.

“If people want to be a part of the political process on their personal time and work to better the state of Michigan, more power to them,” said campaign spokesperson Emily Benavides.

There’s certainly nothing stopping Snyder staffers from running for precinct delegate posts, but the large number is surprising, according to Bill Ballenger of Inside Michigan Politics, who was especially interested to hear that a big name like Posthumus would run in such a small race.

“That has got to be unique,” Ballenger said, noting that various Republican groups have been recruiting precinct delegates for months in what he called the latest front in Michigan's “tea party versus establishment” battle.

More than a thousand precinct delegate candidates will appear on ballots across the state Tuesday, and the general public tends to pay very little attention to the races. But Republicans have been unusually focused on the hyper-local posts ahead of this year’s statewide convention, where delegates will pick Snyder’s running mate.

The Calley campaign claims it has put together the “largest precinct delegate recruitment project in Michigan history,” and groups such as the DeVos-backed Michigan Freedom Fund and the Michigan Advocacy Trust have also been recruiting and endorsing potential delegates.

“This is all going on below the radar and behind the scenes,” Ballenger said. “Anybody active in Republican Party politics knows about this, and they know how critical it is, but the media has largely missed it.”

Other executive office employees listed as precinct delegate candidates include Snyder assistant director of scheduling Melanie Ellison, deputy press secretary Dave Murray, social media director Mike Brownfield, deputy legal counsel Dave Murley, constituent relations representative Ryan Studley and deputy director of legislative affairs Sally Durfee.

Gideon D’Assandro of Grandville, who works for Snyder’s re-election campaign rather than his office, is listed as a precinct delegate candidate in Kent County.

Local delegates elected Tuesday will be eligible for county or district conventions, where delegates to the statewide convention will be picked. The same pool will be eligible for conventions held the next two years and, as a result, may also decide the re-election of embattled Republican National Committeeman Dave Agema.

“The short game is making sure that Calley is re-nominated, but then there’s the long game,” said Ballenger. “What about next year? What about other elections for national committeeman or woman? August 5 is going to be absolutely instrumental in who gets sent to any state convention between now and August 2016.”

Tea party activists did not field a candidate to challenge Snyder in Tuesday’s Republican primary, but many have been frustrated by the administration’s push to expand Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act and to allow adoption of Common Core education standards, among other things.

“Grassroots” leaders are hoping to send a message to the administration — and shift the ticket right — by knocking off Calley, who was known as a strong conservative during his time in the state Legislature but has backed several Snyder initiatives.

Nakagiri and other tea party leaders have been recruiting precinct delegates of their own, although the effort appears to be much less organized.

Several leading figures in the movement, including current delegates Joan Fabiano of Holt and Isabelle Terry of Rockford, are up for election on Tuesday. Dave Agema’s wife, Barbara, is listed as a precinct delegate out of Grandville.

Clinton County Republican Party Chairman Steve Willis accused those “within and on the periphery” of the Michigan GOP of working to “stack the deck” for a Calley nomination. He noted there were competitive delegate primaries in six of 33 local precincts this year even though candidates traditionally run unopposed.

A recent mailer sent out by the Michigan Advocacy Trust, a “527” political group organized by longtime Lansing insider Richard McLellan, endorsed six “freedom fighting conservatives” running for precinct delegate in Clinton County.

Willis, who described himself as a “true conservative" in a lengthy blog post last week, said he had never heard of the candidates until they filed and suggested the mailer language was intentionally misleading.

“Why they would do this perplexes me, because I think Calley would have won anyway,” Willis said. “But it’s more of an embarrassment to see the manipulation they’re going through to make sure he wins.”

The Michigan Republican Party does not try to impact the outcome of convention elections, according to spokesperson Darren Littell, who is personally running for a precinct delegate post out of Lansing, which he does not see as a conflict of interest.

“Our role is just managing and running the convention in a non-biased manner, which is what we will do,” Littell said.

There are several other big names in Republican politics listed as precinct delegate candidates this year, including U.S. Senate hopeful Terri Lynn Land of Grandville, Betsy DeVos of Ada, Greg McNeilly of Grand Rapids and Ron Weiser of Ann Arbor.

Michigan residents who vote in the Democratic primary on Tuesday will also see local precinct delegate candidates on the ballot, but there’s little convention drama expected on that side of the aisle this year.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.