Metro-North is on the verge of hiring a company to provide at-home sleep apnea tests for some of its 410 train engineers.

As a new precaution in 2015, the railroad plans to have its health services staff along with New Jersey-based Persante Health Care Inc. oversee testing to detect signs of serious sleep disorders.

The National Transportation Safety Board has concluded apnea was largely to blame for a deadly wreck in the Bronx last December, when engineer William Rockefeller Jr. evidently nodded off at the throttle and ran his train off the tracks at 82 mph.

Metro-North historically has done medical evaluations of engineers, but apnea — a sleep disorder that in some cases can lead to around-the-clock fatigue — wasn't part of the testing. The NTSB this fall recommended that railroads screen engineers for apnea to prevent the risk of falling asleep at the controls.

"Today Metro-North is taking another big step in our pursuit of best safety practices," Metro-North President Joseph Giulietti said in a statement. "This pilot will go a long way to ensuring safety of our customers as well as improving the overall health of our employees."

An overnight sleep study at a medical center can cost thousands of dollars; in recent years at-home tests have become increasing popular with both patients and insurance companies. Aetna has estimated that at-home testing costs a third to a tenth as much as an in-lab exam.

The board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, parent of Metro-North, is scheduled to vote Wednesday on a proposed contract with Persante that the railroad said is worth up to $200,000.

Metro-North created the testing policy in conjunction with the Long Island Rail Road, its sister operation, and the MTA's subway division.

The plan is to have the railroad's health services staff do an initial apnea screening of 410 current engineers and 20 who are in training. Based on the results, some will be referred to Persante for more extensive apnea testing.

Persante will provide equipment and training for engineers to do their own at-home apnea tests, which typically involve far fewer sensors — and no staffing — compared with overnight tests at medical centers. The engineers will send the devices back to the company, which will analyze the results.

"If needed, employees will be referred to a sleep specialist for additional testing and/or treatment," the railroad said in a statement.

Rules about apnea screening vary widely in the transportation industry, but the risks have been known for years. In 2008, two pilots with Go! fell asleep during a flight and overshot the destination airport by 30 miles before waking up. The NTSB concluded that one, Scott Oltman, had undetected sleep apnea.