AURORA — As director of racing Bill Powers sat in the racing office last week, two weeks before the opening of Arapahoe Park’s 2015 meeting, about 500 horses already were in the stable area around him.

That was about half the total expected for the 39 days of racing in thoroughbred, quarter horse and Arabian events, running May 22 to Aug. 16. A total of 38 stakes races in the three categories are scheduled to be contested over the 39 days, including the $100,000 Arapahoe Park Classic for thoroughbreds Aug. 16.

So despite the resounding November defeat of a ballot measure, Amendment 68, that essentially would have turned the facility into a full-scale casino with racing as a sidelight, it is business and racing as usual for 2015 at Arapahoe Park. And the Colorado horse racing community is optimistic enough to take the stand that it’s not naive to add “… and beyond.”

“From a horseman’s perspective and our perspective and management’s perspective, we’re doing great,” Powers said. “We’re certainly self-sufficient. We more than make enough money to exist.”

The track’s owner, Twin River Worldwide Holdings Inc., is based in Rhode Island and operates a casino there, as often noted in the anti-Amendment 68 television ads that countered those arguing for passage.

Arapahoe Park’s live race meeting is required by the state as a trade-off for allowing the company to conduct satellite wagering on races and other tracks at various outlets, its own or licensed. In recent years, the sometimes tense relationship between the Colorado horsemen and the track has evolved into an “in it together” co-existence. Bolstered by casino-type wagering, New Mexico tracks offer higher purses, but Arapahoe Park has found a niche, especially for Colorado-bred horses with bonus money going to breeders.

“I’ve been here since 1995, and there have been three or four times we’ve tried to pass something to get alternative gaming of some kind here,” Powers said. “It’s never passed before, so from a horseman’s perspective, it’s almost like crying wolf. We have tried before and probably thought we were going to get something passed and never did, and we kept right on running.

“We’ve always tried to assure the horsemen every time we’ve put forth some legislation or whatever, ‘Hey, we’re going to keep going. We’re just trying to get better, and we wouldn’t be doing our due diligence if we weren’t.’ There’s no doubt that alternative gaming has been the answer for a lot of places to be successful. … So, no, I haven’t gotten a lot of, ‘Aw, you’re not going to run now.’ I get a little of that every year. There are certain people who are doomsday people. But they’re not people in the know. I’m the one that sends out the stall apps, I’m the one going over the horses applying, and it should be as good a year as we’ve had lately.”

Shannon Rushton of Holly is the son of one of the state’s top owner-trainers, Temple Rushton, and was at the track last week in his role as executive director of the Colorado Horse Racing Association, along with the Colorado Thoroughbred Breeders Association the major voice of the state’s horse racing community.

Rushton said of the defeat of Amendment 68: “When they didn’t get that, there was some concern out there that maybe they’re not in it for the long haul. But the folks from Rhode Island had assured us that they’re in to stay and they want to be a viable partner in the community out here. They’ve proven to us that they want to do that. So a lot of those concerns went away.”

The defeat of the measure was expected for weeks.

“Within 24 hours after the vote failed, they had us on the phone telling us that same thing — ‘We’re not going anywhere, we’re going to be right there, the horsemen can have faith in us,’ ” Rushton said.

Rushton said reassurance came from Bruce Seymore, the head of the track’s official parent company, Mile High Racing, plus from representatives of Twin Rivers, in a conference call.

“They also had flown a couple of us back to their casino in Rhode Island and at that point, they told us, ‘Win, lose or draw in this thing, we’re not going away,’ ” Rushton said.

For how long?

“They just said that as long as this continues to be a viable property, they were staying,” Rushton said. “As long as people were going to be interested in the racetrack, they were going to be in the racetrack business.”

Linda Wood owns the 220-acre Menoken Farms in Montrose and is the state’s top dedicated thoroughbred breeder. She doesn’t train or own horses running at the track, but breeds and sells, while still following their racing as the breeder of record.

“I think everybody was looking forward to the amendment passing and when it didn’t, yes, there was a lot of concern,” Wood said. “But they reassured everyone that they were coming back. The question is for how long and what’s going to happen next. I don’t have those answers, but I believe the management is still trying to reassure people that they want to go forward and progress.”

Wood added, “I was pretty worried. I’m still worried. I have pastures full of Colorado-breds. … So if something happens to the racetrack, it’ll be catastrophic for me. There’s always the hope that if it closed, we could come back bigger and better. I’ve always thought it could be a huge success here in Colorado.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei