Last week, my students finished their first major unit in the newly redesigned AP U.S. History course: “A Revolutionary Era?” Despite what people may think the new curriculum excludes, they learned various stories of the American Revolution; discussed core American values like liberty, democracy and equality; and even considered the presidencies of the “greats” like Washington and Jefferson.

Yet they have also been encouraged to critically think about, and evaluate, our past. They analyzed why the Revolution occurred. Was it political ideas? Social conflict? Economic oppression? They assessed whether the Revolution really brought change to American society. And they examined whether the Constitution was a counterrevolutionary document.

Yes, that’s right, counterrevolutionary. The Constitution.

Some people may be uncomfortable asking such questions about our country’s founding. Indeed, it seems such questions are one of the main reasons people are against the new AP U.S. framework. But questions like those above deserve to be asked and carefully considered. Indeed, they are the very questions the historical profession has been asking for nearly a century.

The beauty of the new AP U.S. framework is that it doesn’t provide clear answers to such questions. Rather, it is about the raising of such questions and the ability to answer them with varying pieces of evidence. Multiple answers are valid so long as the evidence can be found to support the claim, which my students have generally found to be true. In examining the Revolution, they found that there was much that did change and much that didn’t in the Constitution, much that concentrated power and much that protected the rights of individuals.

While this may seem relativistic, we must remember that there is no single, “correct” history, despite what some Americans may claim. There are various narratives constantly competing with one another. And, yes, some of those narratives may be less flattering than others.

But exposure to different viewpoints is important as it allows students to critically examine their own views and the myths of our political culture. It allows them to wade into the gray area that is reality. And, most important, it allows students to think for themselves about critical periods in our history and, by extension, the current state of the union. Where would we be if the founding generation we love to venerate had not been able to ask questions about the nature of monarchy, a tradition that existed far longer than our founding myths? What if they hadn’t been able to conceive of something other than “His Majesty”?

Peter Abelard, a Medieval French theologian, said that the key to wisdom was constant and frequent questioning. It is true that some students may walk away from the new AP U.S. history course with a negative view of American history. But that is the risk we must take as teachers, parents and a society if we want a wise public that can think for itself and solve the problems of the 21st century.

Kenneth M. Donovan teaches AP U.S. History and AP U.S. Government at Huntington High School in New York.