One by one, Avalanche players dripping with sweat entered their locker room Saturday and immediately looked at the television or asked someone, “Who won?”

Cody McLeod, a Canadian, was disappointed, along with the majority of the Avalanche players who were born in a province. For Americans Zach Redmond and Nate Guenin, among others, it was Christmas all over. Gabe Landeskog, a Swede, and Russian Mikhail Grigorenko felt little emotion but were similarly as interested.

They all watched parts of the World Junior Championship showdown between the United States and Canada on television before their practice began. The under-20 Americans, as the players learned, scored two late goals to win 4-2 in Helsinki in what would become hockey’s story of the day.

The average U.S. audience, however, still doesn’t get it. To them, the annual WJC is too junior to be associated with anything big. They don’t realize that virtually every WJC player will become a bona fide or borderline NHL player and the WJC is the best international hockey tournament outside the Olympics.

Even the annual World Championship — open to all ages — doesn’t compare because it’s conducted during the NHL playoffs and always absent of many of the world’s top players.

All the great ones played in the WJC or dreamed of it — particularly Canadian boys who equate it to the NCAA’s College Football Playoff or basketball’s Final Four. And thus far Canada is king, having won the WJC gold medal 16 times since 1982, including five-year runs from 1993-97 and 2005-09.

The U.S. won’t always be North America’s little brother when it comes to hockey. The Americans got their name in the mix by winning the WJC gold medal in 2004, then twice in a four-year span (2010 and 2013).

This year, three prominent American teenagers — Jack Eichel (Sabres), Dylan Larkin (Red Wings) and Noah Hanifin (Hurricanes) — aren’t playing in the WJC because their NHL team won’t allow it. Only Canada had that problem previously.

Colorado — like Minnesota, Michigan and Massachusetts — has had multiple local WJC story lines since Colorado College defenseman Mark Stuart captained Team USA in 2004, a gold medal-winning club that also featured University of Denver defenseman Matt Carle. Stuart (Jets) and Carle (Lightning) are still in The Show.

This year no CC or DU players are at the WJC, but Coloradans Scott Eansor and Brandon Carlo are playing for Colorado Springs-based USA Hockey in Helsinki. Eansor is a 5-foot-8 forward from Englewood and Carlo is a 6-4 defenseman from Colorado Springs.

Both played triple-A midget hockey for metro Denver’s Colorado Thunderbirds, who compete nationally in hockey’s highest youth level along with the Westminster-based Rocky Mountain RoughRiders, Colorado Springs’ Pikes Peak Minors and the Colorado Rampage of Monument.

Carlo, a two-time WJC participant, was the blue-line partner of University of Denver defenseman Will Butcher last year and has already signed his NHL entry-level contract with the Bruins.

You can’t be a big-time Colorado hockey fan and not recognize the WJC for what it is: big-time hockey.

Mike Chambers: mchambers @denverpost.com or @mikechambers