Responding to complaints from taxpayers and some newly elected school board members, the financial executives of Elgin School District U46 have issued a report claiming the district has saved at least $55 million in recent years through various changes in how U46 does its business.

Titled "2015 Cost Efficiencies," the 34-page report was issued to the board of education last week and was explained to the board by Chief Operating Officer Jeff King and Director of Financial Operations Dale Burnidge. It shows how costs were cut or state aid increased so as to improve the district's bottom line by at least $55 million over the past five years. The tactics ranged from moving some tasks inhouse and other tasks to outside companies, to keeping better records to using the bus fleet more efficiently and changing employee insurance plans.

The proposed 2015-2016 budget that the board will vote on Sept 28 totals about $500 million, or 10 times the amount of the multi-year savings. Board member Jeanette Ward, one of three members who has been critical of spending, asked why if spending has been so efficient that the budget keeps going up a few percentage points every year.

King said one reason is that "we will save in one place so we can invest in some other place in our organization." As an example, he noted the thousands of computers being bought to equip classrooms under a multiyear technology upgrade plan that was adopted by the school board a few months ago.

But even there, the report says, the district cut the estimated cost of its purchases $440,000 by buying HP Stream laptops instead of bigger conventional laptops and by buying iPad Air tablets instead of iPad Air2s. Administrators actually decided on the latter change based on a suggestion by school board members such as Ward.

King and Burnidge say the savings include:

While overall inflation has totaled 15.1 percent over seven years, King and Burnidge said, U46 spending on supplies has gone up just 11.8 percent and on services by just 8.5 percent. That has saved the district $2.9 million, the report said.

By training special-education staffers to make more detailed reports about the services they are providing to specific students, income from the state's Medicaid reimbursements has almost doubled, from $1.64 million two years ago to $3.06 million last fiscal year.

School bus mileage and fuel consumption has dropped because of more efficient bus routes. An estimated $500,00 a year also is being saved by doing some bus maintenance in-house that the district used to hire an outside company to do.

Food service spending dropped almost $1.5 million from May 2014 to May 2015 because of more efficient purchasing, controlling employee hours and a change in employee health insurance.

By rearranging how working-cash funds are deposited, interest on them has gone up by $448,000 a year.

$8,500 per year each was saved by decreasing the number of mobile classrooms in use from 95 to 36 in recent years.

Total salaries for administrators and support personnel have increased an average of just 1 percent over the last seven years because of eliminating some posts and limiting pay raises, the report says.

Most professional development sessions for teachers have been moved to after-school times to lower the need to hire substitute teachers. The need for subs also will be reduced this year because the state will require fewer testing sessions. Projected savings: $750,000.

The employee health insurance offerings are decided not by union contracts but by a health care committee composed of employees and administrators. In the past five years, the report says, U46's costs have gone up an average of 2.52 percent a year while nationwide health insurance costs have gone up an average 8.26 percent. Over the next two years, King said, that will be changed further as a preferred provider organization (PPO) option is phased out and employees are encouraged to enroll in a "healthy" option by meeting certain health standards. King said that if the PPO is not phased out, it might be considered a "Cadillac plan" under the Affordable Care Act, and that would subject the district to stiff federal penalties.

The district saved $879,000 in just a year by eliminating its print shop and hiring Office Depot to do printing.

The district has received $216,000 over the past four school years by reselling recyclable materials, though that is expected to drop this school year to $22,000.

The district negotiated prices of supplies from sellers that King and Burnidge estimate yielded $8.1 million in net savings.

By switching the payroll data-processing system, licensing fees dropped from $383,000 four years ago to $69,000 last fiscal year.

The district also saved $925,000 by buying "virtual" computer servers that each can do the work of 15 regular servers.

By replacing or rebuilding things — capital projects that themselves cost $36 million — King estimates the district saved $5.4 million in repair costs and down time over three years.

King expects U46 to get $86,000 this year from ComEd as a reward for agreeing to let power deliveries to the high schools be reduced in times of extreme power demand — which most often would happen during the summer break as air conditioning use is at its peak. King said he expects middle schools to be added to this program next year, increasing the reward from ComEd by another $250,000 a year. An effort to cut electricity consumption in each school also has cut power bills by $75,000 a year, which King said is like getting two free months of electricity for two elementary schools.

dgathman@tribpub.com