The Rev. Greg Tyus was appointed Monday night to fill the first two years of the term vacated by Dr. Mark McClure, who resigned from the school board before being sowrn in.

By Rick McCrabb

Staff Writer

Since the Rev. Gregory Tyus already was a member of the Middletown Board of Education, and he ran in the November election, his appointment “made the most sense,” said the board’s president.

In November, Tyus was unseated on the board by Dr. Mark McClure, but soon after his victory McClure announced he was stepping down, even before he was sworn in, because of his work obligations.

So on Monday night, Tyus was appointed to McClure’s position. He will serve a two-year term, and if he wants, he’ll run for another two years in November 2015.

Marcia Andrew, board president, said Tyus’ appointment was the best for the district because the board knew he was “passionate and wanted to help the schools improve.”

Tyus said he had “no problem with defeat,” but after McClure resigned, and no one else stepped forward, he decided to retain his seat. He felt “compelled” to continue his service to the district, he said.

In the letter McClure sent to the school board and the Butler County Board of Elections, he said after meeting with Superintendent Sam Ison and Treasurer Kelley Thorpe to discuss the needs for the next couple years, he realized the impact the Affordable Care Act will have on his medical practice.

He wrote that the increased number of patients and the additional documentation required by Medicare will “greatly limit” his time to perform the duties of an “effective board member.”

Kindergarten deadline may change

The district is considering changing its deadline for those students entering kindergarten. The deadline may move forward two months, from Sept. 30 to Aug. 1, said Elizabeth Lolli, senior director of curriculum and instruction. The board heard the first reading Monday night.

Lolli said the move hopefully will make sure students are better prepared and more mature before they enter kindergarten.

She said kindergartners today face “very, very strong academics.” She said kindergarten students must possess fine motor skills, physical endurance and be able to read in order to be successful.

She said there are about 500 kindergartners in the district and 92 of them were born between Aug. 1 to Sept. 30. If that holds true next school year, there would be about 20 percent fewer kindergartners in class.

Even if the board approves the move at its next meeting, Lolli said parents can have their children take an early entrance exam and if they qualify, they will be allowed to enter school early.