Aug. 10--53 calls

Officers responded to the 400 block of Macon Avenue for a fight that had just occurred. Glenn Peterson, 23, was arrested for assault in the second degree and disorderly conduct. He was transported to the Fremont County Jail.

A party reported a fight in the 300 block of Main Street. Officers arrived on scene to discover that everything was OK.

Officers were contacted by a female party in the 300 block of Main Street who reported two males on the top of a building exposing themselves to women. Donald Darrah, 28, was issued a summons for indecent exposure. Zack Whitney, 29, was issued a summons for accessory to a crime and disorderly conduct.

Officers assisted Fremont County Sheriff's Office with a disorderly individual at Fourth and Main.

A concerned citizen reported a male party walking in a pasture in the 600 block of 19th Street.

Officers checked on a female party in the 200 block of Justice Center Road who was reportedly making suicidal comments.

A female party reported that her vehicle was damaged while it was parked in the 1500 block of U.S. 50. Information was taken for a report.

A female party in the 800 block of Della Vista Lane reported an ongoing issue she has been having with someone harassing her.

Officers spoke to a female party in the 900 block of Clover in reference to a possible trespass issue.

Advertisement

Report was taken on a two-vehicle non injury traffic accident in the area of U.S. 50 and Berry Parkway.

A female party in the 600 block of Forest Avenue requested to speak to an officer about a possible sex assault. Crime was unfounded.

A male party reported the float system in the irrigation ditch had been damaged in the 1000 block of Woodlawn Avenue.

Officer took a report of a theft from the 3100 block of U.S. 50. Investigation is underway.

Officers responded back to the 3100 block of U.S. 50 for an intoxicated male. Party was asked to leave the store.

Officers spoke to some parties in the 200 block of Griffin in reference to a trespass issue.

A resident in the 600 block of Raintree reported that someone had been throwing golf balls at his residence. Information was gathered for a report.

Officers were notified of a shoplifter in the 3100 block of U.S. 50.

Officers took a report of a trespasser in the 700 block of North 15th. Party was warned not to return to the property.

While on routine patrol, an officer was contacted by a female party in the 500 block of Macon Avenue who was reporting that her cell phone had been stolen. Information was taken for a report.

A couple in the 900 block of Ussie reported that they were being harassed. The suspect was warned to stop contacting the victims.

A female in the 400 block of Macon Avenue reported a possible disturbance that had occurred in the area. Information was gathered for a report.

A party in the 700 block of Yale reported a trespass and assault. Officers spoke to both partied involved and information was taken for a report.

Officers responded to an address in the 1300 block of College after two 911 hang ups were received. Everything appeared to be OK.

Aug. 11-- 80 calls

Officers responded to the 400 block of Hazel on a report of suspicious activity. Amber Carter, 20, was issued a summons for underage consumption of alcohol and false reporting to authorities.

Officers spoke to a male party in the 1300 block of Phay in reference to harassment.

While in the 900 block of Clover, an officer found a set of car keys that had been lost.

Male party in the 1000 block of Madison reported fraud.

Officers spoke to an employee in the 1100 block of Ohio who was reporting that her place of employment had been receiving harassing phone calls. Information was gathered for a report.

Male party in the 800 block of Heather Place reported a harassment issue he had been having with a neighbor.

Officers took a report of a stolen vehicle in the 1400 block of Harrison.

Officers responded to the 500 block of Greenwood on a report of a possible disturbance.

Female party in the 1300 block of Phay reported that she was receiving harassing phone calls.

Female party reported her tablet was stolen in the 400 block of Douglas.

Officers responded to the area of Eighth and Harrison for a two-vehicle accident. No injuries were reported.

Female party reported she was being harassed in the 3100 block of U.S. 50.

Officers were dispatched to the 700 block of Four Mile Parkway for a runaway. Runaway was contacted and returned to the facility.

Male party in the 1000 block of Woodlawn reported theft of guns.

Officers spoke to several parties in the 600 block of Family Center Drive in reference to harassment.

Officers took a report of a car vs deer accident in the area of U.S. 50 and Raynolds.

Aug. 12--60 calls

While on routine patrol, officer discovered a vehicle that had hit the median and was left unoccupied in the 800 block of Main Street. Officers later responded to the 600 block of Main to speak to the owner of the vehicle who called in to report the vehicle was not in the place that he had parked it. Owner was reunited with his vehicle.

A resident in the 1400 block of Main reported a female party outside his residence banging on the windows, trying to get in. Officers contacted the female party and she was asked to leave.

Officers responded to the 500 block of Field on a report of a hit-and-run accident. Run vehicle was located and Aaron Rozell, 25, of Cañon City, was arrested for DUI, reckless driving, hit and run and misuse of wireless telephone. He was transported to the Fremont County Detention Center and held on $1,000 bond.

Employee in the 300 block of U.S. 50 reported a non-injury traffic accident. Information was taken for a report.

A female party in the 100 block of Justice Center Road reported a theft. Information was taken for a report.

Officers arrested Joshua Arguello, 30, on an outstanding warrant. He was taken to the Fremont County Jail.

Officers spoke to a female party in the 600 block of Barrett in reference to a possible violation of a protection order.

Officers took a report of a two-vehicle accident in the 900 block of U.S. 50. No injuries were reported.

Officers were dispatched to the 1700 block of Fremont Drive on a report of someone huffing. Janet Armenta, 50, of Cañon City, was issued a summons for abusing toxic vapors.

Female party reported her medications were stolen yesterday in the 3100 block of U.S. 50. Information was taken for a report.

A resident in the 300 block of North 15th thought she heard someone walking around in her basement. Officers checked the house and the basement; everything was OK.

Female party reported items were stolen out of her vehicle while it was parked in the 1700 block of Fremont Drive. Information was taken for a report.

Officers spoke to a party in the 1400 block of Harrison who was reporting elder abuse. Information was gathered for a report.

A resident in the 900 block of Madison reported theft of prescription medication. Report was taken.

Officers checked the welfare of a female party in the 200 block of Justice Center Road after receiving a call from a concerned friend.

Officers responded to the 3100 block of U.S. 50 for a child that was left unattended. Child was reunited with his mother.

Female party in the 1100 block of Rudd spoke to an officer in reference to a trespass issue. Crime was unfounded.