Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, innovation, Robert Parker, taste, Wine, Innovation News, Life News

About two decades ago, a bunch of economists at Princeton formed a wine-tasting club. The tastings would be blind. Nobody would know what was in the glasses until the end, so the fancy labels wouldn’t influence their judgment.

The Princetonians liked red wines best, especially those from the French region of Bordeaux, but because the club members were all academics what they really liked was data. They wanted to see if they could articulate some kind of reproducible results that would separate the good wines from the bad. So one of the founders, Richard Quandt, wrote a computer program that would run the appropriate statistical tests on their ratings — agreement among tasters, correlations, and so on.

Quandt is retired now, with several microeconomics textbooks on his CV (as well as a book on racetrack betting and another on how dogs think). He curses a lot, in a soft Russian accent. “Every time we had a wine tasting we’d run the program, have some comments, and post it on the website,” Quandt says. “If anybody wants to test any hypothesis about how wines are ranked, we are now up to 1,030 wines, and every month we add eight more.” The influence of the software and the group — both dubbed Liquid Assets — grew. They formalized their research as the American Association of Wine Economics, and started to publish a journal. The entire endeavor has turned into a streamlined locomotive of skepticism about the vast, lucrative world of wine tasting and reviews. It’s not a train you want to get in the way of.

Quandt wants to connect preference to the qualities of the wine, to its indisputable chemistry. If you know what’s in a wine, you ought to know whether it’s good or bad — objectively. But you can’t. No one knows how to do it. Nobody can even identify, with certainty, all the ingredients, all the molecules, in a glass of wine (or beer or gin or whatever). Nobody understands, exactly, why booze tastes the way it does, and why people like it. And nobody understands, exactly, how human beings actually taste things.

The difference between Quandt’s group and professional wine reviewers, then, is that the pros attempt to disguise their subjectivity with — well, put it this way: Quandt’s paper on the subject for the Journal of Wine Economics is called “On Wine Bullshit”:

Since there are many wine writers, and there is a substantial overlap in the wines they write about (particularly Bordeaux wines), it is important that there be substantial agreement among them. And secondly, what they write must actually convey information; that is to say, it must be free of bullshit. Regrettably, wine evaluations fail on both counts.

Quandt thinks that pros like Robert Parker — or your friend who always makes a big show over the wine list at a restaurant — are essentially making it all up. Or, like some storefront psychics, possibly they think they know what they’re talking about, when in actuality they’ve merely intuited their way into a con.

In defense of wine reviewers — and reviewers of any booze — it’s really, really hard to talk about how something smells or tastes. Discussions of flavor, that combination of taste and aroma, are subject to the frustrating limitations of analogy. Benzaldehyde tastes like bitter almond and cherry. Cherry and bitter almond taste like themselves. Or benzaldehyde. That’s excruciatingly non-helpful if you’ve never tasted either of those things or, more likely, if my perception of cherries isn’t like yours. Because how could it be? Our noses are different. Our brains are different. Your cherry need not be my cherry.

So how do we talk about booze? How do we connect the subjective perception of what we are drinking with the objective knowledge of what’s in it and how it’s made? Perhaps not surprisingly, booze researchers are getting close to solving this problem. Research into the taste of alcohol promises to explain the taste of . . . well, everything, really. Booze, more than any other foodstuff, connects the quantifiable real world to the messy version of it we all create in our own brains.

Talking about taste and smell is not like talking about, say, colors. For these senses, the hard philosophical and scientific work is trying to find words that we recognize in common and can share with each other, so that we all know what we’re talking about.

The first step is to acknowledge just how limited our senses actually are. A study titled, simply, “The Color of Odors,” will destroy your faith in anybody’s ability to taste anything. Here’s how it worked: three French researchers started with two wines from Bordeaux, a white made with Sémillon and Sauvignon grapes and a red made with Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot.

The researchers first had a group of subjects taste both the white wine and the red, under white light in clear glasses, and write down all the words they could think of to describe each one. In this test it didn’t matter whether the tasters perceived the same things. Inter-rater reliability wasn’t a factor here — the researchers didn’t care if tasters agreed with each other about the wine color and taste, just that each taster would consistently call one “red” and one “white.”

Then the researchers took an odorless, tasteless extract of the grape-skin pigment anthocyanin and dripped it into the white wine, turning it red. And they called the tasters back for a second go-around, asking them to compare the white wine and the colored wine — the same wine, in other words, with red food coloring. The result was a taste-test catastrophe. Almost to a person, the tasters chose to use the same words for the white wine from the initial tasting on the white wine in the second. And they used the same words for the red wine on the red-colored white wine. They simply could not tell the difference.

Color alone — not aroma, not flavor — told them what to expect, and that’s exactly what they tasted.

But what about experts? At nice restaurants, a professional walks you through a wine list, telling you what each one tastes like and which ones might go best with what dish. Surely these sommeliers must have a more highly developed palate. The four-level training to be a master sommelier, according to the Court of Master Sommeliers, culminates in a grueling, three-part final exam including a twenty-five-minute practical test in which the applicant must identify six wines correctly — grape variety, country, district, and vintage. Thousands of people take and pass the first two levels of the testing every year, but only a couple hundred try the fourth level — the one with the practical test — and only eight or ten pass. Today there are just over 200 of these “master sommeliers” in the world.