Author and commentator Ann Coulter has accused Republican presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz of being “a sleazy, Rovian liar” for remarks he made about his rival Donald Trump.

During an interview on The Kelly File on Wednesday evening, Cruz said that Trump “is calling for the same socialized medicine as Bernie Sanders.”

“Both of them are saying expand Obamacare to put the federal government in charge of every one of our health care, which will eventually lead to rationing of care,” Cruz said.

Coulter, who has been a vocal supporter of Trump, took to social media in an effort to refute Cruz’s remarks.

This is shocking. Cruz is a sleazy, Rovian liar. You can look up the debates. Trump never said ANYTHING like this – https://t.co/DWVxHTdMeo — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) February 11, 2016

Trump insults opponents; he doesn't lie about them. Cruz is a despicable liar – see video: https://t.co/DWVxHTdMeo — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) February 11, 2016

See my Facebook page for transcript of what Trump actually said about healthcare, compared to Cruz's outright lies on Coyote News last night — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) February 11, 2016

Ted Cruz lies like a Clinton — see my Facebook page for details. — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) February 11, 2016

FULL transcripts of Cruz's lies & Trump's actual words on my webpage. I wanted to like Cruz, but this is despicable. https://t.co/kwGC1z9VvV — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) February 11, 2016

In an extensive Facebook rant, Coulter highlighted excerpts from debate transcripts in which Trump denied support for socialized medicine.

In both instances she referenced, Trump denied support for Obamacare, arguing that he would repeal it and replace it with “something so much better.”

“HERE’S CRUZ,” she concluded. “LYING UP A STORM!”

TED CRUZ, SLEAZY LIAR: Compare Cruz's claims on Fox News (Coyote News) last night – to what Trump actually said about… Posted by Ann Coulter on Thursday, February 11, 2016

In the very excerpts that Coulter highlighted, however, Trump said that “As far as single payer, it works in Canada. It works incredibly well in Scotland. It could have worked in a different age, which is the age you’re talking about here.”

In the second excerpt highlighted by Coulter from the most recent GOP debate, Trump said, “We’re going to take out the artificial boundaries, the artificial lines. We’re going to get a plan where people compete, free enterprise. They compete. So much better.”

He went on to say that:

“In addition to that, you have the health care savings plans, which are excellent. What I do say is, there will be a certain number of people that will be on the street dying and as a Republican, I don’t want that to happen. We’re going to take care of people that are dying on the street because there will be a group of people that are not going to be able to even think in terms of private or anything else and we’re going to take care of those people and I think everybody on this stage would have to agree you’re not going to let people die, sitting in the middle of a street in any city in this country.”

Asked about universal health care during an interview with 60 Minutes in September, Trump said, “I am going to take care of everybody. I don’t care if it costs me votes or not.

“Everybody’s going to be taken care of much better than they’re taken care of now,” Trump said.

“The uninsured person is going to be taken care of how?” Scott Pelley asked in response.

“They’re going to be taken care of,” Trump said. “I would make a deal with existing hospitals to take care of people. And, you know what, if this is probably-”

“Make a deal? Who pays for it?” Pelley pressed.

“The government’s gonna pay for it,” Trump replied. “But we’re going to save so much money on the other side. But for the most it’s going to be a private plan and people are going to be able to go out and negotiate great plans with lots of different competition with lots of competitors with great companies and they can have their doctors, they can have plans, they can have everything.”