Topics: Abortion, abortion coverage, abortion restrictions, Affordable Care Act, antiabortion lawmakers, antiabortion legislation, Conservatives, GOP, insurance coverage, larry taylor, Republicans, Texas, Social News, News, Politics News

What a world it would be, if it were even a little bit surprising that the Texas Senate just approved a measure to prohibit health insurance companies from covering abortion in all cases except for medical emergencies.

Alas, that is not the world we live in, and thus I have unsurprising news: On Tuesday, the Texas Senate gave its preliminary approval for SB 575, a bill to eliminate insurance coverage for “elective” abortions.

The measure, proposed by Republican State Sen. Larry Taylor, would prevent both private health insurance plans and federal plans offered through the Affordable Care Act marketplace from providing any coverage for abortion save for cases of medical emergency, such as a threat to the pregnant woman’s life or major physical function. SB 575 explicitly excludes psychological and emotional conditions in its medical emergency guidelines, and also prohibits coverage for “a potential future medical condition that may result from a voluntary act of the woman or minor” — such as, perhaps, attempting suicide in lieu of being able to terminate a pregnancy.

“This is not a ban on elective abortions,” Taylor explained in a committee hearing last month. “In fact, this bill is all about choice.”

According to the Texas Tribune, the senator added that the legislation is intended to give Texans a “choice” as to whether or not they will pay for other people’s abortions via the health plans they buy. The bill doesn’t completely limit all insurance coverage for “elective” abortions, and would allow women who do seek to terminate their pregnancies — including victims of rape or incest — to purchase supplemental insurance plans to cover the procedure.

As State Sen. Kirk Watson (D) pointed out in a challenge to Taylor’s bill, the cost of additional insurance could easily make abortion inaccessible for women who face devastating fetal anomalies or, as previously mentioned, became pregnant as the result of rape or incest. (Of course, Taylor’s Texas GOP colleague Matt Schaefer thinks women who face fetal anomalies should have to carry their non-viable pregnancies and deceased fetuses to term, a view he has worked to codify into law this session. So, at least that part is taken care of!)

Watson offered several hypothetical scenarios in which women might find themselves unable to access abortion care as a result of SB 575, which Taylor wrote off as “extreme” “worst-case scenarios.” Watson’s response aptly summarizes some of the most glaring issues with the bill (via Texas Tribune):