One local ministry group wants families to know they're welcome on our beaches. Twelve area churches have teamed up to give visitors a small token of appreciation.

Catie Byrd knew she wanted to find a way to spread God's love throughout her community, but growing up she often felt too shy to voice her beliefs.

"I've always kind of been scared to talk to people just cause I'm kind of an introvert, but I've realized that doing projects like this and giving people small gifts is a way to show people God's love," said Manna Bag Outreach Founder, Catie Byrd.

Three years ago Byrd founded the Manna Bag Outreach Program.

The Manna Bag Outreach started as a way to make visiting families feel welcome in our community. Each bag contains different items like a bible, a water bottle, and a chapstick.

"Everything in this bag is for a family and this is a way to show people that not all of Panama City Beach is crazy and not all the people here want the people to be crazy down here. We want to show people God's love and that they're worthy of God's love down here," said Byrd.

Panama City Beach's reputation has been tarnished by the violence and crime we saw over spring break. But this ministry group is determined to show families Panama City Beach has much more to offer.

"We are a family destination and this is the greatest way to prove it. I mean we're coming out here we're not asking for donations, we're not asking people to give us money or anything we're just giving people water and bibles and little different types of things that I'm sure they probably love," said volunteer, Justin Rivera.

The outreach project has grown a lot of the past three years. Last year they handed out 200 bags, and this weekend they will hand out more than 500.

"It's a great opportunity to mentor and coach some of the younger kids and it's a way to give back to the community," said volunteer, Greg Simmons.

This year volunteers from 12 churches of different denominations pitched in.

"People are divided by denominations and they think that their traditions define them and the thing is that in common we all have Jesus and this has really been a way to unite the church," said Byrd.

Byrd says it's been difficult for her family to run it on their own and they are hoping a church might take on the project so they could expand the Manna Bag Outreach to several times a year rather than just one weekend.