Canary Wharf, in east London’s Docklands, fiercely rivals the City of London to attract the world’s biggest banks. Bloomberg News

A new bid for Canary Wharf has brought together many of the banks involved in the protracted takeover battle for the financial hub in London over 10 years ago.

Songbird Estates, which owns the majority of Canary Wharf, said in a statement on Thursday that it had been approached by the Qatar Investment Authority and Brookfield Property Partnersout a possible takeover. The approach is at a preliminary stage.

The Qatar fund already owns 28.6% of Songbird. Songbird owns 69% of the Canary Wharf Group, the ultimate owner of the hub. Brookfield already holds a 22% stake in Canary Wharf Group. The hub is home to the regional headquarters of many large banks, including Citigroup, HSBC and Barclays.

The advisory roster has echoes of the last battle for Canary Wharf a decade ago, one of longest and most hotly contested takeover battles in U.K. history.

The sale at the time pit Silvestor U.K. Properties consortium, later renamed Songbird, against a consortium led by Canadian property giant Brascan, advised by Deutsche Bank and Merrill Lynch.

Ultimately, Songbird won.

Alex Midgen, now global co-head of real estate advisory at Rothschild, advised Songbird at the time. He’s now named as an adviser to Songbird on the approach. A second Rothschild banker, Peter Everest, is also on the deal. He is a director focused on real estate and housebuilding M&A, according to his LinkedIn profile.

Morgan Stanley was also an adviser to Songbird on the last battle, which began in 2003 and concluded in 2004 and is now back on the roster. The advisers on the deal for the U.S. bank this time around are Nick White and Ian Hart, according to the deal announcement.

J.P. Morgan Cazenove is the nominated adviser to Songbird, with Bronson Albery, an executive director in the bank’s U.K. real estate investment banking team, named on the deal. Ten years ago Cazenove was joint adviser, alongside Lazard, to Canary Wharf Group’s independent committee.

To comply with the U.K. takeover code, Qatar Investment Authority and Brookfield Property Partners must now make a firm offer or withdraw from making a bid by 5 p.m. on Dec. 4.

Songbird’s board said in a statement today it would consider the approach – raising hopes the deal won’t turn as hostile as the last takeover a decade ago.

Sister title Financial News revisited the takeover in March.

J.P. Morgan and Morgan Stanley declined to comment. Rothschild did not immediately respond to a request for comment.