WASHINGTON, D.C. - Sixteen-year-old video maker Andrew Demeter of Concord Township kept his cell phone camera running when he visited the nation's Capitol a few weeks ago to collect a video-making award from C-SPAN.

Over the past two days, a video he made of House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi's response to his inquiries about National Security Agency data collection went viral on YouTube after it was picked up by conservative websites eager to attack Pelosi.

Approximately 250,000 people have watched the video since Demeter posted it on June 2, along with links to a press release that Demeter wrote and bids for PayPal and Bitcoin contributions.

The video begins with Demeter asking Pelosi why she supports the NSA's "illegal and ubiquitous data collection."

Pelosi replies that she had questions about the program but didn't support a resolution to defund NSA because she "didn't think that was the appropriate resolution."

"You did vote for a bill to continue funding for the NSA though," Demeter continued.

"Yeah, of course," Pelosi responded. "I don't think we should not fund the National Security Agency. They do many, many things."

Pelosi told Demeter she doesn't think the NSA violates Constitutional prohibitions against unreasonable search and seizure and that it performs necessary functions, but should be subjected to scrutiny.

"From 9-11 on, the Bush administration went too far on all of these things," said Pelosi.

Websites including Infowars and Glenn Beck's The Blaze have featured it and Fox News has requested an interview with him.

Demeter - a self-described Libertarian and "youth activist" - said he thought Pelosi displayed hypocrisy by saying she opposed Bush administration surveillance programs but wouldn't vote to defund them now that the Democratic party has "amped it up to a higher level than ever before."

"I think there are more reasonable ways to catch illusory terrorists than ubiquitously collecting the data of Americans and not targeting specific people," Demeter told The Plain Dealer.

The junior at Notre Dame Cathedral Latin High School in Chardon said his group of C-SPAN award winners was originally supposed to meet with House Speaker John Boehner and Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid, and he had hoped to grill Reid about Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy's dispute with the federal government. Instead the group got to meet with Pelosi. Demeter also had a 30-second meeting with Ohio GOP Sen. Rob Portman which he described as "a quick PR picture" that "wasn't all that interesting."

Because the memory in his cell-phone ran out halfway through Demeter's questioning of Pelosi, Demeter sought footage from C-SPAN to complete his piece. Demeter said the network was originally reluctant to provide it because it was only supposed to record without audio during the Pelosi meeting.

Demeter said he has only received about $5 in Bitcoin contributions from viewers of the video and nothing from PayPal. He said he is getting minimal revenue from the ads that YouTube is running with his video, and he does not control which ads run.

This afternoon, an ad from the conservative Club for Growth that criticizes Alaska Democratic Sen. Mark Begich for parroting President Obama's claims about the Affordable Care Act was running with Demeter's video.