On January 8, 2012, former Clinton spokesperson in his putative role as objective moderator of a Republican presidential primary debate fired the first warning shot in what soon became known as the “War on Women.” He asked the candidates if birth control was included in the right to privacy and if states had the right to ban it.

In what was surely a total coincidence (totally, you guys!), just days later the Obama administration would declare the federal contraception mandate for all insurance-providing companies to provide copay-free birth control in their coverage.

The War was on, contraceptives instantly became a legal right (read: entitlement), anyone who opposed forcing companies to pay for them hated women, the term “slut” became both an intolerable slur and a badge of honor, the administration and the courts both carved out religious exemptions that shrill harpies decried as emerging theocracy, and men were suddenly illegitimate politically since only women were justified in voting on health issues.

All of this is, of course, ridiculous. But the issue is now so viscerally charged that it is untouchable in the public discourse. So let’s uncharge it with a hypothetical allegory.

WHAT IF…

As part of a new Healthy America plan, Congress passed a comprehensive nutrition, exercise, and health bill, including a federal mandate for all employers with over 50 employees that requires they have a cafeteria that provides balanced meals to all employees working at least 30 hours per week.

Conservatives and libertarians, of course, objected to the whole plan as a massive abuse of federal authority. They were called anti-food, blamed for malnourished children, and viral videos were spread far and wide of Republican leaders eating, clear evidence of rank hypocrisy. They even suggested people buy their own lunch. The monsters.

As part of the legislative process, certain organizations, including PETA, lobbied to include an exemption for conscientious objections by vegetarian nonprofit employers to including meat in their meals. To fulfill this exemption and maintain comprehensive meal coverage, the FDA mandated that caterers pay for any meat that carnivorous employees wanted to bring into their vegetarian employers’ cafeterias.

Anyone who wanted meat would still receive it free of charge, but vegetarian employers wouldn’t have to pay for it. PETA was smeared as anti-carnivore, and pundits on cable news asked why they were denying their employees access to protein-packed, life-sustaining meat.

Seeing the nonprofit exemption, Chipotle, a nationwide premium Mexican fast food chain, sued the FDA, arguing they shouldn’t have to include four specific meats full of hormones and antibiotics that violated their nutritional beliefs in their employees’ meals. They had no problem providing and paying for many healthy, natural varieties of meat for their employees, but objected to those few artificially-enhanced products.

The federal mandate, of course, required everyone to provide everything, antibiotics and hormones included. Twitter was abuzz with people asking why their employer gets to come between them and their food.

It took two years, but the Supreme Court finally ruled that Chipotle and other privately-owned, for-profit companies could use the same exemption as PETA and other nonprofits, assuming the FDA/caterer workaround would also apply to them.

Chipotle’s employees would still get their hormone-inflated carnitas if they wanted them, but Chipotle wouldn’t have to pay for it. Chipotle was attacked as anti-meat, and people condemned the five vegetarians on the Supreme Court for caring about corporations more than carnivores.

CRAZY, RIGHT?

This is exactly how the Hobby Lobby/birth control debate has gone down. Conservatives and libertarians objected to the federal mandate, not the existence or access to birth control, and are called anti-woman, anti-birth control, including the conservative women who use birth control.

Catholic groups and Hobby Lobby both won the religious exemption from paying for four out of several dozen contraceptives, though they will all still be covered and paid for by someone other than the employees, and frothing leftists scream that they hate women and are denying their employees access to medicine.

It’s George Orwell’s world, we’re just living in it.