Topics: cable tv, hulu, Pajiba, Sitcoms, Sports, Television, Media News, Entertainment News, News

This piece originally appeared on Pajiba

My wife and I got rid of cable a couple weeks ago. I’d kicked the tires on the idea a few times over the years — ever since reading this piece, actually — but the inertia of paying the monthly bill made it hard to take the necessary steps. As recently as last month, I’d done research on what it would cost to switch to a lower package but not give it up altogether. As part of a flurry of cost-cutting measures, though, we eliminated cable TV altogether and kept our Internet service. Comcast sent me a shipping box with a prepaid UPS label, and the cable box was gone.

And nothing has changed. Everything is the same, but better.

I should be clear, cord-cutting might not be for everyone. But for us, right now, it’s amazing. Here’s why:

We don’t watch sports.

At all. My wife and I don’t follow sports, watch live games, or keep up with sporting news. I couldn’t tell you what channel ESPN was in my now-defunct lineup. I don’t remember who won the Super Bowl earlier this year; I don’t even remember who played in it. I know the baseball playoffs are happening right now, and my gut says something happened with the Tigers, but I don’t care enough to look it up because I’m just going to forget it in an hour.

This is probably the biggest barrier for people who want to ditch cable, because even with a digital antenna or a device like Aereo to watch over-the-air games, your selection is still limited by location. (And at this moment, the future of Aereo is uncertain, too.) We’re lucky, though, in that we’re just not that into sports, so giving up the opportunity to watch them wasn’t even a factor.

We already pay for Netflix, Hulu Plus, and Amazon Prime.

Our Netflix plan allows for unlimited streaming, as well as one disc (Blu-ray or DVD) out a time, because there are still loads of movies and shows not available to stream. That covers dozens of series, as well as recent seasons of things like Breaking Bad or Mad Men. We’ve also got Hulu Plus, which has back catalogs of a variety of series as well as new episodes of ongoing series that are still airing, like New Girl and Parks and Recreation. And I’ve been an Amazon Prime member for years, since it was solely a shipping-related perk, so the addition of streaming video made it an even better deal. (At $80 per year, Amazon Prime is also cheaper than either Netflix or Hulu Plus, both of which offer streaming service for $8 per month, or $96 per year.) We already had so many ways to watch TV and movies, whether on our computers or phones or streamed to the TV via my Xbox 360. We weren’t hurting for entertainment options.

We’re already used to time-shifting.

Related to that, we were already so used to watching new TV series a day or two after the latest episode aired that having to wait for those episodes to hit Hulu Plus doesn’t feel like a chore. Even when we watched shows the night they aired, we rarely watched them live: we’d usually allow for a buffer of 15-20 minutes that meant we could skip commercials and rely on the DVR. Bumping New Girl from Tuesday night to Wednesday night doesn’t feel abnormal or inconvenient.

A family member remarked that one of the things that made it easier to cut cable when we did was that Breaking Bad had finished airing a couple days before we pulled the plug. And yes, it was nice to watch Breaking Bad the day it aired, and to be able to publish pieces on each episode the same night. But I didn’t need cable to watch the show. I could just as easily have bought the show via iTunes, downloaded it a day after air, and been fine. My reviews would’ve been a day late, but that’s it. It was the powerful illusion that I needed cable that kept me on the hook.

We don’t watch that many new series, and we’re OK paying for the ones we do watch.

My wife and I both like to keep up with (among others) Parks and Recreation, New Girl, Bob’s Burgers, and Brooklyn Nine-Nine, all of which are available the day after air via Hulu Plus. We’re also big fans of FX’s Justified and The Americans, both of which are available to purchase through iTunes and Amazon. (Currently, the fourth season of Justified is $35 on iTunes, though that’s HD; the SD version is $23.) It’s easy to purchase a season pass for those shows and then have them download after they’ve aired, which we plan to do when they return next year. I could easily see us buying an Apple TV or a Roku to make the TV interaction even simpler. Paying for a season pass is cheaper than footing a cable bill, and the episodes are yours to keep, too. I could buy both season passes at once for $70, which is still less than one month’s cable costs in my old setup.