The simple swipe of a bus card will soon help give parents peace of mind in Denver Public Schools.

Next month, DPS will begin issuing electronic cards to about 26,000 children in an effort to strengthen safety measures for those who take a bus to school.

The system, which is estimated to cost $748,000 over three years, is one of several adopted by districts throughout Colorado that provides data reflecting the times and places children get on and get off buses as well as tracking those buses while in transit.

For parent Griselda Jackson, the new system helps put her at ease each morning when her 7-year-old son boards the bus and every afternoon while she awaits his return from school.

Jackson’s son, Mauricio, attends University Prep in northeast Denver, one of the schools that has been piloting the program for about three months. When Mauricio did not arrive at the bus stop on time one recent afternoon, a school employee was able to calm her fears by assuring her that the bus was running late but that her son had scanned his card and would be home soon.

“As a parent you always worry,” Jackson said. “I went to Denver Public Schools … and we didn’t have any system for the buses. I remember being young and getting off at the wrong bus stop and my mom wouldn’t know.”

Starting in October, district officials will begin training other campuses to implement the monitoring system. Nicole Portee, DPS’s executive director of transportation, said all of the district’s campuses should be using the student tracking system by the end of January.

A key piece of the program that will also be implemented next month gives parents access to the information about their child through a secure website.

“We deal with a lot of obstacles on the road, and time is of the essence to everyone,” Portee said. “For us, our whole premise for doing this is providing parents and schools more accessible information as it relates to students and their whereabouts and safety.”

School districts in Boston, North Carolina and Illinois have implemented some form of tracking system on buses carrying students. In Colorado, districts that include Douglas County, Aurora, Adams 12 and St. Vrain Valley Schools have programs that can track when individual students board and exit school buses.

“The educational responsibility for us starts at that bus stop, and this is a way of knowing who gets on that bus the same way we know who comes to class,” said St. Vrain Superintendent Don Haddad.

DPS received a $98,000 grant from the state’s Regional Air Quality Council to install GPS systems on school buses. The district will pay for the rest of the program, which includes providing badges to students, with money from its general fund.

David Singer, who leads University Prep, said the system has been particularly important for parents in northeast Denver, where one bus can carry students from various elementary, middle and high schools and make several stops.

“The more information parents have about the whereabouts of their kids, the happier they are,” Singer said. “The fact that our parents can really know where their kids are and have peace of mind about that is a real plus.”

Zahira Torres: 303-954-1244, ztorres@denverpost.com or twitter.com/zahiratorresdp