The SEIU remains supportive of the law, but the AFL-CIO has expressed disenchantment. Unions and Obamacare: 5 questions

Key parts of organized labor have a case of buyer’s remorse over Obamacare and they’re letting everyone know about it.

The AFL-CIO at its convention this week passed a resolution calling President Barack Obama’s health law “highly disruptive” to some union insurance plans, “substantially changing the coverage available for millions of covered employees and their families.” The labor federation did back the sweeping goals of Obamacare — covering people and restraining costs —but that wasn’t the part of the message that resonated politically.

Story Continued Below

“It’s encouraging to see those who strongly endorsed the health care law finally recognize its fundamental problems,” the GOP-led House Education and Workforce Committee said in a statement Thursday.

( PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

The SEIU remains very supportive of Obamacare. It even announced this week that it was pitching in for outreach and enrollment efforts across the country. But that was eclipsed by the disenchantment of the AFL-CIO, the biggest labor federation in the country.

Here are five questions about the brewing conflict between labor and Obamacare.

What are “multiemployer” plans and who is in them?

About 20 million people get insurance through multiemployer or Taft-Hartley plans.

Instead of contracting directly with private insurers, these health benefit plans are collectively bargained between unions and multiple employers often in the same industry, like food service or construction.

The government treats the plans like other employer-sponsored insurance, providing the same generous tax breaks on employer and employee contributions.

Often, industries that use these multiemployer plans don’t employ a long-term, full-time workforce. But the plans are portable — workers can often take their insurance from job to job among participating employers. A roofer, for instance, can go from job to job, without any interruption in coverage. With a traditional health plan, he’d change insurance each time he changes jobs — if he even got insurance.

Why do unions feel these plans are threatened?

That’s easy. Smaller employers who now pay into these multiemployer plans may look at the deal their employees can get on the new Obamacare health insurance exchanges and decide they would be better off there. The unions are also worried about rising costs.

“The threat is that employers and in particular small employers are going to say, ‘I basically have low-income employee[s] who would be better off in the exchange than they would be with my contribution to a Taft-Hartley plan, so I’m going to walk away,” said Tim Jost, a professor at Washington and Lee University and expert on the Affordable Care Act. “That then undermines the Taft-Hartley plans because fewer employers contribute to them, and fewer employees will want them. It’s going to undermine the ability of the unions to have a benefit they can offer their members.”

Tim Schlittner, spokesman for the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union, said, “That’s a pressure that’s been created by this law and one of the unintended consequence. I don’t think anyone could have imagined that the ideal outcome of the law would be to cover millions of people by disrupting the good insurance that millions of people already have.”

Some of the other labor complaints are the same ones that conservative critics lodge — Obamacare is chock full of taxes and fees that will make insurance more expensive. They also worry about a “Cadillac tax” — a tax on the most generous insurance plans starting in 2018 that may affect some unions’ health coverage. The idea is to encourage smarter utilization of health care, but the unions fear it will just erode benefits.