Third in a four-part series profiling the Republican primary candidates for U.S. Senate. The primary is Tuesday.

Brian D. Goldberg

Politics was "mainly a sideline" for Brian D. Goldberg until last year.

He'd worked in technology companies until the dot-com bubble burst and then went into the specialty concrete business his father started.

That, and his family, usually meant he only had time to help others running for local and federal offices - not become a candidate himself.

Still, Goldberg knew he wanted to run.

"So I started to look for opportunities for a full-time position," he said. One came last June, when Sen. Frank Lautenberg died. But Governor Christie's executive order calling for a special election gave potential candidates less than a week to collect the needed 1,000 signatures, and Goldberg came up 400 short.

He said he is running now because he is "really scared about what's going on this country," and sees himself as a mediator.

Small-business owners have to reach their goals without fighting with vendors, employees and customers, he said, so why not politicians?

"There are ways to try to get what we want in terms of our platform, the positions we represent, without having to be angry, having to fight, having to constantly block and obstruct," he said.

Here's Goldberg in his own words, from an interview with The Record and a meeting with its editorial board.

On use of military force: I'm OK with preemptive strikes given there's information that justifies it. But typically it would be in a defensive posture. It's important to have a presence, to be known that we have the ability to defend ourselves and our allies around the world so that our enemies, or even other non-enemy but non-ally nations around the world, don't take it for granted that we would not be able to defend ourselves or our allies.

On same-sex marriage: I support civil unions and domestic partnerships and I believe it's a states-rights issue. And in New Jersey it's been settled law on this.

On workplace discrimination based on sexual orientation: It needs to be proven that there is that discrimination going on, and I'm not confident that's the case. I think adding additional qualified classes eventually can run into lots of different ones & and so I would not support that. The way you deal with that is not by having the government step in and tell people how they have to do things.

On campaign finance limits: People should be able to give unlimited amounts, but disclosure is what it all boils down to. Those contributions should be disclosed so we know who's giving where and we can draw lines to see what's going on. If you have an independent expenditure and a corporate entity is doing independent activity on its own, do we have a right to pierce that corporate veil and find out who the members necessarily are? No. But we have to be strict in making sure there's compliance that in those instances the separate independent expenditure is truly independent.

On abortion: I personally am pro-life and I'm very strong in that conviction, but I believe because of that conviction we need to have fewer and potentially no abortions or limiting them as much as possible. To have that dialogue I have to acknowledge women have the right to choose. & So while I don't actually support a ban, I do support things like waiting periods, I do support notification for minors. And basically it is my personal conviction that in any circumstance, I believe a woman should be counseled to not have an abortion.

On gun rights: I support concealed carry laws. I believe it is very important for people to have the ability, not just the right, but to exercise that right to defend themselves, both their own person, their loved ones, their personal property, for sure. & I have no problem with gun enthusiasts, I think that's fine if that's your hobby or you have a gun for personal defense reasons. & But I personally have not chosen to handle firearms. & Background checks are fine as long as, as soon as someone passes the background check, any information that was discovered during that process is immediately destroyed.

On reducing gun violence: Better training, better education and better concerted efforts to [get] law enforcement to go after the criminals that have the guns. & The problem is we have these knee-jerk reactions that wind up just affecting the law-abiding citizens. They don't do anything to take the weapons away from the criminals. If you increase the penalties for committing a crime while using a certain type of weapon, that may have an effect on violent crime.

On a positive message: I try to focus on what I'm going to do and my positive message, and that positive message is that I believe that people will succeed if we give them opportunities for success and the programs and the policies that promote the ability to do that. You ask what my top issues are and I say, well, Nos. 1 through 20 are jobs and the economy. & We tend to talk about things like extending unemployment benefits. Instead we should be focusing on job training so we can get people better qualified to do jobs. We should talk about how can we limit the regulations and the red tape that affect businesses.

On the Affordable Care Act: It does not make things more affordable nor does it focus on care. It's the mandatory insurance law and it needs to be repealed and replaced with something that actually will drive down the cost of health care and that will actually provide better access to health care to people around the country. So things like tort reform and focusing on innovation and being able to purchase insurance across state lines, so if New Jersey wants to have laws that force the insurers to have all kinds of extra things in their policies but another state on the other side of the country might not, if a New Jersey resident doesn't want to have those extra features, we should have the right to purchase at lower cost from another state.