FAIRFAX — Democratic front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton spent the eve of Super Tuesday in Northern Virginia and Hampton Roads, telling several hundred students and activists at George Mason University, “I need your help tomorrow.”

Three of the seven presidential hopefuls campaigned in Virginia on Monday, ahead of Tuesday’s contests in 11 states. GOP front-runner Donald Trump held a rally at Radford University and Republican hopeful Ben Carson spoke at Regent University in Virginia Beach. Ohio Gov. John Kasich is holding a noon rally Tuesday in Arlington County.

“I will stand up and fight for you throughout this campaign, no matter who the Republicans nominate,” Clinton told an enthusiastic crowd at GMU in Fairfax County.

Clinton said she has the “experience and temperament” to lead the nation, but cast doubt on the GOP field.

“At some point you can’t just say whatever pops into your head when you are president of the United States,” she said to loud applause.

Clinton, who spoke at a Norfolk high school Monday night, hopes to maintain her momentum on Super Tuesday after her big win over Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., in South Carolina on Saturday.

She campaigned Monday with Gov. Terry McAuliffe, a longtime friend who led her unsuccessful 2008 bid for the Democratic presidential nomination.

“Virginia is Clinton country,” yelled McAuliffe, as Clinton stood next to him at George Mason. “Elections matter, and it matters that Hillary Clinton gets elected president of the United States of America.”

Clinton did not mention Sanders at GMU. She focused most of her remarks on Republicans and the general election.

A Republican in the White House would “rip away the progress, send us backwards and deprive people of rights,” Clinton said. “I’m running for president to break down every barrier that stands in the way.”

“America never stopped being great,” she said, in a twist on Trump’s pledge to “make America great again.”

“We’ve got to make America whole,” Clinton said.

Clinton said she regrets the tenor of the GOP presidential contest — “the scapegoating, finger pointing, blaming. ”

She said that as president, she would “target communities that have been left out and left behind.”

She said Republicans want to sell America “snake oil” and return to “trickle-down economics.” She said she would defend the Affordable Care Act, and said Republicans would return care to the insurance companies.

Clinton said she would defend Obamacare, “improve it and make it work better.”

Clinton said the United States doesn’t need any more prisons, but needs investments in education. She promised to allow student debt to be refinanced, and offer reductions, discounts and forgiveness in exchange for public service.

She also said she would defend Planned Parenthood, marriage equality and voting rights and that the U.S. Senate should not resist President Barack Obama’s prerogative to nominate a Supreme Court justice to replace Justice Antonin Scalia, who died Feb. 13.

She said she favors “comprehensive immigration reform” and would protect Social Security and resist Republican attempts to privatize it.

Clinton’s backers at the event included Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va.

“Virginia is now the battleground of battlegrounds,” said Kaine, who endorsed Clinton in May 2014, nearly a year before she announced her candidacy.

“We were irrelevant 15 years ago,” he said. “Now all of a sudden, folks … Virginia is [a] front and center battleground, spotlight on.

“When the spotlight’s on, you’ve got to do your best work,” he told the crowd, encouraging them to work for Clinton until the polls close Tuesday evening.

Republicans on Monday criticized Clinton for her email practices as secretary of state marking the final court-ordered release of her private server.

At George Mason, Clinton spent nearly 30 minutes after her remarks interacting with the diverse crowd, posing for selfies in a sea of cell phones while surrounded by Secret Service agents.