Analysis brings together experts from multiple state authorities

Shireen Malik and Bruce Orr help gather belongings out of the flood-destroyed home of Kathleen McLellan in Salina on Sept. 19, 2013. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

September 2013 flood impacts Deaths: 10 People forced from homes: More than 18,000 Miles of roadway destroyed or damaged: 485 Structures destroyed: At least 1,882 Landslide and hillslope failures: 1,100 People registering for state and federal assistance: 28,000, with more than 21,000 people visiting disaster recovery centers FEMA National Flood Insurance Program: $65.5 million approved on 2,093 claims Counties affected: 24 Sources: "The Great Colorado Flood of 2013," FEMA and the state of Colorado

The storm that upended the lives of thousands of Front Range residents almost two years ago was nearly unprecedented for the area, so much so that it largely confounded the best efforts of those charged with forecasting its scope and impact.

But the lessons learned from the 2013 event could go a long way toward ensuring that should a similar storm strike this area — and in a changing global climate, it could — the forecasting community would be better prepared for it.

Those are key findings from "The Great Colorado Flood of 2013," a paper accepted for publication soon by the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. It is one of the most comprehensive analyses to date on a memorable storm that may only have the September 1938 flood as close precedent in the past century for the Boulder area.

Advertisement

The 71-page paper features no fewer than 26 contributing authors, representing the University of Colorado, Colorado State University, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and CU's Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences.

"We went big, and it took us a little longer than we would have liked," said lead author Dave Gochis, a hydrometeorologist at NCAR. "We would have liked to get it out sooner, but we view it as a pretty complete story. That doesn't mean all the research is done in terms of the documentation of what happened and what a lot of the mechanisms were."

A destroyed car sits in the water and debris after the 2013 flood in Jamestown. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

Lead co-author Katja Friedrich, a professor in CU's atmospheric and oceanic sciences department, said she expects that close study of the storm, and the search for lessons imparted by forecasters' response to it, could extend at least another five years.

"I think a lot of things will come out in the future," Friedrich said. "But I think we analyzed the observations in depth, and I think we have a good picture of what was going on. ... But there are ways we can change in the forecasting models so that a forecasting model can predict these events much better."

The paper's third lead co-author is Russ Schumacher, an assistant professor in the department of atmospheric science at CSU.

Nezette Rydell, meteorologist in charge at the National Weather Service in Boulder, did not want to comment on its contents prior to publishing, but she did comment on what she termed "the value of the process."

"This paper represents the kind of post-event analysis that highlights research needs that in turn help improve operational forecasting," Rydell said.

"The features and mechanisms that may be identified here and in further studies will help improve forecasts on the Colorado Front Range and across the U.S. If we can recognize it, understand it, model it, we can forecast it. This paper addresses the first two steps."

Not long before the paper's conclusion comes an admission that no one who lived through the event would be surprised to see: "In summary, operational rainfall forecasts did predict a significant precipitation event focused in the northern Front Range of Colorado, although predicted rainfall amounts were far lower than what was observed."

And how.

Before the storm was over, Boulder would set a one-day rainfall record of 9.08 inches, a seven-day record of 16.9 inches and a month's record 18.16 inches.

The National Weather Service's own assessment, published in June 2014, has already conceded that it didn't understand the volume of rain assaulting the area, and the rapid evolution of the flash and river flooding, until the event was well underway.

"We were able to point to -— and it also came out in the NWS assessment — that their ability to predict and manage forecasting information on a very widespread event like this certainly had room for improvement," Gochis said.

"And they are now taking many steps to improve those processes. It raised the awareness of shortcomings in the way that flood forecasting has been done in the past and why it needs to change."

Colorado behaving like the tropics

The record-breaking dimensions of the 2013 storm were born of a confluence of climatological factors, including a significant tropical influence flowing into a charged atmosphere flush with water vapor, over a landscape that was already well saturated.

Recapping the way the system had set up, the paper states: "The large-scale atmospheric pattern that supported persistent heavy rainfall in northern Colorado during 10-16 September 2013 consisted of a blocking ridge over the Canadian Rockies and a slow-moving, cutoff, upper-level cyclonic circulation to its south over the western U.S. The blocking anticyclone assisted in keeping the western-U.S. cutoff circulation in place for several days, and to the east and southeast of this circulation, moist air was transported northward and westward toward the Front Range in Colorado."

That's far different from the usual variety of flood-prone events for which most local forecasting models are geared — such as a slow-moving thunderstorm that might camp out over a localized river basin, like that which triggered the tragic Big Thompson flood of 1976.

And just as the tuning of a musical instrument can be adjusted for the music it is expected to play, the forecasting tools of the National Weather Service are calibrated for conditions they expect to see — not the outlier that invaded Colorado two years ago.

"Weather forecasting models are tuned to observe the weather in the entire United States year-round, and they are tuned to typical weather, not atypical weather," Friedrich said.

"Then, because the models didn't forecast the rain correctly, the radars didn't measure the rain correctly, and that had trickle-down so the hydrological forecast was basically lagging, due to the incorrect input data. And the reason the radars did not observe it correctly was the nature of the storm. It was very tropical."

Weather blogger Bob Henson stated in an email, "This paper reiterates how challenging it is to accurately predict and measure heavy rain and flooding. This was a Colorado storm that behaved like a tropical downpour, from the microphysics within the clouds to the phenomenal rainfall they produced."

Meteorologist Matt Kelsch, a co-author on the report, said atmospheric models are always evolving, using past storms as guidance.

"When a storm occurs that is so far removed from the historic experience, our forecasts, both computer and human, struggle," Kelsch said. "The modeled atmosphere leading up to the second week of September 2013 was strongly suggesting an unusually wet period — but not 12 to 20 inches."

As bad as things were for the 24 Colorado counties socked by more than $2 billion in damage, Henson said it could have been worse.

"We are lucky to have far better modeling and observing technology at hand than we had in 1976, when the Big Thompson flood took almost everyone by surprise and killed more than 100 people," he said. "Neither humans nor models fully anticipated the scope and power of the 2013 disaster, but we knew heavy rains could affect a wide area, and we had much better tools for responding quickly and saving lives when the threat materialized."

The paper concludes by offering the hope that new research weather forecast models such as NOAA's High Resolution Rapid Refresh model could improve precipitation forecasts, and that new generations of spatially continuous hydrological models could produce better information on timing and location of floods — presuming that more accurate rainfall estimates and forecasts are available to feed into those models.

The storm was such that it stretched historical superlatives in the moment, and some endure. Most notably, the paper supports the contention that in some pockets in a corridor stretching from Boulder northwesterly toward the St. Vrain, Little Thompson and southern half of the Big Thompson watersheds, rain fell during one 24-hour period at a clip qualifying as a 1,000-year-rain — meaning that in any given year there is a 1-in-1,000 chance of it occurring.

"We don't have the data to say otherwise," Gochis said. "It's all a fit to what you have seen before. Otherwise, you're just kind of extrapolating."

Gochis added, "If we had 1,000 years of data, we could have a lot more confidence in saying that. ...

"I don't really like that (1,000-year) term. The flood was definitely unprecedented in its scale — not just in local amounts, but in its widespread extent."

'Do we know what actually fell?'

Many might be surprised to know that even now, two years later, it still isn't known exactly how much rain came down.

"Do we know what actually fell? No, but we certainly have a very good estimate, much better than what we would have had even 15 years ago," Kelsch said. "The struggle is in low-population mountainous areas. Low-population areas have fewer rain-gauge reports, and mountainous areas have less radar-based measurement of what is happening between the cloud and the ground. This was most apparent in parts of northwestern Boulder and western Larimer counties."

Friedrich noted in an interview last week that a question that remains prominent in her mind is "whether this is an outlier event and whether these types of events might occur more often. Is this a response to climate change? Is this something we might experience in the near future?

While noting that there is not yet enough data to draw a solid conclusion, she referred to a paper published in June by NCAR distinguished senior scientist Kevin Trenberth. The Trenberth paper, published in the journal Nature Climate Change, didn't assert that climate change caused the 2013 flood, but that it likely enhanced its severity.

The 2013 storm was extraordinary, Trenberth said, as demonstrated by the fact that records were "not just broken but smashed."

"And yet we are seeing more and more of these sorts of things around the U.S. and around the world," he said. "They are hard to connect because every one is different; the atmosphere has infinite variety, and the weather never repeats. But climate change is altering the odds."

Currently, hurricanes in the east Pacific and a record-breaking El Niño boosting sea-surface temperatures over large areas are examples of the Earth's natural variability which, coupled with climate change, "puts us outside the previous experience," Trenberth said.

"There are many phenomena involved in all these different events, but the environment in which they occur has changed to make the extremes more extreme — the rainfalls heavier, and the droughts hotter and drier and with wildfire a consequence," he said.

Whatever the future might hold, Gochis said the fact that "Boulder, itself, didn't receive a lot of catastrophic damage" suggests much of its floodplain planning and flood strategizing has paid dividends — and should continue to, in the face of future events.

Gochis was less sanguine about other areas of concern, mentioning as an example the restoration of foothills roadways.

"Transportation corridors were put back where they were," Gochis said. "I think we're still vulnerable there. But to make them more flood resilient would take a lot of money."

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan