Dallas-area hospitals and insurance carriers are making a final push to encourage thousands of low-income patients to buy private health insurance as the sign-up deadline looms for the new federal health care law.

“We began talking with patients across the entire system on Oct. 1,” said Sharon Phillips, who is overseeing the sign-up effort at Parkland Memorial Hospital.

The county hospital estimates that 25,000 of its current patients should be buying insurance under the Affordable Care Act. They have until March 31 to purchase it through the federal government’s insurance marketplace at HealthCare.gov.

“I don’t think anybody has any idea how many people have signed up here. That’s patient choice,” said Phillips, the hospital’s interim chief operating officer for ambulatory care.

The sign-up campaign has been constant at many local hospitals, where uninsured patients seek care.

“We’ve identified patients daily, who are uninsured, and talked to them about their options,” said Leslie Pierce, who is overseeing the enrollment effort at Methodist Health System Dallas. About 300 patients went through the process since last fall, with the help of hospital employees.

An outside vendor was hired by Baylor Scott & White Health North Texas to handle enrollment in its various hospitals. The effort involves multiple phone calls to uninsured patients and even home visits, according to a statement from Baylor.

“Patients can walk in and receive assistance with purchasing a plan on the exchange,” it said. “Across the system, approximately 30 uninsured inpatients are assisted every day.”

The sign-up effort will shift into high gear in the next two weeks.

Starting Monday, Parkland’s business office will be open from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. weekdays, and from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekends to assist the enrollment effort. Applicants can use hospital computers to file applications.

Blue Cross-Blue Shield of Texas will hold a Countdown to Coverage event from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday at Fair Park’s Food and Fiber Pavilion. It will offer free bags of fresh produce, health screenings and the guidance of 25 enrollment counselors.

“We understand that health insurance can be confusing,” said Dr. Dan McCoy, the company’s chief medical officer. “We’re trying to raise awareness of the deadline and show people how to sign up.”

His company is marketing 18 of the 38 insurance plans available in North Texas under the new law.

The message driving these efforts is clear: If you earn even a dollar more than the 2014 federal poverty levels, you must have private health insurance coverage in Texas.

That means any uninsured individual who earned more than $11,670 in 2013 must buy a plan before the end of March or face a penalty. A family of four earning above $23,850 would have to buy coverage, too.

People with the lowest incomes qualify for a federal subsidy to help cover their monthly premiums and other costs. The subsidy size depends on income and family size.

About 87,500 Texans picked a health plan offered through the online insurance exchange in February, bringing the number who selected a plan statewide to 295,000 by March 1, Obama administration officials announced this week.

By the administration’s reckoning, about 40 percent of the 758,500 Texans eligible to buy an exchange, or marketplace, plan have done so.

Other groups, however, have estimated a larger number of Texans are potential marketplace customers. According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s latest numbers, the state had the highest share of residents lacking health insurance — 24.6 percent in 2012.

While that translates to more than 6.4 million people who lacked coverage in 2012, comparisons to the administration’s numbers are tricky. Undocumented immigrants, for example, are not eligible to buy coverage through state-based marketplaces.

In Dallas, the exclusion could have the largest impact on Parkland, where the patient population is predominately Hispanic. In recent years, about 70 percent of the babies born annually at Parkland had undocumented mothers.

Last fall, the hospital estimated that 50,000 of its patients probably qualified to buy their own insurance. They are among the 140,000 enrolled in Parkland Health-plus, a program the covers uninsured county residents earning below 200 percent of the federal poverty level.

A more careful review cut the estimate in half, Phillips said.

“We found that many, many more of our people on Parkland Health-plus are below the federal poverty level and will continue on the plan,” she said. “They don’t qualify under the Affordable Care Act.”

That included “a group of undocumented folks and others, who don’t qualify,” said Bob Reed, vice president for patient access.

If the federal law works as promised, charity care at Parkland should decline and the amount of local tax support would fall. Currently, county taxpayers contribute about $420 million annually or about a third of the hospital’s operating costs.

“Parkland and the community will spend less direct dollars on these individuals because they will have health insurance,” Phillips said. “We can’t say how much.”

Parkland and other safety-net hospitals in the state were adversely affected when Texas leaders declined to expand Medicaid, which would have picked up many of Parkland’s poverty-level patients. Gov. Rick Perry said the state could not afford the program’s matching funds.

So far, it’s been difficult to discern how many Parkland patients are signing up.

“We haven’t seen a major surge of people moving away from charity care,” Reed said. “We won’t know until they start coming back with their [insurance] cards.”

Staff writer Robert Garrett contributed to this report.

SIGN-UP EVENTS AND HELP

Local opportunities to sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act:

3-4 p.m. Friday, Southwest Center Mall, Dallas. Enroll America Countdown to Get Covered bus tour. Local officials and volunteers will talk with consumers about financial help available through the insurance marketplace.

9 a.m. - 3 p.m. Saturday, Fair Park Food and Fiber Pavilion, Dallas. Countdown to Coverage: Enrollment and Wellness Fair. Free bags of fresh produce and health screenings, 25 certified counselors to guide people signing up. Sponsored by Blue Cross-Blue Shield of Texas.

Monday through March 31, 7 a.m. - 9 p.m. Monday through Friday and 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. weekends, Parkland Memorial Hospital’s business office, 5201 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas. Certified application counselors will help people sign up for insurance.

5-6:30 p.m. March 23, Interfaith Peace Chapel, 5910 Cedar Springs Road, Dallas. Event sponsored by Out2Enroll, a coalition of organizations targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.