Yoga requires focus, balance, patience, strength, flexibility and a whole lot more.

For a yoga novice, it can be difficult to get used to at first, but with a little practice, the body becomes more accustomed to the movements, and it gets a little easier with each class.

Now imagine doing it on a stand-up paddleboard, also known as a SUP, out on the water.

That’s exactly what two groups of adventurous yogis did Friday in Onset on Broad Cove. Beth McLacklan, a yoga instructor and owner of Ebb and Flow Wellness in Onset, brought a group of eight brave souls Friday evening (another class went out at 9 a.m.) for what was most of the participants’ first time doing yoga on water.

“I’m a little nervous,” said Stephanie White of Bourne prior to the class, which she took along with her son Shaun.

White said they had tried stand-up paddleboarding, one of the fastest-growing outdoor activities in the country of late, before and had enjoyed it. Though she was a little anxious at first, she got right on the board and seemed to do well with the yoga, especially for a first-timer.

To perform the balancing-act that is SUP yoga, each rider was equipped with an oversized surfboard, a paddle, and an improvised anchor tethered to the end of the board to help keep it in place while its rider got into yoga-mode.

Once the her students were settled, McLacklan led them through a one-and-a-half hour yoga class, consisting of breathing exercises, poses such as "downward dog," "dolphin,""Warrior I," "Warrior II," and others, all while attempting to balance on a board.

“I enjoyed it,” said Jen Churchill of New Hampshire, who summers in Onset.

Churchill, who is six-months pregnant, also teaches yoga at Ebb and Flow, which just recently added yoga to the mainly skin care and massage-focused business.

She thought she'd be a little more tentative to try some of the more difficult moves on a board, but after getting her balance down, that wasn't the case.

“I thought there would be some things I’d shy away from being on a board. It’s great when you find your balance,” she said following the class.

McLacklan said that being on the board takes a lot of people out of their comfort zones. But if they can get over the fear of falling of the board (which they often do), they’re able to relax, which is one of the general goals of yoga.

“Once you get tense, it’s not easy to do it,” she said. “Balancing on a board is much more difficult than being in a studio.”

“It was wonderful,” said White following her time on the water.

For those interested in trying SUP yoga with Ebb and Flow, McLacklan said she’d probably be offering more classes in the near future.

“We’ve had a lot of interest of late,” she said.