CHARLOTTE, N.C. — LIVING in a purple state can be exhausting, but it’s never boring. What we lack in entertainment value — it would be hard to beat our southern neighbor, where Representative Mark Sanford recently broke up with the Argentine “soul mate” he’d had an extramarital affair with while he was governor — we make up for in unpredictability.

We’re a state that likes to change its mind (Obama 2008, Romney 2012, each time by a squeaker). Nearly two years ago, voters amended the State Constitution to outlaw same-sex marriage. Yet on Monday, joyful gay couples thronged the county register’s office here to get marriage licenses, after a federal judge in Asheville found the ban unconstitutional.

This year, North Carolina has a dubious distinction: No other state has been flooded so much by outside money for political ads this election cycle. Our first-term Democratic senator, Kay Hagan, is being challenged by Thom Tillis, speaker of the majority-Republican State House. Control of the United States Senate could hang in the balance.

For those who have turned down the volume or changed the channel, here’s a capsule summary of the TV broadsides: Ominous music. Unflattering black-and-white images of an opponent determined to ruin life in this New South paradise. Cozy conversations in which the candidate quietly admonishes the other side for “distorting my record.”

“I wish they would campaign somewhere else,” Iotha Parker told me recently, as she perused the gift shop at the Levine Museum of the New South here, where a permanent exhibition is called “Cotton Fields to Skyscrapers.” Ms. Parker, whom the state honored several years ago for her 49-year teaching career, is registered as an independent. I got the feeling she might vote for the candidate who ran fewer annoying ads.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In the early 1960s, Thereasea Elder was one of the first black nurses to treat white patients here in Mecklenburg County, providing care in homes festooned with Confederate flags. “The Republicans are so far away from everybody, except the superrich,” Mrs. Elder, 87, told me. “They need to read and study their Bible.”

In uptown Charlotte, what most places would call downtown, I talked with a 29-year-old Mexican immigrant, Alberto Rosales, who recently moved here for a tech consulting job at Wells Fargo. His education at the University of California, Berkeley, “pretty much changed my life,” he told me, explaining that he was a Democrat who agreed with the party’s support for public schools.

Charlotte, the largest city, the “research triangle” cities (and college towns) of Raleigh, Durham and Chapel Hill, and cities like Greensboro, Winston-Salem and Asheville are turning more blue than red, partly from an infusion of new workers in finance, health care, technology and education. But the state as a whole is more of a tossup.

Last year, Republicans took control of the governor’s mansion and increased their majorities in both chambers of the Legislature, giving them total control of state government in Raleigh for the first time in over a century. The new governor, Pat McCrory, thought to be a moderate when he was Charlotte’s mayor, helped lead a sharp turn to the right. He signed laws that slashed unemployment benefits; opted out of the Affordable Care Act’s Medicaid expansion; toughened voting requirements; made it harder for abortion clinics to operate; and repealed a law that allowed death row inmates to have their sentences converted to life in prison without parole if they could prove racial bias in their cases.

The resulting backlash — a series of weekly sit-in protests known as “Moral Mondays” — has given pause even to Republicans such as Sally Dalton Robinson, whose family has been central to the life of Charlotte and the state. Her husband, Russell, was a founder of one of the state’s largest law firms; his grandfather was the principal author of the state’s 1868 Constitution.

“Russ and I see so much the same way,” said Mrs. Robinson, who is 80. “Our whole voting lives, we’ve been registered Republicans, and we don’t intend to change.” Her husband’s great-grandfather came over to Goldsboro, N.C., from Ireland before the Civil War and was a Republican when that meant opposing secession and slavery, supporting President Abraham Lincoln, and being at dangerous odds with their neighbors, who were overwhelmingly white Democrats.

“What we feel is that the Republican Party we have voted for and supported most of our married life has really gone off and left us — that’s sad to us,” Mrs. Robinson said. “A lot of that — not all — is social issues. I’m very opposed to what Republicans in this state have done in terms of abortion, making it harder. I’m opposed to putting into the Constitution that marriage is between a man and a woman. I think it’s very detrimental that we’ve cut back on the days that we have for early voting. That makes it harder for folks to get to the polls. I think it’s sad that students can no longer vote on their own college campuses.”

She added: “I grew up in a city that was very segregated, and I did not question that as a child. When I would get on the bus as an 8-year-old to go to town, the African-Americans were seated at the back and I was seated at the front. I didn’t question it. It’s hard for me to take that in about myself, but it’s true.”

North Carolina, like Sally Dalton Robinson, has changed. Still, in 2014, it’s a state that is still weighing what it wants to be now and will be in the future. This midterm election could give us, and the rest of the nation, a clue.