Topics: aol_on, Ben Carson, Donald Trump, Election 2016, end of year, GOP 2016, Hillary Clinton, Joe Biden, Kim Davis, king v. burwell, Politics News

Before we get this listicle started, let’s get something out of the way first: That headline is not intended to be taken literally. We are not so callous or shallow to think that anything could be “worse” than what happened in Charleston this summer, or Colorado Springs this fall. Those were two atrocities, yes; but they were profoundly political acts, too. They resulted in the murder of innocent people; human beings who loved and were loved, and will never come back. Nothing could be worse.

So this list is, like all listicles, a contrivance. Here, “worst” can be seen as an equivalent to “most annoying” or “most aggravating” or “most please for the love of God can I go on Facebook for just five minutes without seeing this crap?” With that said, please enjoy this quick-and-dirty recap of some of the worst moments in what was — for American politics, at least — an extremely no good year.

6. The Supreme Court’s taking on King v. Burwell

It’s hard to imagine a Supreme Court case inspiring more cynicism and disillusionment than Bush v. Gore — but King v. Burwell came very, very close.

The case, which was spearheaded by anti-Obamacare absolutists within the Republican Party and the libertarian movement, was laughable on its face. Its proponents argued that because a single line in the bill, ripped from context, suggested that it was possible that the Affordable Care Act (ACA) intended to deny subsidies to those who lived in states that did not set up their own exchanges, the subsidies making health insurance affordable for millions of Americans in Republican-run states were unconstitutional. As many noted at the time, to accept the argument, one essentially had to believe that the then-Democratic Congress of 2009-2010 purposefully hid a time-bomb within the ACA.

Reason ultimately prevailed, with the majority of the Court siding with the government because, as Chief Justice John Roberts put it, the law was clearly intended “to improve health insurance markets, not to destroy them.” Still, the fact that we even got to this point was deeply troubling for those who, against mounting evidence, would like to think the Justices of the Court are more than politicians in robes.

5. Hillary Clinton’s damn emails

While I’m no longer inclined to see the scandal around former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s private email server as a total non-issue (hat tip to Jason Leopold for changing my mind on that one), the idea that a story so arcane, technical and far removed from Election Day could matter in 2016 was always ridiculous.

As is almost always the case when it comes to Clinton, it brought out the absolute worst neuroses and instincts of the mainstream campaign press. The likelihood of finding a “smoking gun” (an email from Clinton with the subject line: “I did Benghazi, and it was good. LOL!” perhaps?) was always infinitesimally small. Clinton isn’t that stupid, for one thing; and even if we hypothetically grant that she is corrupt, that’s not how corruption works. Not in 2015, and not when it comes to someone so firmly enmeshed in the global elite.

Yet because the press was bored, scandal-thirsty, and desperate to ensure the Democratic primary wasn’t a total snooze, we spent I-don’t-even-want-to-know how much time talking about Clinton’s emails, her servers, her “home brew.” There was a reason, in other words, that Sen. Bernie Sanders’ quip about the issue during an October debate went viral.

4. Kim Davis’ 15 minutes of fame

As far as stale leftovers of the culture war go, the story of religious fanatic and Kentucky County Clerk Kim Davis, whose refusal to grant marriage licenses to same-sex couples made her a global story, is better than most. I’d certainly be more willing to relive Davis’ histrionics (and Mike Huckabee’s opportunism) than those of Cliven Bundy (and Sean Hannity). But, really, that’s not saying much.

What made the Davis story such a drag, though, wasn’t just her bigotry and the Christian right’s eagerness to defend it. No, what made the Kim Davis story such a drag was the way it confirmed that, despite the Supreme Court’s recognition of a right to marry, the culture war would endure for quite some time. Not in some separate form, mind you, but rather almost exactly as it was throughout the ’80s, ’90s and ’00s: with huckster zealots like Ralph Reed on one side, self-satisfied elitists like Bill Maher on the other, and with no new arguments, and no new perspectives. Just lots and lots of yelling.