ORLANDO, Fla.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Cigna (NYSE: CI) and Central Florida Affordable Care, LLC have launched a collaborative care initiative to improve access to health care, enhance care coordination, and achieve the goal of improved health, affordability and customer experience.

Cigna Collaborative Care is the company’s approach to accomplishing the same population health goals as accountable care organizations, or ACOs. The program will benefit more than 12,000 individuals covered by a Cigna health plan who receive care from nearly 50 primary care doctors and specialists affiliated with Central Florida Affordable Care. Cigna now has eight collaborative care programs in Florida and 134 of them nationwide.

In places where it’s been introduced, Cigna Collaborative Care is helping to improve the health of Cigna customers while effectively managing medical costs. The programs are helping to close gaps in care, such as missed health screenings or prescription refills, reinforcing the appropriate use of hospital emergency rooms, increasing the number of preventive health visits and improving follow-up care for people transitioning from the hospital to home.

“With a focus on care coordination and access to data from Cigna, we can take the quality of our care to the next level,” said Robert Alexander, executive director of Central Florida Affordable Care, LLC. “As people live healthier, more productive lives, costs will go down and the entire community will benefit.”

“Through these types of collaboration we have the opportunity to help transform the health care delivery system,” said Michael Howell, M.D., Cigna’s senior medical director for Florida. “When we reward doctors for results and focus on prevention, wellness, health improvement and care coordination, we can create a system that works for everyone who uses, pays for or delivers health care.”

Under the program, Central Florida Affordable Care will monitor and coordinate all aspects of an individual’s medical care. People will continue to go to their current physician and automatically receive the benefits of the program. Individuals who are enrolled in a Cigna health plan and later choose to seek care from a physician affiliated with Central Florida Affordable Care will also have access to the benefits of the program. There are no changes in any plan requirements regarding referrals to specialists. Individuals most likely to see the immediate benefits of the program are those who need help managing chronic conditions, such as diabetes, heart disease and obesity.

Critical to the program’s benefits are the registered nurse clinical care coordinators, employed by Central Florida Affordable Care, who will help individuals with chronic conditions or other health challenges navigate the health care system. The care coordinators are aligned with a team of Cigna case managers to ensure a high degree of collaboration between the medical group and Cigna, which will ultimately provide a better experience for the individual.

The care coordinators will use data from Cigna to help identify individuals being discharged from the hospital who might be at risk for readmission, as well as those who may be overdue for important health screenings or who may have skipped a prescription refill. The care coordinators are part of the physician-led care team that will help people get the follow-up care or screenings they need, identify potential complications related to medications and help prevent chronic conditions from worsening.

Care coordinators can also help people schedule appointments, provide health education and refer individuals to Cigna's clinical support programs, such as disease management programs for diabetes, heart disease and other conditions; and lifestyle management programs, such as programs for tobacco cessation, weight management and stress management.

Cigna will compensate Central Florida Affordable Care for the medical and care coordination services it provides. Additionally, the organization may be rewarded through a “pay for value” structure if it meets targets for improving quality and lowering medical costs.

Cigna has been at the forefront of the accountable care organization movement since 2008 and now has 134 Cigna Collaborative Care arrangements with large physician groups. They span 29 states, reach nearly 1.5 million commercial customers and encompass nearly 60,000 doctors, including approximately 30,000 primary care physicians and 30,000 specialists.

About Central Florida Affordable Care, LLC

Central Florida Affordable Care LLC (CFAC) is a private practice physician led company that is designed to meet the changes in the healthcare delivery system primarily brought on by the Affordable Care Act. Its mission is to provide the highest quality, lowest cost care to both commercially insured patients, and those that are covered under Medicare and Medicaid.

The CFAC board of directors is made up of primary care physicians who are not only committed to the high quality low cost mission for patients, but also to provide better access for patients seeking to utilize the healthcare system through various exchanges.

The company formed in 2013 is wholly owned by Central Florida Medical Affiliates, Inc., (CFMA) an individual practice association (IPA) made up of 1, 400 practicing physicians, in virtually every specialty, that has been serving patients in Central Florida for nearly 30 years.

About Cigna

Cigna Corporation (NYSE: CI) is a global health service company dedicated to helping people improve their health, well-being and sense of security. All products and services are provided exclusively by or through operating subsidiaries of Cigna Corporation, including Connecticut General Life Insurance Company, Cigna Health and Life Insurance Company, Life Insurance Company of North America and Cigna Life Insurance Company of New York. Such products and services include an integrated suite of health services, such as medical, dental, behavioral health, pharmacy, vision, supplemental benefits, and other related products including group life, accident and disability insurance. Cigna maintains sales capability in 30 countries and jurisdictions, and has more than 89 million customer relationships throughout the world. To learn more about Cigna®, including links to follow us on Facebook or Twitter, visit www.cigna.com.