Tenure-track job producers Computer science 1. Stanford 2. Berkeley 3. MIT 4. Cal Tech 5. Harvard 56. CU-Boulder Business 1. Stanford 2. MIT 3. Harvard 4. Berkeley 5. Rochester 35. CU-Boulder History 1. Harvard 2. Yale 3. Berkeley 4. Princeton 5. Stanford 81. CU-Boulder Source: Aaron Clauset, assistant professor in the University of Colorado's computer science department

A new study by a University of Colorado researcher found that when it comes to landing coveted faculty jobs, an alma mater's prestige matters.

According to the study, led by Aaron Clauset, an assistant professor in the University of Colorado's computer science department, a quarter of doctoral degree-granting institutions across North America produce the majority of tenure-track faculty jobs — 71 to 86 percent, depending on the field.

The research team reached their conclusions after spending years analyzing the educational histories of 19,000 active faculty members in three disparate disciplines — computer science, business and history — at institutions that offered doctorates. They calculated prestige from a university's ability to hire candidates from better-ranked programs and place graduates in desirable faculty positions elsewhere.

Advertisement

The results weren't exactly surprising for Clauset, who had begun questioning the role of prestige during his doctoral degree at the University of New Mexico. Given the enormous social and financial undertaking of a doctoral degree, Clauset wanted to know what institution would offer the best chance at receiving a coveted tenure-track faculty position.

Now, thanks to his research, would-be Ph.D. students have more insight into the hiring process at many world-class institutions. Unlike traditional college rankings that rely on educational inputs, such as financial investment made per student and standardized test scores, Clauset's work looked at the final output — jobs.

This could be bad news for CU students, as the university ranked 56th in computer science, 35th in business and 81st in history.

Ultimately, the ranking system created by Clauset and his colleagues was found to predict the placement of doctoral students better than U.S. News & World Report rankings or National Research Council rankings.

"It was in some sense a validation of the (U.S. News) technique, but we went much further and looked at what that ranking implied for the prospects of people going out into the job market," Clauset said.

He and his team found that only about 10 percent of graduates move up in prestige — meaning they land faculty jobs at institutions that rank higher than where they undertook their doctoral degree.

The study's findings could also be cause for concern. The sheer advantage of an alma mater's prestige couldn't be explained away by educational quality. So while there was little difference in quality among the top 10 schools and the next two tiers, the first tier produced substantially more faculty positions.

"These are not great differences (in quality), and yet in terms of placement power, the difference is large," he said.

Moreover, Clauset and his team found that, on average, women who graduated from the same elite institutions as men had a more difficult time receiving high-ranking faculty appointments than their male counterparts.

Clauset hopes his methodology could be expanded to evaluate undergraduate programs. By looking at outcomes, he thinks he could produce a school ranking based on who gets into prestigious graduate schools.