Topics: ag-gag, Agriculture, animal abuse, big agriculture, Editor's Picks, factory farms, investigative journalism, Pollution, slaughterhouse, Video, Innovation News, Sustainability News, Social News, Media News, News

In 2008, the Humane Society released a shocking video taken in a Southern California slaughterhouse. The footage depicted workers using chains and forklifts to drag cows that were too sick to stand across the floor. The abuse was appalling; the cows’ condition, which indicated a food safety risk, led the USDA to order a recall of 143 million pounds of beef. It was the largest meat recall in U.S. history — and it was all brought about by the work of an undercover whistleblower.

Since then, Big Ag has been hard at work preventing this sort of thing from happening again, but not by actually working to stop abuse — at least, not completely. Instead, the industry’s been pushing states to implement laws, known collectively as “ag-gag,” aimed at silencing activists.

Eight states currently have ag-gag laws on the books, the most recent of which, in Idaho, takes anti-whistleblower legislation to a worrisome new extreme. Under the law, signed by Gov. C . L. “Butch” Otter, it is illegal for anyone not employed on the farms — and undercover activists don’t count — to make recordings of what goes on there without the owner’s explicit consent. In practice, that means videos taken of factory farms’ illegal practices — like this one, which depicts three workers at an Idaho dairy farm beating cattle with a cane, kicking and stomping on them once they’ve fallen and dragging one cow across the floor via a chain around its neck — can no longer legally be made public.

But that these laws effectively allow animal cruelty to go undetected and unreported only scratches the surface of why critics find them so appalling. In the interest of protecting the agriculture industry, ag-gag laws criminalize whistleblowers and, ultimately, ensure consumers remain in the dark.

Enter Will Potter, an investigative journalist and 2014 TED Fellow who’s dedicated his career to animal rights and environmental issues — and to exposing the way people dedicated to such causes are treated as domestic terrorists by a government primarily interested in promoting corporate interests. Last week, Potter took to Kickstarter to pitch an ambitious new investigation: he’s going to find out what’s really going on at the factory farms and slaughterhouses hiding behind ag-gag laws.

And he’s going to do it using drones.

It took only five days for Potter to meet his fundraising goal. As of Friday afternoon, he’s raised $35,000 and counting to pay for everything he needs to produce his “aerial exposé”: the drones, but also travel expenses, production costs for planned documentary and e-book, and plenty of legal counsel. The challenge now is going to be figuring out how to actually pull this off. It’s unclear he’ll find what he’s looking for, Potter told Salon, and whether he’ll be able to look at all without breaking the law. But he’s excited to try. Our conversation, lightly edited for clarity, is below:

I thought I was going to help you gain Kickstarter backers, but apparently you didn’t need my help. Were you surprised?

Crazy, huh? It just happened in five days. I was floored by it. I mean we still need help — I’ve been just kind of scrambling talking to photographers and other journalists that were interested in helping and kind of creating an expanded plan, because it seems to really resonate with people.

What has the response been like? Have you heard from other people who have been looking to do something like this?

It’s not so much people who were wanting to do the same, but a lot of people that were just intrigued by the idea. I have a good readership of activists and people that are already informed about these issues, but I was really blown away from the diversity of responses: people from a lot of different backgrounds and professional news organizations. The Kickstarter founder chipped in and made a donation. And helped publicize it. I mean just that kind of wide range of support was really striking to me.

Were you hearing from people in states where these ag-gag laws are going into effect?

Yeah, certainly. Not just where the laws have already been passed but where they’ve been debated, because this year we’ve had a half dozen states consider ag-gag laws. Last year it was about 12. So a lot of different people are becoming familiar with these as they’re popping up in their states, and also through the media coverage of the issue. So I think that’s really helped. As people are really more aware of ag-gag and frustrated and opposed to it, they’re supportive of attempts to continue carrying out investigations.

Take me through the legality of using drones. They’re legal if you’re not using them for commercial purposes and keep them out of restricted areas. So even in states with ag-gag laws in effect, can you can still fly over farms?

It is a complicated legal area, because in addition to ag-gag laws there are some states that have restrictions on drone usage specifically already. For instance, in Texas, a — for lack of a better word — hobbyist drone photographer caught images of blood coming out of a slaughterhouse into the Trinity river area, and it led to this full-scale investigation. And also in response, the legislature just passed an incredibly restrictive law on aerial photography. So laws like that are popping up as this footage is exposed. And then the third element that makes it more complicated is that the FAA has been really firm in its posturing of how journalists are not exempted from restrictions on drone photography.

Now, what’s reassuring to me is that as time goes by we’re seeing the top media outlets in the country and around the world speaking out against that kind of position. The only case where a drone photographer was fined had a friend-of-the-court brief signed by the New York Times, the Washington Post, the Tribune Company and just a laundry list of the top media outlets of the world speaking out against it. I think that climate is changing but you’re right, there are a lot of restrictions right now that I’m going to have to be very sensitive to.