SPECIAL SECTION 2014 FALL ELECTION

Ryan, Zerban deliver polite, pointed remarks in Janesville debate

Bill Olmsted Rep. Paul Ryan, (R), left, and challenger Rob Zerban, (D), shake hands before a debate as part of their race for the Wisconsin 1st Congressional District race. The debate on Monday took place in Janesville at UW-Rock County.

Bill Olmsted Rep. Paul Ryan,(R) left, and challenger Rob Zerban, (D) met at UW-Rock County in Janesville for their second debate in their race for the Wisconsin 1st Congressional District seat on Monday.

Bill Olmsted Rep. Paul Ryan, (R), makes a point during a debate against challenger Rob Zerban held at Janesville's UW-Rock County on Monday. The pair are squaring off for Wisconsin's 1st Congressional District seat that Ryan has held since 1999.

Bill Olmsted Rob Zerban, (D) makes a point during a debate against Rep. Paul Ryan, (R) at Janesville's UW-Rock County on Monday. The pair are squaring off for Wisconsin's 1st Congressional District seat that Ryan has held since 1999.



Hear the full debate



-- To watch a video of the debate anytime, visit gazettextra.com/RyanvZerban.

-- WCLO Radio will replay the debate starting at 10 a.m. Tuesday at 1230 AM on the radio dial. Related Stories Web Desk: The story behind 'Ryan v. Zerban' Gazette to live stream final Ryan-Zerban debate Monday night

JANESVILLE—The debate between 1st District Congressional candidates Rob Zerban and Rep. Paul Ryan was remarkable for its civility while highlighting a clash of political philosophies.

Ryan called for “collaboration to make a better life, not a government-centered vision based on coercion.”

“It doesn't matter who you are or where you come from; you can make it in this country,” he said.

Zerban argued that Ryan's budget proposals would cut spending so much that government would be less able to address problems such as Ebola and would push women, children and senior citizens “out in the cold, hungry and without shelter.”

Zerban said government debt can be conquered by ending billions of dollars of corporate handouts to industries such as oil and gas.

Ryan, the Republican incumbent from Janesville, and Zerban, the Democrat from Kenosha, debated before a nearly full house Monday night at UW-Rock County.

Tim Bremel of “Your Talk Show” on WCLO Radio moderated the debate and asked all the questions.

The crowd of more than 200 heeded Bremel's admonition to hold applause until the end. There were no interruptions.

“We are living under the majority party's policies, and I think those policies are producing horrible results,” Ryan said.

“You can just think about Ebola, or you can think about the website crashing on Obamacare, or you can look at the fact that we have 92 and a half million Americans, able-bodied adults, who aren't working …

“The problem is when you make government so big, when you have no limiting principle, government does everything poorly,” Ryan said.

The candidates were polite, if sometimes pointed, in their remarks.

People are tired of government not getting the job done, of dysfunction and of partisanship, Zerban said.

“I would argue that Congressman Ryan has been very partisan in his time in D.C. and has been part of the problem,” Zerban said.

“I think the Democrats have been better leaders in this respect,” Zerban said, citing the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) as “some of the most groundbreaking legislation we've passed in the past four years, … comprehensively addressing the health-care crisis that's going on in this nation.

Zerban said he would prefer a single-payer system in which every American was covered by Medicare, much in the way many European countries handle health care, at half the price of the U.S. system.

The debate format the candidates agreed to did not allow for rebuttals, but Ryan took time from his response on international crises to challenge Zerban on health care: “Government can't even run a website. Imagine what it would be like if we put them in charge of our health care.”

Ryan said he has gotten better in his job of serving constituents since he was first elected in 1998 and pointed to his work in finding solutions—not just criticizing—when it comes to problems of government debt and the solvency of Social Security and Medicare.

Zerban called Ryan “a career politician” and pointed to his own record of creating two businesses that he said employed dozens of people and gave him the problem-solving approach that is needed in Washington, D.C.

Ryan repeated his stance on allowing people to invest part of their contributions to Social Security so they would have more for retirement, which federal employees have.

Zerban said that approach would mean people losing their money and sinking into poverty at times such as the Great Recession.

The candidates agreed that poverty is a big problem while the rich are raking in profits in the stock market.

Ryan called for lower tax rates to help manufacturers so they can hire more people, more sensible regulations and a tax code “that is fair and simple and stops picking winners and losers” among other solutions.

“We should be springing out of this recession. This is the worst economic recovery since World War II,” Ryan said, adding he thinks government is to blame.

Zerban said the country should add jobs by investing in infrastructure with public and private funds and should raise the minimum wage.

Trade deals should ensure that other countries have fair labor standards, good pay and measure up to environmental standards, Zerban said.

“I'm convinced that if you put the American worker on a level playing field, we'll win every time,” he said.

On immigration, Zerban faulted Ryan and the other House Republicans for not supporting a bipartisan immigration reform bill that passed the Senate.

If the bill had included profits for somebody, the Republicans would have passed it, Zerban said.

“We want an immigration system … in this 21st century in which we have a society in which we have viruses and heroin coming into our schools right here in Janesville—drugs, crime—we want to be able to control our borders—ISIS,” Ryan said.

The country needs a system in which the economy gets the workers it needs, Ryan added.

Answering a question about student debt, Zerban noted his wife got a free college education in her native country.

'If a country that is a third the size of the United States' GDP (gross domestic product) can provide an education through college, we can do it here, too, and I think we need to,” Zerban said.

Ryan blamed the federal government for “facilitating tuition inflation” by doubling funding for higher education in the past 10 years.

Ryan called for consolidating myriad job-training programs and more transparency about the kinds of jobs students can get coming out of their college programs.

The event was the candidates' second and final debate before the Nov. 4 election. They previously faced off at Carthage College in Kenosha on Oct. 13.

Last updated: 4:28 pm Monday, October 20, 2014