TRENTON — Workers whose job is to monitor whether their employer complies with standards and regulations are not barred from whistleblower protections under a state law designed to prevent retaliation against employees who speak out, the state Supreme Court ruled Wednesday.

Advocates hailed the decision as a major victory for workers' rights, though business leaders feared it will open companies across New Jersey to more lawsuits.

New Jersey's highest court voted 5-0 in favor of Joel Lippman, who claimed he was fired from Ethicon, a subsidiary of New Brunswick-based Johnson & Johnson, in 2006 in retaliation for raising concerns about the safety of some products. Ethicon, which is based in Somerville, manufactures surgical devices.

Ethicon said Lippman, a vice president who helped oversee product safety, was fired because he engaged in an inappropriate relationship with someone who worked under his authority, according to court papers.

A trial court ruled that Lippman was not afforded whistleblower protections under New Jersey's Conscientious Employee Protection Act, saying that because it was his job to raise issues regarding product safety, he failed to show he performed a whistleblowing activity.

But an appellate panel reversed the decision, saying "watchdog employees" are the most vulnerable to retaliation because they frequently speak out and that state law "does not limit protection based on job title or function."

The state Supreme Court on Wednesday agreed.

Writing for the court, Justice Jaynee LaVecchia said there is no language in state law that strips watchdog employees of whistleblower protection "due to their position or because they are performing their regular job duties."

Bruce McMoran, Lippman's attorney, said the decision reinforces state law that the Conscientious Employee Protection Act "should be interpreted to protect all employees." He added that Ethicon's concerns "were really misplaced."

"Whistleblowers not only protect society, but also protect companies from huge errors," said McMoran, who is based in Wall.

Matthew Johnson, a spokesman for Ethicon, said the company appreciates "the clarification" from the court about state law.

"We look forward to a full trial, where we feel confident the evidence will show we appropriately terminated the employee for cause," Johnson said.

In Wednesday's decision, the Supreme Court overturned part of the appeals court ruling that set several benchmarks before watchdog employees could be covered under the whistleblower law.

The appellate panel had said that unless those employees refuse to participate in an employer's conduct, they must demonstrate they "pursued and exhausted all internal means of securing compliance."

But the Supreme Court court disagreed that watchdog employees must exhaust all means to qualify for whistleblower status, saying it "incompatible with prior precedent and imposes an obligation nowhere found in the statutory language."

The Supreme Court sent the case back to trial court for further proceedings.

Debra Coyle McFadden, interim director of the New Jersey Work Environment Council, praised the ruling.

"This decision not only protects employees, it protects all of us by making it more likely violations get reported," McFadden said. "This includes violations affecting public safety and health, the environment, and financial security of individual households and businesses."

But Michele Siekerka, president of the New Jersey Business & Industry Association, said said the decision "dramatically increases the probability that whistleblower claims may be brought against New Jersey businesses."

"The burden of an expanded whistleblower law comes on top of a continuing series of mandates that are being imposed on our members," Siekerka said. "When added to paid sick leave, an increased minimum wage, increased costs resulting from the Affordable Care Act, and a proposed increased in worker's compensation costs the state's economic climate becomes far less friendly to business dramatically impacting the predictability and confidence that inspires our members to invest."

Brent Johnson may be reached at bjohnson@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @johnsb01. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.