Topics: Editor's Picks, Finance, Financial Crisis, financial sector, Jordan Belfort, Leonardo DiCaprio, Martin Scorsese, Movies, Our Picks, Our Picks: Movies, the wolf of wall street, Wall Street, wolf of wall street, Business News, Entertainment News

Here we are again: How does Martin Scorsese feel about Jordan Belfort, the debauched penny-stock tycoon played by Leonardo DiCaprio, who never quite receives his just deserts in “The Wolf of Wall Street”? How did Vladimir Nabokov feel about Humbert Humbert, the pedophile narrator of his most famous novel? How does Brian DePalma feel about Al Pacino’s Tony Montana (“Say chhh-ello to my leetle frien’”) in “Scarface”? For that matter, how did Howard Hawks feel about Paul Muni’s Tony Camonte in the original 1932 “Scarface,” which had to be released with a didactic prologue, a capital-punishment ending and an interpolated scene in which a group of newspapermen sit around talking about how bad the bad guys are? (I’m deeply sorry for issuing a spoiler on a movie made 80 years ago.) Oh, and while we’re on the subject, how do Kathryn Bigelow and Mark Boal feel about extraordinary rendition and torture? Are they more or less responsible for it than, say, Donald Rumsfeld?

Now that I’ve enraged nearly every possible reader, let me hasten to add that I’m not suggesting that all these cases are the same. (Or that you’re a hopeless Philistine if you find any of those works troubling.) I am saying that once you start interrogating the moral intentions behind art and culture, sooner or later you end up asking questions that don’t have clear answers. I recently read an article or discussion online (which I now can’t find) about Picasso’s masterpiece “Guernica,” which raised the question of whether it was a great painting because it was an antiwar and anti-fascist painting, or whether that was an extraneous factor that made the audience feel virtuous about admiring the work’s balance of careful design and explosive aesthetic innovation. Everyone’s answer to that question will depend on his or her subject position and analytical perspective, but we can say a couple of things: It is clearly possible, God knows, to make bad art against war and fascism, and D.W. Griffith, Leni Riefenstahl and the Italian Futurists created good or great art that was informed by despicable politics. That said, does it really seem right to suggest that the power of “Guernica” has nothing to do with the political passion that we know, or believe, lay behind its creation?

Some works of art come with explicit meanings attached and some don’t, but meaning is an anarchic beast, a shape-shifter that never stays still, and the relationship between what books or movies or paintings “say” and how they affect us is never entirely clear. It’s obviously prejudicial to compare Picasso’s most famous painting to a brand new movie whose legacy is unknown, but let us note that “Guernica” drew mixed reviews and sparked heated debate on its 1937 unveiling; many leftists thought it lacked a clear political point of view. That’s roughly where we find ourselves with “Wolf of Wall Street,” a deliriously and deliberately hyperbolic satire that has become, since its Christmas Day release, the latest litmus test of cultural politics. It has pitted feuding camps of film critics against each other, sometimes within the same publication: David Denby of the New Yorker was alternately nettled, bored and scandalized by “Wolf”; after grousing that the movie is “a bit of a trap for critics” and that he may be considered squeamish for disliking it, he ultimately calls it “disgusting, obscene filmmaking.” Richard Brody, the magazine’s ultra-erudite film blogger, took an opposite tack, describing “Wolf” as “an exuberant, hyper-energized riot” and perhaps Scorsese’s crowning masterpiece. (Yes, the world of New York film criticism is very small, and I’m on cordial terms with both of them.)

It supposedly got a banker-heavy preview audience in Manhattan’s financial district — literally within sight of the Goldman Sachs trading floor — cheering at the “wrong” moments, including Belfort’s raid of his secret cocaine stash (inside the sofa cushions) and his attempt to double-cross the FBI and federal prosecutors. In the other direction, “Wolf” also sparked a brief but surprisingly intense backlash in the social-media universe, largely among people who I suspect had not seen it. Christina McDowell, whose father went to prison as a business associate and co-conspirator of Belfort’s, published an Op-Ed in the LA Weekly directed at Scorsese and DiCaprio, accusing them of glamorizing Belfort’s misdeeds, “exacerbating our national obsession with wealth and status and glorifying greed and psychopathic behavior,” sending a “misogynistic, ass-backwards message” to younger male viewers, and being traitors to some unspecified liberal agenda. “Did you think about the cultural message you’d be sending when you decided to make this film?” she asked, and I don’t think that question is meant to be rhetorical.

I won’t pretend to be neutral on “Wolf of Wall Street,” which I think is a terrific film that will likely get better with repeat viewings, a Grand Guignol spectacle of absurd and often nightmarish excess that snorts cinema history the way Jordan Belfort snorted coke and whose intentions are, in fact, pretty clear. There are various ways to respond to McDowell’s simplistic understanding of culture as politics, including the observation that “Marty” and “Leo” (as she addresses them) are not personally responsible for our national obsession with wealth or the misogynistic attitudes of white male stockbrokers in the 1990s. Forbes blogger and Salon contributor Scott Mendelson made the fascinating point (in a Facebook post) that some people seem more exercised about the depiction of Wall Street greed and excess in “Wolf,” or by the depiction of torture in “Zero Dark Thirty,” than they were by the actual phenomena as they occurred in the real world. It’s a peculiar testimonial to the power of culture, or perhaps a fulfillment of Guy Debord’s vision of “The Society of the Spectacle,” in which “all that was once directly lived has become mere representation.”