Become a fan of the Political Gabfest on Facebook. We post to the Facebook page throughout the week, so keep the conversation going by joining us there. Or follow us @SlateGabfest!

To listen to the discussion, use the player below:

Advertisement



For this week’s Slate Plus bonus segment, David, Emily, and John reflect on David’s tenure and what he should do after Slate. Slate Plus members get an ad-free version of this podcast with bonus segments. Visit slate.com/gabfestplus and try it free for two weeks.

On this week’s Slate Political Gabfest, Emily Bazelon, John Dickerson, and David Plotz discuss John Boehner’s threatened lawsuit against President Obama, Sen. Elizabeth Warren’s possible 2016 run for the Democratic presidential nomination, and the role of police in the community.

Here are some of the links and references mentioned during this week’s show:

On Monday, David Plotz stepped down as editor in chief of Slate . Deputy Editor Julia Turner replaced Plotz, who despite the changes will remain at Slate as editor at large and host of the Political Gabfest.

. Deputy Editor Julia Turner replaced Plotz, who despite the changes will remain at as editor at large and host of the Political Gabfest. The GOP is threatening to sue Obama over the president’s delay of Obamacare’s employer mandate. Some see the lawsuit as a way to redirect far-right calls for impeachment.

The lawsuit’s legitimacy rests in part on whether the House has legal standing.

Federal courts generally abide by the “political question doctrine,” refusing to hear cases that could be easily solved by other branches of government.

The Justice Department’s refusal to challenge Colorado’s and Washington’s marijuana laws is a prime example of selective enforcement.

Elizabeth Warren is seen as a possible challenger to Hillary Clinton for the 2016 Democratic presidential nomination.

Republicans blocked Warren’s student loan legislation.

An NBC/Marist poll released this week shows Hillary Clinton’s enormous advantage among Democrats.

Kevin Roose argues that Warren is attempting to change the dialogue on financial regulation.

Debra Harrell, an African-American single mother and McDonald’s employee, was arrested after leaving her child at a park during the workday. Previously, Harrell’s daughter spent her summer break surfing the Web at her mom’s work, but the family’s laptop was stolen during a break-in.

Instances of child abduction by strangers are extremely rare.

Advertisement



Emily chatters about Amelia Showalter’s analysis of the Gabfest’s guest hosts.

John chatters about the description of the Berlin airlift in William Manchester’s “The Glory and The Dream: A Narrative History of America, 1932-1972.”

David chatters about Richard Linklater’s film “Boyhood.”

Topic ideas for next week? You can tweet suggestions, links, and questions to @SlateGabfest. The email address for the Political Gabfest is gabfest@slate.com. (Email may be quoted by name unless the writer stipulates otherwise.)

Podcast production by Mike Vuolo. Links compiled by Max Tani.