It turns out all that was needed to awaken the cultural heart of a tiny town in the Monadnock Region was a war, a fight and “Wang Dang Doodle.” Well, that and Dennis Molesky.

Mole Hill Theatre, owned and operated by Molesky out of the old Triple M Tool and Die shop, is tucked off a back dirt road amid quiet fields and farms. For more than eight years, Molesky and a bunch of supporters have worked to make it a community center of Alstead, albeit a tough-to-find one. It’s hosted regional bands, charity events, live theater and even multi-media performance art.

And when people do find the place, not only do they stay, they keep coming back — bringing friends, coolers of homemade hooch and a dish to pass.

“I’ve seen a tremendous transformation in Dennis and the community in terms of him transforming that space,” said Mole Hill co-founder Peter C. Hendrick, who by day runs a scientific association, but at heart and at night is an acting coach at Mole Hill.

“What Dennis has really done is taken that space and has really provided a vital spark to a very small, rural community. And now what we’re seeing are events where families and young musicians and old musicians and folk musicians, blues, rock ’n’ roll and the acting performances are all in this small unique theater. And so, it’s been very exciting.”

Molesky, 52, grew up on the property, just as his father did. Molesky’s father, Ben, was the son of immigrants — his mother from Sweden, father from Lithuania — and one of 12 siblings. Ben Molesky’s father bought the 8 acres of property at 789 Gilsum Mine Road in 1924 for $250 and paid it off a little bit per year, working in the mines, Dennis Molesky said.

“My dad said they had so many kids in such a small house that they had to sleep in drawers, in shifts,” Molesky said. “My dad was prone to exaggeration, but you get the idea of how small it was.”

The sons eventually learned how to use their hands and set to work building a slightly bigger, but still modest, house on the property. It’s the house Dennis Molesky still lives in today, with a few additions built over the years.

When Ben Molesky was a young man he made his way 11 miles every day from Alstead to Keene to learn the tool and die business. By 1955, his father had died and Ben Molesky promised his siblings he would care for their mother. Eventually, he was able to borrow some money, buy a few pieces of machinery on credit, kick the cows out of the barn and set up his own shop — named Triple M after his wife, Marjorie Marie Molesky, whom he’d married that year.

In 1961, Dennis Molesky was born, the middle of two brothers.

“Growing up was idyllic,” Molesky said. “There were fields around and dogs and summers. We were lower middle class I’d say, but there were still vacations to the White Mountains.”

By the late 1960s, Molesky’s father expanded the buildings and the business to include metal stamping. The boys all helped their dad at the shop, but that was it.

“I did not learn the trade,” Molesky said. “My mother’s attitude was ... she wanted to offer us the freedom so that we weren’t obligated to be in the shop. And we also didn’t run the machines in the shop, the presses, because, you know, there are certain dangers involved in that. So we weren’t necessarily steered away from the business, but we certainly weren’t steered towards it.”

In the meantime Molesky graduated high school and went on to the University of New Hampshire to study chemical engineering and earned his MBA at the school. At the end of it he was offered a partnering interest in a start-up business doing applied research in flame technology in Lee, and lived and worked there for seven years.

But then, well, he shifted gears. He headed West. He worked in the skiing industry, built log homes, conducted wilderness trips for kids, and went exploring.

He eventually came to Vermont, where he dabbled in the renewable energy business.

“It was prompted perhaps when my mother passed. And I just wanted something different,” Molesky said. “From the time I was in high school, I had no clue what I wanted to do. We had so many opportunities handed to us on a silver platter — not that we were rich by any means, I don’t mean that — but everything my parents did, they did so that we had choices. And sometimes when you’re given all these choices, it takes a while to sort through them.”

After five years, he spent a summer back in Alstead with his dad. And for the first time, he could imagine himself settling down there, if only to be closer to his father. Molesky started learning a little more about the business and where his father was at with it. Like the rest of the industry, Triple M was getting by, but definitely not thriving.

Molesky’s dad died in 1999 and left the property to him. Molesky settled into life back in Alstead and started sorting through the business, determined to continue it long enough to get its two full-time employees to retirement. It was important, he said, because his dad was an old-school employer, a man of loyalty. He wanted to honor that. That said, tool and die making just wasn’t his calling. He just had to make it through.

And he was making it through when, at the suggestion of his girlfriend Jackie Hensen in 2003, the couple decided to have a karaoke party in the shop. But just three days before, war broke out in Iraq. The party went on, complete with beer, karaoke, and, soon, differing opinions on the war.

“Things got kind of tense,” Molesky said.

Though it didn’t come to fisticuffs, a fight broke out. To settle the tension, one of the party-goers got up and sang Howlin’ Wolf’s, “Wang Dang Doodle,” which broke the ice. Out of the chaos came inspiration.

“Peter (Hendrick) said, ‘This is great theater. Let’s build one,’ ” Molesky said.

So they did.

In the weeks that followed, they loaded up a truck with some wood and built a stage between two of the biggest presses.

They started out by giving free weekly acting classes, which turned into full-scale productions, including an original musical adaptation of “The Wizard of Oz,” called “Dorothy’s Road to Oz,” written by Alstead Selectman Matthew Saxton.

Music was the next natural step, and bands started agreeing to play the off-the-beaten-path venue, with almost all the proceeds going to local charities. And as word has gotten out about Mole Hill, it’s developed a loyal following of regulars, who’ve helped keep the light lit at the place most Friday nights.

“I think it’s been a very, almost mythical journey,” Hendrick said. “Dennis has taken it in his own way and created a performance space for the entire community. ... I think it’s really his spirit and Jackie Kensen who’s been partnering with him who have really transformed that space from an industrial, masculine, oil and machinery tool shop into something very special.”

Just as it has over and over again in its long and storied history, the venue is going through yet another iteration: Nonprofit.

Not only did they recently expand the stage, but Molesky said they are in the process of making the Mole Hill Theatre a nonprofit performing arts center for Alstead, where productions will continue to benefit local charities. Molesky would act as landlord and the shop, with all its equipment, would be preserved for an on-site museum.

“The fulfillment (for me) is in having taken my dad’s world and morphed it into a place that resonates with me, and I had a lot of help with that,” Molesky said. “The fulfillment was and is in the transformation of space and in what happens when people gather and are able to celebrate. I’ve been able to honor the hard work of my parents through this.”