Buy Photo Hunter Harritt of New Albany watches quietly as the Hoosiers struggle with the Tar Heals. March 25, 2016 (Photo: David R. Lutman/Special to The CJ)Buy Photo

It was a somber night for Indiana fans watching their team play top-seeded North Carolina in the Sweet 16 game from television screens at Wick's Pizza in New Albany.

The Hoosiers fell behind early in the game and were never able to catch up, eventually losing to the Tar Heels, 101-86.

About 60 to 70 people came to watch the Sweet 16 contest on Wick's pub television screens, said Crystal Sparks, assistant general manager for Wick's. The restaurant probably sold more beer when Indiana played UK, she said.

"When Indiana is winning, people are happy and want to celebrate. The crowds were a little thicker for that game, too. There wasn't an open table in the house," she said, adding that Friday night's game had a late start.

Still, there were a lot of loyal Indiana fans that came to watch, despite the time.

"Some showed up four hours before game time to get a good seat," she said.

Carol Wilkerson, who just moved back to Southern Indiana from Louisville, was at the pub to cheer for the Hoosiers. She said team support in her family is divided: She used to be a University of Louisville fan, her brother roots for the University of Kentucky and her sister for Indiana. Now that she's crossed the river, so have her loyalties.

"I've been out of state for so long. It was a coming home thing for me to root for Indiana," she said.

Paul Crockett, who was also at Wick's, said he comes from a family of Indiana loyalists. Both his mother, Brenda, and his wife, Kelsey, went to the school in Bloomington.

Crockett said he fell in love with his wife when they were both Floyd Central students. After graduation and going their separate ways, he to Vincennes University and his wife to IU, he often went to Hoosier games with her whenever he visited IU.

"It's great that IU made it to the Sweet 16," he said. "It's been a good run, and it's too bad it had to end like this."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1RssP0h