“The New Atkins Made Easy” is a new way to eat healthy food while keeping things simple. The new book by Colette Heimowitz has just been released to the public according to an email dated December 24. Detroit Healthy Foods Examiner was given a copy for review by the publishing company, Touchstone.

“The New Atkins Made Easy” is an extension of “The New Atkins for a New You” which was published in 2011. Colette spends many hours researching the latest data and even spends time on the Atkin.com community forums where she’s available to listen and answer questions. Those question and answer sessions, along with reading success and failures from Atkins followers is what led her to embark on a new journey.

Having read “The New Atkins for a New You” there was a bit of disappointment. When reading an original book written by Dr. Atkins, one knows the stance on prepackaged and processed foods. After Dr. Atkins death and the takeover of his company, those same types of items which he fought so hard to keep his patients away from became a part of his program. Many were upset and the forum was flooded with outcries from longtime Atkins fans.

When visiting the community forums users will find a community divided between ‘Old Atkins’ and ‘New Atkins.’

With the release of Heimowitz’s latest book, the community is yet again divided. Many argue that Atkins Nutritionals is doing nothing but pushing their prepackaged bars and shakes. While that may have been true with “The New Atkins for a New You” and there is little mention in the latest publication “The New Atkins Made Easy.” The latest publication is a book that should have been written after the passing of Dr. Atkins. There is less discussion of and pushing of brand products and it gets back to the message of what Dr. Atkins was trying to convey with his book “Dr. Atkins New Diet Revolution.”

“The New Atkins Made Easy” is just that, easy. It’s very well put together and much more thought out than previous Atkins editions. All the questions, myths, concerns, and nonsense that people think they know about Atkins are brought forward in an easy-to-understand manual. Week by week, stage by stage, Colette walks you through the program. You will get the hows and the whys as to the reason behind Atkins and the ‘carb ladder.’ You’ll understand why the need for the 14-day Induction. She’ll also give you all the food and grocery lists along with meal plans to get you started. The best part about Atkins is that there are no prepackaged foods you have to buy, no points to count, and no special foods.

“The New Atkins Made Easy” is full of tips and recipes that will even delight long-time Atkins and low-carb followers. The book is enjoyable. It’s not bogged down with a bunch of medical science, but gives you what you need to know. Heimowitz should be applauded for finding balance with this book between ‘Old Atkins’ and ‘New Atkins.’

Anyone interested in purchasing the book can download a $3 off coupon from Atkins for a limited time.

Disclosure of Material Connection: I received this book free from the publisher as part of a review program. I was not required to write a positive review. The opinions I have expressed are my own. I am disclosing this in accordance with the Federal Trade Commission's 16 CFR, Part 255: "Guides Concerning the Use of Endorsements and Testimonials in Advertising."

Subscribe to my channel or follow me on Twitter and Like me on Facebook to get more entertainment news and celebrity headlines!

More articles by Chrystal Mahan. Follow her eatables on YUM eating . Follow her writing on Self Employed Writer.

©Chrystal Mahan. All Rights Reserved. No part of this article may be reproduced without prior permissions from the author. Partial reposting is permitted with a link back to the original article.