*NSYNC Tweets About Obamacare, Conservatives Fire Back at Band For Allegedly Promoting New Health Care Reform (TWEETS)

*NSYNC's latest tweet about Obamacare may have been relatively inoffensive, but it started quite a riot in the Twittersphere, as a number of conservative tweeters fired back at the boyband for allegedly promoting the new legislation.

Oct 01, 2013 11:27 AM EDT

One simple tweet from *NSYNC about Obamacare set off a number of conservatives on Twitter. (Photo : Reuters)

*NSYNC's latest tweet about Obamacare may have been relatively inoffensive, but it started quite a riot in the Twittersphere, as a number of conservative tweeters fired back at the boyband for allegedly promoting the new legislation, PoliticusUSA.com reports.

It all began when the band tweeted, "Love, hate, or just confused by it -learn all you can about the Affordable Care Act which starts enrolling tomorrow! http://www.healthcare.gov," referencing, of course, the controversial new piece of legislation from the Obama administration that will reform the American health care system.

Love, hate, or just confused by it -learn all you can about the Affordable Care Act which starts enrolling tomorrow! http://t.co/yJk1kjpm2J — *NSYNC (@NSYNC) September 30, 2013

Obamacare has been lampooned on SNL, various YouTube channels and sites like Funny Or Die, and while it seems that everyone has an opinion about the new plan, *NSYNC didn't even need to announce their views one way or another for their Twitter feed to start piling up with some rather vicious messages.

"So your solution to 'learn' about it is to direct everyone to a pro-ObamaCare website. Propaganda. Lovely," tweeted SunnyRight, while one user, @jdonels, simply tweeted, "f**k you."

"I used to like you. How sad that you're now liberal #puppets," tweeted @CassiaSpice, while Michelle Malkin wrote, "I'm singing Bye Bye Bye to my health plan, while @NSYNC pimps Obamacare."

Other comments included "Pro #ObamaCare propaganda from @NSYNC? Seriously? We are SO boycotting your new album. Oh wait, it's not 1999" from @tjdanzi, and "Wow, that made me just lose a hell of a lot of respect for them" from @RAJankowski.

Pro #ObamaCare propaganda from @NSYNC? Seriously? We are SO boycotting your new album. Oh wait, it's not 1999. — T.J. Danzi (@tjdanzi) September 30, 2013

"So, here's a warning to all you brands out there: Don't you dare follow the law or try to educate American citizens about it, or else conservatives are gonna get you," PoliticusaUSA.com writes. "You are not allowed to even mention it, let alone try to inform them about the law, forget endorsing it. Pretending as if you have no opinion on the law is not good enough. If you're not a rabid hater of the law, they hate you."

*NSYNC has yet to respond.

Tags: *NSYNC