Jon Huntsman Sr., father of former Utah Governor Jon Huntsman Jr. and self-proclaimed “lifelong Republican,” says that the Tea Party has “completely captivated and ruined the Republican Party,” and they will show this in 2016, according to the Washington Times. He goes on to say that, because of this, the GOP doesn’t stand a chance unless someone like his son is elected.

Huntsman Sr., former assistant to President Richard Nixon, is looking ahead with concern regarding the Grand Old Party’s 2016 prospects, according to Yahoo Finance.

He says, “Unless Jeb Bush comes in or John Huntsman Jr., the Republicans don’t have a prayer.”

The junior Mr. Huntsman sought the GOP nomination in 2012 and lost. He now serves as the U.S. ambassador to China.

When asked if his son will run again in 2016, Mr. Huntsman Sr. says, “I don’t think so [but] I wish he’s listen to his father and would run.”

Huntsman Sr., who is founder of Huntsman Chemical Corporation, says that he didn’t think that a “moderate” Republican like his son could win with the party’s nomination. With regards to Jeb Bush, Huntsman says that he “would represent the Republican Party very well, but I doubt he’ll be embraced too heavily by the Tea Party gang.”

Huntsman goes on to say that he thinks that Hillary Clinton “would be a fine president.”

Emboldened by recent midterm elections, the Tea Party movement promises a clash with President Obama, reports Global Post. However, an equally consequential battle awaits between the far-right lawmakers and their Republican leaders.

There are several conservatives backed by the small-government, anti-tax movement who, in January 2015, will embark on efforts to repeal or defund the Affordable Care Act, eliminate government departments like the Environmental Protection Agency, and fight Obama over excessive government funding.

Whether Tea Party conservatives can find common ground with Democrats or with their own leadership is a key question for Congress when it opens January 3, 2015.

The Inquisitr reports that the recent elections reveal Americans are fed-up with the infighting, as well as the Republican and Democrat extremes.

Raw Story reports that Michelle Bachmann says voters want Congress “united”, and the Tea Party is simply misunderstood. She says that “fiscal sanity” is what the party is standing for, and that was the Tea Party message from the people who voted last Tuesday.

She goes on to say, “That’s what the Tea Party is—it’s maligned. And, people don’t—misunderstand what it is, but it’s really about brining fiscal sanity.”

During a panel discussion on CNN, Bachmann argued that now that the Republicans have control of both the House and the Senate, Congress should relinquish its “do nothing” label.

Time will what unification, if any, is being created following the recent midterm election. And, as to whether or not if Huntsman is right about the Tea Party ruining the GOP, we’ll know more in 2016.

[Image via The Conversation]