By Jeffrey Ferrer

What is global warming? We often hear this term and it seems to be a substantial and continuous issue for our country, but why can’t we find a permanent solution for this? Why can’t we prevent it? Who really created this issue?

Changes in the Earth’s climate

Global warming is the term used to describe a gradual increase in the average temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere and its oceans, a change that is believed to be permanently changing the Earth’s climate. The increased volumes of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases released by the burning of fossil fuels, land clearing, agriculture and other human activities are believed to be the primary sources of the global warming that has occurred over the past 50 years.

Global warming threatens the future of the planet and there is both an urgent need and a moral imperative to reduce fossil fuel consumption. I think I can define global warming as a silent killer, endangering our lives and even our planet. Global warming also exacerbates the poverty level among farmers and fishermen and creates new hunger spots. Because of the temperature change, many fish will die, thus affecting the fishermen, reducing their catch, affecting the amount they can sell and even the food they put on the table for their family.

Farmers will experience significant decrease in crops yields due to either very wet or very dry conditions. As a result of lower yields, together with the pressure of a growing population, food prices will go up, making food less affordable for those living in poverty, resulting in increased hunger and malnutrition.

Campaign for awareness

In the aftermath of the recent elections, I would like to raise this issue to our newly elected officials. We can prevent or even lessen global warming by instituting three actions. First is awareness. I think the government should launch an information campaign to educate people on global warming and how this affects our daily life.

Nowadays, we all live busy lives, trying to earn money, to rise up the corporate ladder, to care for our family that we have no time to read up and educate ourselves on global warming on our own. A strong campaign for awareness must be the first action of the government so we will be aware on how directly it affects our living and the future generations. With increase awareness, they will be conscious enough on how they act more responsibly, especially when they are driving a car, or having a cigarette, or burning trash in the backyard—those small things that can have a big impact on Earth. It really matters.

Maximize natural resources

Second is to maximize our natural resources. We are blessed with bountiful resources and we should conserve it and not destroy it. With proper care, we can use these resources wisely. Let’s advocate planting trees. Let’s invest in green jobs and clean energy. Let’s encourage smart investments in green, job-creating industries.

Investing in clean energy industries, such as wind and solar, as well as enhancing energy efficiency programs and retooling manufacturing plants can lead us out of this crisis and into a new clean energy economy. This is a win-win situation because at the same way we will provide a job to the people for the benefit of our country.

Build better communities and transportation systems

Lastly, please build better communities and transportation systems. Shorter drive equates to less pollution. Less time behind the wheel means less money spent on gas—and more time for you. Plus, studies show that a neighborhood where people walk more is healthier, safer and friendlier. And when people walk to the store, the office, or the movie theater instead of driving, we slow down global warming. Each “smart growth” community reduces global warming pollution by 20 to 40 percent compared to the norm.

It’s never too late, but we have to start today. We can still save our Mother Earth for today and future generations. It’s a matter of awareness and discipline on how we live and what to live for.

The author is an MBA student at the Ramon V. del Rosario College of Business, De La Salle University. This essay is part of a journal he kept in fulfillment of the requirements of the course, Lasallian Business Leadership with Corporate Social Responsibility and Ethics. Visit his blog at https://officiallyjeff.wordpress.com/

The views expressed here are the author’s and do not necessarily reflect the official position of DLSU, its faculty, and its administrators.