Senators see 'political agenda' in Scott's budget vetoes

TALLAHASSEE — Gov. Rick Scott used his veto pen Tuesday to slash $461 million from the lawmaker-approved state budget, a move that drew an openly hostile reaction from senators who have been feuding with the governor since his November re-election.

Senate President Andy Gardiner, an Orlando Republican, said that Scott was playing “politics” with his veto list in an attempt to help frame his future political ambitions, which could include a 2018 run for U.S. Senate.

Story Continued Below

“It is unfortunate that the messaging strategy needed to achieve the governor’s political agenda comes at the expense of the most vulnerable people in our state,” Gardiner wrote in a statement.

Senate Majority Leader Bill Galvano of Sarasota said that Scott’s massive veto list will impact relationships with the Legislature heading into next session, which begins in just three months.

“The cuts will still be fresh in members' minds when they return to Tallahassee,” he said.

House Speaker Steve Crisafulli took a much different tone, underscoring his chamber’s better relationship with Scott’s office.

“I want to thank Governor Scott for swiftly signing the budget into law,” he said in a statement.

This year’s legislative session was marked by a fight in which House Republicans and Scott’s office together opposed a Senate plan to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

The $461 million in vetoed spending is the most since Scott cut $615 million in 2011, his first year in office. Scott signed the budget behind closed doors, which is contrary to the public signing ceremony that usually comes with finalizing the state spending plan.

“I went through the budget saying, what is a statewide priority, can I get a good return on investment, has it gone through a state process?” he said of his veto rationale.

He said “absolutely not” when asked if his veto list was designed to retaliate against those who opposed his policy positions. During an availability with reporters, Scott touted the budget’s $427 million in tax cuts, nearly $20 billion for public education—a record overall number—and a record $45 million for springs restoration.

Among the projects that did not make the final cut are $15 million for a downtown University of Central Florida campus in Orlando, a big priority Gardiner; $2 million for IMG, a private sports academy in Galvano's district; and $1 million for a marina in Palm Beach County sought by powerful Republican state Sen. Jack Latvala of Clearwater.

Scott also vetoed more than $20 million in local water projects, which are politically important for lawmakers who use them as concrete examples of state cash they can bring home to their districts.

Senate budget chief Tom Lee says members are already calling him about potential veto overrides.

He specifically pointed to a $27 million veto for “water farming,” or using contracts with private land owners to store water, and a handful of vetoes to funding for developmental programs championed by Gardiner, whose son has Down syndrome.

Lee said he thinks his chamber’s hostile reaction is tied to meetings held during regular session in which Scott threatened individual senators with vetoes.

“Expectations were set among members of the Senate that the governor is going to be punitive,” Lee said. “If he had not foreshadowed that, I don’t think senators would be reacting this way.”

The final spending plan was signed just days after it was passed by lawmakers last Friday, a quick turnaround that surprised many.

“I was not given a heads-up,” Galvano said.

The time between final budget passage and the governor's signature is traditionally used by both lobbyists and lawmakers to make the case for their budget items. They provide the governor’s budget staff with background information and more details about projects to try and avoid the veto ax.

Scott’s budget staff had been asking a handful of lobbyists for backup information on projects early, because the special session was going to give him a shorter turnaround time to sign the spending plan.

“Insiders should not be too surprised,” said Nick Iarossi, a lobbyist and Scott fund-raiser. “Our firm was providing information requested about our client’s projects back during regular session.”