Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share The Kentucky win is Trump's 11th in the race. It was one of four states up for grabs Saturday.

Buy Photo Voters walk past candidate tables such as this one for Donald Trump at Seneca High School during Saturday's GOP presidential caucus. (Photo: Matt Stone/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

1. Despite all the talk about long lines at the Kentucky Republican presidential caucus, there really was nothing exceptional about the turnout Saturday. While the 17.9 percent who showed up at the caucus was above the average 16 percent turnout in the last seven presidential primaries, it was lower than turnout in 1992 and 2008.

2. The long lines were merely a function of fewer hours to vote (six hours instead of 12 in a primary) and fewer voting locations. In Kenton County, for instance, the GOP had only one voting locations for 56,377 Republicans.

3. The only candidate who came to Kentucky won Kentucky. Donald Trump visited Louisville for a rally four days before the caucus and walked away from the state with 17 delegates. Ted Cruz, who sent his father to campaign for him, claimed 15.

4. U.S. Sen. Rand Paul, at whose request the caucus was created and who raised $250,000 to help pay for it but dropped out of the presidential race on Feb. 3, garnered 872 votes. That’s $286.70 per vote for those of you scoring at home.

I just cast my vote in the #kycaucus! Make your voice heard: https://t.co/VMsUB2qQs9pic.twitter.com/PW6ZRLXNuW — Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) March 5, 2016

5. Marco Rubio’s performance here was, to say the least, disappointing. He put together a long list of endorsements that included former U.S. Sen. Jim Bunning, U.S. Reps. Anne Northup and Geoff Davis, 28 current or former state legislators and numerous local and county officials but to no avail. He got just 16.4 percent of the vote and 7 of the state’s 46 delegates.

6. Trump won 79 of Kentucky’s 120 counties, dominating in the coal counties in both the East and the West. Meanwhile, Cruz did best in the Purchase area, the Bluegrass region and in Northern Kentucky suburbs of Cincinnati. Neither Rubio nor John Kasich won any counties.

7. Other than long lines and long waits, the caucus itself seemed to go rather smoothly around the state. The problem came when state party officials tried to collect and disseminate the results. The plan was to report a winner by 7 p.m. but results trickled out slowly. The Associated Press didn’t have enough data to declare a winner until it was nearly 11 p.m.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1p0cPej