Jason and Megan Johnson wanted to offer the children a safe, fun environment to learn the basics of football, so the couple has started Twin Peaks Youth Sports, a flag-football league for ages 5 through 14. The program is part of the NFL outreach program to get kids to participate in an outdoor activity.

"Flag is a fantastic introduction to football, five on five, learning ball skills, playing all different positions," Jason said. "For kids starting out, they don't have that contact that they could be scared of."

The Johnsons have four children of their own, two of whom play flag football. Jason has taught youth and high school sports for the last 23 years.

This will be the first year for the league and the couple is committed to making it a great way for children to spend their time.

"It's just a fun sport and the kids build confidence in a fun way," Megan said. As a mother she sees the danger in contact sports, "It's important for kids to develop correctly before they enter middle school where injuries occur," she said.

In order to accomplish this, the couple has come up with a few ways to make the league more family friendly. For instance, all games will happen on Saturdays.

"A lot of church-going kids and kids that do family things on Sundays can't play," Megan pointed out.

They have also decided pick the teams based on an evaluation system to spread out the different skill levels.

Advertisement

"With kids this age, a lot of them haven't played before," Megan said.

The children will have to do a little spring training exercise in order to determine where their skill levels are. The couple said this is a way to spread out the experienced players and will leave more playing time for everyone.

Jason is also developing handbooks for the coaches.

"(In) youth sports, the coaching is based on volunteers. Sometimes it's good for the kids if they get an experienced coach." Jason said, noting that he realizes that is not always the case, as even the most experience coach can get sidetracked.

The handbook is designed to allow volunteers with or without coaching experience to have a guideline as to what the children need to learn to enhance their skill levels. All coaches will be given development outlines so that each child can work on different skills. The teams are based on age, 5-7, 7-9, 9-11, and 12-14, with skill level taken into consideration.

Teams are currently forming with registration ending on March 31. The cost is $99, with a $20 discount if enrolled by Feb. 28. Players will each receive a jersey, flags and a mouth guard. The first game is scheduled for April 12.

Call 720-635-5726 or go to twinpeaksyouthsports.org.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Michelle Vendegna at 303-684-5218 or mvendegna@times-call.com