Sen. Roy Blunt, R-Mo. speaks during a news conference on Capitol Hill on Feb. 12, 2015. (Photo: Molly Riley, AP)

WASHINGTON — As the 2016 election approaches, some Senate Republicans are already looking over their shoulders, terrified of a primary challenge from the right.

But in Missouri, Sen. Roy Blunt appears to have a clear path to the GOP nomination — even though he's viewed by many as an entrenched, establishment Republican.

Interviews with Republican strategists, conservative activists and political experts suggest Blunt will not face the kind of bruising, expensive intraparty fight that has hobbled other GOP incumbents in recent elections. Blunt may get a nominal challenger, they said, but he won't have a real battle on his hands.

"I have seen nothing and heard from no one who is thinking about running," said John Hancock, a longtime GOP consultant who is vying for the Missouri Republican Party chairmanship.

It's not that Tea Party activists are enamored of the 65-year-old Blunt. At a time when his party is riven by a division between old-guard Republicans and insurgent conservatives, Blunt is seen as a traditional, Chamber of Commerce Republican.

He's been in politics since 1972 and in congressional leadership for about 15 of the 18 years he's been in Congress. He is married to a Washington lobbyist, Abigail Blunt, head of government affairs at Kraft Foods Group. His son, Matt Blunt, is the former governor of Missouri and now a D.C. lobbyist for the American auto industry.

The Senate Conservatives Fund labeled Blunt a "big-spending" Republican when he and others pushed for passage, in the lame-duck session of the 113th Congress, of a massive government funding bill at the end of last year. They also dinged him ahead of the 2013 government shutdown for not joining with Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, in an all-out effort to block money for the federal health care law.

"These senators want voters to know they oppose Obamacare, but they aren't willing to do what is necessary to actually stop it," the group said of Blunt and 19 other Republicans after a March 2013 vote in favor of a spending bill. The measure didn't block implementation of Obamacare, as conservatives were demanding.

Amber Marchand, a spokeswoman for Blunt, noted her boss has pushed aggressively to block a bevy of President Obama's policies.

"Senator Blunt is fighting every day for families and workers in Missouri, and he continues to be a vocal leader against President Obama's onerous health care law, illegal immigration takeover, and burdensome executive overreach," Marchand said.

Without question, Blunt has been a high-profile Obama detractor, fighting the administration's environmental regulations, criticizing the president on foreign policy and blasting his call for tax increases on the wealthy.

His voting record is conservative by many standards. He has supported a balanced-budget amendment, opposed Obama's climate-change regulations and led the fight against the administration's contraception mandate.

But as his party has tilted rightward, Blunt has not always gone along. National Journal, a nonpartisan magazine, ranked him the 42nd most conservative senator in 2013, its most recent scorecard.

The Club for Growth, a powerful conservative group in Washington, gave him a 67% rating for 2013. He lost points with the group for, among other things, supporting a five-year farm bill that conservatives said spent too much on food stamps and for not filibustering a bipartisan budget deal that lifted tight budget caps.

"I've talked to a handful of friends who think the senator deserves a primary challenge, and I have another group of friends who think the senator is doing well," said Ryan Johnson, president of the Missouri Alliance for Freedom, a conservative advocacy group. "It's kind of a mixed bag."

The alliance commissioned a poll earlier this month of likely Republican primary voters, which found that 52% had a favorable opinion of Blunt. Half of respondents said they would support Blunt if the election were held now, while 19% said they would support St. Louis businessman John Brunner, who ran for the Senate in 2012, and 32% said they were undecided.

Given that "mixed bag," why isn't someone gunning for the senator? There are a few answers — from Blunt's careful cultivation of key Missouri conservatives to Todd Akin's disastrous GOP Senate campaign in 2012.

Let's start with Akin, the arch-conservative former St. Louis County congressman who won a three-way GOP primary in 2012 against Brunner and ex-State Treasurer Sarah Steelman. Akin then lost badly to Sen. Claire McCaskill, a top GOP target, after saying victims of "legitimate rape" rarely become pregnant because "the female body has ways to try to shut that whole thing down."

"Todd Akin is still fresh in everyone's mind," said Jennifer Duffy, who analyzes Senate races for the nonpartisan Cook Political Report. "Nobody wants a repeat of that."

Plus, Duffy noted, Missouri Republicans are already bracing for a tough primary in the governor's race. And that open seat is much more attractive to the state's aspiring Republican candidates than an uphill battle against Blunt, who already has more than $2.2 million in cash on hand.

Brunner, who is seen as a strong conservative with deep pockets to run a statewide race, said he has "no, no, no" interest in running against Blunt.

"I personally understand the problems with primaries," he said. "Too many in the Republican Party tend to get into this infighting and forget about the important battles."

He said any "grumbling from the grass roots" is probably more generic discontent with Washington than any specific complaint about Blunt. "He represents the state really well," Brunner said.

That points to another big dynamic at play. Blunt has proven very adept at keeping both establishment and conservative Republicans happy.

"He threads the needle better" than other Republicans, said Duffy.

Take, for example, the recent fight over Obama's executive order shielding some immigrants in the U.S. from deportation. At the end of last year, Blunt pushed hard for passage of a spending bill that postponed a showdown with the president over immigration.

That legislation — the "cromnibus" bill — infuriated hardline conservatives, who wanted Republicans to threaten a government shutdown and block money for the Department of Homeland Security, using that as leverage to block the immigration order.

Instead, the cromnibus included a short-term extension of money for the security agency, with money set to run out Feb. 27. With that deadline now looming, Blunt has taken an aggressive stance on a new GOP bill that would fund DHS but overturn the president's executive order.

At a Feb. 12 news conference, Blunt joined Cruz and other conservatives in demanding that Senate Democrats allow the bill to move forward, and he brushed off questions about whether the GOP had a backup plan if the stalemate continues and hits the funding deadline.

Sen. Roy Blunt, R-Mo. speaks during a news conference with fellow Republicans on Feb. 12, 2015, to discuss the Department of Homeland Security funding bill. (Photo: Molly Riley, AP)

"It's not that there's no dissatisfaction or asterisk on his record," said Ed Martin, a Tea Party conservative who is chairman of the state GOP party. But on the big issues, such as immigration and abortion, conservatives see him "standing up and fighting."

Plus, Martin and others said, Blunt is simply relentless is getting around the state and talking to allies and foes alike.

Last year, Martin said, some conservatives were pushing for him to block a vote on a Kansas City district court nominee, Steve Bough, a former Jackson County Democratic chairman and McCaskill ally.

"There were people saying (to Blunt) 'Can we put a hold on this guy'?" Martin recalled. Blunt resisted the pressure and explained that he wanted to save such moves for "bigger" fights, Martin said, such as Supreme Court nominations. Even if some remained irked with Blunt's position, Martin said, they appreciated his effort to explain it.

"He knows he's not going to make everyone happy all the time," Martin said. But he's also knows how to "take some of the steam out" of the opposition his positions might ignite.

Follow @dshesgreen on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1EopSIk