The SLU Law Chapter of the Black Law Students’ Association joined activist group Tribe X this week in asking the administration at the Saint Louis University School of Law to remove St. Louis County Prosecutor Robert P. McCulloch from a public program being scheduled by SLU Law students.

“As an organization, we implore the SLU Law administration to rescind Mr. McCulloch’s invitation to speak on February 20,” the black law students wrote in an open letter. “We also implore SLU Law to be tolerant and accepting of protests and dissent that may arise.”

Protests and dissent certainly will arise if McCulloch speaks at the day-long “Thin Blue Line: Policing Post Ferguson” event scheduled for from 8:30 a.m. – 4 p.m. Friday, February 20 at Scott Hall.

Come early if you want to see the fireworks, as McCulloch is slated to give the opening address. A press release says he will “provide personal insight into the political challenges facing prosecutors who are asked to review police conduct, respond to community pressure, and set law enforcement priorities.”

The black law students said McCulloch’s handling of the Darren Wilson case shredded his legal credibility and rendered him unfit to speak under the auspices of a law school. They decried his “unethical behavior during Wilson’s grand jury process and during the post-decision press conference (the latter of which stoked riots in Ferguson).”

The EYE agrees with this account of McCulloch’s actions and credibility, but questions the strategic decision to silence him, especially since a Q&A has been promised. McCulloch is so brazen and unapologetic that he digs a deeper hole for himself every time he goes on public record. Many of the worst claims against McCulloch – for example, that he suborned perjury in the Wilson case – we know because he admitted it in public. The EYE wants more of McCulloch on the record, not less.

Looting anniversary

St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar – who led the homicide investigation in the Wilson case, as well as the initial militarized police response to Ferguson protests – also is on the “Thin Blue Line” bill at SLU Law. This week Belmar’s department observed the six-month anniversary of the August 10 looting in Ferguson by posting video and photos of it. The EYE noticed St. Louis County Executive Steve Stenger did not brand this looting evidence, as he was called out in this space for doing last week.

Coordinated and unconstitutional

Belmar’s counterpart in the city, St. Louis Police Chief Sam Dotson, is exploring a motorist version of “stop and frisk” policing in downtown St. Louis, according to news reports.

Missy Kelley, the chief operating officer of Downtown STL, Inc. – and suddenly an authority on policing – said the new “coordinated safety checks” could include “stopping vehicles and searching for things like unbuckled seat belts, alcohol, guns and drugs.”

Missy and Sam might also search for the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which offers protection against “unreasonable searches and seizures,” while they are at it. They seem to have lost sight of it.

Muni court bill advances

This week the Missouri Senate gave initial approval to Senate Bill 5, legislation sponsored by state Sen. Eric Schmitt, R-Glendale, to prevent municipalities from using unfair traffic ticketing practices for the sole purpose of increasing local revenue. Senate Bill 5 needs a final vote in the upper chamber before moving onto the House for consideration.

Under Senate Bill 5, a municipality may only fund up to 10 percent of its budget with traffic fines. The reduction would be phased in over two years. Additionally, the bill has provisions that create penalties if political subdivisions do not remit money over the threshold: people in the city will get the opportunity to vote on municipal disincorporation; and the excess revenue will be distributed to local schools, enforced by the Department of Revenue.

“As lawmakers, we have to rein in this practice, which all too often falls on the backs of lower-income citizens,” Schmitt said. Finally, a major initiative we can support from a GOP legislator. Good looking out.

Munis going out of business?

Speaking of “municipal disincorporation” – that is, taking a municipality out of business – state Rep. Bob Burns, D-St. Louis, has filed legislation that would streamline the process in St. Louis County. There are more than 90 municipalities in the county, many of which have just a couple hundred residents and offer few, if any, municipal services.

Under House Bill 741, an election to discorporate a city, town or village would be forced by the filing of a petition signed by at least 25 percent of city voters. If a majority of voters support it, then the municipality would be disincorporated.

“Part of our dysfunction as a region stems from the fractured municipal governance in St. Louis County, which not only has too many municipalities, but has too many small municipalities that lack the tax base and revenue to properly function,” Burns said. Yeah, like he said.

Listen up, labor

On Tuesday, February 11, the Missouri House of Represented perfected state Rep. Courtney Curtis’ bill that would impose “Right to Work” in the state’s construction trades, which have been notoriously resistant to racial diversity. Labor is moaning that his bill could lead to more general “Right to Work” laws and the erosion of labor power and wages, but the EYE says labor needs to listen up.

Asking black legislators to protect labor in the trades that have largely resisted the inclusion of black people is plain stupid. Curtis’ constituents see him as a hero taking on a special interest that has actively worked against the interests of the black community. He had the political savvy to align himself with his party’s political enemies to deliver a surgical strike at one of his community’s enemies.

‘Manly firmness’?

Don’t get the EYE twisted. There is no Republican love here. How can there be? When you have the Republican super-majority in the Missouri State Legislature passing a resolution calling for the Missouri Congressional delegation to “endeavor with ‘manly firmness’ and resolve to totally and completely repeal” and not replace the 2010 Affordable Care Act.”

“Manly firmness”? Seriously?

U.S. Senator Claire McCaskill responded, “I don’t think you prove your manhood by kicking folks off their health coverage and once again letting insurance companies discriminate against women and sick people.”

It is estimated that a full repeal of the Affordable Care Act would strip more than 200,000 Missourians of health insurance coverage, and (according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office) would raise the national deficit by billions of dollars.

Temple of doom

Not that the EYE has much love for the actions of Missouri Dems either.

Last week the Missouri Democratic State Committee re-elected Roy Temple as chair of the Missouri Democratic Party. Temple was first elected to the position in 2013, but has been in the Dem game in Missouri, approximately, forever.

Consider the 2014 that Missouri Democrats suffered through in the state’s largest urban center. A Democratic county prosecutor who provoked riots in Ferguson (McCulloch) led the election of a Democratic county executive who would later brand riot looting evidence as his own while forcing blacks out of county offices (Stenger). This unholy alliance of white Democrats forced a major defection of black Democrats to Stenger’s Republican opponent (Rick Stream) – and now a black Democrat-supported Right to Work bill.

All of this happened on Temple’s watch without a word of leadership from him. That was 2014. And we are already looking at critical 2016 contests. And Temple is still your guy in 2015? Really?

Yet all of the other powerful white Dems – McCaskill, Gov. Jay Nixon, Attorney General Chris Koster, State Treasurer Clint Zweifel and Secretary of State Jason Kander – signed on to more of Temple, with the usual platitudes, as if their collective hair were not on fire. “Roy has the strategic vision we need as we continue to grow our party,” said Koster, for example. Really?

The Missouri Democratic State Committee also re-elected St. Louis Comptroller Darlene Green as vice chair. Cue: crickets.