Calendar sales to support Firefighters for Santa Claus

Kendetrick Ellis smiles wide as he rides on Santa's lighted firetruck after Sterling firefighters join Santa in delivering Christmas presents to his family. ( Courtesy photo )

STERLING — — Santa Claus called in his cadre of helpers this week to make a very special delivery in Sterling.

The Sterling Fire Department teamed up with jolly St. Nick to bring a smile to a little boy and his family who haven't had a lot to smile about in recent months.

Kendetrick Ellis, who is in the second grade, had his third heart surgery in September of this year and then his dad, Keylen Ellis was murdered in California in October.

"He has been very unhappy and sad since that time," said his mother, Brittany Dock. "We haven't seen him smile in quite a while."

Santa's firetruck was full of passengers after he helped the Sterling Fire Department deliver Christmas presents to Brittany Dock and her sons. (Courtesy photo)

But that changed one night this week when a "parade" of eight fire trucks and other emergency vehicles with sirens and lights ablaze escorted Santa Claus in his own decorated fire truck to Kendetrick's house. There was an entourage of 25 firemen with some of their own family, along with numerous family members and neighbors who joined in the event.

Kendetrick and his 4-year-old brother, Kamari, were presented with presents from Santa, a ride on Santa's firetruck with friends and all kinds of attention from the firefighters.

"That just made his day," said his mom. "This season is hard without his dad, and this was just awesome, he was so excited and happy."

Advertisement

The project, known as Firefighters for Santa Claus, is an annual event begun by the Sterling Fire Department three years ago.

"We used funds from our Fireman Cookbook sales to purchase gifts for a family and children that is selected each year," said spokesman Fireman Brady Ring. "We find out about them through friends, churches and other organizations. The shopping and wrapping of gifts throughout the year for the program is provided by Fire Department secretary LeAnn Rieb and also the firefighter's wives."

Kamari Ellis tries on a firefighter's gear and decides he wants to be firefighter as the Sterling Fire Department brings their Firefighters for Santa Claus program to his family. (Courtesy photo)

"We give them some toys, clothes, shoes, PJ's and some Christmas decorations," Ring said.

The entire department gets involved and this year is selling a Firefighter's Calendar to raise funds for future projects. The calendar was put together by Troy Nicolaus and features pictures of the fire trucks and various fire action scenes. They will be available for a couple of months for $15 at Walker's Pharmacy and Mr. D's Ace Hardware in Sterling.

Dock also has undergone two ankle surgeries this year and missed a lot of work.

"This was just so awesome," said Dock. "We were in the process of getting ready to move back to California when Keylen was killed. But everyone has been so amazing and great with helping us. Not just monetarily, but also caring. I'm trying not to be too emotional, but the way this small community has pulled together and thought of us during this hard time makes me think, I want to raise my two boys here so they know this way of life."

The boys got to open one present but the rest are waiting for Christmas, Dock said.

"After all, they are from Santa!"