Empress Michiko takes a stroll with Emperor Akihito in the Imperial Palace garden in Tokyo on Sept. 4. Associated Press/Imperial Household Agency of Japan …

Empress Michiko stands in the Imperial Palace in Tokyo on Oct. 1. Associated Press/Imperial Household Agency of Japan …

Emperor Akihito, right, and Empress Michiko, second from right, are joined by family members harvesting rice and millet grown in a dry field adjacent to the Biological Laboratory at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo, on Sept. 21. Associated Press/Imperial Household Agency of Japan …

Emperor Akihito, right, and Empress Michiko head for the altar to offer silent prayers during an annual memorial service for war victims in Tokyo on Aug.15, as the country marks the 69th anniversary of its surrender in World War II. Kazuhiro Nogi/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Emperor Akihito, left, and Empress Michiko leave the Akasaka east residence, where the body of Prince Katsura, who died of heart failure, is placed, after they made a call of condolence in Tokyo on June 9. Yoshikazu Tsuno/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Empress Michiko, left, speaks with U.S.President Barack Obama during an official state dinner at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo on April 24. Jim Watson/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

U.S. President Barack Obama bids farewell to Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko in Tokyo on April 25, prior to his departure. Kimimasa Mayama/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Emperor Akihito, front 2nd left, and Empress Michiko greet Japanese medalists at the Sochi Olympics during the annual spring garden party at the Akasaka Palace imperial garden in Tokyo on April 17. Kazuhiro Nogi/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko watch the Davis Cup World Group Quarter Final match between Japan and the Czech Republic in Tokyo on April 5. Atsushi Tomura/Getty Images …

Standing behind Emperor Akihito, Empress Michiko, left, welcomes Vietnam's President Truong Tan Sang and his wife Mai Thi Hanh upon their arrival at the Imperial Palace for a banquet in Tokyo on March 17. Toru Yamanaka/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko deliver an address in front of an altar for the victims of the March 11, 2011 earthquake and tsunami at the national memorial service in Tokyo on March 11. Franck Robichon/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, along with other imperial family members, greet well-wishers as part of celebrations for the New Year on the veranda of the Imperial Palace on Jan. 2 in Tokyo. Ken Ishii/Getty Images …

Emperor Akihito, left, and Empress Michiko wave to well-wishers during the Japan Royal Family’s New Year Greetings at Imperial Palace in Tokyo on Jan. 2. Ken Ishii/Getty Images …

Empress Michiko, third left, walks with Indonesia's President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and his wife Kristiani Yudhoyono after a tea party for leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo on Dec. 13, 2013. Toru Hanai/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, right, welcome Emperor Akihito, left, and Empress Michiko, during a welcome ceremony at the Presidential Palace in New Delhi on Dec. 2, 2013. Raveendran/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Empress Michiko, left, meets Indian and Japanese students during her visit to Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi on Dec. 2, 2013. Raveendran/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko stand next to a black bear mascot of Kumamoto named “Kumamon” during their visit to the southern prefecture on Oct. 28, 2013. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images/Jiji Press …

Empress Michiko plays the piano with Klaus Stoll, former principal bassist of the Berlin Philharmonic, during their joint performance at the Kusatsu International Summer Music Academy and Festival in Gunma, north of Tokyo, on Aug. 30, 2013. Associated Press/Imperial Household Agency of Japan …