A leading lifestyles blog has compiled the Top 10 U.S. cities for conservatives — and not surprisingly, the South rules the list.In first place is the Alabama city of Alabaster, a suburb of Birmingham with a population of 31,000, where residents "consistently back conservative candidates," says Livability.com, which ranks America’s most livable small and mid-size cities."The last time a Republican presidential candidate lost the vote in Alabaster was in 1968, when most of Alabama voters backed Gov. George Wallace, who ran as a Democrat," the blog notes.Coming in second is Crestview, Florida, in the Sunshine State's deeply red Panhandle, where "residents tend to hold strong to traditional Republican values, especially when it comes to taxes and spending.""The last time a Republican presidential candidate lost here was in 1968, when George Wallace picked up 58.8 percent of the vote," the website says.In third place is Clinton, Utah, where many teenagers are active in the local Teenage Republicans group, which is affiliated with the Davis County Republican Party."Most residents oppose same-sex marriage, abortion and the Affordable Care Act. In 1964, Lyndon Johnson lost the popular vote by just half a percent. That's the closest a Democratic presidential candidate has come to a win in the Clinton area in half a century," Livability.com says.Next is Bristol, Tennessee, where most residents describe themselves as leaning to the right."By one local observer's count, four out of the five members of Bristol's City Council are conservatives. Bristol, a predominantly white community, is home to a NASCAR short track and more than 30 churches, according to the website.A popular politician in Bristol, Rep. Phil Roe, "has strongly supported anti-abortion legislation, opposed cap-and-tax measures, and co-sponsored a bill that would allow people to carry concealed weapons across state lines."In fifth place is Odessa, Texas, which Livability.com calls "one of the fastest-growing small cities" in the nation."Residents are largely pro-big business and against big government. Republicans control every level of government in Texas' 11th Congressional District, which includes Odessa. It was President George W. Bush's strongest district during the 2004 election."Yukon, Oklahoma, which weighs in at No. 6, "is deeply tied to the agricultural industry. One of its claims to fame is Grady the cow, which drew national attention … in 1949 when she got stuck in a silo for several days," the website says."While it has become more suburbanized in recent decades, residents still uphold conservative principles. Property rights are a critical issue, and residents adamantly oppose tax hikes. Most residents support conservative candidates across all levels of government."Ranking seventh is Slidell, Louisiana, a city in the state's 1st Congressional District, which is represented by Rep. Steve Scalise, who serves as majority whip and is a leading conservative.In addition, Slidell Mayor Freddy Drennan recently received an award from the Slidell Republican Women's Club, honoring his support of conservative values; and State Sen. A.G. Crowe, who is from Slidell, was recently given a 100 percent score by the Louisiana Family Forum because of his strong support of pro-life and pro-family legislation.In eighth place is Olive Branch, Mississippi, where Jimmy Carter was the last Democratic presidential candidate to win the popular vote."Since 1976, most residents in this small southern town have backed Republicans. The majority of residents in Olive Branch and surrounding DeSoto County identify themselves as conservatives, support pro-life candidates and hold the Second Amendment high," Livability.com says.Peachtree City, Georgia, scores the No. 9 slot and was "among the minority" in supporting Republican candidate Guy Millner for Senate during the 1996 election."Peachtree City residents have largely backed conservative candidates in all levels of government since 1976, the last time a Democratic presidential candidate won the popular vote here. That candidate was Georgia's own Jimmy Carter."Lynn Westmoreland, who represents the state's 3rd Congressional District, which includes Peachtree City, is one of the farthest-right-leaning Republicans, according to GovTrack.com.Rounding out the Top 10 is Benton, Arkansas, where even Arkansas native Bill Clinton, a Democrat, had "a hard time finding support … Clinton won the popular vote here in 1996 by an 8 percent margin. Since then, voters in Benton and surrounding Saline County have backed Republican presidential candidates," the website says.Benton is part of the state's 2nd Congressional District, represented by Tim Griffin, who has received awards from the American Conservative Union and the American Family Association for his unflagging conservative voting record.In making its selections, Livability.com weighed politics and community involvement."The political landscape is important. Do the people around you share your beliefs and values? Are your elected officials in Washington, D.C., representing your interests? Or is your town full of hippie liberals trying to raise your taxes and force you to do yoga and build bike lanes?" the website says."Being a great place to live is about more than just politics. Do people around you also take part in the kinds of activities, watch the same shows, shop at the same stores and have similar interests to you? What are those goods and services, and how do they differ from party to party?"In its tabulations, the website looked at categories: the ideology of the representatives; the voting records of the residents; the political leanings of the residents; and how the shopping habits of the residents relate to political affiliation.Livability.com also found that liberal cities were most often found in California, Maryland, and Massachusetts.