FAIR LAWN — A developer who wants to build a senior living facility on the site where a Colonial-era home now stands changed his application to move a portion of the historic house to the front of the proposed project, saving the oldest part of the structure.

The Jacob Vanderbeck Jr. House is an 18th-century building said to have been a Revolutionary War headquarters.

The borough’s Zoning Board of Adjustment on Thursday continued its hearing, the third so far, on the application from Wyckoffbased Barrister Land Development Corp. to build a 123-bed assisted-living and memory-care facility. The applicant is requesting several variances, including building a health care facility in a singlefamily residential zone, before the project can be built.

The developer is under contract to buy the property on Dunkerhook Road, where the historic Jacob Vanderbeck Jr. House sits from the estate of Henrietta Vander Plaat. That home is a Dutch stone house that has been standing since before the Revolutionary War and is next door to another historical home that is owned by the borough.

Robert Milanese, the builder’s president, has said that the project could not move forward with the house remaining in its current location.

But during Thursday’s meeting, attended by around 40 residents and historic preservationists, Milanese said his team revised the plans to move a portion of the home near the facility, preserving the older part. The changes stemmed from a resident’s suggestion during a prior meeting, Milanese said.

“It fit very nicely with the adjustments in our site plan and building,” Milanese said.

The new plans call for removing one of two entrances to the facility and reconfiguring the building slightly, dropping the number of beds by three and lowering the height of the structure, among other changes. The proposed height was 38 feet; now the height, measured from the first floor to the midpoint of the roof’s ridge, would be 36 feet and 8 inches, Milanese said.

The changes allow for the developer to move the left part of the Vanderbeck House — the older piece — to the front portion of the property. Milanese would hire a contractor with experience in moving historical buildings to undertake the effort.

The contractor would pour new footings for the structure, but also would move over its original stone foundation. The exterior would be restored, Milanese said.

The home likely would be used as an accessory to the senior living facility, such as to house security or administration. Nothing has been determined yet, Milanese said.

Thursday’s hearing continued deep into the evening and the proposal will be subjected to more board review.

If the historic house were moved, it would change the architecture of the structure, Milanese said, as it currently stands on sloped land but is being moved to a flat surface.

The house’s orientation also would change. Like all stone houses in Bergen County, the Vanderbeck house faces south to receive heat from the winter sun, said Jane Diepeveen, Fair Lawn’s historian, who called the change “unfortunate.”

Some residents asked if there was any way that the entire home could be preserved. Milanese said it would be “impossible” to keep the whole house should the senior living facility be approved.

The developer said he also researched applying for Green Acres funding — state funds that go toward preserving historical structures and open spaces — but it could take up to a year for approval. Milanese said his contract does not allow for him to wait that long.