Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

BERLIN (AP) — As the powerbrokers of European soccer celebrated their championship weekend and some jokingly congratulated themselves for staying out of jail, many said that the next FIFA president needs to do a better job of listening to the continent that pays most of the bills.

While several FIFA executives are awaiting extradition to the United States, European leaders — so far untouched by the corruption case — held closed-door meetings in rooms that cost 2,000 Euros ($2,222) per night as they prepared for the Champions League final where Barcelona defeated Juventus for the richest prize in sports. They ate, drank and discussed the future of global soccer.

The top leaders didn’t want to speculate openly on the election, but many leaders feel the next president should show more respect to the billions of Euros coming out of this continent.

“It’s undoubted that the weight of European football should be properly felt throughout the world,” European Club Association vice chairman Umberto Gandini, an AC Milan director, told The Associated Press at the Berlin Ritz-Carlton. “It is fundamental for those who are risking investing their money in professional football in Europe have the opportunities to design the rules and regulations. We deserve to be there (at FIFA) because of what we represent.”

The scandal so far has focused on bribes in the Americas and Africa. But behind the jokes and revelry, there was clearly a deep uncertainty about who could next be ensnared by the escalating corruption scandal. The other big question was who is best positioned to lead the world’s biggest game out of this mess, with Sepp Blatter preparing to vacate a FIFA headquarters that has already been raided by Swiss police.

European soccer provides the most valuable viewing audience, the biggest clubs and the greatest players in the world — no matter where they were born. But FIFA gives each nation one vote, so tiny nations like the Cayman Islands have as much influence as world powers.

And the 79-year-old Blatter has built a coalition of African and Asian nations, along with some tiny island territories and big outliers like Russia — the next World Cup host. Despite Blatter’s resignation, if another candidate grabs that same coalition, the Europeans won’t be able to change FIFA.

A constant theme from Blatter to deflect Europe’s grasp for more control has been to depict the clubs there as leeching off the rest of the world by pilfering the best players.

“The perception is there’s a neo-colonialism in world football,” said Jerome Champagne, a Frenchman who served under Blatter as deputy secretary general. “European football is using African and South American talent but doesn’t care about the leagues there losing their talent and losing their fan base. There is a lot of resentment from outside Europe.”

Blatter proved that his collation was still strong enough by winning a fifth term as FIFA president on May 29, only to announce four days later that the scandal had cost him too much support and that he would resign after new elections held at some point from December to March.

European chief Michel Platini, a former Blatter confidant turned adversary, is a favorite. But he’ll need help from outside of his European power base.

The former France captain and coach is president of UEFA, overseeing the Champions League and its $1.1 billion prize pool. Saturday’s game was the pinnacle of Platini’s year, a gathering of elite players and coaches, blue chip sponsors and club and federation leaders.