Department of Human Services Commissioner Raquel Hatter and her managers must be held accountable.

Buy Photo State Department of Human Services head Raquel Hatter. (Photo: File/Larry McCormack/Tennessean)Buy Photo

The Tennessee Department of Human Services’ efforts to police itself over fraud and waste have been fruitless.

Meanwhile, millions of taxpayer dollars intended for food and snacks for low-income children have gone to waste.

Leadership failures are nothing short of incompetent, which has rightfully prompted lawmakers to demand greater oversight.

DHS Commissioner Raquel Hatter and her managers must be held accountable for problems with the $80 million program to feed hungry kids — one in five children is at risk for hunger in Tennessee.

Their approach, thus far, such as denying media interviews and deflecting on the issues, is not the right one in light of all the problems.

It is unconscionable that three audits in March have revealed $11.4 million in questionable spending from the state as well as widespread management problems.

State Comptroller audits show that DHS’ performance has slipped, going from zero violations in 2012 to multiple violations since 2013.

They have included $4.3 million in suspicious payments to food providers in 2013 and $1.8 million in questionable payments in 2015.

One contractor used $56,000 for renovations and maintenance on her home.

That case is under criminal investigation. In all, $181,135.59 spent by Cherry Tree Food Program in Clarksville and its former executive director Patsy Simpson is under scrutiny.

In addition, $83,000 spent by another agency, Nashville Academy for Kidz, is also under question as well as an accusation that it falsified records.

Even more, a federal review in February shows lax oversight from the department.

Senate Bill 1472 and House Bill 1940, sponsored by Sen. Jim Tracy, R-Shelbyville and Rep. Tim Wirgau, R-Buchanan, seek to strengthen oversight by requiring greater accountability.

That includes monthly reports to leaders and key committee chairs in the General Assembly as well as the State Comptroller, developing a new monitoring process, and conducting unannounced visits of contractors to ensure compliance.

In addition, DHS would be stripped of managing its financial accounting, and that authority would go to the Department of Finance and Administration.

The legislation takes a hammer to the problems and demonstrates lack of confidence in DHS.

The Senate passed the bill on March 7 and House passed it on Thursday. Both chambers passed the measure unanimously.

An improvement to the bill would have been to make the monthly reports public records rather than confidential, as the bill currently requires.

However, legislators should be commended for passing it, and Gov. Bill Haslam should sign it.

He may also want to consider whether Hatter is the right person to move DHS forward into compliance and responsible control.

Three years of bad reports call her leadership into question.

Opinion Engagement Editor David Plazas wrote this editorial on behalf of The Tennessean Editorial Board. Call him at (615) 259-8063, email him at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to him at @davidplazas.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MLwJo8