3 years ago

(CNN) - Conservative advocacy group Americans for Prosperity's anti-Obamacare efforts have now topped $7.6 million in spending over the last few weeks with Thursday's announcement of a new $1.7 million ad buy.

According to a release, the ad buy marks the group's third wave of TV, radio and web ads going after the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare. As the ads have done in the past, the new round will applaud lawmakers who've opposed the law and blast those who've supported it.



Most recently, AFP launched an even larger buy late last month of $2 million that went after vulnerable Democratic Senators Kay Hagan of North Carolina and Mary Landrieu of Louisiana.

This time, Republican Reps. Joe Heck of Nevada and Dan Benishek of Michigan will be getting praise while Democratic Reps. Ann Kirkpatrick of Arizona and Nick Rahall of West Virginia will be getting criticism.

Both Kirkpatrick and Rahall face challenging reelection bids in next year's midterms.

"Amid a disastrous and inept rollout, it's important to remember that some politicians did what they could to stop ObamaCare, while others did whatever it took to shove the law down our throats," AFP President Tim Phillips said in a statement.

"Heading into 2014, we want to be sure Americans understand the true negative impact of the law. A failing website is just the tip of the iceberg; less choice, higher premiums, and lost coverage will be the legacy of ObamaCare."

AFP is partially funded by the billionaire industrialist Koch brothers, who have spent many millions of dollars to back conservative causes and candidates.

The Republican ads focus on Heck and Benishek's longstanding opposition to the health care law and ask voters to call and urge them to keep fighting.

"Dan Benishek understands. He's fought against Obamacare from the very start," says the announcer in the ad supporting the Michigan Republican.

"He knows healthcare reform needs to be reformed. But Joe Heck knew Obamacare was a bad deal from the start," says the announcer for the second-term Representative's ad.

The ads targeting the two Democrats take ominous tones about the individuals forced from their health plans and blast the so-called "exemption" granted members of Congress in the form of an insurance subsidy.

"It is not perfect. It was a step," Kirkpatrick says in an excerpted interview used for her attack ad. The step was one in the wrong direction, the ad admonishes.

Rahall in turn is quoted saying Obamacare "was the best we can do," which the ad says is not enough.

Obamacare has long been conservatives' favorite punching bag, a bag grown ever more tattered with the disastrous rollout of the HealthCare.gov online exchanges. The Obama administration has vowed the website will be fixed by the end of November.