Ava wrote a letter asking cash customers to report how much they paid so Lori could tally up what was taken.

This Guthrie business owner says two former employees stole at least $20,000 from her. Police are now investigating the embezzlement and the victim's daughter wanted to help.

A single mom who just bought her own company is struggling to pay the bills due to an embezzlement case. She says someone she trusted stole from her, but what the victim's young daughter did is turning things around.

This Guthrie business owner says two former employees stole at least $20,000 from her. Police are now investigating the embezzlement and the victim's daughter wanted to help.

"I love to color. I don't know which color to choose," said 9-year-old Ava. "It makes me feel like I'm happy."

Lori Fellers says her 9-year-old daughter is just as colorful as her drawings. Fellers has only owned "Artistic Tile and Marble" in Guthrie for a year, and is now dealing with a huge setback.

"She can tell even when I'm trying to smile away the hurt," Fellers said.

Two weeks ago, Fellers started noticing money missing and her vendors were never paid. She had taken time off to take full time care of a sick relative and left two employees in charge to run things.

"I considered them family and that was the biggest hurt that I had was that...and so...it was just the betrayal," she said.

Ava wanted to help.

"Please help my mommy," Ava said.

So Ava wrote a letter asking cash customers to report how much they paid so Lori could tally up what was taken. Guthrie Police are investigating and even posted Ava's letter on their Facebook page. Thanks to Ava's letter, Fellers says people are coming forward to say they paid cash at her business.

"I knew that she was feeling better because I saw the smile that she usually has when she's happy," said Ava.

Fellers says $20,000 was stolen, but her daughter stole her heart.

"When I get older, I want to work here because I want it to be a family business," Ava said.

So far, no arrests have been made in this case.