Without question, last week was a big one for news. As we noted in a Sunday editorial, cultural and political shifts abounded. The Supreme Court made pivotal rulings about Obamacare and same-sex marriage, leaders of southern states moved toward taking down the Confederate flag, and lawmakers in California settled a bitter debate over vaccine exemptions.

But for almost anyone old enough to be reading this, even developments as significant as these pale in comparison to any number of memorable news events.

So let’s reflect on the history we’ve seen. Here’s the Opinion section’s Question of the Week for readers: What’s the biggest news event of your lifetime?

“Biggest” can mean any number of things: Most significant. Most far-reaching. Most influential on life, culture, the order of things. Best. Worst.

At the end of the 20th century, historians nominated all sorts of events as the biggest of the era: World War II. The atomic bombing of Hiroshima specifically. Men landing on the moon. The advent of the Internet. The development of penicillin.

That’s a brief sampling of the possibilities.

Were the 9/11 attacks, early in the 21st century, and the ensuing fight against terrorism the most life-changing development of your lifetime?

How about something else from the sphere of international affairs, such as the Cold War and the eventual fall of the Soviet Union?

Or something from U.S. politics, like the election of President Obama, the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, or Watergate?

Or the triumphs of the civil rights, feminist or environmental movement?

Or advances in medicine, science, technology or industry?

Or how about something in the entertainment world? Did the Beatles really, as the pop culturalists claim, change everything?

Tell us: If your life is a newspaper, what’s the top headline?

Email your thoughts to opinion@langnews.com. Please include your full name and city or community of residence. Provide a daytime phone number. Or, if you prefer, share your views in the comments section that accompanies this article online.

We’ll publish as many responses as possible.