If you’re keeping track of the nasty tricks unscrupulous roofers will try when drumming up business in parts of North Texas ravaged by tornadoes, mark this one down.

Someone was calling Rowlett residents last week and saying they were going to be in the recipient’s neighborhood looking at damaged roofs.They asked if the call recipient would be home.

That’s not the greatest scenario, but on the face, there’s nothing illegal about that, unless the recipient was on a Do Not Call list.

The problem comes because the caller used “Caller ID spoofing” to pretend to be calling from a series of Rowlett phone numbers.

The spoofer made it look like the calls were coming from the 972-412-xxxx exchange, which is a popular phone number in Rowlett.

Some of the prominent phone numbers in town start with those six digits, including: Rowlett fire department, Rowlett city administration and Lake Pointe Medical Center.

Caller ID spoofing, unfortunately, is not illegal in the U.S. But it’s incredibly deceptive. You can use it to pretend you’re calling from any other number of your choosing.

The Dallas Morning News Watchdog figured out the scam after a Rowlett resident notified me of a series of calls she received.

She wrote me, “It would be remiss of me to not let you know that I have been getting numerous cell phone calls from what I suspect to be roofing scammers. I did answer the phone one evening last week and sure enough, the individual said they were going to be in my neighborhood looking at damaged roofs. Then asked me if I was going to be home. I do live in Rowlett and am very much blessed my home was not hit by the tornado.

“Here are all the numbers I have on my cell phone. [10 numbers were provided.] If I call the number, sometimes it just rings, or I receive a “the number has been disconnected” recording. They must really have lots of phones! These numbers have been added to my Calls Blacklist. I have checked the website for Caller Complaints, all show location as Rowlett.”

The Watchdog called all the numbers. Most didn’t answer or weren’t working. But one was the tipoff:

A voice mail message states: “Hello. If you have received a call from this phone number and I do not know you, this was a not a call from us. Our phone has been spoofed and is under investigation. I apologize for any inconvenience. Thank you.”

As The Watchdog, I’ve been showing examples of roofers and contractors coming into Rowlett and Garland and misbehaving.

Over the weekend, I hosted “A Tornado Town Hall” with the latest information on matters such as this.

You can watch a highlights video here:

See what member of the audience learned here:

Download your own copy of The Watchdog’s Cheat Sheet to Hire a Good Roofer or General Contractor.

This is why — as The Watchdog — I’ve announced that I’ll lead a campaign to pass a roofer/contractor licensing law in Texas in the 2017 Texas Legislature. If you support such a campaign, send a note to The Watchdog at watchdog@dallasnews.com. Read about the campaign here.

Follow The Watchdog for the latest info at DallasNews.com/watchdog.