A Jordanian terrorist who participated in several bombings in Israel before immigrating to the United States worked for a short time as an Affordable Care Act navigator in Illinois.

Rasmieh Yousef Odeh’s navigator status was quietly revoked in November “based on an investigation which revealed that she had been convicted in Israel for her role in the bombings of a supermarket and the British Consulate in Jerusalem and failed to reveal the conviction on her application,” according to the National Review Online.

The supermarket bombing took the lives of two university students, and injured 10 others. Ten years after being convicted for her role, Odeh was released from incarceration as part of a prisoner exchange.

Illinois, like Florida, actually conducts background checks of Obamacare navigators before they’re allowed to work, but the FBI failed to uncover Odeh’s terrorist activities, according to the National Review, which reported:

According to the director of insurance’s Oct. 25, 2013, revocation letter, the Department of Insurance found out about Odeh’s history after the U.S. Attorney’s office for the Eastern District of Michigan, notified the public about her prior convictions. Odeh, who has as many as nine aliases, was indicted in October for allegedly lying on her U.S. immigration and naturalization application papers. On Dec. 9, 2004, she had been sworn in as a U.S. citizen in a district court in Michigan, the same state where bombing victim Kanner had spent six months studying English. If Odeh is convicted, she could lose her U.S. citizenship and serve up to 10 years in prison. Separately, the Illinois Insurance Code permits civil penalties to be levied after a hearing on any Obamacare navigator whose certificate has been denied, suspended or revoked.

Under intense questioning in November by U.S. Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius admitted it was possible felons would be hired as Obamacare navigators. No one asked her if an international terrorist might also join the payroll.

Fox News’ “On the Record” host Greta Van Susteren interviewed Jillian Melchior, the National Review reporter who broke the story. Watch the Wednesday interview via Fox, then check out “CNN finally gets face-to-face showdown with Ted Nugent; he’s armed and ready.”

Watch the latest video at video.insider.foxnews.com