Mitchell Johnson or Brad Haddin?

It's the question the head of selectors from both countries would have agonised over when deciding who deserved to be remembered as the dominant player of Australia's most comprehensive whitewash of the old enemy.

With three man-of-the-match awards to his name, Johnson would seem a certainty for the man-of-the-series he ultimately collected - but he wasn't.

Brad Haddin and Mitchell Johnson after the whitewash was completed at the SCG on Sunday. Photo: Brendan Esposito

In a testament to Haddin, it must have been desperately close to a toss of the coin.

Advertisement

The veteran 'keeper was arguably the batsman of the series - an outstanding feat for a No.7, even before factoring in his 22 catches and role as captain Michael Clarke's deputy.

Both players have made heart-warming comebacks to the Test arena.

Many figured the red pen had been put through Johnson's name as injuries - and that piercing Barmy Army chant - took their toll.

Haddin's hiatus from the game was more traumatic, stepping down from the Test team to take care of his young daughter Mia, who had been diagnosed with neuroblastoma - a rare type of childhood cancer.

He only returned once she'd made significant steps in her recovery.

And if their comebacks have been remarkable, so have their raw figures this summer.

Johnson's 37 wickets at 13.97 are the best figures by an Australian fast bowler in a five-Test Ashes series.

Haddin's rearguard efforts delivered 493 runs, the bulk of which came in the first innings of each Test.

He became the first player in 50 years to score a half century in each Ashes Test and bettered Adam Gilchrist's record for most runs by a No.7 in a series.

By definition the player of the series should be awarded to the person who, more than any other, decided the series.

Some feel the series was decided when Johnson sent a shockwave through the England camp with his fearsome spell on day two of the first Test at the Gabba.

Or was the turning point even earlier in the series, when Haddin hit a characteristically combative 94 to save Australia's innings?

That was simply a sign of things to come for Haddin, who in four of the five Tests rescued Australia from first innings capitulations.

But Johnson was undeniable.

His lethal bowling has unnerved England's batsmen, triggered stunning collapses and set crowds rumbling and roaring throughout the five Tests.

Perhaps a shared award would've been the fairest result.

AAP