Pharmacy retail titan, Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc. (NASDAQ:WBA) could be about to buy its arch-rival Rite Aid Corporation (NYSE:RAD). On this rumor, Rite Aid’s stock has gone upward over the past few weeks, suggesting this could be a seriously popular move.

Walgreens, the largest retail pharmacy chain in the US, bought up the European drugstore chain Alliance Boots GmbH in 2014. The new entity is now a major player in retail pharmacy, spanning 25 territories with 370,000 staff at nearly 13,000 outlets and 230 pharmaceutical distribution centers.

Buying up Rite Aid – the third largest pharmacy retail chain in the US – would play well with a company intent on expansion at home and abroad.

It was Walgreen’s acting Chief Executive Officer, Stefano Pessina - the engineer of the Boots Allliance takeover - who fired the starting gun on the M&A rumor mill, by saying analysts and investors should anticipate more acquisitions, specifically in the domestic market. He dropped a huge hint by saying the next acquisition would “this time be in the US.”

That Walgreens should expand domestically is a reasonable assumption; with Obamacare overhauling the nation’s healthcare and pharmacy sectors and the wider economy improving. So far, though, there is no hard indication that a deal is imminent or any discussions are in progress. Even so, Bidness Etc believes Walgreens could be about to buy Rite Aid.

These are the pointers indicating a Walgreens move on Rite Aid.

Reinforcing Its Market Leadership Position

The acquisition makes strategic. It will make Walgreens the largest pharmacy retail chain in world, extending its lead over domestic rivals like CVS Health Corp (NYSE:CVS). At the end of the second quarter of Fiscal Year 2015, Walgreens owned 8,333 stores in the country, just ahead of CVS’s 7,998 outlets.

A comparison of comps growth between the two shows CVS trailing Walgreens. Walgreens’ comps show an uptick over the quarters whilst CVS has experienced a sequential comps decline over the past four quarters. CVS still has a long way to go before it catches Walgreens in the pharmacy market.

uld deliver sturdy performance and match up to the leadership position that its arch rival boasts in the pharmacy market.

Rite Aid, with 4,570 retail outlets would increase Walgreens’ physical reach across the country; giving it a portfolio of nearly 13,000 locations. With such a massive network in the country, the merged Walgreens’ Rite Aid entity will give CVS tough competition, possibly pushing its comps into steeper decline in the quarters ahead.

Any buyout would inevitably mean closing some outlets, where two or more overlap territorially. An acquisition coincides with Walgreen’s strategy of broadening its pharmacy, health and wellness services. The fillip for Walgreens comes from Rite Aid’s positioning of itself as a health and wellness expert, by launching services such as the Wellness+.

With reimbursement issues come pressure on revenues, all while input and drug costs are rising. Consolidation with Rite-Aid will put Walgreens’ expertise into Rite Aid stores.

Cost Squeeze From Obamacare

Increasing healthcare expenditure and more government influence on payments to pharmacy retail chains could push Walgreens to speed up its consolidation within the country. Walgreens acting Chief Executive Officer, Stefano Pessina, with experience of operations in Europe and government run health schemes through the Alliance Boots outlets, believes as much.

The US currently spends 18% of gross domestic product (GDP) on healthcare. This is expected to surge. From this spending, almost half is already covered by state, federal and local governments. Assuming healthcare spending continues to rise at historical rates, governmental expenditure on healthcare will hit 34% of GDP by 2040. As US life expectancy increases, health spending is expected to rise, to pay for more healthcare products and services. The aging population will be the source of up to a quarter of this increase. Good news for sales in the sector.

Since Obamacare is directed toward tackling with this issue, the state and the local governments are striving to undertake initiatives to price pharmaceutical products on their own. This in turn is pushing pharmacy retailers to evaluate their costs and consumers to purchase more generic medications. The cost squeeze from Obamacare has already adversely impacted pharmacy retail chains as pressures on margin build up. Even though as more citizens enroll in the Obamacare program, chances of Walgreens benefitting from increased sales shore up, government intervention in pricing of pharmaceutical products such as the reduction of Medicare Part D reimbursement rates, might deem to slash margins. Hence, for drugstores to avoid margin space, costs need to be curtailed. This is primary the reason why the pharmacy juggernaut is so inclined to carry out more mergers in the country.

Obamacare is designed to tackle the country’s healthcare cost growth. This has led local and state governments to price pharmaceutical products on their own. This process, in turn, forces retailers to look more closely at their own costs. Consumers purchase more generic medications. The Obamacare cost squeeze has already been felt by pharmacy retail chains in the form of pressure on their margins.

As more citizens enroll with Obamacare, the chances of Walgreens benefitting from increased sales grow. Government intervention in pharmaceutical pricing, such as the reduction of Medicare Part D reimbursement rates, might appear to cut margins. For drugstores to avoid margin squeeze, costs must be curbed. It is this which is fuelling sector mergers and acquisitions.

If Walgreens is to avoid a hit on its margins, it needs to reduce costs. Buying out Rite Aid could help it achieve this. Mr. Pessina currently is attempting to reduce costs through driving operational efficiencies. There have already been store closures to make retail and corporate functions more efficient. Making savings by streamlining the IT and other departments is also underway. Initiatives such as these are expected to save as much as $500 million up to 2017. A greater cost reduction can be achieved through an aggressive acquisition policy.

Were it to happen, this merger could leverage from an increased scale to open substantial growth opportunities. Beside a larger footprint in the country, this move could create a global corporation with both companies benefitting from a greater bargaining power in negotiations with drug suppliers and vendors. In turn, this will reverse the pressure on margins prevalent in the sector, helping the company to cut its costs.

Rite Aid Will Help Reduce Reliance On Pharmacy Benefit Managers

With reimbursement pressures pulling down margin growth, Walgreens Boots Alliance has a higher exposure to such issues because it has no pharmacy benefit manager business, where CVS, does. The pharmacy benefit manager processes prescriptions, taking advantage of scale and bargaining power to negotiate prices with pharmacy retailers, drug providers, and manufacturers.

They obtain lower prices for individuals and patients through price rebates from drug makers and drugstores. While some of these discounts are passed on to patients, some are turned into revenues. This reliance on the pharmacy benefit manager as the intermediary between consumers and retailers creates higher costs for Walgreens. Such businesses extract reimbursement rates to optimize their own earnings.

Just one of the reasons Walgreens should buy Rite Aid is to benefit from EnvisionRx, its recently acquired national pharmacy benefit management company. Through the acquisition of Rite Aid, Walgreens will be able to enhance its margins on prescriptions by realizing earnings from the EnvisionRx operation. It will also mitigate reimbursement rate pressures and risks. Walgreens will be granted more negotiating power with drug suppliers and manufacturers, whilst gaining access to the high growth specialty pharmacy sector.

Rite Aid: A Lucrative Buyout Candidate

Other factors also make Rite Aid an attractive acquisition target. Its successful company turnaround and capital restructuring efforts have opened the way to immense growth potential in coming quarters. An outcome of the turnaround is a growth in earnings, brought about by major operational and store level restructuring; such as store remodeling, rationalization of underperforming locations and cost control.

For the latest quarter ending February 2015, the pharmacy retail chain posted adjusted earnings of $0.12 apiece, ahead of analysts’ consensus estimates by 55.84%. This is the third quarter in a row the company outperformed analysts’ adjusted earnings expectations. Its earnings almost doubled with earnings from the same quarter last year at just $0.63 a share.

Likewise, revenues also exceeded the consensus estimate during the fourth quarter. It totaled $6.84 billion, passing analysts’ projections by 0.76%. This quarter was the ninth consecutive quarter for Rite Aid to have beaten its revenue estimates, with sales growing at 3.8% from that of the previous year’s $6.59 billion.

Rite-Aid puts its strong top and bottom line growth down to sturdy comparable store sales (comps), effective cost cutting, and healthy growth in prescription count. For the fourth quarter, comps rose 4.5% YoY, comprising a 2% rise in front end sales and 5.7% in pharmacy sales. Comps and revenue growth for Rite Aid have been on a strong upward trajectory, as we can see in the graph below. Its strong performance over the quarters pave the way for substantial growth from which Walgreens can leverage. Rite Aid’s stock is also well positioned to deliver strong growth having grown 10.17% over the past year and 15.29% so far, year to date.

The company has expanded its healthcare services with large acquisitions in the healthcare services industry over the past year, including EnvisionRx. These company initiatives should improve customer stickiness and drive store traffic.

These synergies and benefits are envisaged to aid Walgreens’ top and bottom line. Much will depend on how well the company is successful in integrating its operations with Rite Aid, given it is already dedicating the near future to integrating itself into Alliance Boots. That doesn’t mean Pessina has ruled out acquisition options. It would reinforce Walgreens’ market leadership and make it the largest retail pharmacy chain in the world. Therefore, it makes strategic sense.