It may not be exactly like being cast adrift on an ice floe, but today’s seniors and retirees are hurting nonetheless.

The advent of Obamacare has cost many retirees their company-sponsored health plan by taking away their firms’ tax deduction. It no longer pays for companies to subsidize the cost of their retirees’ health care, so many have exited these programs.

Now that they are in the open market, retirees and seniors are confronted by soaring premiums when they seek to purchase a health plan. This is especially true for branded prescription drugs.

As a consequence, seniors are being forced to move from branded drugs to generics, and from generics to over-the-counter medicines. Clearly, quality deteriorates as you move down the scale.

This is not conducive to good health, I would say. Besides, some retirees’ drug bills will more than double this year compared with last year. If this is not Obamacare-induced inflation, I would like to know what is.

Further affecting older Americans’ financial security is the fact that many pols view cutting Social Security benefits as a means of reducing the government’s budget deficit — even though Social Security is running a surplus and thus is actually adding to the government’s coffers.

Most recently, Congress considered reducing seniors’ cost of living allowances (COLA), which would have taken thousands of dollars out of older Americans’ pockets. Others want to go after Medicare by cutting benefits or forcing seniors to pay higher premiums or co-payments.

You might as well put these older Americans on an ice floe and set them adrift.

Tax increases to pay for Obamacare have already cut into many seniors’ buying power besides jacking up their drug bills and premiums to pay for health care.

The Federal Reserve is not making things any easier for retired folk. Its low-interest-rate policy has reduced the income seniors used to get from safe, fixed-income securities such as bank certificates of deposit and Treasury bills, notes and bonds.

The bottom line is that older Americans are faced with more expenses to pay for their health and less income to cover these costs. Those pols who step up to the plate and try to ameliorate the quandary seniors are in stand to pick up a nice chunk of supporters which could be very helpful, come the next elections.

After all, older Americans not only vote — they vote at higher rates than most of the rest of the population, and they are loyal.

More from MarketWatch