By MARC SILVER

The Washington Post

My daughter Maya is in the family room watching TV. I’m heading out to buy ginger candies for my wife, Marsha, who’s upstairs in bed, feeling queasy after her latest round of chemotherapy.

“Going to get something for Mom; be right back,” I call to my 15-year-old.

“How is she doing?” asks Maya.

In my head I think: “Why don’t you ask her yourself since she is just one flight of stairs away!” But I bite my tongue. I don’t want to add to the tension cancer has already brought to our home.

Looking back, I realize that Maya wasn’t the only family member to avoid direct communication during the seemingly endless months of treatment. Consumed with all things cancer, my wife and I never asked her and her younger sister, Daniela, who was 13 at the time: “How are you guys doing?”

Many families find themselves in a similar situation: parent with cancer, teens in the house, not a lot of cross-generational conversation. Nearly 3 million American children live with a parent who is a cancer survivor. Roughly a third of those kids are 13 to 17 years old. While parents pay a lot of attention to the needs of younger kids, they may figure, as we did, that teens are old enough to cope.

Unfortunately, the nature of adolescence fights against openness of any kind. With their kids locked behind a mask of teen indifference, parents “are often intimidated and don’t know how to talk to them,” says Sharon Sosa, an oncology counselor in Fairfax, Va. The news that a parent has cancer yanks the adolescent back into the fold — exactly where the kid doesn’t want to be.

TEENS AND CANCER

Your spouse has cancer. Your teen is giving you the cold shoulder. What to do:

• Determine the best way to talk: family meeting (if that’s already part of your routine, keep it going), carpool rides (captive audience and no eye contact required), in a notebook where teens write questions and you respond.

• Be honest: That way, your teen won’t fear that you’re hiding bad news. But you don’t have to share every little thing. You may not want to tell your child the degree of pain a parent is in, for example, unless necessary.

• Follow up: “That stuff I told you about the surgery: too much information, not enough? Any questions?”

• Let them eavesdrop: If your teens say they really don’t want to know anything but you think they should, try discussing cancer matters when the kids are nearby.

• Alert your child’s school: Your teen’s academic performance may become erratic. Teachers can keep an eye out and let you know if things slide too far. Source: Marc Silver, The Washington Post Your spouse has cancer. Your teen is giving you the cold shoulder. What to do:: family meeting (if that’s already part of your routine, keep it going), carpool rides (captive audience and no eye contact required), in a notebook where teens write questions and you respond.That way, your teen won’t fear that you’re hiding bad news. But you don’t have to share every little thing. You may not want to tell your child the degree of pain a parent is in, for example, unless necessary.“That stuff I told you about the surgery: too much information, not enough? Any questions?”If your teens say they really don’t want to know anything but you think they should, try discussing cancer matters when the kids are nearby.Your teen’s academic performance may become erratic. Teachers can keep an eye out and let you know if things slide too far.

Some respond with a disappearing act: After-school activities, mall excursions, sleepovers, you name it, they’ll do it to avoid the uncertain environment at home. It doesn’t mean they don’t care; it’s just their way of dealing with it all, says Maureen Davey, a family therapy professor at Drexel University College of Nursing and Health Professions.

Other kids respond by defying their developmental stage, assuming responsibilities that normally fall to the parents. Out of sync with their peers, these kids sometimes talk about their real age and their “cancer age.”

“I’m 16, and I have to act like I’m 40,” a teen named Lyndsey told me. While her mother is in treatment for breast cancer, she says, “I have to cook, clean, make sure my mom eats, my brothers are fed.”

A “parentified” teenager will inevitably feel frustrated. Teens may be “angry they have to take over everything and nobody appreciates that they’re doing so much more than they used to,” says psychiatrist Karen Weihs, medical director for supportive care at the University of Arizona Cancer Center in Tucson.

No matter how the teenager responds, the parents can help. That means sharing, whether the news is good or bad.

It is critical for parents to remember that, cancer or no cancer, they still need to keep an eye on their teens — no easy task, especially when a parent is ill. The key, Sosa points out, is listening closely even though “your head is in so many different places” because of the cancer diagnosis.

That means not just going “un-huh, un-huh,” but asking follow-up questions, even challenging your teen at times. If teens know you’re truly paying attention, she says, “they’re going to tell you all sorts of things.”