Longmont City Council is considering overhauling its trash collection system in two ways so that residents will have more choices and pay less overall. Yes, that's right. More options and lower costs for trash disposal for people who live in single-family homes.

How is that possible? The city is considering doing what its neighbors Lafayette and Louisville have done with great success: Switching to a three-cart system that adds a compost cart for food and yard waste in addition to the trash and recyclables carts. At the same time, the city is contemplating a new and more equitable pay-as-you-throw fee system under which residents would pay based on how much trash they toss.

Unfortunately, the benefits of such a system have been obscured by confusion over a price increase for the compost cart, which city staff put forward at a recent council study session — a number that did not include the considerable cost savings that would accrue with a pay-as-you-throw system. The price increase was also too high as a scan of fees imposed by nearby communities found. Lafayette, which started curbside composting last month, charges only $4.45 for service or 26 percent less than what Longmont city staff initially put forward.

Moreover, there are many ways to design compost service that will be affordable, convenient, and accessible for everyone. The Boulder County Resource Conservation Board, for example, is considering at least 14 different options for promoting composting countywide. Longmont should do likewise.

Advertisement

Opportunities abound. For example, single-family residents in Longmont currently have only two options for trash cart sizes: Large, 96-gallon carts and medium-sized 48-gallon carts. Eighty percent of residents have the large carts. How about adding an even smaller 24-gallon cart as city staff suggested at the council study session? Under a pay-as-you-throw system, residents who currently pay top dollar for the larger carts could downsize to the 24-gallon cart and save money even with an extra composting fee.

Just look at Lafayette, where residents can save $16.50 or $8.25 per month if they put their food and yard waste in the compost cart and opt for a smaller trash cart. At least 225 Lafayette residents have already downsized their trash carts to save money.

There's plenty of room for downsizing. According to Boulder County estimates, nearly half of what we throw in the trash is food and yard waste, which is compostable! Although Longmont's waste diversion center accepts food and yard waste, curbside composting is more convenient for most residents and easier on the environment than having the city's 27,000-plus single-family homeowners drive to the center regularly. Moreover, curbside composting complements backyard composting. What you can't put in your backyard compost — meat, bones, weeds, and pizza boxes — you can put in your curbside cart.

Additionally, we should look to the many communities nationwide that offer assistance to make sure that waste services are not a financial hardship for seniors living on fixed incomes and low-income families. Access to recycling, composting, and trash collection, which are public services, should be available to everyone.

Longmont is an innovative city in many ways, and we should focus our ingenuity on our waste. Lafayette and Louisville have already moved successfully to three-cart, pay-as-you-throw systems that include composting, why not us?

More than 500 Longmont residents have signed a petition by Citizens for Curbside Composting saying that they want the service, and a survey commissioned by the city last year found that 65 percent of respondents were also in favor. Clearly, support in Longmont for composting is strong. Now is the time to change the system and making composting and recycling the new norm in Longmont.

David Fridland is East County Campaigns Coordinator for Eco-Cycle and a Longmont resident