Researchers find that healthcare payments relative to income are increasing for consumers enrolled in marketplace coverage, especially as they age or face more medical needs.

Financial burdens due to healthcare costs remain high for low-income consumers and those who have more medical needs, according to new research from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Urban Institute.

In the paper, “How Much Do Marketplace and Other Nongroup Enrollees Spend on Healthcare Relative to Their Incomes?” Senior Fellow Linda J. Blumberg, Institute Fellow John Holahan and Senior Research Associate Matthew Buettgens examine health insurance premiums and out-of-pocket costs and the total financial burdens for consumers with different characteristics who are enrolled in “ACA-compliant non-group coverage.”

“We show that despite the additional assistance available, individuals across the income distribution who are ineligible for Medicaid can still face very high expenditures,” Blumberg, Holahan and Buettgens write.

Insurance coverage among nonelderly adults has increased by 15 million people, or by 42.5 percent, since coverage reforms under the Affordable Care Act took effect, (comparing September 2013 with March 2015,) according to the report.

During the same time period, the percentage of nonelderly adults reporting problems paying their medical bills improved from 22 percent to 17.3 percent, respectively.

“This decrease in financial hardship, a 21 percent decline, represents a significant improvement in affordability. But with over 17 percent of nonelderly adults continuing to report challenges paying their families’ medical bills, affordability remains an issue; it is central to concerns that further marketplace enrollment gains will be increasingly difficult,” according to the report.

Additional key findings in the report include:

At the median level, financial burdens can be “reasonably high” for consumers with incomes between 300 and 400 percent of the federal poverty level.

Ten percent of consumers enrolled in nongroup marketplace plans with incomes below 200 percent of the federal poverty level, even with federal financial assistance, will pay a minimum of 18.5 percent of their income toward health insurance premiums and out-of-pocket costs.

Ten percent of consumers enrolled in those health insurance plans with incomes between 200 and 500 percent of the federal poverty level will spend more than 21 percent of their income on medical costs.

Consumers in fair or poor health and those older than age 45 are the most likely to have high median financial burdens.

“In this paper we have shown that, for those enrolling in marketplace coverage using federal financial assistance, at both the median and 90 percentile, premium payments relative to income increase as household incomes increase and the [Affordable Care Act’s] premium tax credits phase down,” Blumberg, Holahan and Buettgens write. “We conclude that the affordability of marketplace premiums and out-of-pocket limits need to be further addressed to reduce the risk that enrollment and reductions in the number of uninsured will be well below the law’s objectives.”

Follow ACA on Twitter @ACAIntl and @acacollector or Facebook for news and event updates. ACA’s LinkedIn Group includes news updates, member discussions, event promotions, jobs and more. Visit the group page and request to join today.