Reprinted from REPORT ON MEDICARE COMPLIANCE , the nation's leading source of news and strategic information on Medicare compliance, Stark and other big-dollar issues of concern to health care compliance officers.

Although Medicare accountable care organizations (ACOs) received another year of relief from fraud-and-abuse laws with the Oct. 17 extension of waivers from CMS and the HHS Office of Inspector General, they may be dropping the ball on the public disclosure and other requirements. At the same time, ACOs face additional challenges as they travel up the learning curve of the Medicare Shared Savings Program (MSSP). They must embed compliance into numerous physician offices, for example, and ensure privacy and security are preserved while communicating quality data.

ACOs were authorized by Sec. 3022 of the Affordable Care Act. ACO “participants,” such as hospitals and physician groups, coordinate patient care, hopefully to achieve better outcomes and reduced costs. Medicare pays ACOs, which must be separate companies, on a fee-for-service basis, with shared savings payments if quality and cost-reduction goals are achieved. They must appoint a compliance officer who doesn’t double as legal counsel but does report directly to the governing body, report suspected violations of law to law enforcement and meet other requirements.

Possibly most pressing from a compliance perspective are the fraud and abuse waivers because they can be important to ACO survival. In the fee-for-service world, hospitals court disaster under the Stark and anti-kickback laws if they give money, goods or services to referring physicians or patients. But the incentives are different in ACOs. That’s why CMS and OIG in November 2011 set forth five fraud and abuse waivers for ACO participants, and in an interim final regulation extended them for another year, meaning they won’t expire until Nov. 2, 2015. At that point, CMS hopes to have a final rule in place to address how ACOs need to comply with the Stark and anti-kickback statutes.

“If they use the waivers, it’s an area of compliance they need to pay attention to,” says Washington, D.C., attorney Troy Barsky, former director of the CMS Division of Technical Payment Policy. “It can trip you up.”

There are five waivers:

ACO pre-participation waiver: Hospitals can pay start-up costs on behalf of physicians if they are reasonably related to the Medicare Shared Savings Program. As long as hospitals meet certain conditions, they are protected from the Stark and anti-kickback statutes and the civil monetary law that imposes fines for gainsharing (i.e., hospital payments to physicians for efficiency or quality improvement).

ACO participation waiver: This waiver is similar to the pre-participation waiver but it extends protection for operating costs past the go-live date of the ACO.

Shared savings distribution waiver: This waiver protects shared-savings payments and distributions among ACO participants and providers from the Stark and anti-kickback statutes and gainsharing CMP.

Compliance with the physician self-referral law waiver: Hospital-physician relationships that implicate the Stark law but fall into a Stark exception don’t have to worry about the anti-kickback statute or gainsharing CMP under this waiver.

Patient incentive waiver: Incentives offered by ACOs to beneficiaries to encourage preventive care and compliance with treatment regimens will be protected from the CMP that prohibits inducements to beneficiaries to sway them to pick a particular provider or supplier.

ACOs Have Not Posted Waiver Information

Although ACOs must be forthcoming about their use of waivers, that’s not always the case, Barsky tells RMC. “We have not seen many ACOs post information about their use of waivers on their websites.”

Barsky, who has informally studied the prevalence of ACO reporting of waiver use, says “generally, the vast majority of ACOs don’t have information on their websites.” ACOs are expected to explain the nature of participant contracts and state that the waivers are protecting those arrangements. Although CMS and OIG haven’t spelled this out, an ACO might say something like “we are paying for the electronic health records for physicians throughout the ACO to help facilitate care coordination” and using the pre-participation waiver to protect the payments, he says.

Some ACOs don’t comply with the transparency requirement because they aren’t using the waivers or they don’t think the waivers apply to their activities, says Barsky, who is with Crowell & Moring. Others are out of compliance.

Barsky also questions whether the substance of ACO board resolutions complies with waiver regulations. CMS and OIG require boards to assert that the activity protected by the waiver is necessary and “reasonably related” to the purpose of the ACO (i.e., improving care management and coordination). That may not, in fact, be universal. “They think they are automatically protected by the waiver, but the board needs to determine whether the waiver is necessary,” he says. For example, if the ACO gives seed money to a medical group for infrastructure, it needs to pass a resolution stating why the investment is necessary, and how it’s reasonably related to the mission. “And they need to officially invoke the waiver to get protection from it.”

Applying the beneficiary inducement waiver is easier said than done, says St. Louis attorney Chris Kanagawa, who is with Norton Rose Fulbright. On the one hand, it seems clear that providers can give beneficiaries blood pressure cuffs or scales. On the other hand, there is a Medicare Shared Savings Program regulation that bars providers and suppliers from giving goodies to beneficiaries for the purpose of encouraging their use of a particular provider or supplier, he says. “What does that mean? You can give it but you can’t induce it? It’s a struggle,” Kanagawa says. “I think it’s so new people are feeling it out.” The best approach for now is for ACOs to document their activity and how they determined it was reasonably related to the purpose of the shared savings program, which, in this case, is the care of the patient, Kanagawa says.

ACOs Pose Other Compliance Problems

Waivers are far from the only compliance issue facing ACOs. Margaret Hambleton, vice president and chief compliance officer at Dignity Health in California, says they must also ensure the compliance program reaches every ACO participant. It’s not that hard when the hospital joins forces with affiliated physicians. “You can have the compliance officer of the hospital serve as the compliance officer of the ACO and report ACO activities to the ACO governing body,” she says. “Most commonly I have seen the compliance officer come from one of the partners and leased to the ACO at fair market value,” Hambleton says. For example, the ACO will pay the hospital for use of its compliance officer.

It’s another story when ACOs have 100 participants, including physicians and other entities. “There are significant challenges given the number of entities involved,” Hambleton says. “Sometimes the participants have competing compliance programs, and the governing body may get mixed messages,” she says. What’s the ACO’s compliance philosophy? Who will be the compliance officer if he or she comes from one of the participating entities? Which hotline will be used? This must be negotiated and it can be painful.

ACO compliance officers have dual responsibilities: ensuring participants understand the requirements of the Medicare Shared Savings Program, including the duty to report potential violations of law, and implementing compliance-program elements, including education, hotline reporting, standards, policies, auditing and monitoring, and enforcement and discipline. In particular, compliance officers must closely monitor compliance with the participation agreement or the ACO dream goes up in smoke. Participation agreements establish each participant’s expectations in a number of areas, including reporting quality statistics, complying with standards of conduct and following policies.

When a hospital compliance officer doubles as the ACO compliance officer, there must be safeguards, Kanagawa says. For example, they shouldn’t commingle records. “At what point are they acting as compliance officer on the hospital side vs. in the ACO role? Because CMS could look around and there are different record-retention requirements,” he said. ACOs, after all, aren’t really brick-and-mortar things; they may just have a small office.

Diverse problems crop up with ACO compliance programs. Hambleton has gotten complaints about the distribution of shared savings (e.g., were quality statistics counted correctly?). Marketing materials are another concern because CMS has strict rules on them. CMS must approve ACO marketing materials, whether they are distributed to beneficiaries or providers and suppliers. “It’s different than what you see in the hospital,” she says. For example, marketing materials can’t be disseminated in a manner to avoid at-risk patients, says Mark Pastin, president of the Council of Ethical Organizations in Alexandria, Va. “You have to distribute marketing materials effectively to a patient population that is most likely to hurt you financially, so that’s a curve ball,” he notes.

The most effective ACO compliance officers tend to come from the physician side of the business because, at its heart, “it is a physician-led organization,” Hambleton says. “ACO compliance is more like a physician-practice compliance program than a hospital compliance program.” For example, the ACO requires the connection of unaffiliated providers. Compliance officers need to think of the security of data transmission. Does everyone understand their privacy obligations? Have they had privacy and security training? Do they know what data can and can’t be shared between the participants? “Make sure you’re partnering privacy and compliance closely in the ACO compliance program,” she says.

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

For more timely news and business strategies on accountable care organizations, check out the monthly newsletter ACO Business News at the AIS Marketplace.