Editor’s Note: With today’s post, we highlight two key Federal websites that are now responsively designed. For more information, read our blog post about responsively designed sites, including the AIDS.gov website.

AIDSinfo recently updated the AIDSinfo and infoSIDA websites, and they are now automatically optimized for display across all devices—desktop computers, tablets, and smartphones. Visitors to the AIDSinfo and infoSIDA websites will now be able to access all of the website content on any device they are using. Most people who visit the AIDSinfo or infoSIDA websites on desktop computers won’t notice a difference with this redesign, but people who visit the websites from smartphones or tablets will immediately notice the new design and easy navigation of the websites.

The decision to create a responsive design website—a site that automatically adjusts to any device—was driven by the shift in ways people access the Internet. According to the Pew Research Internet Project , 63% of cell phone owners use their phone to access the Internet, and of these, 34% access the Internet mostly using their phones, and not computers. Tablet use is also increasing—42% of adults in the United States now own a tablet computer. We have noticed this trend at AIDSinfo as well—over the past several years, there has been a sharp increase in the amount of traffic coming to the AIDSinfo and infoSIDA websites from mobile devices, as illustrated by these statistics:

Between 2010 and 2014, mobile traffic to the AIDS info website increased 10-fold.

website increased 10-fold. Between 2012 and 2014, mobile traffic to the info SIDA website increased 3-fold.

SIDA website increased 3-fold. Almost 90% of health care providers surveyed on the AIDS info website have Internet access at the point of care (i.e., while caring for patients).

website have Internet access at the point of care (i.e., while caring for patients). Of those, more than 2/3 use a mobile device when seeing patients.

With this redesign, health care providers, researchers, people with HIV/AIDS, their family and friends, and anyone who visits the website will now be able to access the HIV/AIDS medical practice guidelines, drug database, fact sheets, clinical trials search, HIV/AIDS glossary, and all of the other website features in an easy-to-navigate format no matter what device they are using.

If you have saved the mobile site URLs (http://m.aidsinfo.nih.gov/ and http://m.infosida.nih.gov/) as a Bookmark or Favorite on your tablet or smartphone, there is no need to worry! These URLs will be automatically forwarded to the responsive design website.

We would love to hear from you! Do you have questions or feedback about the responsive design website? Send an e-mail to ContactUs@aidsinfo.nih.gov with your thoughts. Please also follow us on Facebook and Twitter to stay updated on the latest HIV/AIDS news and AIDSinfo/infoSIDA features!