Buy Photo They look so good, but those cookies are loaded with sugar that you don't need. (Photo: Register file photo)Buy Photo

Remember the old USDA food pyramid — the triangle graphic with different food groups pictured? It was supposed to be a tool that translated nutritional recommendations into the kinds and amounts of food that we need to eat each day.

Every year, scientific research reveals new discoveries about health, and what that triangle poster represented has morphed over the years.

The USDA recently published new Dietary Guidelines outlining the latest information. This huge document, representing thousands of hours of interdisciplinary research and collaboration, is primarily targeted toward health professionals and policy makers. However, the implications for the everyday American are huge.

Dietary Guidelines impact what the food industry produces, what’s found on grocery store shelves and what public schools serve kids for lunch. This document also outlines the fact that Americans need to get moving more.

According to the new information, almost half of Americans (117 million people) are coping with chronic diseases, many of which are preventable with eating properly and moving more.

Physical activity plays a crucial role for staying healthy and, according to the latest findings, Americans are just not cutting it in this category. The guidelines indicate that adults should engage in 150 minutes of moderate intensity exercise per week. For additional health benefits, we should do muscle-strengthening exercises at least two times per week. Two and a half hours may seem like a chunk out of your week to spend at a gym, but remember, physical activity doesn’t only mean lifting weights or walking on a treadmill at a gym. Getting moving also includes yard work, a pick-up game of basketball, painting a room in your house or walking at the mall.

The secret to sustainable exercise is finding activities that are productive, enjoyable or both.

Two key changes in the dietary guidelines

In the realm of nutrition, two key changes were made that will ultimately impact government programs such as school lunch, and also products placed on supermarket shelves.

A limit on added sugar — “Consume less than 10 percent of calories per day from added sugars.”

To put this significant change into perspective, an average diet of 2,000 calories a day would mean only 200 calories could come from added sugar, including syrups or other caloric sweeteners. Those 200 calories equal approximately 12 teaspoons of sugar a day. A 20-ounch bottle of Mountain Dew (or insert your favorite soda here) has almost 20 teaspoons, more than your daily recommended amount.

Buy Photo Eggs (Photo: Michael Zamora/Register file photo)

Dietary cholesterol — “No longer a nutrient of concern for overconsumption”

To translate: Eggs aren’t evil and you may enjoy one (or three) at breakfast each morning. Science now tells us that there is no significant correlation between dietary cholesterol leading to increased blood cholesterol levels.

For most of us, the Dietary Guidelines document won’t be on our reading list this year, but the key information it contains is something we should all pay attention to. We have the power to avert or reverse some chronic diseases with proper self-care, nutritious foods and physical activity. Simply moving your body in enjoyable ways and making small changes in your diet are two, very positive steps toward health and longevity. It’s time to get moving.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1V2aZ6A