Eleanor Kinney

December 11, 2014

Editor’s note: This post is part of a series of several posts stemming from presentations given at “The Law of Medicare and Medicaid at Fifty,” a conference held at Yale Law School on November 6 and 7.

When Congress establishes a new regulatory program, it lodges the program in a regulatory agency or executive department. A regulatory agency generally has presidentially appointed commissioners with staggered terms and expert staff. This design provides insulation from politics and facilitates applying technical expertise to regulatory problems. Also, administrative agencies make rules and policy and have the powers of investigation, adjudication, and sanction to enforce compliance. Administrative law, an essential instrument of democracy, regulates the operation and procedures of government agencies.

The Social Security Amendments of 1965 established Medicare in the Social Security Administration (SSA). Medicare initially contained two parts, hospital insurance for hospital and related services and supplementary medical insurance for physician and other outpatient services. Pursuant to contract, Medicare contractors handle claims and pay providers as well as adjudicate appeals and make program policy.

This post chronicles the development administrative law, policymaking, and regulation in the Medicare program. It describes how the program evolved a revolutionary collaborative model of regulation that could provide a useful guide for other programs.

Background

Congress did not intend that Medicare regulate the American health care sector, as the first section of the Medicare statute states:

Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to authorize any Federal officer or employee to exercise any supervision or control over the practice of medicine or manner in which medical services are provided, or over the selection, tenure, or compensation of any officer or employee of any institution, agency, or person providing health services; or to exercise any supervision or control over the administration or operation of any such institution, agency, or person.

Further, in the 1960s, federal constitutional law did not recognize a protected property right in federal benefits. The Supreme Court decision, Goldberg v. Kelly, granting rights to procedural due process for disputes over federal benefits, was in the future. The federal Administrative Procedure Act of 1946, which contained procedures to adjudicate disputes over property rights, did not address disputes over government benefits. Further, the APA provided that rules regarding government benefits did not have to follow legislative rule-making procedures.

Over time, the Medicare program changed. Initially, Medicare paid institutional providers their reasonable costs and outpatient providers their usual and customary charge. The only stipulation was that costs and charges be “reasonable.” These payment methods generated inflation in Medicare program expenditures, growing to an estimated $572.9 billion in 2010 from 7.5 billion in 1970. In 2013, net Medicare program costs were about $500 billion, or roughly 14 percent of the federal budget.

As Medicare responded to escalating costs, the program transformed from a passive distributor of benefits to a major regulator of the health care sector. In 1972, Congress enacted several regulatory programs to reduce costs. These programs included limits on total annual hospital costs and physician charges, limits on payments for unapproved capital expenditures, the establishment of a professional standards review program for utilization review of hospital care, and stricter penalties for fraudulent acts and false statements.

Throughout this transformation and with the mindset of a benefits agency, Medicare policymakers wrestled with associated administrative law issues with a poor sense of how administrative law functions in a regulatory context. The result was a complex and fundamentally accidental set of procedures for making rules and policy, enforcing regulatory requirements, and adjudicating disputes.

Medicare Policymaking

Initially, Medicare policymaking was quite informal and decentralized. For example, the original policy on Medicare payment of hospitals was based on principles of cost reimbursement from the American Hospital Association (AHA) and Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association (See Note 1). The local contractor administering the Medicare program made coverage and other policy determinations.

In its early years, the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), the predecessor agency to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), often would issue major policy with little notice in inaccessible guidance documents. In the mid-1980s, responding to the Administrative Conference of the United States and the American Bar Association (See Note 2), among others, Congress enacted stricter requirements for promulgating substantive Medicare policy. In more recent years, CMS promulgated interim final rules that have immediate effect with an opportunity to comment. In the MMA, Congress reformed this practice.

Medicare coverage policymaking. The history of coverage policymaking is exemplary of HCFA’s not understanding itself as a regulatory agency. In the early 1980s, HCFA realized that Medicare was paying for heart transplants in some states and not others. Subsequently, HCFA focused on coverage of new technologies and procedures. A HCFA physicians committee made National Coverage Determinations (NCDs) in a stunningly secret process that purposely excluded any participation or input from vitally interested medical device manufacturers.

In the late 1980s, HCFA did develop public procedures for making coverage policy but the effort was derailed over a proposed criterion of cost effectiveness. Indeed, neither HCFA nor CMS promulgated a final rule due to the opposition of medical device manufacturers over cost effectiveness.

In 2000, a Republican Congress established procedures for coverage policymaking by statute. These requirements were intended to make the coverage policymaking process more transparent to device manufacturers and other interested parties. In the MMA of 2003, Congress made major changes, including stricter deadlines, to the national coverage policymaking process.

In recent years, CMS has also become much more open in its coverage policymaking process. Today, coverage policymaking is far more collaborative. CMS publishes its deliberations on a highly accessible website and has multiple opportunities for input and participation of stakeholders.

Medicare payment policymaking. Historically, HCFA was not transparent in promulgating payment policy. Consequently, Congress required HCFA to publish and make available manual provisions and other guidance every three months. HCFA also applied rules retroactively and inappropriately according to the Supreme Court of the United States.

In adopting the inpatient hospital prospective payment system, Congress was concerned about HCFA overreaching in setting payment rates. The American Hospital Association urged that outside experts should be participate in updating payment rates. Congress created the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission as a congressional commission to oversee the rate-setting process. In 1986, Congress established another commission to oversee the new physician payment system. In 1997, Congress consolidated the two commissions into the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. The creation of these agencies reflects congressional distrust of CMS and HCFA over payment policy.

Medicare fraud and abuse policymaking. In 1996, Congress accorded the Inspector General authority to issue advisory opinions about the application of OIG’s fraud and abuse authorities to a requesting party’s existing or proposed business arrangement. Advisory opinions are widely used in regulatory agencies to facilitate compliance. Fraud and abuse prevention and prosecution are the most regulatory functions of the Medicare program.

A sea change in Medicare policymaking. In 2000, HHS policymakers inaugurated a sea change in their approach to working with providers on policy. The approach moved from controlling regulatory approaches to collaboration in addressing Medicare’s issues with the cost and quality of medical care. Addressing fraud and abuse was a different matter, but the OIG has primary responsibility for this area.

The MMA of 2003 added many complex and technical programs to improve quality and control costs. To accomplish these programs effectively, CMS had to work with providers as colleagues rather than regulated parties. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) continued the collaborative model. Many of the ACA’s programs are established with minimal guidance in the form of legislative rules and provide considerable space where providers can innovate.

For example, the final rule for the Medicare Shared Savings program contains only two pages of rule language. The rule’s preamble reads like the minutes of an academic conference. Also, the ACA precludes administrative and judicial review of many of the policies and decisions regarding the Shared Savings program, requiring disgruntled providers to resolve issues politically. So far, participating providers in the Shared Savings program have been, in the main, pleased, and the Accountable Care Organizations established under the program are flourishing and helping to lowering Medicare expenditures.

As an approach to achieving regulatory goals, the collaborative model of regulation is revolutionary and may be useful for other economic sectors. Perhaps the stewards of the Medicare program have been able to innovate procedurally because the Medicare program is truly unique and not solely a regulatory or benefits program.

Note 1

See Judith M. Feder, Medicare: The Politics of Federal Hospital Insurance 54-80 (Lexington Books, 1977); Sylvia A. Law, Blue Cross: What Went Wrong? 59-65 (Yale University Press, 1976 2nd ed.); Herman M.Somers & Anne R. Somers, Medicare and the Hospitals 154-58 (Brookings Institution, 1967).

Note 2

American Bar Association, Recommendations on Medicare Procedures by the ABA House of Delegates (Aug. 1988).