North Texas is still struggling to recover from this week’s winter storm. Temperatures will remain below freezing all day today, so be prepared to keep dealing with a number of weather-related issues. Roads are still dangerous, tens of thousands are still without power and flights are still being cancelled. Here’s a look at the latest on a number of fronts that we’ll keep updating throughout Saturday.

ROADS:

Updated at 9:50 p.m.: Contrary to initial reports, Fort Worth police will not be shutting down all freeways to clear ice.

TxDOT’s Fort Worth bureau said they would coordinate with Fort Worth police Sunday morning to clear out corridors of ice, just like they did during the 2011 Super Bowl.

“We would need their coordination to help direct traffic out of the way,” public information officer Val Lopez said.

Lopez said conditions would have to be right, but instead of closing all freeways and overpasses they would work one roadway at a time.

Fort Worth police said the state of Texas will deploy a task force of heavy duty road maintainers, sand and salt trucks, and other resources to clear the cobblestone ice. There will be temporary highway closures at specific locations in Tarrant County affected by the cobblestone ice. Once it the ice has been removed, the highways will be reopened.

The Texas Department of Public Safety is also working to stop all 18-wheeler traffic through 6 a.m. on Monday. If the trucks are moving, they will be allowed to continue, police said. If they are stopped on the roadway or shoulder, they will have to move to a safe area to park until the roads are safer.

Police emphasized that all drivers should stay off the road. Those words of caution have been echoed by law enforcement and emergency teams across North Texas:

Motorists who choose to travel US75 NB and SB through Grayson County are risking their lives. #txwx #stayinOK #staysouth — Grayson County OEM (@GraysonCounty) December 8, 2013

The westbound I-30 exit at Summit is closed because of stranded 18-wheelers. Traffic is moving slowly on I-20 eastbound because of two jackknifed 18-wheelers. Interstate 35W north of U.S. 287 is also experiencing issues with ice.

Updated at 7:42 p.m.: In Fort Worth, eastbound I-20 between Weatherford and Loop 820 will be closed because of icy conditions. Forth Worth police are also advising drivers to avoid Highway 81 at Ramhorn Hill Road near the Tarrant/Wise County line for the next two hours. There is a truck accident affecting both lanes.

Updated 5:28 p.m.: Carrollton police are urging drivers to stay off I-35 southbound if possible, due to poor conditions. Police are working on a crash involving three or four vehicles near Frankford Road. In Irving only the left lane of eastbound Highway 114 at Spur 482 is open. Westbound traffic is using the right shoulder.

I-35 has proved to be dangerous for drivers Saturday. Earlier today, Interstate 35-E in Carrollton was shut down in both directions due to a wreck. Around the same time, the westbound lanes of Interstate 30 were shut down in two places in Dallas County, because an 18-wheeler jack-knifed on the road in each instance.

At least one person has died in an accident, likely due to weather. And Sanger remains a traffic nightmare on northbound Interstate 35. With temperatures not reaching past the mid-20s today, treacherous streets and dangerous highway overpasses are still an issue throughout North Texas today.

The body of one person was found in a silver pickup truck that went over a Lewisville Lake bridge. WFAA reports that witnesses saw the truck slide over the guardrail at 3:30 a.m. Saturday morning. Rescue teams worked for hours to locate and pull the truck out of the icy lake.

Much of the slush from the winter storm has refrozen on areas roads, making streets and highways that weren’t already iced over slick.

“During this time and with any major weather event, I’d advise that if you don’t have to go out don’t travel,” said meteorologist Joe Harris.

– Christina Rosales, Julie Fancher, Claire Cardona /Staff Writers

FLIGHTS:

Updated 7:46 p.m.: About half of scheduled flights are getting out of Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport right now. Sunday cancellations are already starting, but airport spokesman David Magana doesn’t have an estimate of how many flights are affected.

Two runways are open. The airport has seven total, but normally only operates with five. Magana said crews are working to get a third online, but the amount of accumulated ice combined with below-freezing temperatures is making it difficult.

“As you know we’ve got a lot of ice on the ground,” Magana said.

In all, more than 400 flights have been cancelled today. Magana expects more passengers to stay overnight tonight, but doesn’t know how many will. About 4,000 slept there Friday night.

Expect delays calling airlines and at ticket counters at the airport. There are reports of about 300 people in line at the American Airlines counter in Terminal D.

Even if you’re flight is still a go, the roads to the airport will likely prove dangerous. Roads around the airport are icy, but open.

The airport suggests side roads like Mid Cities Boulevard and Walnut Hill to get into the airport.

–Brandon Formby/Staff Writer

WEATHER FORECAST:

Updated at 7:18 p.m.: Freezing fog is moving through the area. It’s affecting Dallas, Waco and points south and east of there.

Some light mist will accompany the fog, which will deposit a fine glaze of ice on the ground, said Ted Ryan, meteorologist with the National Weather Service Fort Worth.

Since there is already ice on the streets, the freezing fog won’t make too much of a difference on the roadways, Ryan said. It should disappear when the sun comes out, but drivers should remain cautious.

Updated 3:35 p.m.: The National Weather Service says some light sleet and snow are falling in different parts of Dallas-Fort Worth today, but none of it will be enough to accumulate. Temperatures are expected to hover around 25 degrees for the rest of the day and into the night. Tomorrow, North Texas will finally see the thermometer rise above 32 degrees, but not for long.

The high for tomorrow will be in the mid-30s. It will be sunny, so some of the ice left from this week’s winter storm will start to melt. But by sunset temperatures will fall back into the mis20s, so whatever melts will likely just refreeze.

“Tomorrow night is still going to be an issue,” said Jennifer Dunn, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service.

–Brandon Formby, Claire Cardona /Staff Writers

POWER OUTAGES:

Updated 5:45 p.m.: Oncor spokeswoman Jamey Molina said about 75,000 remained without power Saturday evening, slightly less than earlier in the day. That was down from a peak of 270,000 on Friday.

Molina said they hope to restore power to at least 5,000 more people by midnight Saturday.

The company has more than doubled its workforce by bringing in workers from Arkansas, Mississippi, Florida and South Texas. About 3,700 people were repairing lines in the area.

Anna Kurian, another spokeswoman, said Oncor now expects to have power restored to almost everyone by Sunday night. The only exceptions, she said, will be rural areas and homes that have had specific damage to their electrical system.

The company’s Twitter feed has been flooded with inquiries from frustrated people, but it has been unable to provide guesses for when specific areas will be back online.

Kurian said she understands people’s frustration.

“A moment without power feels like an eternity, especially in this cold weather” she said. “We are doing everything we can to restore power as quickly as possible.”

– Matthew Watkins/Staff Writer