Mule deer have been all over the pages of The Denver Post in recent weeks. This, as many of you have discovered, makes it hard to read the newspaper — with all those ears, tails and antlers in the way.

Seriously, a Colorado Parks and Wildlife count estimates the state’s mule deer population has dropped from some 614,000 in 2005 to 390,000 in the most recent survey. That’s upwards of 200,000 missing deer.

Now the good news: They’re in my yard.

That was just a joke, of course. Obviously not all of the 200,000 missing deer are in my yard. Nope, several of them are on my front porch, having learned — and I’m not kidding — to climb the six steps from the driveway to feast in the fall on pumpkins and during the summer on my wife’s flower pots.

Anyway, there has indeed been a rather drastic decline in the Colorado deer population, the wildlife biologists tell us, down some 36 percent from 2005 to 2013.

There are known factors for the decline, including predation by coyotes, mountain lions and bears. Another factor is the increase in vehicle traffic that results in collisions with the deer and also cuts off traditional feeding and migration routes.

And, of course, many mule deer are handcuffed and beaten by the Denver Sheriff’s Department.

Two years ago, the CPW says, our mule deer herd numbered about 408,000. That’s far below the population objective set by wildlife biologists of 525,000 to 575,000.

“Unlike previous times in history when mule deer populations have bounced back, we’re in a time right now where mule deer populations are continuing to decline,” the CPW’s Jody Kennedy told The Associated Press.

And CPW biologist Brad Weinmeister told Denver Post writer Scott Willoughby: “The last 10 to 20 years there has been a lot of growth in homes in the country with the new roads, driveways, dogs, horse pastures and traffic. It takes away habitat and puts stress on the animal.”

An example of that kind of severe stress on deer occurred outside my home near the Air Force Academy two weeks ago when the ear-piercing, roaring sound of my riding lawnmower caused a buck resting in the middle of my backyard to almost get up. I actually mowed in a circle around the big guy, leaving him bedded in a 15-foot diameter of long and matted-down grass.

Like me, many people across the state have noted a dramatic increase in the number of deer in our yards over the past 20 years. A month ago, as another example, in the early morning hours a doe gave birth to a fawn just 25 feet from my back door. (I love those spotted fawns. Especially with a baked potato and A1 Steak Sauce.)

As for the actual deer that now routinely climb our front steps, well, I’ve resorted to stretching a length of rope at night between the railings to prevent them from eating our flowers. It seems to be working.

On a slightly less positive note, I forgot to tell my neighbor Russ about the rope and last Thursday night he tripped violently up the steps while returning some Tupperware. Doctors say he’ll be OK. Although they added that the recovery time would have been lessened if I hadn’t field-dressed him.

Contact Rich Tosches at richtosches@gmail.com.