The fine for going without health insurance in 2015 has more than doubled for the new tax year. Taxpayers will be hit with the penalty, called the Individual Shared Responsibility Payment, when they file their 2015 tax returns. The fine will either reduce any refund or increase the amount owed. Most Americans are required to have health insurance under the individual mandate provision of the Affordable Care Act, although the law does allow some exemptions.

The Individual Shared Responsibility payment is calculated in one of two ways. Those who did not have qualifying health insurance for all of last year must pay either $325 ($162.50 per child younger than 18) or 2 percent of their income, whichever amount is greater. The penalty for 2014 was $95 or 1 percent of annual income. The fee is prorated by the number of months without coverage, so the penalty is reduced for taxpayers that had health insurance for part of the year.

The penalty is intended to affect anyone who can afford health insurance, but chooses not to purchase any. If the lowest-priced coverage available to an individual, through either their job or the Health Insurance Marketplace, is more than 8.05 percent of household income, the penalty will be waived. Additionally, those who do not earn enough to require they file a tax return will not have to pay the penalty for lacking health insurance. Individuals that qualify for Medicaid, but live in a state that did not expand Medicaid are also exempt.

The law also considers certain hardships. If you are homeless, facing eviction or foreclosure, a domestic violence victim or experienced a fire, flood or other disaster that substantially damaged your home, are in debt due to medical expenses or suffered other financial difficulties, you may be exempt from the mandate. Visit healthcare.gov to apply for an exemption.

For 2016, the fines again increase. Individuals that do not have coverage in 2016 must pay $695 or 2.5 percent of their income. The open enrollment period to buy insurance for 2016, and avoid this penalty, continues through Jan. 31. Visit Healthcare.gov to get started.