As part of our ongoing election coverage, we asked the Democratic candidate in the “Battle for JeffCo,” Jeff Roorda 10 questions.

The Missouri Times: You’re in an extremely close race. Does a race this close come down to raising/spending more than your opponent?

No and it shouldn’t. That being said, we have out-raised and outspent our opponent and clearly have momentum on our side. But, this race is about communicating with and relating to voters and that is where our real strength lies. Simply put, I understand and reflect Jefferson County values and my opponent does not.

TMT: What makes you the best qualified candidate to represent Jefferson County in the senate?

The senate is no place for on-the-job training. I have a proven ability to work across the aisle and pass legislation on issues important to my constituents. In my years in the House, I have passed more legislation than anyone else in the minority party. My opponent likes to talk about creating jobs, but offers no plan to create new jobs. I worked in a bi-partisan way to pass the Manufacturing Jobs Act, which has created thousands of new jobs in Missouri. My opponent proved his inability to get things done when he could not keep a small appropriation for the Jefferson County Port in the Senate budget.

TMT: Polling shows both President Obama and Gov. Jay Nixon are unpopular in Jefferson County. How do you distinguish yourself from these two more high profile Democrats?

I’m running for state senate. Paul Wieland is running against Barack Obama. I offer a moderate, common sense, alternative to voters. Paul offers meaningless political rhetoric, which voters see through.

TMT: You’ve knocked a lot of doors. What’s the issue you’re hearing about most from the voters?

Voters in my district care about safe neighborhoods, good public schools, retirement security and personal integrity. These important issues are where the clear distinctions exist between my opponent and I. I have a proven track record of keeping our communities safe and promoting our public schools. I believe seniors and veterans should be able to retire with dignity. My opponent voted for a tax increase on seniors on the same day he voted to spend to spend 50 million dollars for new offices for himself and his legislative colleagues. My opponent has attacked the work I have done for our community as a police officer and the work I have done for police charities and the families of officers while ignoring the fact that this District strongly supports law enforcement and public safety. It’s simply an attempt to distract voters from his own record of bankruptcy, ethics complaints, and pandering for the insurance industry. Those aren’t Jefferson County values.

TMT: Where are the areas you and your opponent disagree that you think the voters should know about?

First of all, we don’t agree on those issues. My opponent has some pretty radical beliefs that line up more with Todd Akin then they do with me. His support for organized labor has been lukewarm at best and that is why every labor union that has endorsed in this race has endorsed me. The real differences between us comes down to how you treat school children, working families, and seniors. I treat them with respect. Paul subscribes to a radical agenda.

TMT: You’ve been featured in local and national media after the Fraternal Order of Police and Shield of Hope became involved in managing fundraising for Officer Darren Wilson. How has that impacted the campaign?

People concerned about public safety, and the things going on in the Saint Louis region, bring those subjects up every day when we are knocking doors. Without exception, every voter I have talked to believes that Officer Wilson deserves a fair trial and thinks we should avoid a rush to judgment. I’m doing what I’m doing for police officers in Ferguson because it is the right thing to do. There is no political motivation here. But, if my opponent wants to make this election a referendum on whether we should support the police or not, the election is already over.

TMT: Your opponent has made headlines and with his lawsuit against the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate. Do you agree with Wieland’s actions in court?

My opponent has demonstrated that he does not understand the difference between birth control and abortion. In his lawsuit, he called common forms of birth control and women who use it “immoral” and “intrinsically evil.” This shows that my opponent subscribes to a radical Todd Akin agenda that the voters in my district have already rejected.

TMT: Your history as a police officer is a significant part of your background. You were terminated from one department and accused of filing a false report, which Republicans have cited as evidence that you’re not trustworthy. Why should Jefferson County voters elect you in light of these accusations?

The “false” report involved a crime that was covered up by my police chief who had violated an order of protection filed by his wife. Reporting the crime was my job and he later fired me for it. After a subsequent investigation, that same police chief was fired for the very same misconduct that I reported in the supposed false report. Meanwhile, I was hired as the police chief in the neighboring city and Jefferson County voters elected me 4 separate times to state office because they know that when someone breaks the law — no matter who it is — I do the right thing.

TMT: What’s the first piece of legislation you plan to file if you’re elected?

I’m filing two bills as soon as I am elected to the Missouri Senate: Medicaid Expansion and a minimum wage increase

TMT: Can we expect more television ads soon?

They are running as we speak.