Body Labs

If you had an exact three-dimensional avatar of your own body, what would you be able to do with it?

New York startup Body Labs Inc. sees a wide range of uses for its technology, which takes information about any body scanned by off-the-shelf hardware such as a Intelligent Systems, based in Germany, by some of the startup’s team members.

Since founding in 2013, Body Labs has signed up customers including a major U.S. sports apparel maker and the U.S. Army. The apparel maker is using body scans to create better-fitting clothing for elite athletes, Mr. O’Farrell said. The Army is developing body armor for its soldiers using Body Labs’ technology.

The startup opened up BodyHub.com where consumers can upload scans of their bodies by using Microsoft Kinect and Body Labs’ app BodySnap, or by inputting their measurements and having the online software create a 3-D avatar. At this point the 3-D avatars are free for consumers, Mr. O’Farrell said.

Technology for 3-D scanning overall is gaining quick traction and moving fast from the realm of expensive commercial and laboratory equipment to consumers, starting with the introduction of the motion-sensing Microsoft Kinect device in 2010 for the Xbox. Now, Google is working on Project Tango, a prototype mobile device that could create 3-D models of spaces. Apple has also gotten involved in the space via its purchase of 3-D sensor and camera technology company PrimeSense Ltd.

“The input mechanisms are becoming more and more ubiquitous,” said Mr. O’Farrell.

As the hardware becomes cheaper, the software has followed suit. Several startups, for example, got venture backing to make 3-D models of indoor spaces.

At the same time 3-D printing and other technology are making the potential of customization more real.

“We very much believe in a world where goods and services are made increasingly and eventually exclusively for you specifically to match your size, shape, taste, and preference. We believe in this mass-customized world,” Mr. O’Farrell said.

Body Labs charges commercial customers about $250 per scan currently or sells annual subscriptions for practically unlimited number of scans for between $10,000 and $25,000. The company is also getting revenue by doing studies for its customers on what the bodies of target customers look like, based on demographic information, for example.

Down the line, Mr. O’Farrell said he imagines numerous uses for its technology. Consumers could, for example, get suggestions for which clothing brands would fit their body types best. That would be based on the 3-D model of their own body and the ability by Body Labs or another partner to compare that to the standard-fit models used by apparel makers of different brands.

Fitness enthusiasts could do scans of their bodies at different points during an exercise regimen, for example, to note progress.

Body Labs is a platform technology, Mr. O’Farrell said. The company is opening up its technology for use by other developers. For example, its data and software could serve the animation and videogame market as a tool, he said. That industry currently uses much more capital-intensive and time-consuming methods to develop realistic body avatars.

The company expects to seek a Series A round next year, the CEO said.

“We have more people to scan, more parts of the body to model,” as well as to improve the technology by making it faster and more accurate, he said.

Write to Yuliya Chernova at yuliya.chernova@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter atv@ychernova