Topics: Department of Labor, FairWarning, wage theft, Wal-Mart, Working Ahead News, Business News, News

This piece originally appeared on FairWarning

For workers stuck on the bottom rung, living on poverty wages is hard enough. But many also are victims of wage theft, a catch-all term for payroll abuses that cheat workers of income they are supposedly guaranteed by law.

Over the last few years employers ranging from baseball’s San Francisco Giants to Subway franchises to Farmers Insurance have been cited for wage violations. More often, though, wage abuses are not reported by victims or punished by authorities despite being routine in some low-wage industries.

“If you steal from your employer, you’re going to be hauled out of the workplace in handcuffs,” said Kim Bobo, a Chicago workers rights advocate and author. “But if your employer steals from you, you’ll be lucky to get your money back.

Victims typically are low wage, low-skilled workers desperate to hang on to their jobs. Frequently, they are immigrants—the most vulnerable and least apt to speak up. “They know that if they complain, there’s always someone else out there who is willing to take their job,” said Maria Echaveste, a former labor official during the Clinton administration who is now at the University of California, Berkeley School of Law.

While heart-breaking for employees, wage theft also robs federal and state treasuries of many billions of dollars in taxes, and puts employers who play by the rules at a serious competitive disadvantage.

While there are no exact figures on the extent of wage theft, authorities say it is rampant in such industries as construction, garment manufacturing, restaurants and home health care. The Wage and Hour Division of the U.S. Department of Labor reported in 2012 that of more than 1,800 restaurant investigations it conducted on the West Coast over several years, it found violations in 71 percent. Of more than 1,500 investigations of garment firms, violations were discovered in 93 percent.

A landmark survey survey of thousands of low-wage workers in New York City, Los Angeles and Chicago found that 26 percent had been paid less than the minimum wage the week before they were interviewed. According to the 2009 report by the National Employment Law Project and two other groups, 76 percent of the workers who put in more than 40 hours did not get paid or were underpaid the required time-and-a-half overtime rate. About 17 percent of the workers put in unpaid time “off the clock” before or after their shifts, another violation. In the three cities alone, the study estimated, low-paid workers were losing more than $56.4 million per week to wage theft.

As the main cop on the beat, the Wage and Hour Division over the last five years has put almost $1.1 billion in back wages back in the pockets of underpaid workers. But with just over 1,000 investigators to oversee about 7.3 million business establishments, agency officials concede that violators have a good chance of not getting caught. Said Laura Fortman, the agency’s deputy administrator: “Some businesses may take that kind of calculated risk because the likelihood of being investigated is actually so low.”

Business advocates say many violations are unintentional and involve close calls, such as decisions about whether to exempt certain employees from overtime or treat others as independent contractors.

“Wage theft, by its very nature, implies an intention to steal wages,’’ said Richard J. Reibstein, a New York attorney in the labor and employment practice group of Pepper Hamilton LLP. “You should not put the same label on all of these things.’’ There are “gray areas as well as black-and-white areas.’’

Frank Cronin, a lawyer in Costa Mesa, Calif., who has represented employers for more than 30 years, called wage theft an “activists’ bumper sticker to get politicians a basis for passing more laws.” Violations are “almost always unintended misinterpretations” of complex laws, or “a new interpretation being imposed by extremely aggressive lawyers and/or regulators.”

Matthew Haller, a spokesman for the International Franchise Association, a trade group, said that many franchise operators cited for violations “are people that have never been in business before, that with good intentions may run afoul of these complex regulations.”

But some firms have shown real ingenuity in cheating and covering it up. In 2009, for example, federal investigators found that several Los Angeles garment makers were using specially designed software to create false payroll records. The firms were paying workers piecework rates that fell below the minimum wage. However, according to an investigation report, the software allowed them ‘’to generate falsified payroll registers that displayed an appearance of compliance.’’

In other cases, officials say, construction firms have declared workers to be part-owners to deny them wage and hour protections and workers’ compensation insurance.

Globalization, the decline of organized labor, and an immense pool of immigrants who are afraid to rock the boat all have played a part, along with limited enforcement staffs. Moreover, even when compelled by judgments or settlements to pay back wages, some employers disappear or go out of business before victims can collect.

Fundamental shifts in employment practices have also helped wage theft to flourish, officials and experts say.

One trend–misclassifying workers as independent contractors —is not new but has drawn increased attention as a pervasive feature of the underground economy. Independent contractors are supposed to be people who set their own hours and offer services to multiple clients. But the label has often been imposed as a condition of employment on working stiffs who in no way are running their own businesses. When that happens, the worker loses wage protections, while the employer escapes payment of Social Security, Medicare, unemployment taxes and workers’ comp.

“Employers are working very hard not to pay wages, and to put employees in difficult situations where it’s a ‘take it or leave it’ type of situation,” said Gary K. Pechie, director of the Connecticut Department of Labor’s Wage and Workplace Standards Division.

The “very challenging” task of interpreting differing state laws is behind many of these cases, Reibstein argues, adding: “The standards and tests for independent contractor status are anything but clear.’’

Even so, the incentives to misclassify workers are powerful. A report by the Treasury Department’s inspector general found that for each worker making $43,007 (which the report called an average wage), misclassification saves the employer $3,710 per year in federal taxes alone. “The misclassification of employees as independent contractors is a nationwide problem affecting millions of workers that continues to grow,” the report said. Since 2011, the Wage and Hour Division has signed cooperative agreements with the IRS and 15 states to fight misclassification.

Outsourcing hiring to staffing agencies and subcontractors also encourages wage abuse, authorities say. It can result in companies at the top of the food chain pushing responsibility for labor standards onto smaller, weaker companies that are less likely to comply.

‘’Every time there’s that kind of increased distance between a company and their core work force, then the probability of wage theft goes up,” said Janice Fine, an associate professor of labor studies at Rutgers University. When the top-tier companies are “many levels disconnected from’’ the work force, they “don’t have to accept responsibility” for working conditions, Fine said. “And when the profit margins they’re offering to contractors are so tight,’’ the contractors “are skimping on things like wages.”

The outsourcing of hiring to alleged violators of wage standards has been the focus of a federal class-action suit in Los Angeles against Walmart and three of its contractors and subcontractors. The suit by workers at Walmart-leased warehouses in the Inland Empire region east of Los Angeles claims that Walmart is jointly responsible for employees being “forced to work long hours, under oppressive workplace conditions, for legally inadequate pay.” Walmart says it did not control hiring or pay practices and was not to blame if violations occurred. Under a proposed settlement filed in court this week, one of the Walmart contractors, Schneider Logistics, will pay a settlement to the workers of $21 million, and claims against both Schneider and Walmart will be dismissed.

Small Names, Big Names

While small, fly-by-night companies are often the culprits in wage cases, large and iconic businesses have been cited, too.

The San Francisco Giants baseball club, which pays its most famous employees spectacularly well, last year agreed to pay more than $500,000 in back wages to dozens of clubhouse and administrative workers the Labor Department said had not received minimum wage and overtime pay.

In recent years, scores of fast food restaurants–including McDonald’s franchises in Colorado, Subway stores in Michigan, Ohio and Florida; Dunkin’ Donuts shops in New Jersey and New York; and Domino’s Pizzas in Florida—paid back wages after being cited for such violations as failing to pay employees for all hours worked.