One of the funnier lines in the movie, "Tammy," an otherwise mostly forgettable 2014 comedy now playing on premium cable on a television near you, features Melissa McCarthy grousing about high gasoline prices with an out-of-nowhere (and likely improvised), "Thanks, Obamacare." The joke's premise was in its nugget of truth, that some would blame President Barack Obama's health care reform legislation for whatever ills befall them.

Last week's headlines regarding health insurance costs in Maryland likely brought out the Tammy in many of us, including longtime Obamacare critics like Rep. Andy Harris. The big news was that the Maryland Insurance Administration had approved a whopping 26 percent rate increase from CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield, the state's largest health insurance provider. To be sure, the rate increase was no laughing matter, but whether Dr. Harris was "vindicated" by the announcement, as he told reporters, is another matter altogether.

Here's the problem with just reading the headlines: What happened is a bit more complicated than what can be described in one sentence, let alone a few words. CareFirst is raising rates by 26 percent in the individual market where the vast majority of Marylanders do not buy their insurance. More than 90 percent of state residents get their private health insurance coverage through an employer, and those who do get insurance through the individual market are far more likely to receive government subsidies that may offset rate increases.

And here's another important point: The beauty of Obamacare is choice. Not happy with CareFirst's new rates? Choose another insurance company. While approving the new CareFirst rates (actually trimming them from the initial 30.4 percent CareFirst sought), the MIA simultaneously approved new rates for a slew of CareFirst's competitors, some of which actually went down.

That's right. Some insurance rates are going down. So while CareFirst's individual rates are going up 26 percent, All Savers Insurance rates are going down 3.2 percent, and UnitedHealthCare of the Mid-Atlantic's rates are down 0.5 percent. Others are going up, but none as much as CareFirst. Meanwhile, rates in the small group market are mixed with the largest decline by — believe it or not — CareFirst, which will be lowering rates by 16.9 percent.

Confused? You should be. Insurance rate-setting is a complex business, but at its most basic level it's simply a matter of having rates sufficient to cover medical claims (as well as administrative costs, which, by the way, are now limited by Obamacare, and maintaining reserves). Want to know the real reason CareFirst rates in the individual market are going up? Most likely, it's because the company underestimated the cost of health care as more small employers dropped their relatively pricey coverage and put workers (many of whom had preexisting conditions) in the individual market.

That's not really the fault of Obamacare. Even Maryland Insurance Commissioner Al Redmer Jr., a Republican who once served as minority leader in the House of Delegates, doesn't see the rate increase as connected to the Affordable Care Act. Rather, it's a onetime market adjustment and perhaps even a sign that CareFirst had undervalued its product — perhaps deliberately so to help it capture market share in the first year of Maryland's state-based exchange. (In fairness, CareFirst sought a rate increase last year, too, but was denied it by Mr. Redmer's predecessor.)

That doesn't mean anybody should be happy to see health care costs continue to rise in Maryland or elsewhere. But what's needed is not griping about Obamacare, real or imagined, but more ways to contain costs. Maryland's Medicare waiver, for instance, and the financial incentive it offers hospitals to keep people healthy rather than readmitted as patients, represents the kind of creative problem-solving that's needed.

Large rate increases may always grab the biggest headlines (bad news has a way of doing that), but insurance costs in the overall market only went up about 2 percent his year, Mr. Redmer notes. That's not great, particularly at a time of relatively stagnant wages, but it's not a disaster either. Fellow Republicans should take note: Spending less time blaming Obamacare for everything under the sun and more time helping people gain access to affordable, high quality health care — or at least being honest about the challenge — is what your constituents require from their elected representatives.