The first cold of the season always prompts advice about copious consumption of herbal tea with honey and lemon, but a better cure-all is today’s Political Pint.

The Pint is nursing a post-Pennsylvania Society cold so severe that it scuttled attendance for a reception at the governor’s residence.

No matter, political scuttlebutt and The Pint go on.

In the time since last we sipped, the rift between establishment business types and grassroots tea party folk within the national Republican Party has escalated to a point that it’s not dissimilar to the Klingon civil war.

The Huffington Post carries a nice overview of the beef, but also notes that at least one local New England lawmaker is advocating armed rebellion - within his own party.

By the time the 2016 presidential cycle, the Republican National Committee expects the infighting to have ceased. Politico says it’s already reforming its debate criteria to stage fewer and agree to less informed moderators.

No one has been at the epicenter of this simmering feud more than House Speaker John Boehner, who The Daily Beast explains has finally grown a set and is going public with the intra-party rancor.

And in keeping with the laws of physics – every action has an equal and opposite reaction – conservatives are pushing back.

They’ve branded Boehner and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell “hostile” to the cause, according to USA Today.

Still, The Hill says the Senate is just about ready to sign off on the bipartisan budget deal that’s already been approved by the House.

NPR, however, sees it differently and suggests 2014 will see a return of the debt ceiling standoff.

In more nefarious news, The Hill also reports that a federal judge has ruled the NSA’s spy program is probably unconstitutional.

An eyebrow rising aside to the NSA affair comes in the shape of the lawyer who filed the challenge. Among his many unusual actions, The Huffington Post reports he once sued his own mother.

The Pint is particularly heart-warmed by this touching family tale during the festive holiday season.



The NSA situation – as well as the lingering Affordable Care Act website issue – has prompted President Barack Obama to have a special NSA and ACA tech meeting, says USA Today.

The president has also got beef with U.S. Rep. Darrell Issa, who The Hill reports is bird-dogging Obamacare.

The Washington Post says the president’s approval rating – like every other national political institution – has hit yet another all time low.

That may be why Obama is turning back to his populous roots. The Huffington Post explores the now old “Third Way,” and uses ‘liberal as he wanna be’ Pennsylvania state Sen. Daylin Leach as an example.

Over in the Los Angeles Times, there are two national political pieces are worth pouring in your snifter.

One points out that several potential 2016 presidential contenders could end up doing battle with political allies for their respective nominations.

That won’t overshadow the just-opened House inquest into U.S. Rep. Trey Radel’s drug arrest.

And speaking of congressional investigations, The Daily Beast has an early exploration of the new film “American Hustle” and its historical accuracy to the Abscam scandal.

Lastly, crack smoking Toronto Mayor Rob Ford will be inhaling a sigh of relief, after a different Canadian politician hit American front pages.

The BBC reports that a cabinet level Canadian official has had to apologize for saying the notoriously socialist federal government there isn’t in the business of feeding hungry children.

The Pint is shocked, shocked to see a politician say one thing and mean something completely different.

Cheers PA!