JOLIET – As part of a growing trend nationwide, the Will County Community Health Center is joining other walk-in clinics that cater to people with hectic schedules and a desire for quick and easy health care access.

This week, the clinic expanded its walk-in hours – now staying open two additional hours until 6 p.m. Monday through Thursday.

The move is a response to the growing demand for same-day services and the increase in the insured population with the advent of the Affordable Care Act, said Gina Wilkins, family nurse practitioner at the clinic.

“Spaces were filling up quickly. We would fill up before noon sometimes or not have as much availability,” Wilkins said. “People were coming in that afternoon and we would have to tell them you have to come back tomorrow or set up an appointment. It was frustrating, so having these additional hours will be helpful.”

A good portion of the patients coming to the clinic are low-income, have unreliable transportation or have children in school – three factors that put stresses on families that are sometimes forced to choose between health care, work and family.

“It’s nice to have later times because, depending on when people work, they can come in a little bit later and not have to miss work,” Wilkins said. “For some people, that can cause work instability, so that is a big factor for a lot of my patients. I don’t want people losing their jobs because they need health care.”

With the additional hours, the clinic – one of just 1,200 federally qualified health centers in the U.S. – is working to remarket itself as more than “a last resort,” said Dr. Howard Ehrman, chief medical officer for the clinic.

“A lot of people see [federally qualified health centers] like us historically as the clinic of last resort as opposed to we’re here because we give really good, quality care that’s more accessible than people realize,” Ehrman said.

The clinic is achieving this by adding more physicians into the walk-in rotation schedule, he said.

The number of uninsured patients at the clinic has declined with the creation of the Affordable Care Act, said Mary Maragos, the center’s chief executive officer.

“I think what it really translates to is people are able to get the care that they’ve been needing instead of putting it off,” Maragos said.

In 2013, a little more than half of the clinic’s patients were uninsured. Now, just 27.5 percent remain uninsured. About 61.7 percent are enrolled through Medicaid this year, compared to 42.2 percent in 2013, according to Maragos.