SAN ANTONIO (AP) - Ivory Smith stood in his kitchen unpacking a box of groceries when he turned at the sound of Andy Guerra snapping his fingers.

“Can opener,” Guerra said, pointing at Smith, whose almost barren cupboards had begun to fill. “You don’t have one, do you?”

Smith smiled as he took aim with a verbal jab.

“So you brought over a bunch of canned stuff but no can opener?” he said. “Man, that’s like giving a soldier a rifle without giving him bullets.”

Both men laughed, and Guerra promised to drop one off later that day. For Smith, an Army veteran, the lapse rated as less than minor, considering that a week earlier he had been homeless.

The swift change in his fortunes occurred with the help of Guerra, who oversees an innovative program for the nonprofit Family Endeavors that has fortified San Antonio’s campaign to house its population of homeless veterans.

Guerra and the three members of his so-called navigator team combine the roles of outreach specialist, peer mentor and case manager. True to their title, the navigators seek to guide veterans living on the streets or in shelters into a place of their own, and then, over time, toward self-reliance.

The approach treats housing as the start of their reintegration rather than the endpoint. The navigators assist veterans in pursuing a new future by connecting them to drug and alcohol treatment, mental health counseling, medical care, job training and other supportive services.

Guerra and his team act as benevolent shadows, talking with the veterans almost daily by phone or in person. The navigators ask how therapy is coming along, provide reminders about upcoming doctor’s visits, offer rides to food banks. Their steady presence reassures the veterans as they attempt to begin again.

“Once you get them housed, the hard work really starts,” Guerra, a former longtime emergency medical worker who spent five years in the Army Reserve, told the San Antonio Express-News (http://bit.ly/1VFVBjc ). “A lot of these guys have addiction problems or mental health issues, some have criminal backgrounds. They don’t trust the social services system. So we walk with them and make sure they know someone has their back.”

The city’s efforts to move homeless veterans into permanent housing received a lift in January when USAA donated $2.1 million to the cause. The funding went to three groups - Family Endeavors, the American GI Forum and the South Alamo Regional Alliance for the Homeless - that collaborate to house and rehabilitate former service members whose lives have imploded.

The grant so far has enabled 60 veterans to move into apartments in 14 complexes citywide, with most paying a modest percentage of their monthly rent and utilities based on income or disability benefits. Another 70 veterans are enrolled in the program.

San Antonio has found housing for more than 800 homeless veterans since January last year, when Mayor Ivy Taylor announced the city would join a nationwide initiative to end veteran homelessness.

A city analysis at the time estimated 850 to 1,000 homeless veterans lived here. Taylor has set a March 31 deadline to bring the count to “functional zero,” and she’s expected to discuss the topic at her State of the City address Tuesday.

San Antonio would join Houston, New Orleans, Phoenix and a dozen other cities that have reached the threshold since 2014.

Story Continues →