Newly appointed executive director of NJ Psychiatric Association says proposed legislation will endanger patients

Patricia DeCotiis, a resident of Westfield, assumed her new role as executive director of the New Jersey Psychiatric Association (NJPA). High on her list is championing a new model for mental health care and opposing proposed legislation that would allow psychologists to prescribe medication. She believes only medical doctors should be allowed to prescribe medication, and the proposed legislation will ultimately put patients at risk. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF THE NEW JERSEY PSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION) Story Highlights In 2014, legislation was introduced to grant psychologists the privilege to prescribe medications in NJ

NJPA opposes the legislation, claiming that it would endanger patients

A2892/S1864 fails to mandate sufficient education and training

There is no shortage of policy and legislative issues that require the attention of the New Jersey Psychiatric Association (NJPA) according to Patricia DeCotiis, who assumed her new role as executive director in December and high on her list is leading the NJPA's opposition to proposed legislation that would allow psychologists to prescribe medication.

Established in 1935, the NJPA serves as the District Branch of the American Psychiatric Association and is comprised of approximately 1000 member physicians.

Solving the access issue

In 2014, Assemblyman Patrick J. Diegnan, Jr introduced bill A2892 and state Sen. Donald Norcross introduced S1864 that would grant psychologists the privilege to prescribe medications in New Jersey.

DeCotiis said proponents of the legislation believe it is necessary to allow psychologists to prescribe drugs in order to offer greater access to patients, but she contends that the proposed legislation will endanger patients.

"Authorizing individuals without proper training to prescribe medication is not the solution. Psychiatrists are medical doctors with 12 years of training, they are trained in human behavior and how to safely prescribe medications," she said.

As part of its campaign to oppose the legislation, the NJPA has created a website, www.protectnjpatients.com, to educate the public about its position.

According to DeCotiis, the organization stands in opposition for a number of reasons. It maintains that A2892/S1864 fails to mandate sufficient education and training and would place patients at risk and asserts that 400 hours of didactic education to prescribe psychotropic medications is insufficient to ensure quality health care.

Supporters cite critical need

Diegnan said in a recent interview with the Courier News that the proposed legislation is critical because there are not enough psychiatrists to meet the needs of those in the state who require immediate intervention through medication.

"It's going to help folks who are suffering from severe mental illness, especially those who are suicidal. And we know that medication does work. This legislation can literally save lives," he said.

He said since psychologists are on the front lines, they are more likely to encounter those who need immediate help.

"The legislation calls for 400 hours of training and in addition, the psychologist would be prescribing medication in consultation with the patient's physician of record. So the decisions would be made in collaboration with a medical doctor," Diegnan said.

He said he is surprised at the opposition to the bill since nurse practitioners, who are not medical doctors, currently prescribe medication.

Offering an alternative prescription

DeCotiis acknowledged that in some of the rural areas of the state, it may be more difficult for patients to access a psychiatrist, but believes there is a better alternative than giving psychologists, who have not studied medicine, carte blanche to employ a medical remedy.

"We need to look at alternatives such as integrated collaborative care. This is at the heart of what should be employed," she said.

A potential solution to the access problem is establishing programs that support collaboration among primary care physicians and mental health professionals.

How would the model work?

DeCotiis said patients are more comfortable with their primary-care physicians because of longstanding relationships.

"It's easier for patients to overcome the stigma associated with mental illness and discuss symptoms and treatment options with their primary care physician," she said.

DeCotiis said the integrated collaborative care model would allow primary-care physicians to speak to a psychiatrist on behalf of their patients and ask questions about diagnosis, treatment and community resources.

What is required, according to DeCotiis, is formalization of a collaborative care program at the state level.

"A formalized program is essential to provide a framework that encourages and facilitates collaboration between primary care physicians thereby enhancing access to care," she said.

To better serve the patient

DeCotiis said the proposed model would better ensure patient safety because primary-care physicians and psychiatrists are both physicians trained in the medical model with the education and clinical experience necessary to evaluate, diagnose and prescribe.

She said access to care would also be improved because there are greater numbers of primary-care physicians geographically distributed in closer proximity to patient populations.

The mission ahead

Raising awareness about the proposed collaborative, integrative model is essential, she said, and offers the success of the model in more than 20 states — as proof.

She said the model has worked very well in Massachusetts with its Massachusetts Child Psychiatry Access Project, and Washington's Psychiatry Access Line.

DeCotiis said the new model will require focusing on the appropriation of funds, the identification of service providers willing to come together and work in the proposed model, and requiring third party payers to pay for collaboration.

Embracing the challenges

DeCotiis said she is energized by the challenges of her new position and feels that her experiences have provided a solid foundation for the work before her.

Her career has included serving as deputy attorney general with the New Jersey Attorney General's Office for eight years, the first five devoted to Education and Health & Human Services in the Division of Law, and the remaining three years working in the Division of Consumer Affairs.

Born and raised in Carlstadt, she is now a resident of Westfield.

Upon earning her law degree at Villanova University Law School in Pennsylvania, DeCotiis clerked for the Honorable Edward J. Toy and Honorable Leonard S. Sachar, Superior Court of New Jersey, Criminal Division, Union County.

Since 2000, DeCotiis served as assistant counsel to the New Jersey Dental Association (NJDA), as well as director of membership from 2002-2014. From 2011 to 2014, she served as assistant executive director.

She said she feels that her career path in some ways has come full circle back to working for the betterment of mental health care since her early work with the Attorney General's office involved working in the Division of Mental Health Services.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1DxXTaN