The NHL needs two things. More scoring. And more scoring chances.

Those aren’t original thoughts, but I’ve seen and covered 1-0 NHL games that were exhilarating, full of scoring chances and during which you had the feeling you’d better not blink. It doesn’t even necessarily have to be shot after shot and a succession of great saves, posts and crossbars to make a great game. But all of that is about a feeling too.

One example was when Patrick Roy and Dominik Hasek, then with Buffalo, dueled to a scoreless tie through 65 minutes in Denver on Nov. 2, 1996. They combined for “only” 52 saves — Hasek made 30, Roy 22 — but it was an exciting game, albeit in part because it was the two best goaltenders in the world going at it.

You just don’t get that feeling often enough anymore, even in those low-scoring games. That’s what is missing.

I have a copy of The Denver Post’s April 4, 1982, sports section, jammed with coverage from Woody Paige and me of the Colorado Rockies’ final hockey game in Denver.

The Rockies beat Calgary 3-1, thanks to goalie Chico Resch, but the NHL Roundup noted that a natural hat trick from Peter McNab led the Bruins to a 5-4 win over the Quebec Nordiques (oh, the ironies), and the other league scores that night were 6-3, 7-4, 6-0, 5-4, 5-4 and 4-3. It’s a single yellowing newsprint snapshot from 33 years ago, of course, but it also is jarring.

Since, we’ve been through the dead puck era, the success and popularization (at least among coaches) of the (yawn) neutral-zone trap, then crackdowns on obstruction and clutching and grabbing … all of that. The red line has been eliminated. (Well, kind of.) Still, there are too many nights when you feel like you’re watching the players’ pregame fun with a soccer ball in the hallways make it onto the ice.

So the latest wave of “what can be done” talk sounds familiar. But at times, the mind-set issue is underplayed, lost amid the emphasis on equipment.

I’m all for anything that opens up the game. Shave the goalposts down or otherwise widen the nets. Pare down goalie equipment, which is the solution that seems so obvious when you see memory-triggering shots of “under-equipped” goalies from past eras, or even of Roy early in his career. Yes, work on eliminating the overcoaching mind-set that discourages individual flashiness because you need to finish your checks, give it 110 percent and be responsible at both ends of the ice. (These are the guys who think Pavel Bure should be kicked out of the Hall of Fame.)

I also wonder what the league would be like now if about the time the Rockies fled to New Jersey, the NHL declared that all new league arenas would have to be built to allow for the wider international-sized ice sheet. It would have led to fewer low seats for hockey between the edge of the basketball court configuration and hockey’s front row in the new arenas (including the Pepsi Center), but allowances could have been made in the designs. It’s too late for that now.

Something has to be done.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei

Spotlight on …

Barclays Center, Brooklyn

When: Monday, 5 p.m.

What’s up: The Avalanche plays the New York Islanders on the road for the first time since the Islanders moved their home games to Brooklyn this season after a 43-year run in Uniondale, N.Y.

Background: The Islanders joined the NBA’s Brooklyn Nets, who moved from New Jersey to the new Barclays Center in 2012. A total of 10 arenas, including the Pepsi Center, house both NHL and NBA franchises. Several other metro markets have both NHL and NBA franchises, but the teams play in different buildings.

Frei’s take: When Avalanche attendance slipped after the many years of announced sellouts, it was fashionable to proclaim it demonstrated that Denver “isn’t a real hockey town.” Now, the Avalanche’s average attendance of 16,207 is 21st in the 30-team league, but it represents 90 percent of capacity. Meanwhile, the Nuggets’ average of 13,180 (or 68.8 percent of capacity) is the lowest in the NBA. Does that mean Denver “isn’t a real basketball town”? Of course, it doesn’t. But this Monday matchup is of teams that are part of the worst-drawing, same-building, NHL-NBA combinations. Through Thanksgiving, the Nuggets’ and Avalanche’s combined Pepsi Center average was 14,788; and the Nets’ and Islanders’ average was 13,171. That’s ninth and 10th among the 10.