ADVERTISEMENT

Jack Andraka just graduated high school. It was a big deal, of course, but it was also a moment of normalcy for a kid whose life so far has been anything but ordinary.

Andraka overcame homophobic bullying to become a world-famous science prodigy at the age of just 15. He's been invited by Michelle Obama to the State of the Union as her "champion of change" and President Obama once said "What Jack is doing is better than what I was doing at high school, I promise you."

His trophy shelf houses prizes like the prestigious public service Jefferson Award, the Smithsonian American Ingenuity Award. Not to mention his Stanford acceptance letter to study bioengineering in the fall, leaving behind his makeshift lab in his parents' Baltimore basement.

He also beat out 1,500 entries from around the world to win the $75,000 Gordon E. Moore Award at the Intel International Science and Engineering Fair. Three years ago, Andraka created a potentially groundbreaking test that can help detect pancreatic, ovarian and lung cancers in early stages. He says the tests can come up with results in five minutes for as little as three cents.

While that promising invention undergoes trials, he's already moved on to what he believes could be the next frontier of cancer treatment: Building nanobots out of iron oxide, or rust, that can destroy cancer cells.

Andraka spoke to The Huffington Post Canada following his talk at the recent Ideacity conference in Toronto about a range of issues including his revolutionary science projects and diversity in science and tech, especially among his fellow LGBT youth.

Why did you decide to work on your cancer detector at age 15?

What really inspired me was the death of a close family friend from pancreatic cancer. I found out that most people are diagnosed far too late and that's the big problem with pancreatic cancer. Whenever I wake up, I go to the lab and think 'How can I save 100 lives today?' That was the big thing that I did. That got me inspired.

What's the current status of it?

Right now it's in pre-clinical trials, we tested it on a lot of different patients and and we're in talks with a bunch of different biotech companies, so just trying to get through the process. It'll probably be on the market in the next five to 10 years, hopefully.

As a high school student, how did you get access to the intellectual, and actual, tools to put this together?

I just used Google and Wikipedia to get all the background information. Also I emailed 200 professors at Johns Hopkins University and the National Institute of Health. I got 199 rejections, and finally one acceptance. But definitely it was a process of getting into a lab.

And how did you get access to nanobots?

I actually create my own nanorobots. It's really easy to make them, you just mix up the components in a glass jar and shake it.

Most people picture them like tiny little robotic creatures that get injected into the bloodstream, but what are they actually?

My nanorobots are like these miniature bombs that go around. What makes them robots is that they can communicate with each other and learn how to treat cancer. I programmed them with artificial intelligence and I do that using DNA, which is programmable. So instead of writing in like JavaScript I'm writing in DNA.

How do you program DNA?

It's all based on how strongly it will bond or something. So for example, a certain sequence of DNA will bond to a protein or something because of its shape. But then if you have an identical strand of DNA, its compliment, that will prevent it from bonding to the protein. You can use these little physical property tricks in order to program it using its innate properties. With the DNA you actually just buy the sequences. I tell them what sequence I want and they ship it to me and then I can just pop it on my nanorobots.

What is your ultimate plan for them?

The possibilities are endless, you could inject them and have them monitor you for cancer, monitor you for pretty much any disease, and instantly treat it even before you know you have it. But the work is so preliminary [it'll take] at least 20 years.

What do you think about Obamacare?

I'm a huge fan of Obamacare. Health care should be free. It's a basic human right people deserve to be healthy and you shouldn't have to pay for your health. Implementation could've done better but I'm glad that's finally there and I hope we will reach a place where we are like Canada's health system where you don't have to pay for your health care because that's ridiculous.

One argument against universal healthcare is that it impedes research because our system is for people, not for profit.

Medicine is for people, and if you don't have that human aspect why are you doing the research. But I don't think it's going to impede research, there's always going to be money in medicine. By making it universal I don't think you're going to diminish that.

The STEM [science, technology, engineering and math] fields have a diversity issue right now, how would you encourage that situation to change?

We really have to change how we're our teaching STEM. Right now we have this bulimic learning system where we're trying to cram as much information down kids throats as possible and have them puke it up on tests. That's not what science is. Science isn't this cold, hard discipline, it's more about using your curiosity and creativity to change the world and inquire about the world around you.

I really think we need to show that through more hands-on demonstrations. And also show people more than the traditional white male who does science. As an LGBT youth I didn't see any role models for me except for Alan Turing, and that was 60 years ago. We definitely need to show more diverse role models in STEM.

Are you doing any specific outreach to the LGBT community?

Yes, I'm a Point Scholar now. That's an organization reaching out to LGBT youth and I work with a bunch of companies, like Intel, about inspiring LGBT youth to get out there.

So, you're 18 and you just wrote a memoir, Breakthrough: How One Teen Innovator Is Changing the World.

That was fun. It was definitely a really interesting process and I'm super happy that I got it out there got to tell people my story. And really showing kids if they can change the world because I didn't even know what a pancreas was and I just used Google and Wikipedia and found a new way to to detect cancer.

So just imagine what you can do.

This interview has been edited and condensed.

Close  Fun STEM Activities For Your Kids of  

Sneak in a lesson about gravity while creating beautiful art with pendulum painting. Suspend a broomstick in between two chairs and hang a plastic cup with some string in between. Put some paint in the cup, then poke a hole in the bottom. Set the cup to swinging to get some lovely designs. (Then you can talk about why the pendulum keeps swinging back and forth, gradually creating smaller and smaller circles.) Get the details: Hand Made Kids Art

You may know the recipe for homemade slime, but have you ever made magnetic slime? This incredibly cool experiment involves a bit of parental help and supervision, but it's well worth it! Get the details: Frugal Fun For Boys

Whip up a little kitchen chemistry to teach your kids about colour changes and chemical reactions. Red cabbage juice turns blue when mixed with a base (baking soda) and red when combined with an acid (vinegar). Combine both to get bubbles! Get the details: One Time Through

The maker movement has done a lot to get people of all ages interested in DIY technology. The MaKey MaKey kit helps kids take everyday objects and turn them into keyboards! Think playing piano with a banana or playing a videogame with Play-Doh. For a demonstration of what a MaKey MaKey kit can do, check this out. Get the details: MaKey MaKey

This one's called "$7 and a Screwdriver," because Leah at Socks & Shoes Not Required spent $7 on an old VCR at a thrift store. She explained to her kids how it worked, then gave them a screwdriver and let them go to town. Older kids could even try to put it back together. Brilliant! Get the details: Socks & Shoes Not Required

Wanna check out something cool? This neat experiment involves piping drops of water (carefully) onto coins. Your kids will be amazed that the water doesn't spill over the side! It's a lesson in surface tension, and your child can measure the amount of drops each type of coin can handle until it overflows. Get the details: The Science Kiddo

LEGO and STEM go hand-in-hand, and you can use your child's favourite multi-coloured building toys to teach many science, math and engineering concepts. Here, you can tackle density with some oil, water and a brick. (More ideas on the site below.) Get the details: Science Sparks

Anyone with a child and a smartphone knows that kids love taking photos. Send your school age children on a scavenger hunt to photograph items in nature, like flowers, seeds, birds, insects or tree bark. Great for an outdoor birthday party! Get the details: Betsy's Photography

If you glue popsicles together in a particular way, they will pop apart when you drop them. This lesson in tension is a fun one, and you can even set up the "bombs" next to each other for a chain reaction (a la the domino effect). Get the details: Frugal Fun For Boys

Forget boring old regular Bingo. Teach your child about fractions in a fun way with this Fractions Bingo game. She rolls the dice to figure out what fraction she's looking for, then fills it in once she finds it. First to get five in a row wins! Get the details: School Time Snippets

Kids don't learn about simple machines until grade school, but you can introduce the important concept of levers at an early age with this fun and colourful project. Your child can investigate which lever sends the cube flying the furthest. Get the details: Munchkins & Moms

Your child will learn about kinetics, the study of forces acting on mechanisms, while creating some little funny pals to play with. Turning the wooden dowel makes the googly heads spin, as you can see here. Get the details: Left Brain Craft Brain

Get your preschooler interested in number recognition and counting by utilizing the landscape of Dr. Seuss favourite, The Lorax. Older kids can work on adding and subtraction. Get the details: Inspiration Laboratories

If you REALLY want to bring the outdoors in, why not grow mushrooms with your children? This mom of quadruplets taught her four little ones a new x-word by growing xylophagous fungi on a log in their house (in this case shiitake and oyster mushrooms). The kids cared for the mushrooms by misting them each day until finally, mom made them into a casserole. Get the details: Capri + 3

Ever heard of ichnology? It's the study of the traces of organismal behaviour, like burrows or footprints. Introduce your child to this fascinating study with some air dry clay and plastic animal figurines. Check the website for more ideas involving paint (to make animal footprints on paper). Get the details: Suzy Homeschooler

A simple mixture of oil, water and food colouring creates a colourful light show in a jar. It also teaches kids about density. (ICYDK, the food colouring is denser than the oil, so it sinks through the oil layer and starts to dissolve in the water). Get the details: I Can Teach My Child

Even preschoolers can get in on the action with this cute apple-picking counting game. Kids pick up "mini-apples" with child tweezers and place enough on each corresponding number. Get the details: Fun-a-day!

Magna Tiles are awesome building toys. But you can also get kids excited about multiplication with these colourful, versatile squares. Here, this child is demonstrating 10 x 2. Get the details: And Next Comes L

Your little ones probably love to look at the sky at night. Bring that magic into the daytime by letting them try their hand at creating each of the planets. A great introduction to astronomy for even the youngest kids! Get the details: A Little Pinch of Perfect

Set out containers of varying sizes and shapes, then have your scientists-in-training guess whether they think a full scoop of coloured rice will fit inside or overflow. You can explore volume with liquids as well. Get the details: Little Bins For Little Hands

Explore "pirate science" by freezing small bits of treasure in a baking soda, Jell-O and water solution. Your kids can "dig" for treasure by using vinegar to excavate the goods. Get the details: Fun-A-Day!  Share  Tweet  ✖ Advertisement Share this ✖ close Current Slide

ALSO ON HUFFPOST: