President Obama and Magic Johnson in 2011. (Photo: Susan Walsh, AP)

It figures that one of the nation's most prominent basketball fans -- President Obama -- would get help for his new health care law from one of history's greatest basketball players.

Magic Johnson has cut a video urging people -- presumably young, athletic people -- to sign up for one of the new health care exchanges.

"You can go online to find and compare options, determine if you qualify for lower costs, and enroll in the plan that's right for you," Johnson says in a post on the White House blog.

The former Michigan State and Los Angeles Lakers star has also played a role in health care history. In 1991, Johnson announced he had the HIV virus, but has gone on to a successful business career.

Johnson is also a big political supporter of Obama, hosting a political fundraiser last year that featured the president.

The text of Johnson's blog item:

"No one plans to get sick or hurt -- I certainly didn't -- but most people will need medical care at some point in their lives.

"As an athlete, I understood the value of my health insurance. I knew that in my profession, injuries were common and could happen at any time.

"It was important that I had the insurance needed to protect me in case I got hurt. It's been almost 20 years since my playing days and having health insurance is still important to me.

"All athletes know that a broken bone, or knee surgery can cost a lot, and medical bills can add up. But it doesn't just happen to professional athletes, it can happen to anybody. And, without health insurance, some medical treatments can cost thousands of dollars.

"The good news is, now you can finally get the health insurance you need. The new Health Insurance Marketplace offers affordable, quality health insurance that can help you get the care you need without risking your life savings.

"The Marketplace is a new, simpler way to purchase health insurance -- all in one place. You can go online to find and compare options, determine if you qualify for lower costs, and enroll in the plan that's right for you.

"I encourage folks to check out my video and visit HealthCare.gov to determine your options.

"Everyone should have the opportunity to get affordable, quality health coverage. There's still time to enroll through March 31.

"Protect your health -- enroll today."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/Kj5TnP