MISSOULA, Mont. -

If you have health insurance, there's a good chance you'll pay more for less coverage next year.

Analysts tell us premiums have slowed over the last two years, but employees’ share of expenses, like copays and deductibles have increased.

About half of us get insurance through an employer, but that doesn't mean it's cheap. Unless -- in some cases -- your employer is the government.

Ask almost anyone, and they'll tell you they are spending more on health insurance. Premiums are up.

“We are paying $280 per two-week paycheck,” one Missoula resident told us.

“Our family plan is around $1,100 a month,” said another.

Deductibles are higher. “The last papers I signed made my deductible about $1,500,” said one resident we talked to.

A 2014 Kaiser Family Foundation report backs them up. It shows while premiums from 2004 to 2014 increased 69 percent, workers took the hardest hit, with an 81-percent increase.

While reviewing policies we were struck by one thing -- private sector workers are burdened by rising premiums and near catastrophic copays, but public employees have few complaints.

“The administration has always wanted to keep the health care benefit at a manageable and fair amount,” said Assistant Missoula Finance Director Leigh Griffing.

That amount is $20 for an individual employee in Missoula and free for workers in Kalispell and Bozeman.

Compare that to Kaiser’s estimated average of $243 a month.

Then there are deductibles. Missoula's -- $470 for a city employee, $1,300 for a family. Bozeman's is $1,500 per employee and $3,000 for a family. In Kalispell, it’s $1,000 per employee and $2,000 for a family.

eHealth averages the 2013 individual deductible at $3,319, and $4,230 for families.

It appears the public plan is a lot better than what's available to private workers. Griffing explained, “The majority of public employees don't have salaries that are comparable with the private sector, so the administration has considered this a benefit they would offer.

Your taxes pay Missoula, Bozeman and Kalispell’s insurance bills.

Most comes from what's called a permissive levy.

Next year in Missoula, it will cost the owner of a $225,000 house $113.25 a year.

Griffing wonders if the city will need more to cover the anticipated 9-percent jump in health costs.

“We've been increasing taxes around 2 to 4 percent over the last handful of years, so that is considerably higher than what we have been levying for.”

That means taxes will likely go up, too, for people already feeling the pinch from their own insurance.

“You practically have to be in triage dying before you can use it,” one resident said.

In 2018, employers -- public and private -- will face the potential of penalties under the Affordable Care Act's high-cost tax plan, often referred to as the "Cadillac Plan" tax.

The Kaiser Family Foundation says employers will likely begin to modify insurance plans in the coming year to avoid substantial penalties. That means further increases in deductibles, eliminating covered services and capping or eliminating tax-preferred savings accounts.

Public employers are not exempt for Cadillac Plan penalties.