Topics: behavioral modification therapy, hallucinogenics, psilocybin, Smoking, Sustainability News, Life News, News

A small study conducted by the cognitive behavior therapy program at Johns Hopkins University indicates that magic mushrooms could be effective in helping long-term smokers quit, even after numerous other methods have failed.

The current king of smoking cessation drugs, Chantix, only has a 35 percent rate of success at six months, while nicotine patches and gums are even less effective. Of the 15 volunteer participants who took two to three rounds of psilocybin (the active hallucinogenic drug in mushrooms), 12 were still smoke-free six months later.

Bloomberg reports:

Because the psilocybin pill was given in combination with behavior modification therapy, including counseling and keeping a journal, it’s not clear how much of the benefit for the smokers came from the hallucinogen. Future studies are being planned to include a comparison group who won’t receive the mind-altering compound, and all participants will get brain scans to help researchers pinpoint and study where the effect occurs. A wide range of volunteers took part in the study, including a teacher, a lawyer and a museum worker. They were all more interested in quitting smoking than in taking a psychedelic drug, Johnson said. Conducting the research in a carefully controlled environment allowed the investigators to protect the volunteers and avoid the acute anxiety that can occur, the experience that’s generally known as a “bad trip,” he said. The therapy occurred over two or three sessions. Volunteers came to a laboratory set up like a living room, took a 20 milligram pill of psilocybin, covered their eyes and relaxed with music for several hours as the psychedelic effect took hold. Those who had a transcendent experience, where people say they went into a mystical state that helped them feel unity with themselves and the universe, tended to have more success, the researchers said.

The study’s participants returned two weeks later for one higher dose, and then were offered a third but were free to decline.