The Morning Report is a quick roundup of links to stories that Carroll County residents are talking about for Wednesday, March 30, 2016.

For high school sports news be sure to visit our Carroll Varsity section and get other sports news here.

Caption Q&A: Francis Scott Key's CJ Goon FSK Senior CJ Goon talks about his experience as a multi-sport athlete, and what's coming up for him after graduation. (Megan Woodward and Ulysses Munoz / BSMG) FSK Senior CJ Goon talks about his experience as a multi-sport athlete, and what's coming up for him after graduation. (Megan Woodward and Ulysses Munoz / BSMG) Caption Q&A: Francis Scott Key's CJ Goon FSK Senior CJ Goon talks about his experience as a multi-sport athlete, and what's coming up for him after graduation. (Megan Woodward and Ulysses Munoz / BSMG) FSK Senior CJ Goon talks about his experience as a multi-sport athlete, and what's coming up for him after graduation. (Megan Woodward and Ulysses Munoz / BSMG) Caption Board of Commissioners approves 2017 budget The Board of Commissioners voted 3-2 to approve a fiscal year 2017 budget on Thursday. (Heather Norris / BSMG) The Board of Commissioners voted 3-2 to approve a fiscal year 2017 budget on Thursday. (Heather Norris / BSMG) Caption Raising money with (hair) style After students from Westminster West Middle School raised more than $9,000 for the Cool Kids Campaign, a charity that supports children with cancer, their teachers agreed to adopt extreme hairdos with help from Esquire and the Lady Salon in Westminster. After students from Westminster West Middle School raised more than $9,000 for the Cool Kids Campaign, a charity that supports children with cancer, their teachers agreed to adopt extreme hairdos with help from Esquire and the Lady Salon in Westminster. Caption Recap: Citizens Police Academy Looking back at the past six weeks of training in the Citizens Police Academy. (Carroll County Photo Staff and Ulysses Munoz / BSMG) Looking back at the past six weeks of training in the Citizens Police Academy. (Carroll County Photo Staff and Ulysses Munoz / BSMG) Caption Two-alarm fire in Westminster Friday night Scenes from a two-alarm fire in Westminster Friday, May 20. (Jon Kelvey and Ulysses Munoz / BSMG) Scenes from a two-alarm fire in Westminster Friday, May 20. (Jon Kelvey and Ulysses Munoz / BSMG)

For more stories, photos and videos, visit www.carrollcountytimes.com.