Vassar scholar figuratively froths with anger and vitriol over Republican politician

A professor at Vassar College has penned a lengthy screed against Republican Gov. Scott Walker, an angry rant that leaves no hyperbolic accusation unstated as he tells the presidential candidate: “F– you.”

The tirade, posted earlier this week on Huffington Post, was written by Tim Koechlin, a senior lecturer and director of international studies at the private liberal arts college in New York.

The piece centers around Koechlin’s angst for receiving campaign e-mails from Walker seeking contributions. Koechlin’s emailed reply begins: “F– you.”

Koechlin went on to describe his online engagement with Walker’s campaign and his overall disgust for the man, lambasting the candidate for “tax cuts for the 1 percent, deregulation and relentless attacks on working people and the unions that advocate for them.”

He charged Walker with “pandering to the worst impulses of right wing voters” and pledged to do “whatever I can to make sure you will not become president.”

Koechlin also accused the governor of racism and actively working to hurt the poor and people of color, noting “Walker has shamelessly adopted the right-wing’s racist play book, at every opportunity, blaming the low pay, insecurity and anxiety of white working class people on ‘undeserving’ people of color – ‘welfare’ recipients,** ‘illegal’ immigrants, Muslims and, of course, President Obama.”

“Apparently, from Scott Walker’s point of view, the problem with the U.S. is that corporations and the super-rich are getting too little, while people of color, workers, teachers, students, the elderly, and the poor are getting too much!”

Leaving no stone unturned, he also stated Walker has “attacked” education and “gutted” the University of Wisconsin system, bemoaned the politician’s criticisms of Obamacare, accused the presidential candidate of being a puppet of the Koch brothers, griped about the politician’s fight against the EPA, and suggested he holds disdain for “most Americans.”

And that’s just the highlight reel.

The College Fix reached out to Koechlin, asking him in emails if he considered his classroom lectures unbiased in the wake of such ardently held views. He did not respond.

Walker’s campaign also did not return requests for comments.

Koechlin is slated to teach “Intro to Urban Studies” this fall as Vassar, according to the online schedule.

“Before arriving at Vassar in 2001, Tim taught economics at Smith College and Skidmore College, where he was a tenured member of the economics department,” his faculty profile states.

Koechlin is no stranger to touting leftist views.

In a previous Huffington Post column “Why I Will Vote for the Democrats,” Koechlin wrote “I believe that racism, sexism and homophobia are widespread, and bad for all of us. And I believe that many Americans are in denial about this.”

His personal contribution to ‘Vassar College’s Privilege Campaign’ in 2013 stated in part: “I am a highly educated, prosperous, straight, white man. I always get the benefit of the doubt.”

He has also written a satirical article essentially arguing “Stand Your Ground” laws are racist and only help white people.

“This law will simply allow a Normal American to respond with force if they encounter a truly threatening person: an urban gang-type person; a hostile seeming Muslim type person, or maybe a predatory-looking homosexual,” he stated.

Like The College Fix on Facebook / Follow us on Twitter

IMAGE: YouTube screenshot