Sony Pictures Entertainment is reeling from the most damaging hack ever against a U.S. corporation, which will likely increase pressure on Congress to pass comprehensive cybersecurity legislation despite years of failing to do so and the retirement of several lawmakers that were key to previous attempts.

The FBI announced on Friday that North Korea was responsible for the attack that occurred in November, recognizing patterns in the attack and the malware used against Sony that were similar to previous hacks staged by the Stalinist dictatorship.

“North Korea’s attack on [Sony Pictures Entertainment] reaffirms that cyber threats pose one of the gravest national security dangers to the United States,” the FBI wrote in a news release.

The damaging hack that leaked personal emails and data of the company’s employees, pirated five of its unreleased films online and cost the studio millions of dollars was “unprecedented in its damage to computer systems,” Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., said in a statement.

[READ: 'The Interview' and the Reckoning]

“This is only the latest example of the need for serious legislation to improve the sharing of information between the private sector and the government to help companies strengthen cybersecurity,” she said. “We must pass an information sharing bill as quickly as possible next year."

Feinstein has been among the lawmakers pushing for comprehensive cybersecurity reform for several years. Previous attempts failed because of pushback from businesses about fears that setting standards on cybersecurity or data breach notification would be counterproductive or expensive, so Congress has shifted most of its attention to bills that would ease information sharing on threats between the government and companies.

The latest information sharing bill proposed by Feinstein also failed this year in part because of criticism from civil liberties advocates such as the Center for Democracy and Technology, which argued the bill would share too much private data with the government and enable broader surveillance.

The House is losing one of the top advocates for cybersecurity information sharing with the retirement of Rep. Mike Rogers, R-Mich, but Rep. C.A. “Dutch” Ruppersberger, D-Md., tells U.S. News he hopes the Sony hack “will move Congress to pass cyber information sharing legislation and deliver it quickly to the president’s desk.”

“North Korea’s cyber attack on Sony was extremely severe, forcing Sony to take its entire system offline, destroying computers, and stealing confidential information,” Ruppersberger says. “We need to stop dealing with cyber attacks after the damage is done. We need to have foresight and prevent them from occurring in the first place.”

Previous information sharing bills introduced by Rogers and Ruppersberger have passed the Republican-controlled House, so it is possible that the new Republican majority in the Senate could ease passage with fewer voices concerned about the privacy risks of those bills.

[ALSO: Sony Hack Takes Darker Turn With 'Interview' Terror Threat]

Information sharing between government and the private sector can be helpful if legislation is well-crafted to ensure data privacy, but it will not be enough to prevent online attacks like the breach of Sony’s networks, says Jake Laperruque, a fellow with the Center for Democracy and Technology.

“The info sharing that these bills would grant would not have prevented these attacks, which were the result of poor digital hygiene and system monitoring,” Laperruque says. “These companies have the capacity to take stronger measures.”

A lack of cybersecurity preparations at U.S. companies are blamed for enabling hackers to breach networks and steal data, according to recent studies by groups including the Center for Strategic and International Studies think tank and PricewaterhouseCoopers industry research firm. Only 49 percent of companies surveyed by PwC have a formal plan for dealing with security breaches conducted by current and former employees, for instance.