MORE than 18,000 children had their teeth checked during the first month of a new Medicare dental scheme that dentists warn could be open to rorting.

The scheme introduced by the Greens and the previous Labor Government will see nearly 3 million children get up to $1,000 of Medicare funded dental care every two years.

However, a decision to introduce a separate set of Medicare identification numbers for dental services rather than use existing health fund identifiers could open the way for fraud.

Health fund members may be able to claim both a Medicare rebate and a health fund rebate for the same dental service.

Australian Dental Association chief Robert Boyd Boland says Medicare adds an 88 prefix to many of the item numbers that identify dental services for health fund claiming purposes.

“We had discussions with the government and pressed the fact that to avoid confusion they should make it (Medicare) compatible,” he said.

In the early months of the new scheme many parents took their children to the dentist before they received letters informing them they were now eligible for a Medicare rebate for the service.

When they take their original bill to Medicare it cannot be refunded because the item numbers the dentists charged are for health funds not Medicare.

Many parents have been returning to the dentist to ask for a second receipt that lists Medicare item numbers for the same treatment and can end up with two receipts for the same service.

They could potentially use one to claim from Medicare and the other to claim from their health fund.

‘We have advised them (dentists) not to issue a revised account, there could be a discrepancy between the two documents. They should have patients and Medicare sort it out,” Mr Boland said.

“We’re telling dentists to be cautious if they have duplicated accounts to note they have given patients advice not to double dip,” he said.

The Department of Health says dentists are not prohibited from issuing a second invoice.

“If a dentist chooses to participate in the CDBS for services provided earlier in the calendar year, issuing an amended invoice with appropriate CDBS item numbers is not prohibited under the Dental Benefits Act 2008 or subordinate legislation, so long as the dentist complies with the program’s requirements,” a spokeswoman said.

Government guidelines simply require the dental provider “keep a record of both invoices” and “advise the patient that they are not entitled to claim both CDBS and Private Health Insurance benefits for the same service item under the Rules”.

Medicare data shows nearly 500 children had root canal treatment paid for in January and another 7,600 had fillings reimbursed.

In the first month the scheme has cost the government $5.6 million.

Dentists don’t have to take part in the scheme and they do not have to bulk bill.

The Australian Dental Association has warned Medicare rebates are up to 20 per cent lower than the fees dentists charge and parents could be left with some out-of-pocket expenses.

The Greens are hoping to persuade the government to gradually expand the scheme to cover the adult population.