Near his 21st birthday last month, and about a month after making his NHL debut, Chris Bigras’ body language turned from precarious to poised. The rookie Avalanche defenseman from small-town Canadian roots learned he could do this.

“It’s a comfort thing, getting experience up here and a feel for the game,” said Bigras, who has played in 23 consecutive games since being called up from the minors Jan. 13. “It’s definitely a huge jump from where I was last year in junior, and a jump from the AHL as well. I’m getting more and more comfortable and confident with myself and my abilities.”

A year ago at this time, Bigras was playing for the Owen Sound Attack, the Ontario Hockey League team 70 miles east of his hometown of Orillia, Ontario. Orillia is off the banks of Lake Simcoe, and Owen Sound is on the southern end of the Georgian Bay of Lake Huron.

Big cities weren’t Bigras’ thing, and the NHL limelight was startling.

“Always been in that close-knit community,” he said. “I’ve been lucky enough to have two good parents who have inspired me to be a good person, and through the small communities I’ve built long-lasting friendships. It’s a humble place to grow up, a place where I’ll never forget my roots.”

Bigras, who was Colorado’s second-round draft pick (32nd overall) in 2013, turned pro last spring, playing seven games for the American Hockey League’s Lake Erie Monsters. The Avs’ AHL affiliate switched to the San Antonio Rampage during the off-season, and Bigras started this season in Texas, playing 37 games before his January call-up.

Avs goalie Calvin Pickard knows Bigras — nicknamed “Bigsy” — the best among his teammates. Both began the season in San Antonio and finished last season in Lake Erie.

“He’s a quiet guy, but a great guy, and it’s been nice to see him play well. He’s not shell-shocked at all,” Pickard said of Bigras. “Right from the start, he was one of our go-to guys in San Antonio. He’s not afraid to make a play. Really smooth. Good skater. And a great guy off the ice as well.”

Bigras has a goal and two points with the Avs. His first career goal came last week at Minnesota, off a back-door pass from Matt Duchene. Bigras had a career-high 23 shifts in that game.

“It was pretty awesome. A thrill,” Bigras said of his first NHL goal. “Extremely excited about that. It was a perfect pass by Dutchy. I thanked him for that one.”

Bigras is prone to score back-door goals because his skill set allows him to get the green light from coaches to pinch down from the blue line.

“It’s knowing when to pick your spots, when to go, and not leave your D-partner vulnerable,” Bigras said. “My game is very cerebral. I try to pick up as much as I can, learn as much as I can, and use my head out there to make my decisions as far as positioning. I’ve always been a pretty quick study.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or @mikechambers

ARIZONA AT COLORADO 7 p.m. Monday, NBCSN; 950 AM

Spotlight on Shane Doan:

The veteran winger, and former major junior teammate of Jarom Iginla at Kamloops, has been with the Coyotes since their 1996 arrival from Winnipeg. At age 39, he has a team-leading 24 goals to go with 15 assists. He is making $5.3 million this season and can be an unrestricted free agent July 1. He also might retire, and if that happens, Monday night’s game would be his last in Denver.

NOTEBOOK

Coyotes:

Arizona snapped a seven-game losing streak with a 5-1 victory over Florida at home Saturday night. Playing his first game for the Coyotes, former Avalanche forward Alex Tanguay had two goals and an assist. … In the wake of that losing streak, the Coyotes are one of five Western Conference teams realistically out of the race for a playoff berth. … The last time Arizona and Colorado met, Mikkel Boedker’s goal at 4:17 of overtime gave the Coyotes a 2-1 victory in Denver on Dec. 27. Boedker joined the Avalanche a week ago in the trade for Tanguay and two major junior prospects.

Avalanche:

The team conducted its annual charity brunch Sunday and didn’t practice. … In the fight for the final wild-card playoff berth in the Western Conference, Minnesota took a two-point lead over the Avalanche into the Wild’s Sunday night home game against St. Louis. … Coach Patrick Roy said after the Avalanche’s 5-2 loss to Nashville on Saturday: “It’s a tough loss, let’s not kid ourselves. But right now we need to remain even keel and make sure we remain focused for the next game.”