During April, RWJBarnabas Health recognizes National Minority Health Month by raising awareness about the health disparities that continue to affect racial and ethnic minorities. This year's theme, provided by the federal Office of Minority Health, is "Accelerating Health Equity for the Nation."

National Minority Health month is a call to action, a charge for all of us to unite toward a common goal of improving the health of our communities.

At RWJBarnabas Health, we believe life is better healthy. We recognize that certain ethnic and racial groups are more prone to certain illnesses and diseases. We also understand that people with different ethnic and language backgrounds may find it more challenging to access health care. As a result, we've put programs into place to deliver culturally competent care to address the health care needs of different racial and ethnic groups. By connecting with our communities and better understanding the health care needs and challenges of different populations, we hope to expand access to services and bring wellness to more people. We remain committed to delivering the highest quality care.

To meet the unique health care needs of the Latino population, Clara Maass Medical Center has established the Center of Excellence for Latino Health and Newark Beth Israel Medical Center has launched the Hispanic Health Outreach Program. In fact, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Hispanics have different degrees of illness or health risks, including a 50 percent higher death rate from diabetes, 23 percent more obesity, 24 percent more poorly controlled high blood pressure and less likelihood to be screened for various health issues.

The Hispanic Health Outreach Program at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center is specially designed to raise awareness about health issues facing the Hispanic community in Newark as well as enhancing access. The Hispanic Health Outreach Program recently announced the program to the Hispanic community and will work with community leaders to better understand and provide the preventive education and screenings most needed by the Latino population in Newark, in addition to providing information about the services available at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center. The Hispanic Health Outreach Program will initially focus on five areas including diabetes, women's health and breast services, prostate cancer and children's health.

The Center of Excellence for Latino Health at Clara Maass Medical Center has been established to provide comprehensive, multidisciplinary health and wellness services that address a wide-range of acute and chronic illnesses.

To enhance access to health insurance in accordance with the Affordable Care Act, Clara Maass' Center for Excellence for Latino Health (CELH) hosted an open enrollment program to give local families an opportunity to meet with Health Insurance Marketplace representatives, learn more about options and enroll in a health insurance plan. Additionally, the CELH will host a wellness event for local clergy and members of their faith-based health ministries to further increase outreach to local populations.

For more information about the Newark Beth Israel Medical Center Hispanic Health Outreach Program, visit barnabashealth.org/nbihispanichealth. To learn more about Clara Maass' Center for Excellence for Latino Health, call (973) 450-2997.

For more news and features about healthy living, click here.