While many students visit college health centers due to a cold or the flu, others need to speak with someone about reducing stress.

In some ways, college health care feels like going to the family doctor, but most campuses offer a much wider scope of health services – some unexpected – as students make the change from minor patients to independent health consumers. While you can stop by the health center to get a routine flu shot or have your sprained wrist wrapped, you can also learn more about binge-drinking hazards or how to protect yourself from would-be stalkers, or just come in to talk when you're feeling stressed out.

What College Health Centers Offer

Many colleges and universities are expanding or building new health facilities, says M. Jacob Baggott, president-elect of the American College Health Association. One such school is the University of Alabama at Birmingham, where he's executive director of health and wellness.

Beside primary care services, he says many campuses offer sports health services, comprehensive health and wellness programs, and in some cases, dental and vision services.

[Read: Ask These Questions During Your College Orientation.]

All Types of Prevention

A women's health clinic, travel medicine and physical therapy help round out the offerings at University of Wisconsin–Madison Health Services, along with a mental health service including a staff of counselors and a psychiatry team, says Sarah Van Orman, executive director of university health services and current president of the ​ACHA.

Along with a health promotion and prevention unit, she says health initiatives beyond the clinic aim "to prevent the kinds of things and address the kinds of behaviors – alcohol, sexual assault, wellness and stress reduction – that impact students' health and well-being."

Before students arrive on campus, they go through the online AlcoholEdu program to learn about alcohol and its impact, and understand and reduce high-risk drinking. The Tonight program, developed at the University of Wisconsin–Madison to prevent sexual assault, dating violence and stalking, is a requirement for new undergrads. "We talk to them about recognizing situations, being good bystanders, helping to intervene and [about] consent," Van Orman says. The program also discusses resources for students if they or someone they care about is a victim.

"When we think about students getting sick, we think about them getting colds and those sorts of things," she says, "but when we think about what’s most affecting students on campus, it’s these kinds of things."

[Read: Your Brain on Booze.]

Health Independence

Part of a college student’s transition is shouldering more responsibility for his or her health care. For those with medical conditions such as diabetes or asthma, it means becoming more independent in routine self-care as well as adapting to lifestyle changes, Van Orman says.

For otherwise healthy students, she says, it may be the first time they're faced with a cold or the flu without knowing when to seek health care, who they should call or what it's like to see a doctor by themselves.

She encourages parents to coach kids in the transition well before high school graduation. For instance, she asks, has your child ever made his or her own doctor's appointment, picked up a prescription or carried an insurance card?

[Read: How Much Say Do You Really Have in Your Teen’s Health Care?]

The Usual Suspects

With students living in close quarters and working so hard, colds, flu and other communicable diseases are among the most common ailments on campus, Van Orman says, and health services also see a lot of students with alcohol-related injuries.

"[With] the pressures of campus, change of sleep, lots of new environments – it’s not uncommon for student to experience stress, anxiety and sometimes even depression," she adds.

Baggott notes that with older students on campus, health centers are also prepared to deal with arthritis aches and pains, high blood pressure, cholesterol control and other issues you might not associate with younger, generally healthy students.

Insurance and Immunizations

The college transition "is just a great time for parents and teenagers to look at their immunization schedule and get that all together," says Alain Joffe​, director of the Student Health and Wellness Center at Johns Hopkins University.

Updated immunizations at the college level involve two doses of meningococcal meningitis vaccine; a Tdap booster to protect against tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis (whooping cough) because childhood protection wears off; three does of human papilloma virus vaccine; and immunizations for hepatitis A and B.

It’s also smart to check the family health insurance policy at this time. Even though adult children can stay on their parents' health insurance up to age 26 under the Affordable Care Act, don't assume they're automatically covered on campus, Baggott says. Network plans may not extend out of state, or high deductibles could be an issue. For those who need them, insurance plans offered by some universities can bridge coverage gaps.

[Read: How to Find the Best Insurance Plan for You.]

How Much Do You Share?

For adolescents with chronic health problems, it's important to figure out how to handle health care at college – whether they intend to stick with their subspecialist from home, or establish a new relationship nearby. But there's more to consider, Joffe says. "Are you going to tell your roommates? If you’ve got diabetes and you occasionally have low blood sugar and you can go unconscious, or you have a seizure disorder, do you want to share that information with your roommate or resident advisor – so that someone is aware of your condition and what to do in case of a medical emergency?"

Students with mental health issues face unique challenges, Joffe says. They have to decide what's going to happen with psychiatric medicines and counseling. Some may see college as a fresh start, where they stop treatment and don’t tell anybody – but the condition hasn't necessarily gone away.

Those who do continue mental health treatment, like ​for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, have practical concerns, like who will prescribe controlled medications, which doctors may not be able to call across state lines, Joffe says. Students with ADHD or autism who've relied on parents to help with organization and study habits might consider whether to get in touch with their school's disability office and if they’ll seek academic advisement to help with test taking.

[Read: Has Your Child Outgrown the Pediatrician?]

OK to Seek Help

Heading off to college is a big transition, Joffe says, and while most students handle it well, parents should recognize that it’s OK if kids feel down or a little lost for a short period.

Parents should assure kids there’s no shame in seeking help if they need it. A few visits to the counseling center before mid-semester could get them back on track before they're really depressed and have a harder time coping, Joffe says.

Van Orman agrees that “it’s important for students and families to know that those kinds of feelings are really common and to know when they should reach out, get help and know how to do that on campus."