Top 12 Stores With the Best Return Policies for 2014

How to Give to Charity Without Going Into Debt

Here’s How Interest Rates Will Affect Your Money Next Year

A lot of thought and time go into holiday gift-giving: Does your mom want a scarf or a bottle of her favorite fragrance? What about your brother: camping gear or a smartphone gadget? And your niece — well, that’s easy: something, anything Frozen.

Those are all fun purchases, but who on your list should just receive cold, hard cash? For the right recipient, cash is actually a very thoughtful gift — it can help ease a financial burden, boost someone’s savings account or provide an opportunity to have a little fun.

Here are five people on your holiday gift list that should receive a cash gift.

THE COLLEGE STUDENT OR RECENT GRAD

College students and recent grads are notoriously short on funds, and giving a holiday cash gift is one of the best ways to help a struggling student. Money guarantees the recipient will get exactly what he wants or needs, and there’s a lot this demographic needs help with. A college kid can use holiday cash to buy books, pay student loans, catch up on bills, fill up on gas or build an emergency fund.

THE TEACHER OR CAREGIVER

Teachers and caregivers generally don’t make a lot of money, and the holidays are the perfect opportunity to show your appreciation for everything they do. As well-intentioned as a mug or apple-shaped paperweight might be, those are often cited as some of the worst gifts teachers receive. If you are going to spend the time and effort giving a holiday gift, it’s best to choose an item that has a lot of legs — and, oftentimes, that’s cash.

If handing over holiday money in an envelope makes you feel a little too Tony Soprano, consider purchasing a bank-issued gift card so they can still spend the cash however they choose.

THE TEENAGER

Don’t even waste your time trying to figure out what the teenager on your list wants for the holidays — this age group is notoriously hard to shop for and, according to Ebates.com, nearly four-fifths of American teenagers picked cash as their preferred holiday gift. Don’t worry about gift-giving etiquette, either; even Martha Stewart says giving holiday cash to kids is perfectly OK.

THE PERSON ON A FIXED INCOME

I’m not going to lie: Giving your grandparent or someone collecting Social Security benefits a holiday cash gift is pretty awkward. Still, cash is often the gift that will have the most use and make the biggest impact on their lives. So, instead of giving actual money, consider opting for a gift card that adds real value to their lives. Some ideas include gift certificates to a grocery store, favorite barber or salon, or an inexpensive restaurant.

I’ll share a little personal story with you (bear with me): My grandmother used to always give me cash for Christmas. While it was an incredibly thoughtful gesture, she really couldn’t afford it. So every year I would give her a gift card to Trader Joe’s and we’d silently call it even. She felt good about giving me a holiday cash gift, and I felt good knowing it wasn’t impacting her quality of life.

THE EMPLOYEE

When it comes to giving employees a little something extra for the holidays, cash is king. Not to be confused with annual or performance-based bonuses, employee holiday gifts are tokens of appreciation. In a poll conducted by American Express Professionals, 27 percent of respondents said they prefer holiday cash gifts over pay raises, days off, gift cards or holiday parties.

You heard me right: Cash gift over a pay raise — that’s a pretty powerful sentiment. Cash gifts also improve employee morale and loyalty, which is an investment that goes right back into your business.

Morgan Quinn,

GOBankingRates.com