A robot, 3-D printer and exhibit space are among the new additions to the Sadie Pope Dowdell Library next year. .

Buy Photo South Amboy Mayor Fred Henry addresses the group at the Sadie Pope Dowdell Library’s Centennial Salute - Holiday Open House. (Photo: Staff Photo by Susan Loyer)Buy Photo Story Highlights The Sadie Pope Dowdell Library is welcoming a new era with some new technology.

The addenda will give patrons the skills needed to keep current in a changing technological world.

A new robot was introduced at the library's Centennial Salute - Holiday Open House held Monday.

A 3D printer and exhibit space also are new additions to be added next year.

The Sadie Pope Dowdell Library is welcoming a new era with some new technology designed to give patrons the skills needed to keep current in a rapidly changing technological world.

"We wanted to kick off the new century with a robot and this is just the first of many technologies to come," Library Director Elaine Gaber said. "We want to be ahead of the curve and not try to catch up."

The new robot was introduced during the library's Centennial Salute-Holiday Open House held Monday evening at the facility at 100 Harold G. Hoffman Plaza, off John T. O'Leary Boulevard.

"This year's open house saluted our centennial year as we move forward to the next century," Gaber said.

The Finch robot will be used during a new library program, called Code4Fun, which will kick off in January, the director said.

"The robot will be incorporated into a fun and educational after-school program that will teach young adults computer programming," Gaber said. "We're trying to create excitement and wonder and encourage new possibilities for both girls and boys."

Code4Fun will be incorporated into Sadie's Studio's Makerspace program, which was introduced at the library earlier this year, she said.

Sadie's Studio was named after Sadie Pope Dowdell, a librarian who served for 47 years. The library also is named in her honor.

"The Makerspace program is a make it yourself program," she said. "It's a new library trend where kids, young adults and adults drop in the library to learn how to do things — whether they want to learn how to solder, program a robot or make rainbow looms. It incorporates everything from technology to entertaining crafts. We even have a Creative Chefs program."

The robot was made by the Carnegie Melon University, Janet Simeone, supervising library assistant, said.

"The main objective is for children to understand how to do codes," Marilyn Cipollari, library associate in charge of collection development and technology projects in the young adult department. "The more advanced you get, the more elaborate the activity becomes."

The library also is hosting a name the robot contest, which kicked off at Monday's event and ends Dec. 31.

Sayreville youngsters Cameran Kasperan, 10, and Madison Arrington, 6, are looking forward to learning about the new robot.

"It's really cool," Cameran said. "I want to know how it moves and stuff."

"It looks really fun," Madison added.

Gaber also announced that a 3D printer, donated by the Dowdell Library Foundation, also will be added to the library's new technologies in early January.

During the event, Gaber thanked the city, library staff, the Dowdell Library Foundation and Dowdell Friends of the Library for their support.

"We are an in-demand destination for the community," she said.

She also spoke about the many new additions to the library, including the robot, the Makerspace program, the 3D printer and a new exhibit space.

"We're also trying to become more of a cultural center," she said. "We received a donation for an exhibit space. The entertainment, the music and the art exhibition will be another vein of what the library will be doing."

Mayor Fred Henry spoke to the crowd about the library's rich 100-year history.

Henry said the library, which was founded by the Woman's Club of South Amboy, opened on March 17, 1914 on the second floor of the South Amboy Post Office at Broadway and David Street. He spoke about its various locations before settling in at its current location at 100 Harold Hoffman Plaza.

The mayor said he was proud to be involved in plans to relocate the library to its current location.

"We are very, very fortunate that the people in South Amboy saw that this was the way to go," Henry said. "This was the future and it was passed on a ballot by over a 2 to 1 margin. The people of South Amboy realized we had to move forward and a lot of people supported that."

Henry also presented the library with two proclamations - one from the New Jersey Senate and General Assembly and another from the mayor's office — in recognition of the library's anniversary.

Winners of the I Love South Amboy Photography Contest, which netted about 43 entries, also were announced at the event. City resident Yanan (Anne) Wang won the grand prize for her work entitled "Lighthouse Bay Sunrise." Edward Hughes of North Brunswick was the runner-up for his work "Tide Ripples on Sand Bank."

The event also included refreshments and door prizes.

City residents George O'Neill; his wife, Lisa, and daughter, Liza, 8, were among those library supporters who attended the event.

"We just love coming here," George said. "We're here every Thursday for the rainbow loom club. Liza won't miss it for anything. The staff is so nice and helpful here. We also come here periodically if she needs things for school."

"I like how you can look around and get books of any kind," Liza said. "I also use the computer."

And Liza was taking home a form to submit an entry in the name the robot contest.

Additional information about the library is available by calling 732-721-6060, at www.dowdell.org. or by emailing comments@dowdell.org.

Staff Writer Susan Loyer: 732-565-7243; sloyer@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1AbE7hr