SANTA CRUZ -- Chuck Griffen, a commercial real estate agent in Aptos, said he was stunned to hear how much his health insurance would cost next year.

He is looking at paying $1,150 a month, $13,800 a year, for a no-frills "bronze" plan with out-of-pocket expenses of $12,000 covering himself, his wife and his son, a student at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo.

"Half my income could go toward health care," he said. "Anyone making over $60,000 is screwed. You're penalizing middle-class people. I think there will be a huge outrage."

Twice since the Affordable Care Act became law, Griffen changed his health insurance to keep it affordable.

Eighteen months ago, he paid $512 a month for a HealthNet policy with prescription coverage, two office visits and a $6,000 deductible for himself, his wife, his son and his daughter.

When HealthNet's price jumped to $630 a month, Griffen switched to Blue Shield, raised the deductible to $9,600, and his daughter, who got a job after college graduation, left the policy, bringing his cost back to $512 a month. That policy will no longer be available as of Jan. 1.

Pamela Fugitt-Hetrick, who owns DCD Financial and Insurance Services in Santa Cruz, is facing a 70 percent rate increase for herself and her daughter for what she considers an inferior plan.

"There's nothing affordable about the Affordable Care Act," said Betty Lindstrom of Felton, a health insurance agent since 1975 and the owner of her own agency since 1995. "Folks are calling saying, 'My rates are going to double.' "

High deductible plans, such as the one Griffen has, have been popular but under the Affordable Care Act, the deductible is capped at $6,000.

"You can't have a generic-only drug plan," Lindstrom said. "You get more goodies, it's more expensive."

The new rating methodology is another factor. A family will now pay for each person being covered. So a family of six, father and mother, with three of the four children older than 21 will pay for three extra adults.

"You're paying for six, not a family rate," Lindstrom said.

She expects "a huge impact" locally from the Affordable Care Act eliminating the option for a spouse who employs the other spouse in a family business and qualifies for a small employer group rate.

Unless that small business owner hires a non-family member, he or she won't be eligible for a group rate and will have to purchase an individual policy, said Lindstrom, who hopes this provision in the law will be amended.

She recommended people hold off making a decision until information about which doctors are with which insurers is posted on the CoveredCA.com website Tuesday.

Anthem announced doctor information will be uploaded sometime between Oct. 11 and 15, Lindstrom said, attributing the delay to SB 639, which made 29 of Blue Shield's 88 plans ineligible for CoveredCA.

Fugitt-Hetrick advises clients to wait until Oct. 15 when she hopes information about doctors and drugs will be available.

She is losing coverage she and 200 clients had through the California Farm Bureau Federation. The worst part, she said, was the notification letter recommended contacting Keenan & Associates, a private insurance broker based in Torrance, for assistance.

"Thankfully my clients are calling me," she said. "I've probably lost half my income. I was less stressed when I was in the Persian Gulf War."

One option is to seek plans not on the Covered California exchange, such as those offered by Modern Woodmen of America, a fraternal nonprofit.

"We don't have stockholders," said Steve Hoversten, a Modern Woodmen agent in Scotts Valley. "Our profits come back to policyholders through dividends."

Follow Sentinel reporter Jondi Gumz at Twitter.com/jondigumz