WASHINGTON — Former New York Gov. Mario Cuomo, the eloquent voice of the Democratic Party's liberal wing who resisted calls to run for president, died today at age 82.

Cuomo died 33 years to the day he was first sworn in as New York's chief executive and on the same day that his son, Andrew, took the oath of office for another term as governor. Andrew Cuomo won a second term last November, the first Democratic governor to be re-elected in New York since his father.

"Our country and our region lost a giant today with the passing of Governor Mario Cuomo,” New Jersey Gov.Chris Christie said. “He was a strong, eloquent leader who loved New York and its people. As an Italian-American, he was also a role model for future generations that anything was possible through hard work and education."

At a time when Republicans were ascendant, with Ronald Reagan capturing the White House in a landslide and his coattails bringing in GOP control of the Senate, Mario Cuomo used his gubernatorial bully pulpit to offer a rebuttal and electrify his party.

Delivering the keynote address at the 1984 Democratic National Convention in San Francisco, Cuomo offered an alternative view to Reagan's "shining city on a hill" by declaring that "not everyone is sharing" in this largesse.

"In this part of the city there are more poor than ever, more families in trouble, more and more people who need help but can't find it," Cuomo told the convention delegates. "Even worse: There are elderly people who tremble in the basements of the houses there. And there are people who sleep in the city streets, in the gutter, where the glitter doesn't show. There are ghettos where thousands of young people, without a job or an education, give their lives away to drug dealers every day. There is despair, Mr. President, in the faces that you don't see, in the places that you don't visit in your shining city."

His speech made him a national star and an oft-touted potential candidate for president.

But Cuomo declined to run in both 1988 and 1992, the last time with a plane waiting on the runway at Albany Airport to take him to New Hampshire to file for the first-in-the-nation primary.

When Cuomo did have a prime-time speaking role at the 1992 convention, it was to nominate Bill Clinton, who went on to be elected president.

Mario Matthew Cuomo was born on June 15, 1932, to Italian immigrants in Queens. He started out as a professional baseball player, receiving a contact from the Pittsburgh Pirates, though never made it out of the minor leagues. A scout once said Cuomo "would run you over if you get in his way," But he dropped the sport after being hit in the head with a baseball.

He graduated from St. John’s University in 1953 and its law school in 1956. He came to the attention of Democratic Party leaders when he mediated a dispute over public housing in Forest Hills, Queens.

Cuomo ran for lieutenant governor in 1974, though lost the primary, and became secretary of state with the election of Democrat Hugh Carey in 1974. He lost the Democratic primary for New York City mayor to Edward Koch, then lost the general election as the nominee of the state's Liberal Party. Cuomo replaced Krupsak on the Democratic ticket as lieutenant governor after she unusccessfully challenged Carey in the gubernatorial primary.

In 1982, after Carey declined to run for re-election, Cuomo ran for governor, He once again faced Koch, who had the support of the Democratic establishment and a lead in the polls. Cuomo asked son Andrew to run his campaign.

Koch told Playboy magazine that the state capital of Albany as "small town life at its worst," called the suburbs "sterile," and described rural New Yorkers as "wasting time in a pickup truck" or driving "20 miles to buy a gingham dress or a Sears Roebuck suit." Cuomo won the primary, then defeated Republican Lewis Lehrman in the general election to become the state's 52nd governor.

Cuomo refused to describe himself as "liberal," preferring the term, "progressive pragmatist," and touting the tax cuts he championed during his first term in office. He acknowledged that there was a limit to how much Americans would pay for public programs, declaring in his 1983 inaugural address that, "We should have only the government we need, but we have and must insist on all the government we need."

He went to Notre Dame University in 1984 to say that being a good Catholic did not require him to use his power as governor to carry out the church's teachings on abortion, such as backing a total ban on the procedure and stopping poor women from receiving government help to terminate an unwanted pregnancy.

"Are we asking government to make criminal what we believe to be sinful because we ourselves can't stop committing the sin?" Cuomo asked.

Cuomo, who had turned down entreaties from Clinton to nominate him to the U.S. Supreme Court, returned to practicing law and continued to speak out nationally on issues.

Besides Andrew, Cuomo is survived by his wife, Matilda; son Chris; and daughters Maria, Margaret, and Madeline.

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.