And so the health care conundrum in Colorado and all across the nation once again comes full circle.

In 2009, Congress took a route to creating the Affordable Care Act so tortuous that there was no way the United States would create a better way to provide affordable health care. Rather than do the logical thing, Congress tried to create a way to preserve the desires of the most vocal lobbyists, and the needs of a sensible system and package of reform came to the wayside.

To review, Americans demanded health care reform because people who were ill couldn’t get care because they simply couldn’t afford it. The country was trapped in a spiral down of quality and affordability.

Here we are again. Five years later, health insurance rates are higher than they ever have been, many Coloradans are getting less coverage than they did earlier because they’re trading off deductibles for more affordable rates. The country is spending more on health care than ever and there is not only no end in sight, insurance companies are predicting big increases for the next round of hikes.

The Affordable Care Act as written, doesn’t work. It can’t work. It can’t work because Congress kowtowed to a massive health care machine composed of endless factions and lobbies, many of whom provide only bureaucracy and not health care. It can’t work because Democrats caved to Republicans and refused to regulate prices and rates, which are now out of control. It can’t work because Democrats caved to Republicans and failed to create a “public option,” which was the country’s only hope for driving down market insurance prices. It can’t work because too many important insurance companies and too many states are participating in this volunteer experiment.

This newspaper and hundreds of other critics of the Congress that created the Affordable Care Act warned Americans then and all along the way that compromises made by Democrats in creating Obamacare would undermine its laudable goal: increasing Americans’ access to affordable health care. It was conservatives who insisted that the health-insurance industry be preserved in a new health-care system, turning aside single payer ideas that would have done away with billions of dollars in insurance company profits and payrolls, which feed from the U.S. health care trough without providing health care services.

We are where we began because health care is too expensive for too many once again. In fact, it’s easy to argue that it’s unafforadable for more people now than ever before. In a system that’s a gift to doctors and hospitals, which no longer have to dish out mountains of free care, no one is doing anything but raising rates again.

This newspaper and so many others have backed experts in the field vying for consumers and not industries in begging for a universal health care system like those in Canada and Europe. Because Democrats were too weak to do the right thing, this is the thing that Americans received.

While the experiment isn’t a total failure yet, as it is written, the Affordable Care Act will fail. Democrats and Republicans need to set their spiteful partisan politics aside and add regulations and market competition to the ACA before the cost of health care destroys the economy and the lives of millions of Americans. The ACA fails only because our elected leaders in Congress and the state legislature fail. And because of America’s inattention to the American politics, we are the losers in this failure.