Fatal crash in Shawnee County on Saturday | Credit: WIBW

Six people have been killed in crashes across Kansas since Friday, the Kansas Highway Patrol reports.

The latest fatal crash happened east of Tuttle Creek Lake in Pottawatomie County. The highway patrol reports a Chevy pickup was heading south on Carnahan Road near Wildflower Road around 4 a.m., when the picup left the roadway and overturned.

The driver, identified as 27-year-old Colby Mathies of Manhattan, was ejected from the pickup and died at the scene. Troopers are still investigating.

There were two deadly crashes on Saturday.

The first happened just before 10 a.m. Saturday on Highway 166 in Chautauqua County, about 12 miles west of U-75. Troopers said a Ford pickup was heading west when it left the roadway, over-corrected and overturned into a ditch.

The driver, 69-year-old Douglas Carie of Wichita, died at the scene.

The second crash on Saturday happened in Shawnee County. Troopers report a Chevy passenger car was heading westbound on U-24 near Topeka when it hit a Honda motorcycle. The motorcycle then collided with a Mazda 6.

The man on the morotcycle, 36-year-old Scott Ryan of Topeka, died at the scene. Troopers said he was not wearing a helmet.

The 71-year-old woman driving the Chevy was taken to a local hospital for treatment. The driver of the Mazda was not hurt.

On Friday, there were three fatal crashes.

The first happened around 4:15 p.m. on U-56 about three miles west of Ensign in Gray County. The highway patrol reports a dodge pickup and a semi were westbound on U-56 when the semi moved into the right lane and collided with the pickup.

The driver of the pickup, 65-year-old Cornelius Loewen of Sublette, was taken to a nearby hospital where he later died.

The driver of the semi was not hurt.

The second deadly accident on Friday involved a Ford pickup and a riding lawn mower. It happened at 7:15 p.m. on 4000 Road, just north of Chepota in Labette County.

Troopers said the Dixon ZTR left a yard a drove onto the road. The man on the mower, 42-year-old Jason Simpson of Chepota, died at the scene.

A man a two children in the pickup were not hurt.

Just over an hour later in Leavenworth County, a motorcycle passenger was killed. This accident happened near K-37 and 238th Street. That's near the Kansas Turnpike and just northeast of Lawrence.

KHP reports a Harley-Davidson was heading east on K-32 when it left the roadway and went into a ditch, ejecting the driver and passenger.

The passenger, identified as 48-year-old Dawn Caruthers of Baldwin City, was pronounced dead at the scene.

The driver was hospitalized with unknown injuries.