Rep. Delaney fuels speculation he will run for governor

It's not clear whether Delaney is seriously considering a run for governor — which would be an uphill effort this late in the contest, despite his personal wealth — or whether he's raising his profile for some future race. For him to be taken seriously, experts said, there would need to be evidence of voter dissatisfaction with the current field of candidates.

A former banking executive who rose from political obscurity to gain an improbable win for Congress in 2012, Delaney has done little to quell the buzz generated by his repeated criticism of Gov. Martin O'Malley or the revelation that his name appeared alongside other gubernatorial candidates in a recent poll.

Rep. John Delaney, the Potomac Democrat who has emerged as a leading critic of Maryland's troubled health exchange, is fueling speculation that he is interested in running for governor — a move observers said could shake up the state's premier political contest this year.

Delaney, a first-term lawmaker, declined to rule out a run for governor when questioned by The Baltimore Sun. In a statement he said that "lots of people have approached me" about the race.

He said he is focused on his job in Congress but added that he hoped the governor's race would feature "thoughtful approaches to the challenges and opportunities" the state faces.

"Middle-class families can't afford business as usual," he said.

Delaney is the only Democratic official in Maryland pressing the state to abandon its glitch-prone exchange created under the Affordable Care Act in favor of the federal website used by 36 other states. He first raised the idea when asked about the exchange by The Sun during an impromptu interview between votes on Capitol Hill.

But as enrollment data suggest the state has made only marginal progress toward its goal of enrolling 150,000 in private insurance by the end of March, Delaney has pressed the point in increasingly harsh terms. The back-and-forth has created a rare public rift among state Democrats.

In a letter his office made public Tuesday, Delaney wrote that "every state … that borders Maryland appears to be outperforming us."

The criticism has been directed at the state's health department. But politically the brunt of it falls on Lt. Gov. Anthony G. Brown, a leading candidate for governor who was the state's point man on the health law's implementation.

Delaney also raised eyebrows in August by becoming Maryland's first elected official to push to raise the state's minimum wage.

Delaney, 50, would be an unquestionable long shot for governor this year — even though his wealth would give him a considerable fundraising edge. He is not likely to be well known outside his Western Maryland district, which remains more Republican than the state at large.

Senate President Thomas V. Mike Miller, a fellow Democrat, said he hopes Delaney "rethinks his position" and chooses to stay in Congress.

"He wasn't supported by the Democratic establishment when he was running for Congress, so I guess he feels like he has no ties or obligations to other members of the Democratic Party," Miller said. Miller, O'Malley and other Democrats in Annapolis supported Delaney's primary opponent in 2012, Rob Garagiola.

As to whether Delaney could win, Miller said the recent poll should "tell him what he needs to know."

Delaney has neither confirmed nor denied that he commissioned the poll, first reported by The Washington Post. The poll asked about the exchange as well as Delaney as a potential candidate.

Democrats already running for their party's nomination to succeed O'Malley include Brown, Attorney General Douglas F. Gansler and Del. Heather Mizeur of Montgomery County.

In a statement, Gansler's gubernatorial campaign praised the attorney general's record in Maryland and said that it isn't surprising someone would consider joining the field against Brown, "the hand-picked, establishment candidate. People want a choice, not a coronation."