Topics: America, American History, History, Japan, Japanese Culture, United States, News, Politics News

Morris Berman, American historian, cultural theorist, and sociologist, is a starry eyed realist whose grim forecast of American demise makes him alone even in leftist circles. In the brilliant trilogy of books on American decline — “Twilight of American Culture,” “Dark Ages of America,” and “Why America Failed” — he surveys the political dysfunction, economic disrepair and cultural decay of modern America. Unlike most social critics, he does not end his analysis with a perfunctory prescription for revolution. Such optimistic talk, Berman makes clear, is the delusional noise of sounding brass and tinkling cymbals.

After chronicling America’s birth as a “nation of hustlers,” and exhaustively mapping its mutation into a vicious playground for the rich and prison for the poor, Berman has turned his eyes and pen to the East. His new book, “Neurotic Beauty: An Outsider Looks at Japan,” is a bracing, fascinating and challenging exploration of Japanese culture, politics, and ethics. The product of a lifelong fascination for Berman, “Neurotic Beauty” not only examines Japanese history and contemporary culture, but also the relationship between Japan and America, the conflict between individualism and collectivism, craft traditions alternative to consumer capitalism, and the possibility that Japan might emerge as a “post-capitalist” model for economics and politics.

I recently had the pleasure and privilege of interviewing Berman about his book, and his forecast for Japan and America.

You have a diverse range of high quality work – everything from historical investigations to collections of poetry – but you’ve spent most of your recent years chronicling and exploring American decline. Why did you decide, at this point, to write a major study of Japan?

It’s the same with all my books: They decide me rather than the reverse. In other words, for me writing comes about because of some visceral impulse, a deep motivation that impels me in a particular direction, rather than because of some random “intellectual interest.” As I explain in the introduction to “Neurotic Beauty,” my first awareness of Japan came at age 16, when my high school English teacher, for some reason I can’t recall, was discussing Japanese sword making. He explained that the craft tradition in Japan had a strong spiritual dimension; that the sword maker would fast and pray for three days before beginning the work; and that (I can’t remember if he used these exact words) the final product was the expression of that inner process.

As a teenager living in the go-go capitalism of the postwar era, where everyone was excited about tail fins and frozen foods, I found this Japanese tradition speaking for a whole other realm of existence. I was transfixed, and over the years maintained an interest in Japanese art and even wrote about Japanese culture—short bits and pieces—on occasion. But my schedule was such that I never had time to devote myself to a more comprehensive study of the country, until about four years ago, when I finished my “American Empire” trilogy and was finally free to go back to age 16, so to speak, and explore that early romantic impulse. In doing so, I had to examine the dark side of Japanese history as well, of course—I’m no longer 16—but the project had by then taken on a larger dimension, including issues such as the Rape of Nanjing, the bombing of Hiroshima, the nature of the Japanese economy, and so on. I wound up traveling to Japan twice, in 2012 and 2014, interviewing a number of craftspeople and otaku—“nerds”—and soaking up the ethos of the nation as best I could. I’m no Japan expert, to be sure—I can’t read the language, for example—but I think that overall, the final result is a stimulating read, and I’m grateful to have had the opportunity to explore this fascinating world.

Japan has a craft tradition, an embrace of emptiness, and a willingness to confront death and suffering that you convincingly argue compose the best parts of Japanese culture. Why are these features so important, and what problems manifest in America for lacking them?

“Neurotic Beauty” is a study of Japan rather than of the U.S., but the truth is that ever since the two nations collided in Commodore Perry’s fateful arrival in Tokyo Bay in 1853, it has been difficult to avoid comparisons, to discuss one without discussing the other. The most dramatic case of this, in terms of postwar American scholarship, at least, is Ruth Benedict’s brilliant study, “The Chrysanthemum and the Sword,” which explicitly discussed Japan as being “not-U.S.” In many ways, Japan comes out on top in that essay, which was probably a shock to American readers in the wake of our victory in the Pacific. The book sold a few thousand copies in America and a few million in Japan, probably because as an anthropologist, Benedict understood that victory or not, Japan’s strengths were our weaknesses, culturally speaking.

To be more specific, America doesn’t really have much of a craft tradition, except in a decorative sense. You can see examples of this at the Met in New York, of course, and they are very beautiful; but these were not the pots and pans of daily life, as was the case in Japan. Recent research has shown that economically speaking, crafts did not amount to much in the early United States; mass production was already underway by the 1820s. Even today, Tokyo has about 10,000 potters who make a living from their work. I doubt New York has even 500. The result is that beauty is a major aspect of Japanese culture—some would say the number one aspect. America, by contrast, is heavily utilitarian, and aesthetically impoverished as a result.

Of course, modern Japan has “gone American” in a big way, no doubt about it, especially in terms of the consumerist frenzy that characterizes the United States. After the War, Japanese youth was more interested in buying plastic wastebaskets than hand-woven ones, and in drinking Coca-Cola than green tea. Yet the themes you raise in your question—the craft tradition, the embrace of emptiness, and the awareness of death and impermanence—remain firmly embedded in the Japanese psyche. All three of these aspects of Japanese psychology formed the crux of that Tom Cruise film of 2003, “The Last Samurai,” a romanticized version of the Satsuma Rebellion of 1877. The Japanese response to that film was remarkable, consisting of a huge emotional outpouring on talk shows, blogs, and other media that effectively said: “This is us, this is the real Japan.” (Benedict redux, one might call it.) It suggested that Gen. MacArthur notwithstanding, the Americanization of Japan was only skin deep. And that is because the craft tradition, the philosophy of emptiness (think of karate, for example: the empty hand that has enormous power), and mono no aware—the melancholy awareness of the impermanence of human life—go back thousands of years. As someone once said, with reference to the Japanese, scratch a sarariman (businessman) and you find a samurai. (This is probably a romanticization as well, but not without a grain of truth.)

American culture doesn’t possess this form of gravitas. Scratch an American businessman and you find… a businessman. By and large, Americans aren’t very complex; what you see is what you get. As I argue in “Why America Failed,” the dominant culture in the U.S. has always been spiritually thin, consisting in little more than the American Dream (which is, after all, primarily a dream of materialistic success). Thus the frenzy for consumer goods and “undigested tech-shit,” as Ursula Le Guin puts it, is what America is about; and as this dream unravels, the U.S. doesn’t have much to fall back on. Which accounts for much of the hysteria and superficiality—and brutality, I might add—that characterizes America today.

(One friend recently wrote me that he went to a multiplex to see “Selma” on Martin Luther King Day this year, and was in line with four other people; while across the hall, “American Sniper” was mobbed. This probably says it all.)

“Neurotic Beauty” makes it clear that the story isn’t as simple as America staining Japanese purity. One of the most vexing conflicts of modernity is the struggle between individuality and communal involvement and investment. How does one retain one’s own individuality while also belonging to a community committed to a larger good than one own self-interest? America and Japan, in many respects, employ entirely opposite methods in negotiating this dilemma. How does Japan’s insistence on sublimating the individual create problems? Also, how do you find a balance in this struggle? It seems that after chronicling the poison of individualism, but also confronting the flaws of collectivism, you are in a good position to offer insight.

The real insight here is the work of Ernest Becker, specifically his tour de force, “The Denial of Death.” Becker’s exploration of the dialectical tension between the individual and the community has never been surpassed; and from my own point of view, America and Japan are the archetypes, the polar opposites, of that tension. Quite honestly, it could be the major issue of our time, with no easy solution in sight. There is a payoff, and a dark side, to either end of this spectrum, and the U.S. and Japan display this dualism in spades. Group psychology, consensus, is the great strength of Japanese culture, lending coherence to their way of life. Yet it was precisely this psychology that led to their involvement in the Pacific War, and in more recent times, the disaster at Fukushima. And, one might argue, the Aum Shinrikyo cult, which released sarin gas in the Tokyo metro in 1995. As Haruki Murakami shows in his book “Underground,” joining Aum Shinrikyo was a way for Japanese people who were fed up with the dead-end conformity of Japanese life to seemingly escape that trap… only to fall into another one.