University of Georgia graduate students are waiting to see whether the university will continue to help them pay for health insurance that is mandatory for many graduate students.

Some universities recently have dropped the help in response to new guidance from the Internal Revenue Service, saying methods used by UGA and many other universities to help graduate students pay for health insurance are not in compliance with a provision of the federal Affordable Care Act.

Graduate students at the University of Missouri threatened to walk out after Missouri Chancellor Bowen Loftin made national headlines last week by announcing his school would end its health insurance subsidies, giving students just one day’s notice.

Other universities have also cut off the help they once gave grad students, some of them substituting “fellowships” instead.

Some, like UGA, are waiting before they take any action.

“The university is carefully reviewing the implications of the Internal Revenue Service guidelines regarding the Affordable Care Act and its potential impact on health insurance subsidies for graduate assistants,” said Sam Fahmy, a spokesman for the UGA Office of the Provost and vice president for Academic Affairs. “We will be thoughtful and deliberate in our actions to ensure that we meet the needs of our students while also complying with all applicable laws and regulations.”

UGA offers its graduate students health insurance through a private insurance carrier; the cost is $847 for fall semester coverage, Aug. 1 through Dec. 31, and $1,178 for spring and summer semesters, Jan. 1 through July 31.

But for many students on assistantships, having that insurance is mandatory. Those students pay a reduced rate with UGA covering the remainder of the costs.

What UGA does will make a big difference for many graduate students, said Audrey Lewis, president of the UGA Graduate Student Association.

Even before the Affordable Health Care Act issue arose, “Health insurance is probably the No. 1 concern of graduate students,” she said.

Unlike many undergraduates, graduate students can’t rely on coverage from their parents; many are parents themselves, said Lewis, a master’s degree student in UGA’s School of Public and International Affairs.

“We have families, people returning to education after being in the workforce,” she said. “Graduate students are already kind of in a financial bind. To just take that away — suddenly you’re responsible for much more money, and it’s mandatory.”

Meanwhile, higher education groups that represent colleges or graduate students are trying to persuade the IRS and the federal Department of Health and Human Services to change their interpretations of the Affordable Care Act.

The rule in question prohibits business from giving employees subsidies to buy individual health insurance, which would allow them to circumvent requirements that businesses of a certain size provide employer health insurance.

But the IRS classifies graduate students on assistantships as employees, because they work for their money, and Health and Human Services classifies student health insurance plans the same as individual private market plans.

A lot of schools are taking UGA’s approach, said Kristofferson Culmer, president and CEO of the National Association of Graduate-Professional Students.

“It seems like a lot of universities are sitting back and waiting to see what the IRS will do,” he said.

Culmer hopes universities can find some creative ways to help graduate students at the local level, and that federal authorities can be persuaded that being a graduate student isn’t exactly the same thing as being a part-time worker, or that university health plans aren’t the same as individual plans.

“We think there should be an exception or exemption for universities,” he said.

Follow education reporter Lee Shearer at www.facebook.com/LeeShearerABH or https://twitter.com/LeeShearer.