With Donald Trump now the likely nominee of the Republican Party and Hillary Clinton the likely nominee of the Democratic Party, much of the discussion among traders in the last day has centered on what effect these candidates will have on the stock market and on specific sectors.

So far, there is little obvious impact. The themes moving the market today remain the prevailing themes for the quarter: weak global growth (specifically China), currencies (weak dollar/stronger yen&euro), the extent of the oil rebound, and the effectiveness of central bank policies, particularly in Japan.

One of the reasons investors have not focused on the election's impact is that many of the candidates comments have been fairly vague, so it's been difficult to make a clear call on the impact of many sectors.

UBS' Art Cashin says this will be changing. "I think they are going to have to clarify their positions and there are a lot of areas people care about—health care, pharmaceuticals, what's going to happen in the energy sector," he told me Wednesday morning. "I think all of that will build up as we get closer to the convention and important things get decided."

Investors are likely to focus on the candidates' stand on four areas in particular.

Banks/financial services. While Clinton has been accused of being too close to Wall Street, she is a strong supporter of Dodd-Frank. Trump's position has been more difficult to discern. He has talked about being tougher on banks but has also described Dodd-Frank as "a disaster" that has prevented the banks from loaning money to people who will create jobs.

Energy. Clinton has supported solar and alternative energy (she has set a national goals to have 500 million solar panels installed) and voiced less support for oil and coal. Trump has been generally supportive on fracking, coal and ethanol.

Health care. Clinton supports Obama's Affordable Care Act (ACA) but has implied it needs an overhaul to slow the growth of out-of-pocket expenses. She has been critical of high drug costs and supported a cap on patient drug costs; she has also supported allowing Medicare to negotiate prescription drug prices. Trump has been a consistent opponent of the ACA and wants more competition. He supports modifying existing law that inhibit the sale of health insurance across state lines.

Defense. Clinton has close ties to the military and is generally seen as pro-defense. Trump has often espoused isolationist viewpoints but he has also spoken about building a stronger military at less cost.