A New York City Police helicopter flies over a white flag hanging over the Brooklyn Bridge Tuesday. Keith Bedford for The Wall Street Journal

The head of the New York Police Department’s intelligence division got his own view Friday of the investigation into who replaced two American flags with a pair of whitewashed ones on the Brooklyn Bridge.

Dressed in climbing gear, Deputy Commissioner John Miller was joined by detectives on the NYPD squad investigating the incident as they walked up one of the bridge’s cables to the towers.

Mr. Miller said the incident, which occurred Tuesday morning, remains under investigation. He said the police have yet to identify any suspects.

“The investigation is progressing,” he said.

Deputy Commissioner of Intelligence John Miller speaks during the annual NYPD Pre-Passover briefing in April. Andrew Hinderaker for The Wall Street Journal

He said the NYPD has received hundreds of leads and that detectives were combing through them. Investigators are particularly interested in talking with anyone who was on the bridge or has any video take between the hours of 3 a.m. and 4 a.m., Mr. Miller said.

The walk to the top of bridge towers was the latest step in understanding just how a person would get to the top of the bridge tower.

The detectives were joined by members of the city Department of Transportation, which places the flags on top of the towers. They gave investigators a step-by-step process of how the flags get to the top.

“Personally I think we all got a very good understanding of what it takes to walk up and down there and what type of experience you need to do this,” Mr. Miller said.

Mr. Miller said it was the first time he has done the walk, and he wanted to go for investigative purposes and see the perspective of the suspects. He was escorted by other top officials, including Chief of Patrol James O’Neill.

“It was certainly an experience you don’t have every day,” Mr. Miller said. “It’s interesting going down because you tend to go much faster than going up, not just because it’s downhill, but there’s motivation to reach the bottom.”