HAVANA – Cuba’s red-hot now. Seems everyone’s going, wants to go or just got back. And while classic American cars and magnificent, crumbling buildings inspire the tourism boom, the Third World island offers a First World bonus: Visitors who get sick here are in good hands.

During a 10-day trip to Cuba in January, I never once worried about my health, and I’ve had a kidney transplant and three hip replacements. Given such pre-existing conditions, I have health insurance only thanks to Obamacare. Here, I got a glimpse of Castrocare.

I accompanied my world-famous orthopedic-surgeon uncle to Havana, where we spent an afternoon with his longtime colleague, Dr. Rodrigo Cambras, chief of the Frank Pais Orthopedic Hospital, the largest of its kind in the Americas. Back home, I looked more deeply into the healthcare system the world variously admires and criticizes, so I spoke with Dr. Kari Koch, a Hendersonville internist who earned her tuition-free degree in Cuba, and Dr. Sergio Arce, who now teaches at Greenville’s medical school after defecting from his native Havana.

Together, the three physicians offer widely divergent and fascinating perspectives on the curious infrastructure that delivers often-impressive results, including its infant-mortality ranking, which falls between the United States and the European Union, according to the World Health Organization. While WHO consistently rates Cuba’s healthcare in the top third globally, the regime’s system is not without problems: chronic shortages of medicines, devices and equipment and money. Moreover, Havana often invites controversy for exporting the doctors it trains.

As an elder statesman and architect of Cuba’s medical system, Cambras may be one of its biggest beneficiaries. But you wouldn’t know that from his humble home, a tiny, 1,000-square-foot, single-story house a block from the Caribbean.

Cambras, 81, is a walking history book straight out of Fidel’s 1959 Revolution. The two played ball together at University of Havana before Cambras joined Cuba’s now-mythologized physician-turned-guerilla Che Guevara in Brazzaville-Congo, where Cambras delivered Africa’s first polio vaccine.

Cambras’s squat, pastel-yellow home, with a lush garden in the back, sits in one of Havana’s most fashionable neighborhoods, about 10 minutes from the heart of the dilapidated capital. The home stands as a testament to Cambras’s swashbuckling life, packed with a museum’s worth of mementoes from the 62 countries he has visited: a scimitar from Yemen; a tablecloth from Syria; an eagle-headed cane from a Saudi Arabian prince. Before Castro overthrew Fulgencio Batista, Cambras was jailed three times and was shot in the ankle.

Despite that, he lives comfortably—somehow; physicians here earn $67 a month, up from $26 a month, thanks to a recent raise.

He shies away from talking politics, though he and his son, also a physician named Rodrigo, decry that US embargo, which they both condemn as “blockade,” a semantic distinction all Cubans make because a blockade, under international law, is considered an act of war.

“I’m just a doctor who’s done 10,000 surgeries,” Cambras says, preferring to talk instead about how he fishing, “just once,” with Ernest Hemingway; how he repaired one of Saddam Hussein’s herniated discs; and how he’s busy planning a major orthopedics conference in September. The meeting will be held at Varadero, the gorgeous white-sand-beach resort area about 85 miles east of Havana.

The younger Cambras sees the global symposium as a natural extension of long and friendly relations with the American medical community, which, he hopes, will change now that President Obama normalized relations with Cuba last year.

“We’ve been working since 1991 to improve the relationship with Cuba and the US,” he says.

Meanwhile, back in the States, Koch and Arce offer decidedly different takes on the regime’s universal healthcare, which is guaranteed in Cuba’s constitution.

Koch, 32, obtained her degree in 2014 from the Latin American School of Medicine, a Cuban government-run behemoth with nearly 20,000 students from 110 countries. Now the internal-medicine resident in Hendersonville, N.C., owes not one penny in student loans.

“I wanted to go to medical school and come out as a family physician without a significant amount of debt that could hinder where you go because you have to go for a job where you’d get paid more,” she says during a 10-minute break in her day at the Mountain Area Health Education Center.

She’s one of only about 100 Americans who annually attend the school on a scholarship through the New York-based Interreligious Foundation for Community Organization/Pastors for Peace, which encourages graduates to pay their free education forward. Koch serves North Carolina’s apple-growing migrant-farmer community.

“The quid pro quo is that you come back to the United States and serve people who need medical care,” IFCO spokeswoman Emily Thomas says of the scholarship that demands no formal obligation. “The Cubans will not come and knock on your door.

“You’re being trained to be a revolutionary doctor. Your goal is to not make as much money as you can but to serve people. It’s a moral commitment, but it’s a very real commitment,” she says.

After spending six years in Havana, Koch is sticking to the deal.

“Everyone’s passionate about medicine and social justice,” she says. “Those are the kind of people I wanted to be around. The work in the country there was really interesting, the integration of the school with the public-health system. Everything really appealed to me: learning Spanish, the focus on family medicine.”

Not everyone buys into the economy that hardly compensates its doctors, although it does provide (mostly) free housing and food rations.

Sergio Arce is one of them. The Havana-trained physician, who, at 48, is a child of the Revolution, left his hometown in the late ’90s. He moved to Greenville in 2012 after a six-year stint at Eastern Carolina University in North Carolina. Before that, he worked in Buffalo, NY, and in Europe. He got his American citizenship around the time he moved here as a clinical immunologist on the faculty at University of South Carolina School of Medicine Greenville.

“I got a good medical education, I can’t deny that, and I’ve used it,” Arce says, echoing Koch. “But since I’ve been out of Cuba for a while, I can say I’ve had a quality improvement of life.”

It’s not a stretch to imagine Arce earns more than his colleagues in Cuba do. “Everyone gets paid pretty much the same there,” he says. “It’s not only that, but there’s a point in your life where you believe that you need to make a jump. I have experience, and I decided to move out of Cuba. I’m a researcher, and I have a ton more opportunities out of there.”

Arce likely would have found himself caught in a practice that has earned Cuba simultaneous praise and criticism for trading its doctors to generate revenues for the country’s chronically cash-strapped treasury. Reuters earlier this year reported that Havana has sent 30,000 medical professionals to Venezuela, its hardcore socialist ally, in exchange for more than 100,000 barrels of oil a day. And reminiscent of Cambras’s anti-polio effort in Africa in 1965, the government sent 256 doctors in 2014 and 2015 to fight Ebola.

As for fast-thawing relations with the United States, including relaxed travel restrictions that include 110 commercial flights daily now underway to the island, the norteamericano embargo will remain until Congress lifts it. Observers say that’s unlikely any time soon.

That hits Cuba’s healthcare system particularly hard, say all the doctors interviewed for this story. Still, they remain optimistic.

“I’m not a politician,” Arce says, but he adds: “To me, I wish the relationships between Cuba and the us were better. I mean, we are not going to do anything just being in the place where we’ve been in the last 50 years.”

For more information about Cambras’s Ortodepdia 2016 conference, which runs from Sept. 26 to Oct. 1, email eventos@fpais.sld.cu; congreso@fpais.sld.cu; correointernacional@fpais.sld.cu; or commercial@fpais@sld.cu. CUBATUR can also be reached at http://www.cubatur.cu; nelson.ramos@central.cbt.tur.cu or, for those adventurous in Spanish, (53) 7835 5095 / 78364037.

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/1T2OFdB