Francesca Kefalas For The Bulletin

PUTNAM — The news for Day Kimball Healthcare is better — but not good — now that the state budget has passed.

Day Kimball is going to lose $5 million over two years through increased taxes or lost revenue, said Robert Smanik, president and chief executive officer of Day Kimball Healthcare.

It’s much better than the $12 million over two years that was first proposed in the governor’s budget, but still not good for Day Kimball, which has posted financial losses totaling $13.8 million in the last two years.

“We have to come up with an additional $2.5 million in budget accommodations,” Smanik said. “It comes down to expense, and the majority of our expense is workforce.”

Day Kimball is the region’s largest employer, with 1,400 employees.

It has reduced staff by about 100 positions in the last two years and cut its expenses by $6 million.

Those expenses include a 10 percent pay cut to all senior administration, and the administration will also voluntarily forgo an annual 2 percent raise.

Smanik said over the last few years Day Kimball has also reduced the number of senior administration.

He said there is no plan to target a particular number for workforce reduction or ask other employees not to take an annual raise.

“We have to remain competitive as an employer,” Smanik said.

Smanik said the financial losses can be traced to the changes to health care delivery being driven by the federal Affordable Care Act and the changes to funding at the state level.

The state’s methods of funding and regulating health care are not matching the federal mandates that organizations like Day Kimball must meet, he said.

Stephen Frayne, senior vice president of health policy at the Connecticut Hospital Association, said that, in a short time, hospitals have undergone tremendous economic and political change, and the state does not seem to understand the demands of the federal government.

Four years ago, the state created the hospital tax with the idea of generating more federal revenue.

According to a report updated June 1 by CCEA at the University of Connecticut, by taxing the hospitals, the state was eligible for an additional $200 million in state funding.

In the first year of the tax, the money was redistributed to the hospitals plus $50 million in federal funding, giving the state $150 million in revenue to use elsewhere.

Since its inception, however, less and less of the tax has actually gone back to the hospitals and the state is getting less federal funding as a result.

“We have non-profit hospitals with the exception of one in the state,” Frayne said. “They fulfilled their obligation of giving back by taking care of everybody regardless of ability to pay and now they are being taxed on top of it.”

The Connecticut Hospital Association estimates the state’s hospitals have lost about $1 billion in funding annually and those changes have come in just four years, Frayne said.

In addition to the tax, which has both increased while the return to the hospitals has diminished, the state’s payments for medicaid services have been reduced.

For Day Kimball, which has a large portion of medicare and medicaid patients, the formula is onerous, Smanik said.

Day Kimball has relaunched its pledge campaign, “I Am A New Day,” to shine a spotlight on the issue for state leaders. Frayne said getting the community involved is the best shot hospitals have at changing the way the state is funding health care.

State Sen. Mae Flexer, D-Killingly, said now that the state budget has passed, the legislature must now pass implementation bills by July 1.

A fund called the low-cost hospital pool is designed to assist health care organizations such as Day Kimball that serve more medicare and medicaid patients that must be evaluated, Flexer said.

“I’m fighting to keep the number of hospitals in that pool as small as possible,” Flexer said. “Day Kimball is definitely in the pool, but there is a debate over who else needs to be in it.”