‘SNL’ portrays Nancy Grace as insane in marijuana sketch featuring Drake as Katt Williams

Saturday Night Live boiled down cable news show host Nancy Grace this week, portraying her as an insane woman who hates marijuana legalization because of her all-consuming fear for the wellbeing of “the babies.”

Grace, played by SNL‘s Noël Wells, welcomed guests onto her show to discuss Colorado’s choice to allow the drug for recreational purposes. But viewers would be right to assume the host wasn’t really interested in an actual discussion.

“You’re right,” fake Grace said. “I have already made up my mind.”

Throughout the interviews with her guests, the panic-stricken Grace kept focusing on the children.

“Who’s taking care of the babies?!” she burst out.

Kate McKinnon played a baker who owns a marijuana-themed bakery in Boulder called Baked, who, after making $650,000 last week, described herself as Walter White in ‘Baking Bad.’ When criticized for making money off of destroying the fabric of America, McKinnon’s baker brushes Grace off.

“Nancy, I make cupcakes that get people high,” she said. “It’s like I discovered to make pizza cure venereal disease.”

Grace then grilled her next guest, pot enthusiast and stand-up comedian Katt Williams — played by host Drake in a perfect impression — on if he would want his cab driver or babysitter to be “high on pot.”

“Nancy, I am Katt Williams,” the faux comedian responded. “I have not been around someone who wasn’t ‘high on pot’ for the past 15 years.”

Grace thought she won the argument by asking one final, question of the comic.

“What about the babies!?” she howled.

And that when Drake, still rocking his impression, answered back with the statement that summed up Grace.

“Nancy, somewhere out there is a man wearing nothing but a Snuggie and shower shoes, and he is only half as crazy as yo’ a**,” the comedian shot back.

While speaking on CNN recently, the real Grace accused people who want to legalize marijuana of being “fat and lazy.”

Watch the sketch here: