Topics: Ferguson, hacks, Joe Scarborough, Media Criticism, Morning Joe, MSNBC, Police, police abuse, Ryan J. Reilly, Sean Hannity, Video, Wesley Lowery, Politics News

Last night two reporters, Ryan J. Reilly of the Huffington Post and Wesley Lowery of the Washington Post, were arrested by out-of-control police while covering the out-of-control police situation in Ferguson, Missouri. The two were working inside a McDonald’s when a number of officers came in and asked them for identification. Lowery was recording them, as is his right and job as a journalist. Eventually the officers asked them to gather their things and leave. Lowery was eventually arrested, and slammed against a soda machine, for resisting police orders because he wasn’t sure which door to exit and had to gather his things.

As I turned, my backpack, which was slung over one shoulder, began to slip. I said, “Officers, let me just gather my bag.” As I did, one of them said, “Okay, let’s take him.” Multiple officers grabbed me. I tried to turn my back to them to assist them in arresting me. I dropped the things from my hands. “My hands are behind my back,” I said. “I’m not resisting. I’m not resisting.” At which point one officer said: “You’re resisting. Stop resisting.”

Reilly, too, was arrested for vaguely resisting/annoying the cops:

“The officer in question, who I repeatedly later asked for his name, grabbed my things and shoved them into my bag,” said Reilly, who appeared on MSNBC’s “All In with Chris Hayes” shortly after his release to recount the arrest. “He used his finger to put a pressure point on my neck.” “They essentially acted as a military force. It was incredible,” Reilly said. “The worst part was he slammed my head against the glass purposefully on the way out of McDonald’s and then sarcastically apologized for it.”

What happened was another case of militarized police officers going way out of bounds to prevent the media from covering the war zone that is Ferguson. (See, also: firing tear gas at journalists from Al Jazeera America.) All of these journalists have a right and some would say duty to cover what’s been going on following the police killing of a teenager, Michael Brown. They have a right to ask for police identification and to shoot video of police acting, well, unscrupulously.

At least that’s one opinion. Another is that of MSNBC “Morning Joe” host Joe Scarborough! He thinks that reporters should do everything the police say even when police are in the wrong. Joe has been there. Whenever the police ask Joe Scarborough to do something, even if it’s something that they’re outside their bounds asking, he says, “yes sir” or “yes ma’am,” because Joe Scarborough is a great American and a great American is Joe Scarborough:

“I’ve been in places where police officers said, ‘all right you know what, this is cordoned off, you guys need to move along.’ You know what I do? I go, ‘yes, sir, or yes, ma’am.’ I don’t sit there and have a debate and film the police officer unless I want to get on TV and have people talk about me the next day,” Scarborough said on “Morning Joe.” “I am sure I am just the worst person in the world for saying this. I can only judge how I would treat my son who is a reporter who, if he were in this position, okay, well, you know what? Next time a police officer tells you that you’ve got to move along because you’ve got riots outside, well, you probably should move along.”