SOUTH BEND — In the midst of the Great Depression, a fleet of new roadsters heads north on Michigan Street in South Bend, part of a parade celebrating the Studebaker Corp.’s emergence from receivership in 1935.

A crowd watches from the sidewalk along a tightly packed stretch of shops and restaurants, with more people watching from open windows in the upper floors of those buildings.

Fast forward about 80 years. The same view looking southeast from Michigan Street and Colfax Avenue shows a much different scene: Most of those storefronts are gone, replaced with the modernistic glass box 1st Source Center/DoubleTree by Hilton complex.

That’s just one scene in “South Bend Then and Now: Part II,” a photographic exhibit currently on view at Studebaker National Museum.

The exhibit pairs historical images from the museum’s archives with current photos showing the same local spots.

In some pairings the change is dramatic. In others, hardly anything has changed.

A 1962 Studebaker promotional photo showing a female model in a Grand Turismo was taken outside the front door of LeMans Hall at Saint Mary’s College. A contemporary photo, also showing a female model in a Grand Turismo, shows the same view of the campus.

Anyone who wants a glimpse of South Bend’s history will appreciate the exhibit.

A 1950 aerial photo shows the massive Studebaker automotive plant, covering 100 acres, at full production. The “now” view shows only one former Studebaker production building and the former administration building still standing, while new Ignition Park structures cover part of that landscape.

Some other current and former area landmarks showcased in the photos include the JMS Building, the Oddfellows Building, the Sample Street Bridge and “The Hole” that existed for years where the 1st Source Center eventually was built.

mfosmoe@sbtinfo.com

574-235-6329

@mfosmoe

If you go

“South Bend Then and Now: Part II” photo exhibit continues through May 30 at Studebaker National Museum, 201 S. Chapin St., South Bend. Admission charged. See the website at www.studebakermuseum.org or call 574-235-9714 for more information.