Hillary Clinton would like to become the first woman president. Should she succeed, it likely would be a bit anticlimactic. We’ve already had a girly-man president. More correctly, we’ve had a valley girly-man president – an uppity little pampered princess who can’t, or won’t, be bothered with things in which he has no interest, like terrorism or foreign policy.

For six years now we’ve looked for an Obama doctrine. Finally we have one. Last April aboard Air Force One, he summed it up for reporters: “Don’t do stupid s–t!” How very presidential! The only thing missing from that statement was “totally” and “whatever!”

Last week, Obama admitted that he hadn’t developed a policy on ISIS in Syria yet, even though Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Martin Dempsey said it must be defeated there. So did Obama take advantage of the long holiday weekend to come up with a strategy? No. In true valley girl (I’m privileged and don’t have to work) fashion, he spent his time partying with socialites and high rollers at a series of lavish fundraisers and attended an extravagant wedding.

Obama told his guests at the event in Westchester County, New York, “(Like) I promise you (like) things are (totally) much less dangerous now (I’m so sure) than they were 20 years ago, 25 years ago or 30 years ago. (Rad!)” Nor was Obama the least bit worried about the growing crisis with Russia in Ukraine. As if to drive home that point Obama added, “(Like) this is not something that is comparable to the challenges we faced during the Cold War (Duh)!”

Speaking to another group of affluent guests in Newport, Rhode Island, Obama assured those assembled that our post 9/11 security system “makes us in the here and now (like) pretty safe. (Chill!)” He added that ISIS “doesn’t immediately (like totally) threaten the homeland. (Duh! Whatever!)”

Tuesday, as the world watched in horror as ISIS beheaded a second American in as many weeks, Obama’s petticoat was showing, again. When the going gets really tough, a true valley girl gets out of town. Obama left on a four-day trip to reassure our NATO allies that things are (totally) cool and to deliver a stern message to (grody) Russia.

Before leaving, Obama said that part of his reason for stopping in Estonia is to “(Like) let the Estonians know (I’m so sure) that we mean what we say (totally) with respect to our (like) treaty obligations.” He noted that we are under no such treaty obligations with (gag me with a spoon) Ukraine but added, “We do, however, (like) stand shoulder to shoulder with them. (Bonus!)”

After all that, Putin, quaking in his jackboots, boasted to one European official that he could “take Kiev in two weeks.”

Once in Estonia, Obama called ISIS a “manageable problem” if the “international community” will (totally) come together. (Rad!)

Make no mistake, I have no problem with a woman president as long as it’s a “real woman” with resolve like England’s “Iron Lady,” Margaret Thatcher.

Hillary (What difference does it make?) Clinton now wants us to believe that she had major problems with Obama’s foreign policy, but that mean old president just wouldn’t take her advice. Nevertheless, she was all smiles when she presented Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov with that infamous “reset” button.

So, Hillary and Obama skipped out on our friends in Iraq, abandoned our plans to put a missile defense system in Poland and the Czech Republic, dismissed the terror attack in Benghazi as a demonstration over a video, ignored Russian aggression, erased our red line in Syria, ignored China’s hostile actions in the western Pacific and let Iran off the hook. Where does that leave us in the eyes of the rest of the world?

Assuming that we have any friends left, we are now the “friend who cannot be trusted.”

Remember these words of Osama bin Laden, “When people see a strong horse and a weak horse, by nature they will like the strong horse.”

Over the long holiday weekend, the closest Obama came to work was a Labor Day speech in Milwaukee where he concentrated on the “rights of (illegal) immigrants” and the minimum wage. With ISIS bent on our destruction and Russia gobbling up territory, that’s tantamount to a valley girl chewing gum and doing her nails.

How many times has Obama bragged, “The war in Iraq is over. The war in Afghanistan is winding down. Al-Qaida has been decimated and Osama bin Laden is dead”?

Oh, yeah, like whatever. Duh!

Media wishing to interview Jane Chastain, please contact media@wnd.com.