By of the

About one out of three people who lost their BadgerCare Plus health insurance under the state's unusual approach to the Affordable Care Act bought subsidized health plans on the marketplace set up by the federal law, according to figures released Wednesday by the state Department of Health Services.

The figures provide the first thorough look at the number of people who gained and lost coverage through BadgerCare Plus, Wisconsin's Medicaid program, under the approach taken by Gov. Scott Walker's administration.

The approach expanded coverage through BadgerCare Plus for the poorest adults while dropping coverage for others who would be eligible to buy subsidized health plans on the federal marketplace.

The administration has said that every citizen in the state would have access to coverage through Medicaid or the marketplace under the plan. And the Walker administration had contended that more than 90% of the adults losing coverage would buy health plans through the marketplace.

Opponents of the state's approach have contended that many adults who lost coverage would not buy health plans, even after the federal subsidies, because of the cost.

The figures released Wednesday show that about 57,000 people lost coverage through BadgerCare Plus and about 19,000 of them bought health plans on the marketplace.

Almost 6,000 people who were expected to lose coverage remained eligible for BadgerCare Plus.

Wisconsin's approach to the Affordable Care Act affected two groups:

■Adults with dependent children and household incomes above 100% of the federal poverty threshold — $23,850 for a family of four — previously covered by BadgerCare Plus would be able to buy subsidized health plans through the federal marketplace.

■Adults without dependent children and incomes below 100% of the federal poverty threshold would become eligible for coverage through BadgerCare Plus.

The Department of Health Services said Wednesday that 97,509 newly eligible adults had signed up for coverage through BadgerCare Plus as of June 30.

At the same time, the Walker administration has rejected the additional federal money available under the Affordable Care Act to expand coverage.

Under the law, the federal government would have paid 100% of the cost for the first three years for all adults with incomes up to 138% of the federal poverty threshold — $16,104 for an individual — who were gaining coverage under Medicaid. The federal government's share eventually would drop to 90% of the cost.

Under Walker's approach, the federal government instead is paying roughly 60% of the cost for the 97,509 adults who have gained coverage through BadgerCare Plus.

The decision to reject the federal money is estimated to cost the state more than $100 million in the current two-year budget, and it could cost more than $300 million through 2020.

The administration, though, has challenged those projections, contending that the federal government will not be able to fulfill that commitment given the federal budget deficit.

It also supports giving people their choice of private health plans available through the marketplace in place of getting coverage through the Medicaid program.

Separately, the Office of the Commissioner of Insurance said Wednesday that more than 130,000 people in Wisconsin now are covered by health plans sold on the federal marketplace.

The state figures do not include an estimate on how many of those people previously had coverage. Dan Schwartzer, deputy insurance commissioner, said getting an accurate estimate would be difficult.

One national estimate is that six out of every 10 people who bought health plans on the marketplace previously were uninsured.

But Schwartzer said the percentage may be higher in Wisconsin because the state allowed people who already had individual health insurance to enroll in their existing plan late last year before many of the changes under the Affordable Care Act went into effect.