Bundled Payments May Extend to Other Services, Other Payers

Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the HHS Secretary has the authority to scale any pilots after the CMS actuary can attest that savings has occurred with no decrease in quality.

The recent move by CMS to require bundling of reimbursement for hip and knee surgeries is just the beginning of its efforts to link provider profits with costs and quality metrics, analysts say. Next year, the agency will launch the Oncology Care Model to incent cancer doctors to reduce hospital and pharmacy costs, in part through better care coordination.

CMS is likely to move on to other services shown to be ripe for improving quality and cost effectiveness.

The most likely next targets are several medical conditions that have demonstrated positive outcomes under the Bundled Payments for Care Improvement (BPCI) Initiative, which offers voluntary bundling for 48 conditions. The standouts from that model include congestive heart failure, pneumonia, and stroke.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the HHS Secretary has the authority to scale any pilots after the CMS actuary can attest that savings has occurred with no decrease in quality, says Richard Bajner Jr., managing director with Navigant Consulting in Chicago.

Orthopedics Bundled Payments a Classroom for Value-Based Care

CMS has been working toward bundled payments for some time and is finally pulling the trigger, says Rob Lazerow, practicing manager with The Advisory Board Company, a consulting practice based in Washington, DC. Good results from earlier efforts like the Acute Care Episode Demonstration, which bundled orthopedic and cardiovascular procedures, spurred CMS to act on the BPCI results sooner than some might have expected, he says.

Bundled Payments' Disruptive Effects

"I think it's safe to assume that CMS is betting big on the promise of bundled payments to make care higher quality and more efficient," Lazerow says. "It is likely that they are going to expand to more conditions after starting with hip and knee, and I expect they will continue to focus on the areas where they have been experimenting with bundled payments in the past. I think that is much more likely than introducing entirely new areas for bundling."