Chip Somodevilla via Getty Images

Sen. Johnny Isakson (R-Ga.) revealed Wednesday he's been diagnosed with Parkinson's disease.

“Over 1 million Americans have Parkinson’s and I am one of them," Isakson said in a statement.

Isakson said he was diagnosed with Parkinson's in 2013 by a neurologist he had been regularly visiting since 2012, when he experienced stiffness in his left arm. (Parkinson's is a nervous system disorder that affects a person's movement.)

He said he's in the early stages of the disease and the arm stiffness "and a slowed, shuffling gait" are his main symptoms. Isakson said he has undergone "rigorous" physical therapy, does exercises twice a day and takes two medicines to help with his symptoms.

Isakson on Parkinson's Diagnosis: "Just one of life’s challenges, & I’m facing it head on. Ready for 2016 reelect!" http://t.co/tJW2sPTc1y — Johnny Isakson (@SenatorIsakson) June 10, 2015

“While I am facing this health challenge head on, I have wrestled with whether to disclose it publicly. I recently shared the news with my three grown children and my senior staff a couple of months ago. Their support, along with the steadfast support of my wife Dianne, helped me to take this step today," Isakson said in his statement. "In the end, I decided I should handle my personal health challenge with the same transparency that I have championed throughout my career."

Isakson said he will continue to serve in the U.S. Senate, and noted the disease won't affect his re-election campaign.



"I am busier and have more responsibility today than ever before in my political career, and I couldn’t be happier about that," he said.

Also on HuffPost: Scenes From Capitol Hill Scenes From Capitol Hill

1 of 79 Standing With Charleston U.S. House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), center, hold hands with Sherialyn Byrdsong of Atlanta, Georgia, whose husband Ricky Byrdsong was shot and killed on July 2, 1999, in Skokie, Illinois, during a news conference July 8, 2015, on Capitol Hill. House Democrats were joined by community leaders and families from Charleston, South Carolina, and the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence in calling on Congress to pass common-sense gun laws. Share this slide:

Alex Wong via Getty Images