The new federal laws on health coverage are confusing, and scammers want to exploit that.

Federal and state officials are bracing themselves for identity thieves and fraudsters taking advantage of the national enrollment push. In Oregon, thousands of uninsured Oregonians will be contacted about getting health coverage.

The federal health reforms known as the Affordable Care Act offer tax credits to qualified people, and requires people who meet certain income levels to have coverage or pay a fine next year. But authorities fear criminals will try to take advantage of widespread confusion over the law.

"We do anticipate that there will be scammers," says spokesman Frank Dorman of the Federal Trade Commission, which has already set up an online complaint process to assist federal investigations.

Here's what you need to know to protect yourself:

A new agency called Cover Oregon has launched an online insurance marketplace. It can be used by certified enrollment assistance folks in October, and after a couple of weeks will open to the public at large to self-enroll at coveroregon.com.

The new law doesn't affect enrollment or coverage for people on Medicare. If someone says your Medicare will be affected, and they need your Medicare number, they're probably not legitimate.

Enrollment doesn't begin until October so anyone claiming to be able to enroll you before then is not telling the truth. If you have questions about anyone talking to you about insurance, call Cover Oregon at 855-268-3767 to verify they are who they say they are.

Cover Oregon doesn't cold-call people unannounced to ask for personal health or financial information. So don't share that information with anyone you haven't verified. And don't pay for help; certified agents and application assisters will never charge you.

If they aren't legitimate, you can report them to the Oregon Department of Justice consumer hotline between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. at 877-877-9392. You also can file a complaint on the Federal Trade Commission website.

Officials say they are working with the Oregon Department of Justice to formulate a strategy to deal with the problem. Scammers "are one of our biggest concerns," says Rachel Oh, a community affairs manager with Cover Oregon. "We want people to really understand that our certified community partners and our certified agents are people you can trust."

Oregon is spending more than $15 million to educate the state's more than 500,000 uninsured. Starting in January, eligibility for the Oregon Health Plan will be expanded to people making less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level, about $23,500 a year for a family of four. People making more than that, but less than 400 percent of the poverty level, will be eligible for a sliding scale of commercial insurance tax credits for premium discounts.

In all, up to 1,000 people will assist the state in insurance enrollment, officials estimate. More than 200 groups or clinics and about 2,000 insurance agents will be eventually certified to help as well.

--Nick Budnick