By Deena Winter | Nebraska Watchdog

Updated 5:29 p.m. Wednesday

LINCOLN — Nearly half the participants in a state program that assists Nebraskans with health care costs have been dropped from the rolls after a May audit found “gross mismanagement.”

State Auditor Mike Foley’s audit of the Health Insurance Premium Payment program prompted the state Department of Health and Human Services to overhaul the $6.5 million program. Under HIPP, Nebraskans can get reimbursed the cost of private health insurance coverage if that’s cheaper than the person enrolling in Medicaid.

The audit found DHHS “flagrantly disregarded its own regulations” in managing the program, resulting in large payments to ineligible people. Auditors found duplicate payments, errors and other financial discrepancies. While announcing the results of his audit, Foley said it also appeared some people were knowingly, fraudulently getting benefits.

State auditors found hundreds of thousands of dollars in errors in 53 of the 70 most expensive cases they reviewed.

“All in all, this program is one grand mess in need of radical surgery,” Foley said in May. “The shocking level of mismanagement coupled with inattentive supervisions created a perfect storm, resulting in years of wasting large sums of taxpayer money.”

Foley said the biggest problem was that the department failed to do even one cost-benefit analysis for any of the program participants, so it couldn’t have known whether it was cheaper to subsidize health insurance coverage.

In response, Medicaid Director Vivianne Chaumont vowed to review the program and drop participants who didn’t qualify for payments. She also said a recommendation would be made about whether to continue the program, since it’s no longer a federally mandated program and that area of Medicaid is changing as managed care expands.

HHS spokesman Russ Reno said the department reviewed 455 HIPP cases, of which 240 recipients were notified there wasn’t enough documentation to justify the cost-effectiveness of their participation in the program.

Of those, 75 appeals were filed and 33 successfully showed it was cost-effective for them to stay in the program, with 35 appeals scheduled for consideration.

One woman who didn’t want to be named because she’s appealing her termination from the program said the state ombudsman’s office was looking into the situation.

Foley and HHS CEO Kerry Winterer laid the blame for problems on an employee who administered the program single-handedly with inadequate supervision. In one case, the department paid more than $265,000 in premiums when it clearly would have been cheaper to put the person on Medicaid. The HHS file indicated the HIPP administrator was well aware that it wasn’t cost-effective, but continued to make payments of more than $9,000 per month for health insurance premiums.

Auditors also found cases in which the state was reimbursing for the more costly employer portion health insurance costs, not the employee portion, resulting in a $20,000 overpayment in one case and $38,000 in another.

Auditors also found numerous cases in which participants were paying no premiums for health insurance, but were getting HIPP payments, to the tune of $29,000 in one case.

Auditors also found the agency incorrectly paid thousands of dollars for dental insurance, vision insurance, long-term disability insurance, life insurance — even parking expenses, even though they weren’t allowable.

Contact Deena Winter at deena@nebraskawatchdog.org. Follow Deena on Twitter at @DeenaNEWatchdog

Editor’s note: to subscribe to News Updates from Nebraska Watchdog at no cost, click here.