Casting ballot is a right and a privilege. It shouldn’t be a challenge

Voters waiting to vote in polling place (Photo: Getty Images/Blend Images )

Republicans don’t want you to vote.

OK, that’s not totally true. Unless you’re young. Or unless you’re black (especially) or Hispanic. Or unless if you’re a Democrat or if you have Democratic tendencies, as many of the folks in these groups do. Then Republicans really don’t want you to vote.

But if Republicans can’t completely prevent you from voting, they’ll do everything they can to make it as difficult as possible.

Which is why Republicans nationwide have been so busy over the last few years, passing legislation that cuts back or eliminates same-day voter registration, curtails access to local clerks’ offices and polling places, severely restricts early voting and limits the availability of absentee ballots.

Of course, these measures are in addition to the requirement instituted by Republicans in a number of states, including Wisconsin, that a voter must present an approved photo ID before casting a ballot.

Since the “voter fraud” that Republicans say is the main reason for the photo ID requirement simply doesn’t exist in any meaningful or demonstrable way, and since research shows that this requirement has no effect on the confidence or trust in the electoral process, it’s clear that the requirement is only intended to suppress voter participation.

We’ll pause here briefly to note the latest demonstration of hypocrisy by Wisconsin Republicans, namely the lawsuit by Assembly Speaker Robin Vos and Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald against the state’s non-partisan Government Accountability Board.

According to news reports, the lawsuit argues “that the model ballot drafted by the GAB is confusing, gives undue prominence to Democratic candidates and makes it difficult for voters to tell which office the candidates are seeking.”

In particular, the ballot design is unfair because Democratic candidates are listed first, based on the results of the 2012 election, as mandated by state law, “under the name of the office being sought and Republican candidates are separated by a line, the lawsuit said.”

Without a hint of irony, Vos and Fitzgerald nonetheless went ahead and made the ridiculously ironic and completely unsubstantiated claim that the GAB’s model ballot is “extremely likely to violate the right to vote of thousands, if not millions of Wisconsin electors.” Of course, without explaining how.

For the hundreds of early voters who had already cast and returned an absentee ballot, however, there seemed to be no violation, no confusion and, until the recent decision by a panel of three Republican judges to reinstate the photo ID requirement, no difficulties.

There has got to be a better way, Well, in The Post-Crescent’s own editorial pages, a letter to the editor recently offered a solution that was breathtakingly inane: “The plan would be to change voting laws, making it illegal for citizens to vote if they don’t pay a reasonable amount of income tax.”

There are a couple of points to consider as you let that the implications of “the plan” sink in. (I predict that it will make your head hurt.)

Apparently, the idea came to writer because there are “... more people evading income taxes, qualifying for welfare and receiving assistance for health care, food stamps, education, housing, etc., than there are taxpayers to support these programs.” In particular, he claims “that 47 percent of voters paid no taxes,” and goes on to blame them for all the problems.

Hmmm. Does that sound familiar? Of course it does. In 2012, Mitt Romney infamously made a similar claim. The letter writer’s claim, though, is even more misguided and inaccurate than Romney’s.

In 2011, nearly 47 percent of Americans paid no federal income tax. However, nearly two-thirds did pay payroll taxes and most all also paid some combination of state and local sales, gas and property taxes, not to mention numerous user and other fees.

So when the letter writer complains about “voters who don’t contribute to society” but who continue “to obtain ‘free’ services” and “more ‘stuff,’” I can’t help but wonder who he’s referring to.

Is it low-income and middle-class voters and their children? Is it the elderly? Women? Students? Small business owners? Large corporations? Sports team owners? Veterans? He doesn’t say.

In any case, voting is a right and a privilege. It shouldn’t be a challenge.

— David Hovde is an Appleton resident. He can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1semoqb