During Thursday’s airing of Fox News’ Outnumbered, the network’s resident psychiatrist, Dr. Keith Ablow, amazingly claimed that President Obama is using the World Cup as a distraction. Apparently, in Dr. Ablow’s view, a sporting event that is carefully planned and scheduled years in advance and occurs every four years is really just a scheme by the White House to get people to pay attention and talk about something other than the “issues” that this president is facing. Thankfully, based on the absolute idiocy of Ablow’s claims, the rest of the panel members quickly refuted him. When you have Kimberly Guilfoyle telling you that you’ve crossed a line, then you’ve likely gone too far.

Below is video of Ablow’s remarks, courtesy of Media Matters:

Seriously, this guy is a psychiatrist? I think he’s the one in need of psychiatric help. Sheesh.

This is taking the whole ‘Obama is using X event to distract the American people from X scandal’ meme way too far. If I was just shown this clip cold, without the knowledge that it was aired on Fox News, I would have sworn this was a Saturday Night Live skit. That is how utterly ridiculous Ablow’s comments are. This man seriously said that he’s suspicious of this event, feeling that it is being used by Obama to distract everyone from pressing international and domestic issues. Dr. Ablow is certifiable.

Of course, this isn’t the first time Ablow’s made insane comments when discussing the President of the United States. In a column for FoxNews.com, Ablow stated that President Obama believes he is God’s instrument for implementing a new world order and needs to make America less powerful. Vladimir Putin realized Obama’s psychological defects and took advantage of this by snatching Crimea away from Ukraine.

How then could Vladimir Putin fail to notice the remarkable presence on the world stage of an American counterpart (Barack Obama) who is as interested as he is in disempowering the United States? How could he fail to act on the remarkable symmetry of such a moment in history? To not test the possibility that God intends him to be the instrument of a new world order, based on Russia’s manifest destiny, would be contrary to every fiber in his being. To go further, I do not believe that Vladimir Putin would miss the fact that Barack Obama has imperiled the notion of individual autonomy (by seeking to disarm Americans, by seeking to make Americans dependent on unemployment checks and food stamps and by making it officially impossible to choose how to spend your own money, via the Affordable Care Act). Since giving each individual the right to power is not the goal of this American President, why would Putin believe that taking power from others would be opposed vigorously by this President’s Administration?

Last month on Outnumbered, Ablow decided to psychoanalyze the President once again. This time, he focused on POTUS’ commencement speech at West Point. Ablow felt that President Obama hates the American people because he has been abandoned so many times in his life.

ABLOW: Well, when a president takes office and immediately apologizes for the country he’s leading and goes on an apology tour, when he says “You didn’t build that business” so if you thought you were using capitalism and your own smarts to build something, you didn’t. He’s a dispiriting president who has it in for the American public, and he masterfully — why? Um, well, because I think he — well, it’s a long story, but I think he distrusts autonomy. I think people abandoned him in his life again and again and again, and individual decision-making is anathema to him. He hates it.

I believe Dr. Ablow needs to see a doctor ASAP. He is obviously suffering from Obama Derangement Syndrome.