There are 18 missing kids from southern Arizona, according to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.

There are 18 missing kids from southern Arizona, according to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.

The man accused of stabbing a person in the neck at an east-side convenience in April has been arrested, city police said.

The man accused of stabbing a person in the neck at an east-side convenience in April has been arrested, city police said.

Five people were hurt in a collision on westbound I-10 that was one of three crashes between Tucson and Eloy that slowed traffic Thursday morning, May 26.

Five people were hurt in a collision on westbound I-10 that was one of three crashes between Tucson and Eloy that slowed traffic Thursday morning, May 26.

A Thai man is recovering from a bloody encounter with a 10-foot python that slithered through the plumbing of his home and latched its jaws onto his penis as he was using a squat toilet.

A Thai man is recovering from a bloody encounter with a 10-foot python that slithered through the plumbing of his home and latched its jaws onto his penis as he was using a squat toilet.

Thai man bloodied but unbowed after intimate attack by snake

VIDEO: Thai man bloodied but unbowed after intimate attack by snake

According to Tucson police, the investigation is in the 4900 block of East Glenn Street.

According to Tucson police, the investigation is in the 4900 block of East Glenn Street.

Compassion on Christmas Day certainly appears to be on the rise in Tucson.

I have worked on Christmas Day for many years now and I'm seeing a trend.

The Salvation Army is feeding far fewer homeless, poor and needy than it did just a few years ago.

A few years back the Salvation Army's annual Christmas dinner was a pretty good way to gauge need in Tucson. In 2008, nearly 4,000 people lined up for a dinner. Today, it's less than half that.

But that's a good thing, right?

"It's not a bad thing because it means they're getting food somewhere and they'll be able to spend Christmas with someone and have a meal," says Shawna Kroh, a spokesperson for the Salvation Army. "We're hoping that's the case."

And that does appear to be the case.

More and more Tucsonans are going a step beyond volunteering to serve meals, to actually doing the serving themselves.

Just a quick look around town during Christmas, 2014.

Several hundred are being fed in Santa Rita Park on 22nd by a group which has been feeding the needy for the past 17 years.

A pizza cafe on Broadway is giving free pizza to the homeless or homeless who donate to the homeless.

A half dozen food trucks lined up late in the day in Santa Rita Park with 26 turkey's and all the trimmings.

"There are a lot more services out there serving food on Christmas day," says Kroh.

Roy Aros and a couple of friends thought they'd help out in 1997 so they grabbed a couple of grills out of the back yard, bought 50 hamburgers and 100 hot dogs and set up on a cold, wet Christmas and fed a few dozen hungry people.

Fast forward by 17 years and the menu has changed a bit.

"We're probably looking at a thousand pounds of chicken, 18 turkeys, 1,000 hamburgers and a half dozen hams on the rotisserie," says Aros.

And the line is 350 long.

Not just food now but sleeping bags, warm blankets, sweatshirts and more.

Dog food for the dogs. Toys for the kids.

And from Aros. "It's the least we can do," he says.

Later in the day, the food trucks pull in and announce they will feed all comers.

Susan French, one of the organizers, says last year they pulled in with 30 meals and they were gone in eight minutes.

This year they decided to do more.

Down the street and just north, the Broadway Pizza cafe is cooking up pizza's for the neighborhood.

Jay Jofee tells his customers he'll work on Christmas day if they'll bring in some canned food in exchange for free pizza.

And the homeless, the needy or families who can't eat pizza on the their budget, are encouraged to come in to eat a large pizza pie.

We talked to a family which didn't want to be embarrassed told us their kids don't get pizza because they can't afford it.

Jay gave them a real Christmas treat.

Lat year, he gave the food bank 2,500 cans.

It's this kind of generosity which is spreading, making it a bit easier for those who need to have a full belly on Christmas.

But just because the Salvation Army isn't feeding as many as in the past, it doesn't mean the need is any less.

"Those people will always be with us, those people will always be poor," says Major Clement Leslie, of the Salvation Army. "The poor will always be with us."





Copyright 2014 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.