WASHINGTON - The National Rifle Association is working to shoot down President Obama's pick for surgeon general.

Dr. Vivek Murthy is under fire from the pro-gun group and a slew of Senate Republicans for his outspoken assertions that gun violence constitutes a health problem, along with his past support for Obamacare.

Murthy, 36, won support from just one Republican, Sen. Mark Kirk (R-Ill.), when the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee voted on his confirmation last month.

There is some question whether he will be confirmed by the full Senate.

He needs just 51 “yes” votes, and there are 55 Democratic senators. But Republicans hope to pressure Democrats facing tough reelection fights this year to oppose him.

If Kirk remains a backer, seven Democrats would have to vote "no" to doom the nomination.

After the NRA circulated a letter opposing Murthy, several Republican senators, including Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.), Rand Paul (R-Ky.) and John Barrasso (R-Wyo.), argued the young doctor was picked for his political activity and lacks the experience to be the nation's leading health advocate.

"This nominee seems much more committed to politics than to patients," Barrasso, a former surgeon, said.

Murthy founded Doctors for Obama, now Doctors for America, a group that has promoted Obamacare and gun control measures, including a proposed assault weapons ban.

Some Republican senators also are irked at Murthy for ripping them on Twitter.

At a February committee hearing, Alexander read to Murthy a 2012 tweet in which the doctor said he was "tired of politicians playing politics with guns, putting lives at-risk because they are scared of the NRA."

Murthy told Alexander he does not plan "to use the Surgeon General's Office as a bully pulpit for gun control."

He said he "priority and focus is going to be on obesity prevention."

"My concerns with regards to issues like gun violence have to do with my experience as a physician," he said.

dfriedman@nydailynews.com