Animal Alliance of NJ will host "Black Friday" a day of special adoption rates on all cats and kittens with any black on them

Porkchop. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF ANIMAL ALLIANCE OF NJ) Story Highlights Prices for all adult cats with any black on them will be slashed from $75 to $25

Kittens with any black fur will be reduced from $125 to $75.

On Nov. 28, Animal Alliance of NJ will host "Black Friday" a day of special adoption rates on all cats and kittens with any black on them at The Robert W. Curts Memorial Pet Adoption Center, 1432 Route 179 North. The adoption center has also extended regular hours of noon to 8 p.m. on Black Friday.

Prices for all adult cats with any black on them will be slashed from $75 to $25. Kittens with any black fur will be reduced from $125 to $75. All of the cats and kittens at Animal Alliance have already received spay/neuter surgery, negative Feline Leukemia/FIV blood test, rabies and FVRCP vaccines, flea and tick treatment, deworming and Home Again Microchip.

Additionally, adoption rates for cats who are FIV+ (FIVERS) will be reduced to just $5. FIV in cats is often quite misunderstood and therefore sometimes these cats can be overlooked. FIV is a slow growing virus in cats that can leave affected cats susceptible to secondary illness; the FIV virus itself does not cause any symptoms of illness. While it is impossible to accurately predict the life expectancy of a cat infected with FIV, with appropriate care and under low stress and indoor living conditions, many infected cats will remain in good health for years.

FIV is mainly passed from cat to cat through deep bite wounds, the kind that usually occur outdoors during territorial disputes (the perfect reason to keep your cat inside). Free-roaming, outdoor intact male cats most frequently contract the disease. Cats who live indoors are the least likely to be infected. Casual, non-aggressive contact is not a route of spreading FIV; as a result, cats in households with stable social structures where housemates do not fight are at little risk for acquiring FIV infections.

"FIV+ cats can become wonderful family pets with limited future FIV related health issues," said Anne Trinkle, executive director of Animal Alliance. "Animal Alliance has 10 FIV + cats for adoption, all are friendly and lovable and live peacefully with each other in a giant free-roaming room. These cats are in good health, other than their FIV status, and are ready to become the perfect addition in the right home this Holiday season."

The $5 adoption fee of FIV+ cats includes their already done spay/neuter, negative Feline Leukemia blood test, rabies and FVRCP vaccines, flea and tick treatment, deworming and Home Again Microchip.

Fiona. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF ANIMAL ALLIANCE OF NJ)

Animal Alliance T-shirts and Tote Bags will also be reduced to $10 from $20.

Black Friday hours are from noon to 8 p.m. For questions or appointments, call 609-818-1952. All cats and kittens can also be seen on the agency's website at www.animalalliancenj.org An application is required.

At Animal Alliance's new adoption center, interested adopters can observe all of the felines as they roam and play freely in the cat rooms, and spend time with them individually in the meet and greet rooms. The center's retail center also provides all of the necessities for any adopter including cat/kitten collars, toys, food, grooming supplies and other accessories.

Darius (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF ANIMAL ALLIANCE OF NJ)

The SPCA reports that approximately 3.4 million cats enter shelters each year. Of those, 1.4 million are euthanized and 1.3 million are adopted. Shelters and rescues like Animal Alliance throughout the nation work vigorously to change those numbers, reduce the number of cats euthanized, encourage adoptions and educate the public about the importance of having pets spayed/neutered.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1rjDIKD