Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Arizona Republican Party says an anti-U.S. Sen. John McCain resolution is improper at meeting Saturday, Jan. 23, 2016.

Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., who is seeking a sixth U.S. Senate term, is maintaining his fundraising advantage over his Democratic and Republican opponents. (Photo: John Samora/The Republic)

The Arizona Republican Party opposed another attempt to rebuke U.S. Sen. John McCain at its annual meeting on Saturday.

There was enough support from the party's conservative wing to bring a resolution to the floor but party officials said a move to endorse "anyone but" McCain in a primary election for U.S. Senate may be illegal and could subject the party to legal liability.

Al Gage, the party's licensed parliamentarian, said the resolution was out of order because party rules cannot bind members to endorse or not endorse any candidate.

Based on the resolution, Gage said, "each individual committeeman in this body would have to endorse someone other than John McCain. This body does not have the power to require each individual committeeman to do that."

The development comes a week after Maricopa County Republicans succeeded in delivering a similar broadside to McCain. The county party tends to be more conservative than the state party.

Lorna Romero, McCain's spokeswoman, noted Saturday's resolution was brought forward by A.J. LaFaro, the former Maricopa County Party chairman who once referred to former Gov. Jan Brewer as "Judas." In a statement, she said he has been "totally consumed with attacking fellow Republicans" rather than beating opponents at the polls.

"The fact that this dishonest, pointless resolution failed at today's state GOP meeting is very positive news for Arizona Republicans who want our Party focused on winning elections and advancing the Conservative cause," Romero wrote in a statement. "John McCain remains committed to uniting the Republican party and resolving differences to achieve victories and maintain our Republican majority.”

Party activists barely had enough support to bring a resolution to consider censuring state GOP Chairman Robert Graham.

Supporters of that resolution accused him in handouts of improperly meddling with activists' business, limiting access to voter information, and various conflicts of interest. Anti-Graham Republicans also claimed he and the state party are being investigated by the Federal Elections Commission for alleged campaign finance violations.

A spokesman for the party said to his knowledge the party is not under investigation. And many in attendance leapt to their feet to show support for the GOP leader.

The anti-McCain resolution centered on the senator's past support of immigration reform, campaigning on securing the border but co-sponsoring legislation giving a pathway to citizenship "to millions of illegal aliens," and demeaning Republicans "who stand for the Constitution, calling them 'crazies,' and 'wacko birds.'"

McCain, who has for years clashed with grassroots Republican activists, did not attend the meeting, instead he attended a rally for the Arizona Cardinals. Maricopa County Republicans have long targeted him for being a "Republican in name only," and two years ago, the Arizona and Maricopa County GOP parties censured him for being, in their minds, too liberal.

Supporters of the McCain and Graham resolutions needed 129 signatures from state committeemen to bring the resolution to the floor for a vote by the full body. They had 220 signatures against McCain and 130 against Graham.

.@SenJohnMcCain spot: That "dishonest, pointless resolution" failed is a win for Republicans, who want to focus on conservative cause — YvonneWingettSanchez (@yvonnewingett) January 23, 2016

The party members did pass symbolic resolutions to defund Planned Parenthood, repeal Obamacare, and strengthen the Republican Party.

Of the failed attempt to bring the resolutions against McCain and Graham, LaFaro accused McCain of bringing in "an outside source to rule in his favor." LaFaro said rejection of the resolutions "is one of the symptoms of what's wrong with our country. The people of this body -- the state committeemen of the Arizona Republican Party, have a right to vote on resolutions."

The six-hour meeting featured speeches from Reps. Trent Franks, Matt Salmon, David Schweikert, and Paul Gosar, as well as Attorney General Mark Brnovich, state Treasurer Jeff DeWit, Maricopa County Attorney Bill Montgomery, Sheriff Joe Arpaio and other GOP leaders. Gov. Doug Ducey attended the Cardinals rally instead of the GOP meeting.

Outside of the church where the meeting was held, supporters of presidential candidates Donald Trump, Ted Cruz and Ben Carson handed out buttons, stickers and literature. Corporation Commissioner candidates Frank Riggs and Al Melvin were pitching themselves as candidates. And the Proposition 123 campaign, which would add $3.5 billion in education funding over 10 years, was hitting up voters for support for the May special election.

McCain's team erected a booth to tout his leadership and record.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share A Republican explains why she's disappointed with U.S. Sen. John McCain

Nearby, an anti-McCain Republican, who dubbed herself "Nurse Ratched," gathered signatures in a booth modeled after a first-aid station. Her station, named "John McPAIN," featured the logo "Do you have a McPain? We have the cure!" She sold T-shirts, buttons and handed out a "prescription" that let people check off their sickness: amnesty, Obamacare, VA, Debt. The woman, whose real name is Judy Hoelscher, wrote on the piece of paper that "Kelli is the cure," referring to Kelli Ward, who is challenging McCain in the primary.

Follow the reporter on Twitter @yvonnewingett and reach her at yvonne.wingett@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-4712.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1RFE4Ha