Prairie fires in the spring months are as much of an annual ritual in Kansas as, say, good Sunflower State college hoops.

And while some question why the fires are started, fire experts agree, the benefits of the burning are crucial to keeping Kansas’ prairie land alive.

Each year in the months of March and April, farmers and ranchers set pastures ablaze through the use of prescribed burns — that is, having a plan, then burning the grass by using fire as a tool with an end goal in mind.

Still, so far this year, the fire season has been unusual because of the strong winds causing problems just days after the burns were done correctly and responsibly.

“We want folks to get burning done, because we know it’s good for the land, but we want it to be done safely,” said the Kansas Forest Service’s Jason Hartman, the fire prevention specialist for the state. “So going back and checking again the next day or the day after even is a recommendation that would make things safer this year.”

Kris Sanders, meteorologist with the National Service in Topeka, said this winter was unusually windy, and it carried over into the spring.

According to weather service data for the month of March, Topeka hit 40-plus mph peak wind gusts seven times, including four in the last six days of the month. March 30 and 31, when several fire calls were reported by county dispatchers — including one for a large wildfire northwest of Topeka that damaged several structures — the average wind speed was 15.7 and 20.1 mph, respectively.

Additionally, for March 30 the maximum sustained wind speed was 31 mph, and the peak wind gust was 41 mph. For March 31, the maximum sustained wind speed was 31 and the peak gust was 44 mph. Other areas in northeast Kansas had similar windy numbers for March.

With all that in mind, the state statute for legal burning says the wind speed has to be 15 mph or lower.

So while farmers burned March 29 when the wind was an average speed of 4.9 and perfect for burning, the next few days caused havoc for fire crews.

“One gust of wind from a different direction could just change your whole day,” said Silver Lake fire chief Joe Hawkins, who said calls were up for his volunteer fire department this year, in large part because of the grass fires.

Hawkins said last year around this time, the department had just 55 calls. This year? They already have done 93. The 93rd didn’t come for them until May 28 last year.

“It’s just been kind of a weird season, I would say. This is the rough time (for grass fires),” Hawkins said.

One farmer who hasn’t had any problem with his burns this year is Rossville’s Derek Brunin.

A rancher who has several acres of crops, as well as around 250 acres of pasture for his calf-cow operation, Brunin has been around farming his whole life, including the institution of prescribed burning.

The 27-year-old, with several friends and family, burned around 200 acres of pasture two weekends ago on March 29 not far from Rossville with no troubles of wildfires.

While burning serves several purposes, including helping with wildlife habitats and prairie preservation, Brunin and his fellow ranchers use it to help make grazing better for their cattle. They need the fire to bulk up the calves to make more money to provide for their families.

As shown through studies at Kansas State University Research and Extension, cattle who graze on grass that was burned previously as opposed to the alternative are healthier and gain several more pounds.

“My biggest concern is, you know, a lot of people not involved in agriculture, they don’t understand,” Brunin said. “They probably think, ‘Oh yeah, they just don’t want to mow (the grass).’ There’s a lot more that burning accomplishes than just cleaning it up.”

Brunin said the key to a successful, safe burn is prep work and back burning, which creates a buffer around the desired burn area so it doesn’t escape into other areas.

While Brunin said he has never seen an out-of-control fire in person, Hartman said the Sunflower State doesn’t lack for wildfires.

“We don’t make CNN like Montana or Colorado or California, but there are a lot of years actually where we’ll have more acres burned than those states will,” Hartman said. “But our fires, they’re over in four, five, six hours and then they’re done. That’s why we don’t really make national media news.

"We do get a few structures each year,” Hartman added, “and that’s unfortunate, but we don’t get dozens of houses lost all in one event like some of those western states do, fortunately.”