While many Oklahomans, including legislators, feel the satanic monument will never come to pass at the capitol, there are some who feel acceptance is changing, and the group's leader says he's being flooded with support.

The leader of the Satanic Temple says it's getting an outpouring of support for their proposal of placing a satanic statue next to Ten Commandments at the State Capitol.

While many Oklahomans, including legislators, feel the satanic monument will never come to pass at the capitol, there are some who feel acceptance is changing, and the group's leader says he's being flooded with support.

"It's really encouraging. It's really moving. We do get a lot of messages that start out with the caveat, 'You know I am a Christian.' However, and they explain that they appreciate what we're doing," said spokesperson for the Satanic Temple, Lucien Greaves.

Greaves says support for a monument at the Capitol is growing by the day. It would be placed next to the Ten Commandments.

"We've gotten a lot of messages from people saying that they served or are serving in the armed forces, and they feel that these values are exactly what we fought for," Greaves said.

And they're not alone. There are some Oklahomans who support the idea.

12/9/2013 Related Story: Satanic Temple Wants Monument At Oklahoma State Capitol

"I think Oklahoma is becoming more of a progressive state, so I think it could definitely happen," said Michelle Reynolds.

"This is kind of what America was based on, freedom of religion. And for us to say whether you believe in it or not, that it shouldn't be there, is kind of wrong," said Bailee Boyce.

But many say the statue goes against core Oklahoman beliefs.

"And having little kids around it, that's just ridiculous. I mean, don't understand where they come from," said Terry Hill, pastor of the Canadian County Cowboy Church.

Greaves said the monument would have a bearded goat-like figure with two horns in front of a pentagram with two kids in front. He said children would be able to sit on the structure's lap and take pictures as a fun, family-friendly event.

Harold Harvey of Yukon says whether supporters of the Satanic monument respect the Ten Commandments or not, it is a part of our judicial system.

"We're not based on a Judeo-Christian set of rules, Harvey said. "We hope every one of them gets saved because they're going to live with Satan in a bad place for an eternity, and in my mind, that's the worst thing that could happen."

Greaves says he submitted designs to the Oklahoma Capitol Preservation Commission after he was asked by the Commission to do so. He says the group will start creating the structure even if the proposal gets shot down.

"We have to let this play out however it plays out, but we'll keep pushing to make sure that it's going ahead," Greaves said.

"It's not a call to war against one side or the other, it's actually a call for reconciliation to have a plurality of voices. There is no singular voice of the Oklahoman, you need to embrace the diversity of your population and see that no single politician's view represents the entirety of the law abiding citizenry in Oklahoma."

The Commission placed a moratorium on making a decision on the Satanic monument while a lawsuit against the Ten Commandments monument is making its way through the courts.

Meanwhile, the Satanic Temple has an Oklahoma Monument Fund set up on its site: http://www.thesatanictemple.com/