Vice President Joe "I Say I'm from Scranton Because Pennsylvania Has More Electoral Votes Than Delaware" Biden currently defeats just about every conceivable Republican contender. At least the folks from within that stale Washington GOP crowd.

Vice President Joe "I Say I'm from Scranton Because Pennsylvania Has More Electoral Votes Than Delaware" Biden currently defeats just about every conceivable Republican contender. At least the folks from within that stale Washington GOP crowd.

It's the most depressing poll of the month: believe it or not, in a Rasmussen Reports poll of 1000 likely voters, Joe Biden handily beats almost every potential GOP candidate for president in 2016 except one. Andrew Malcolm of IBD delivers the bad news with his customary wit:

Great news for America's late-night comics. Biden's hair plugs trump Rand Paul's curls, 44%-36%. Biden beats Marco Rubio, 44%-34%. And at the moment he even tops conservative darling Ted Cruz, 43%-32%. Great news for America's late-night comics. Biden's hair plugs trump Rand Paul's curls, 44%-36%. Biden beats Marco Rubio, 44%-34%. And at the moment he even tops conservative darling Ted Cruz, 43%-32%.

It gets worse, if you are a conservative:

You'll never guess the lone Republican who defeats Biden, according to this Rasmussen survey. Well, maybe you would. It's Chris Christie, the shrinking New Jersey governor who was Obama's best bro' during last year's hurricane season. The former federal prosecutor draws 39% to Biden's 35% among likely voters.

Are you depressed yet? If not:

Now, here's the rest of the story three years out from the 2016 primaries: Hillary Clinton absolutely murders Joe Biden. Political homicide -- 77% to 11% among Democrats. But, wait! There's more: Three years out from her party's 2008 primaries Clinton was also the clear favorite to win the nomination and presidency. But what difference at this point does it make?

Despite a disastrous Obama presidency (with more to come), 2016 will not be a cakewalk for the GOP.