By of the

Paying for "value" — that prized mix of quality and cost — is widely cited nowadays as essential in slowing the rise in health care costs.

The catch is that measuring quality and cost is proving to be much more difficult than often acknowledged.

The inescapable and significant challenges are made clear in a website the Wisconsin Health Information Organization launched this month to rate physician clinics.

The website is the first stab by the organization, founded in 2006, to track and publicly report how physician clinics perform on an array of quality measures and how efficiently they use health care resources.

The website is a start, but the limited information after nine years of work indicates just how much work remains before patients will have access to truly useful information on their doctors.

At this point, a consumer can find a particular clinic by typing in a ZIP code and learn whether that clinic rates above average, average or below average for primary care on two general measures: providing recommended care at the right time, and making good use of health care dollars. No ratings on specific doctors or specific conditions are available.

"There's a long way to go," said Jo Musser, chief executive of the organization.

The organization, known as WHIO (pronounced "we-o"), was an outgrowth of the Wisconsin Collaborative for Healthcare Quality, a consortium of health systems, physician practices and others created to publicly report quality measures.

WHIO set out to take that initiative a step further: It would sift through millions of insurance claims to determine which doctors and hospitals provide quality care at the lowest cost.

The state's largest health insurance companies, who were among the original members, agreed to pool their claims data. Other members included the Wisconsin Medical Society, employer coalitions and the Wisconsin Collaborative for Healthcare Quality. The state also has supported WHIO with a one-time grant of $5 million and other funding.

It was an ambitious goal that put Wisconsin at the forefront of efforts to improve the health care system. It also proved to be harder than anyone expected.

The website — MyHealthWI.org — launched this month, and it provides information only for clinics, and only for the three largest specialties in primary care: family medicine, pediatrics and internal medicine. And information is available for fewer than half of the clinics listed on the site.

"This first iteration is just that," said Chris Queram, chief executive of the Wisconsin Collaborative for Healthcare Quality and a WHIO board member. "We all recognize that successive iterations will build on this first attempt."

But Queram also praised WHIO for the challenges it has overcome, including standardizing claims data in different formats from multiple insurance companies and developing methods for accurately attributing patients to specific clinics when applicable.

"That's been a challenge," Musser said. "I would not dispute that at all."

WHIO also had to agree on accepted quality measures. And it had to develop a way to present the information in a format that people could understand quickly.

There also is the sheer volume of information. WHIO has more than 300 million insurance claims in its database, a number that could double when it adds Medicare claims later this year.

"It's wicked hard," said Elizabeth Mitchell, president and chief executive of the Network for Regional Healthcare Improvement, which includes WHIO and similar organizations in other states.

Maine, Minnesota, Colorado and Oregon are cited as states that have made the most progress.

Nationally, an estimated 50 efforts are underway to track and report on physician performance, according to a policy brief from Health Affairs, a policy journal, and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

These include efforts by private companies, such as HealthGrades, that offer online reviews and other information and that are supported by advertising.

The Affordable Care Act requires the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS, to set up a website, known as Physician Compare, to provide information on the quality of care provided by individual physicians. The website would be modeled after similar websites for hospitals, nursing homes and home health care.

But the Physician Compare website is off to a slow start, with little information available.

"CMS faces the same obstacles as other entities in accurately measuring physician performance and presenting the results in a compelling way: It's simply not an easy thing to do," according to the policy brief by Health Affairs and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

But a wide range of experts and stakeholders contend that developing accurate measures to determine the quality and cost of care could be an essential component in making the health care system more efficient.

"One could ask themselves, 'Wait a minute, we are spending 20% of GDP (gross domestic product) and we don't know how to measure this stuff?'" said Mark Moody, chief executive of WEA Trust and a member of WHIO's board.

There also are few public measures for specialists. And even when that information exists, it is not public. For instance, several medical societies, such as those for cardiologists and heart surgeons, have extensive information on physician performance but do not disclose it.

"There is a lot of information that's not available to organizations such as ours, and that's a challenge," said Musser of WHIO.

At the same time, health systems and researchers are drawing on WHIO's data.

"WHIO is an incredible asset for Wisconsin," Musser said.

The database can be used by researchers to track the use of low-value procedures and other care. WHIO itself has begun publishing a report on how the use of health care resources, such as referrals to specialists or the use of radiology services, varies throughout the state.

"The key here is this is a great start, but it certainly is a work in progress," said Rick Abrams, chief executive of the Wisconsin Medical Society.

No one disputes that.

"We have a lot more work to do, but it is necessary work," Moody said. "Just because it is hard doesn't mean we should give up."