Tim Straus (Photo: File photo)

There you go again Billy.

Representative Long’s recent opinion (Sept. 30) regarding the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) is terribly misleading.

But don’t take my word for it, please read the comments made on-line by News-Leader readers and real authorities on the subject.

• Trent Condellone: “Outright lies about ‘fines.’ ‘Penalty for being privately insured’ - i.e., trying to get fake coverage that doesn’t pay anything, aka fraud and have the costs passed on to those who pay. ‘Treatment quality sacrifices.’ There’s no proof offered, that’s just thrown in to scare people.”

• Mike O’Shea: “The biggest of the many lies and misinformation is the term ‘penalty for being privately insured.’ The penalty is for having no insurance or just a bogus policy that doesn’t meet even minimal coverage; and even then only if you CAN afford coverage under the ACA.”

• Ted Allen: “Since the onset of the ACA, Long and those of his ilk have raked it over the coals. Twice the Supreme Court has upheld it. Yet here we are still being told about this wonderful replacement that has never materialized. No details what-so-ever to be able to compare the opposition’s proposal to the current policy. No efforts in the past six years to improve, modify, alter or otherwise make the ACA more effective. Just opposition and empty rhetoric about some elusive plan.”

• Jim Lee: “Billy throws a lot of numbers out in this piece but no supporting documentation as to the source of those numbers. He makes the statement ‘This law is just getting started, and already plans are lacking affordability and quality.’ Huh? Give me some examples, I haven’t found this to be the case.”

The Kaiser Family Foundation is the authority on the topic and provides a very different picture than Long’s “as many of us feared, government-run health care is an industry that benefits a few through overwhelming cost and treatment quality sacrifices of many.”

They conclude: “Even with these new requirements, most market fundamentals have stayed consistent with prior trends, suggesting that the implementation has not caused significant disruption for most market participants. Premiums for single and family coverage increased by 4 percent in 2015, continuing a fairly long period (2005 to 2015) where annual premium growth has averaged about 5 percent (http://kff.org/health-costs/).

Further, the National Restaurant Association, which represents the restaurant industry, were once strong opponents of Obamacare. Now their stance is to improve and make the ACA easier to work with rather than fight it.

They are simply being constructive.

Why can’t Mr. Long and his colleagues in Congress?

Tim Straus is the Co-Founder & President of The Turover Straus Group, a Food Innovation and Product Development company headquartered in Springfield.

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1LcBGn1