A debuting guest conductor, a Pittsburgh premiere, a charismatic soloist in a popular concerto, an emphasis on the rhythms of dance and an unusually enthusiastic, demonstrative (though far from capacity) audience: and that describes only the first half of the Pittsburgh Symphony's varied and gratifying Friday evening concert at Heinz Hall.

After intermission, the audience was treated to two contrasting ballet scores, each an engaging and evocative masterpiece in its own way.

Guitarist Pablo Villegas, conductor Gustavo Gimeno and Rodrigo's "Fantasia para un Gentilhombre" are all of Spanish origin, creating a unanimity of purpose that made the concerto segment utterly riveting. Mr. Villegas, who debuted with PSO last year and wowed chamber music audiences with a spectacular recital at East Liberty's Kelly-Strayhorn Theater in July, was more subdued in his rendition of Rodrigo's Fantasia.

The work, composed in 1954, is based on dance pieces by 17th-century composer Gaspar Sanz, each movement giving the guitarist opportunities to shine, most notably in the virtuoso cadenza of the final "Canario" segment. But Villegas did his most dazzling playing in his signature encore, Francisco Tarrega's delightful arrangement of a traditional Spanish Jota melody.

Jonny Greenwood's Suite for string orchestra from "There Will be Blood" was the evening's only work not derived from dance, although the play of rhythm and movement is a significant part of the music's structure. Mr. Greenwood, best known as guitarist with the English rock group, Radiohead, is actually a serious composer of symphonic and film music, and the present work is derived from one of his most successful film scores.His music has a distinct profile. He doesn't sound like anyone else, which in itself puts him above most of his peers.

The opening movement, "Open spaces," features deep sonorities from cellos and basses pitted against high string commentary. Quite ear catching is the "Henry Plainview" movement, in which each of the 34 strings has its own line, creating an eerie effect that is mitigated by a cello melody associated with the character in the film. Another compelling effect occurs in "Proven Lands": pizzicato notes in which the strings are plucked with guitar picks at breakneck speed. Mr. Gimeno, who has been an assistant to former PSO director Mariss Janssons in Amsterdam, and is currently music director of the Luxembourg Philharmonic, conducted the Greenwood piece with great care and specificity of gesture.

But it was in the two dance scores on the second half that Mr. Gimeno made his strongest impression. Stravinsky's 1936 "Jeu de cartes" (card game) describes a poker game, the various moves of which are interfered with by a deceitful Joker. It's a lean, mean score, delightfully kinetic and tongue in cheek, with numerous quotes from older composers, of which the most immediately recognizable is the Overture to Rossini's "The Barber of Seville." Mr. Gimeno, with the grace and elegance of a ballet dancer, indicated each detail clearly, eliciting some of the evening's best orchestral effects. The fanfare that opens each of the ballet's three "deals" was stated with grandeur, each time morphing into pungent musical descriptions of the momentary wins and losses.

With the "Daphnis et Chloe" Suite No. 2, Mr. Gimeno reveled in the coloristic possibilities of Ravel's rich orchestration, holding the slow, dreamy sections perhaps too strictly in control, letting go full force for the oceanic swirls of sound that brought the evening to a rousing conclusion.

Robert Croan is a Post-Gazette senior editor.