The United States has lost its way or--more accurately--it has been purposely steered off course, away from democratic order, by moneyed elites and corporate tools holding public office. That is the essence of Professor Lawrence Lessig’s argument in Republic, Lost: How Money Corrupts Congress--and a Plan to Stop It. The reason the republic has been lost for Lessig is campaign finance anarchy, the gift economy of political donations leading to legal political corruption.

The Spirit of '76 is a sentiment explored by Thomas Jefferson. The principles outlined in the Declaration of Independence promised to lead America—and other nations on the globe—into a new era of freedom. It was believed the revolution begun by Americans on July 4, 1776 would never end. In an 1899 speech titled Liberty, socialist Eugene V. Debs remarked: "Manifestly, the spirit of '76 still survives. The fires of liberty and noble aspirations are not yet extinguished."

That was then; now the United States has become an oligarchic, corporate-state. 2002 Pulitzer prize winner, Chris Hedges, writes scathingly about the corporate-state, spitting out questions like, "When did our democracy die? When did it irrevocably transform itself into a lifeless farce and absurd political theater? When did the press, labor, universities and the Democratic Party…wither and atrophy? When did reform through electoral politics become a form of magical thinking? When did the dead hand of the corporate state become unassailable?"

Fortunately, the Spirit of ‘76 is back this July 4th with the political revolution launched by Senator Bernie Sanders. Of all people, you would think that Hedges would embrace Sanders’ call for a political revolution; but in an interview with the Huffington Post to "talk revolution," he dismisses Bernie Sanders’ campaign for the White House. Sanders, Hedges asserts, "legitimizes the Democratic Party which has no legitimacy at least as a party that maintains or is a positive force for democracy." That's true, and it's moot.

There are four significant American parties at this point. From right to left, they are: wignnut-reactionaries (tea party folks), corporatist-religious (Republicans), corporatist and socially tolerant (Democrats) and Bernie Sanders. Only one of these offers any chance of reviving the American republic and securing its survival; and it is not any of the first three. Survival; that’s a strong claim, but it cuts to the core of why Hedges’ puritanical reasoning and criticism of Senator Sanders' decision to run in the Democratic Party is misplaced.

One issue trumps Hedges’ thinking. One issue undermines the thinking of nay-sayers on the far left who consider Sanders a sheepdog pulling progressives into the Democratic Party fold or a "sparing partner" in the race specifically to lose it. That issue is not:

Student loan debt although that’s onerous,

Inequality which is undermining the economy,

Banks to big to fail, even though they are,

Oligarchy, even though it has buried democratic order to make way for the corporate-state,

Health care although the Affordable Care Act leaves millions of Americans without health care insurance,

Obamatrade even though the TPP, TTIP and TiSA will be international, corporate coups des lois,

Campaign finance reform even if campaign finance anarchy is the root cause of oligarchy and our lost republic.

Naomi Klein's This Changes Everything addresses the urgent need for many actions required to keep the Earth habitable for humankind. "This" is climate change, and it matters more than all other campaign issues. Sanders' campaign website is clear: "Unless we take bold action to address climate change, our children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren are going to look back on this period in history and ask a very simple question: Where were they? Why didn’t the United States of America, the most powerful nation on earth, lead the international community in cutting greenhouse gas emissions and preventing the devastating damage that the scientific community was sure would come?"

"Everything" includes the nay-sayers like Hedges who will throw their vote away on a third party candidate without a snowball's chance in hell of winning the next election. "Everything" includes the hope that someday a third party will come to power. "Everything" includes loyal Green and other third party members, who need to get behind the one and only revolutionary candidate with any chance whatsoever of being the next president, who is not beholden to corporate fat cats."Everything" includes supporting the most qualified candidates for the Executive Branch.

The spirit of ’76 is certainly not captured by Secretary Clinton, who—like her husband and the current President—is already deeply beholden to Wall Street bankers. Five of her top nine donation categories come from them, and all but one of the top ten (Emily’s List) are corporations. Clinton embodies the corrupt spirit of the corporate-state. She, like virtually every Republican running for the White House, is part of the very problem only Americans can solve by supporting the political revolution America needs.

This July 4th, Americans of all political stripes can and must declare their independence from corporate-backed candidates and the oligarchy they have turned the United States into. That begins by taking a pledge to write-in Bernie Sanders in the general election next year. It’s a campaign strategy designed to take away the advantage moneyed candidates like Secretary Clinton have. The Revolt Against Plutocracy (RAP) website points out, "If this strategy is not employed, there is very little possibility Senator Sanders will secure the nomination." RAP co-founder, Patrick Walker writes, "If [Sanders] doesn’t win the Democratic nomination—and if he fails to, it will be due simply to party propaganda we aim vigorously to counteract—we plan to write him in in the general election. In states where write-in votes aren’t counted, we plan to simply vote Green." That's a revolutionary approach one would think Hedges could embrace.

By this date next year, people will know if Bernie Sanders’ revolution is still alive or not. Regardless, a revolutionary movement will continue with or without him. It has to; global warming is changing everything including politics as normal.

Update, July 5th, 2015: Senator Sanders had to run -- and win -- in the Democratic primaries because the presidential debates are no longer run by the League of Woman Voters as they used to be. Now, the debates are completely rigged by the two major parties. They block all third party and independent candidates out of the debates. To fault Senator Sanders for running in the Democratic Party primaries is faulting him for wanting to win the election to the White House. Under the rigged system of presidential debates, there is no other way to win a presidential election. Running as an Independent in the Democratic Party is the only practical option available to Senator Sanders. Period! Any other choice would have made Sanders a protest candidate, like all third party candidates at this point in history.

Chris Hedges' unwillingness to support Senators Sanders, or even vote for him, is extremely puzzling. It's mind-boggling. Chris Hedges is on record for being a "democratic socialist," just like Senator Sanders. Hedges is a supporter of a revolution in the United States, but he's voting for the Green Party candidate who will garner about 0.5% of the popular vote if history is any guide. With all due respect to Chris, putting concerns about legitimizing an illegitimate party ahead of his own political philosophy (democratic socialism), the urgent need to address climate change and his recognized need for an American revolution is puritanical, unreasonable and counter-effective.