Selected comments from a Facebook post by The Jackson Sun about Jeb Bush’s statement that he will not vote for Donald Trump. Comments have been edited for grammar and spelling.

Join the conversation by “liking” The Jackson Sun’s Facebook page at facebook.com/JacksonSun.

Sunny Brooks: He broke his pledge that they all said Trump would break. Time to vote all new people in!

Ben Wilford: I don’t like Trump, but I will take him any day over a dishonest, lying, socialist like Hillary. Jeb and all the others need to get over this ... or they are guaranteeing that Hillary will win.

Jason Vales: The best thing the Bush family can do is enjoy retirement, because they will not be elected into any high office again. Trump 2016!

Gay Arnold Gregson: The establishment politicians are so scared of being found out by Trump that they would rather have Hillary win. The country can go to hell in a hand basket as far as they care, as long as they can keep their power.

Larry Shackleford: Gay, you’re right. If he won’t vote for Trump, that means he will support Hillary.

Bonnie Coble: With these people like this is why Trump is so popular. But to say you’ll not vote - have you forgotten the men and women who died for this right and privilege?

John Walker: Idiot politicians acting like this are the reason Trump is winning. Spineless, worthless, entitled RINOs.

James Boyd: He pledged to support the Republican nominee. Glad Bush didn’t make it if he could lie about something so simple. I voted for his brother, but Jeb has lost my respect and is a sore loser.

Spencer David Guth: The man already sabotaged American democracy by handing his brother the election in 2000, leading to a thoroughly ruinous eight years. I don’t much care what he thinks.

Judy Boldan: Smartest thing I have ever heard a Bush say.

Mike Moorman: And all the previous candidates pretty much demanded that Trump put his vote to he GOP candidate. What a sore stack of losers.

Beverly D. McVay: Bush is a calmer person. Yes, Trump overpowered him with his mouth. The same mouth I’m afraid will lead us in to huge trouble if he is elected. Hate me if you want. Trump is like a child running loose with a gun. He really scares me.

Larry Shackleford: Beverly, yes, Trump does worry me with his mouth, but I can assure you he will tone it down when elected. Talk softly and carry a big stick is my way. I hope his cabinet will tell him about this, and he will make adjustments.

Benjamin Tournier: That’s why he didn’t get even close to a nomination. We all knew he would never follow through with anything.

Ted Smith: Jeb Bush is a traitor to the Republican Party.

Cathy Baird Wheeler: So he isn’t going to vote. I guess he is just going to pout. Well, he can’t fuss with the ways things go if he doesn’t vote.

Ricky Lightcap: It was only a pledge until it didn’t work out. Two Bushes were enough for this country and only one Clinton.

Kris Yager: Jeb is the president-elect of the Sore Losers Club. Does anyone care who he votes for? I know I don’t.

Jerry Durham: So he straddles the fence again.

Christie Stone Smythe: Not voting is voting for Hillary Clinton.

Jeff Shepard: Guess that whole pledge thing was just a big fat lie! There was a reason we didn’t want this guy!

Roger Malone: And here I thought it was a civic responsibility to vote. Must be my old fashioned values.

TENNCARE MISERY METER

Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey’s, House Speaker Beth Harwell’s and the Tennessee General Assembly’s lack of leadership and urgency and failure to expand TennCare under the Affordable Care Act are bringing misery to an estimated 280,000 Tennesseans who could have received health insurance, including an estimated 30,000 veterans. Meanwhile, the financial stability of hospitals is at risk, and workers could lose their jobs. It is costing Tennesseans an estimated $2.5 million per day. The loss to date is:

$2,650,00,000

Read or Share this story: http://www.jacksonsun.com/story/opinion/2016/05/09/readers-react-jeb-bush-vote-donald-trump/84149386/