The Left is "Making" Me Care about Duck Dynasty

"The left doesn't want you to talk about the real Christmas. Pretty soon we'll all be on 'winter holiday.' It is anathema to them that people can believe anything. The left's doctrine in secular America is you can believe in nothing because then you can believe everything." -Erickson

"Hundreds of Christians were killed in a Muslim uprising in Nigeria. The left doesn't want you to pay attention to that. They want you to pay attention to Phil Robertson." -Erickson

RushLimbaugh.com: The Left's Mock Outrage Over What Phil Robertson Said Could be a Tipping Point

"A&E, they can do what they want to do. If they want to throw away this money and throw away the ratings and let somebody else have it, they're free and clear to do it. It's called 'unfettered capitalism.' Ahem, ahem, ahem." -Rush

Events Change Things

"Rush is always willing to call it like he sees it. He's not gonna apologize for it and he's not gonna give a party line. You give a party line and you give a pass. That's the problem the Democrats have right now. Look at 'em! They are be-clowning themselves letting Obama get away with stuff they would have never let Bush or Halliburton get away with." -Erickson

RushLimbaugh.com: The Pop Culture Will Never Abandon Obama

"I just think you get to a tipping point. ... I think the more bungling and the more experience the low-information voters have with all these bad Obamacare policies that are gonna cost 'em a fortune, and the more negative experiences they have, I think they're gonna be primed to listen, and they're gonna hear it." -Rush

Erick's Lifelong Dream of Filling in for Rush Comes True

"There's one thing I've always wanted to do in life; it is fill in behind the Golden EIB Microphone. I've been wanting to do that since I was 18 years old." -Erickson

"I put the 'fun' in fundamentalism. I am an evangelical Christian. I believe that men are sinful creatures and that's why I want small government. I want as few sinners in charge of me as possible. The Democrats, they don't care. They're happy to have big government, the waste, the fraud, the greed, the corruption. This is why conservatism is the only legitimate political philosophy." -Erickson

More Stories Discussed on Today's Program...