Topics: Dana Milbank, Foreign policy, George W. Bush, Golf, Hillary Clinton, Iraq, Iraq war, Media Criticism, political pundits, Punditry, The Atlantic, Washington Post, Media News, Politics News

For your typical D.C. pundit, the month of August poses both a challenge and an opportunity. With no congressmen around to say stupid things and legislate poorly, it can sometimes be difficult to come up with the smart, fresh takes that your editors and legions of devoted fans require. One way to overcome this dearth of material is to move outside your comfort zone, find issues you don’t normally cover and expand the breadth of your commentary. The other option is to just phone it in until September rolls around.

In that latter category we find Washington Post columnist Dana Milbank, who’s written a piece this morning chastising President Obama for going golfing while things are happening in the world. This obsessive focus on Obama’s golf habit has actually become a recreational activity in and of itself for D.C.’s pundit class, who’ve come to realize that the president’s passion for the game – in an almost unbelievable coincidence – confirms every single criticism they’ve lodged against him. What are the odds?

“Obama vacations as the world burns,” reads the headline to Milbank’s column. The big, earth-shaking world event that Obama’s blowing off to play golf is, per Milbank, Hillary Clinton’s interview with the Atlantic in which she criticized Obama’s foreign policy. Milbank apparently believes that Obama should have canceled his vacation and hunkered down in the Situation Room (the real one, not the Wolf Blitzer one) to deal with the devastation wrought by his former secretary of state chatting with a magazine:

As the criticism became public, Obama was doggedly sticking with his plans to go on vacation — a decision that, if not in the category of stupid stuff, could fit under the heading of “tone deafness.”

It’s not readily apparent how canceling his vacation would have shown that Obama is in control of the Hillary-said-a-thing-in-public crisis. In fact, you could argue and not be wrong that an abrupt schedule change in response to a magazine interview would be the very definition of erratic. But whatever! This is August D.C.! Rules and logic are for wintertime pundits.

Which brings us to Milbank’s larger point – it’s all about the optics:

Even presidents need down time, and Obama can handle his commander-in-chief duties wherever he is. But his decision to proceed with his getaway just 36 hours after announcing the military action in Iraq risks fueling the impression that he is detached as the world burns.