Back in 2009, when President Barack Obama and a Democrat controlled Congress forced ObamaCare down the throats of the American people and launched a drive to grant amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants against the will of the people, something rare happened.

Millions of average everyday Americans, sick of watching Congress do whatever it wanted to do, came together to start the Tea Party movement.

With no identifiable leader (the very definition of a bottom up popular protest movement) self-described Tea Party members began showing up at congressional Town Hall meetings, community rallies and local marches to send this simple message to the political class in Washington – we want our country back.

Entrenched politicians soon learned that they could not ignore Tea Party protesters. Tea Party activists came from all walks of life and did not divide themselves up by age, gender, color, class or creed because they were focused on a greater purpose – to keep their nation free.

Fast forward to today and the “Black Lives Matter” movement.

To demonstrate “popular” outrage against police departments, urban poverty and an outsized sense of entitlement, protesters came together to chant “Rev.” Al Sharpton’s trademark rant – “No Justice, No Peace”. Now it seems that “Black Lives Matter” protesters joined up to express their “outrage” for another reason – payday.

According to the “professional protesters” camped out at “Missourians Organizing for Reform and Empowerment” (MORE) headquarters (a successor organization to the now defunct ACORN group) – they aren’t being paid.

This according to a report published by FrontPage magazine revealing that MORE had been paying protesters $5,000 a month to demonstrate in Ferguson. But now that the payments have stopped, the professional protesters provided by “Millennials Activists United” (MAU) are conducting a sit-in to get paid.

According to a letter dripping with anti-white racism on MAU’s website that speaks for itself:

“Early in the movement, non-profit organization MORE, formerly known as the St. Louis chapter of ACORN, and local St. Louis organization Organization for Black Struggle created a joint account in which national donors from all over the world have donated over $150,000 to sustain the movement.” “Since then, the poor black [sic] of this movement who served as cash generators to bring money into St. Louis have seen little to none of that money. “Questions have been raised as to how the movement is to sustain when white non-profits are hoarding monies collected of off [sic] black bodies? When we will [sic] hold the industry of black suffering accountable? The people of the community are fed up and the accountability begins here and now,” the statement said. “We NEED to be thinking about justice for black people…” “This means white people must renounce their loyalty to the social normalcy that maintains white power and control. If black lives really matter, justice and self-determination for black people would mean the black community would control [its] own political and economic resources. Moving forward, we are building a board of accountability within this movement. We must funnel economic into this movement through the hands of black people who are fighting with and for black life. More on this board will be discussed as we develop.”

If Tea Party activists were paid to protest or published economic demands in letters laced with racism, it is unlikely that the Internal Revenue Service would have used its power to target Tea Party leaders, pepper Tea Party groups with paper to drive up its costs and to both to stop the Tea Party movement dead in its tracks.