Man writing with pencil, close-up of hand (Photo: David De Lossy, Getty Images)

FDR’s New Deal

Only those who oppose the dream of American homeownership would attempt to dismantle President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal by eliminating two publicly traded, shareholder-owned companies that have single-handedly provided $7 trillion – yes, trillion – in liquidity to support America’s mortgage market since 2009.

Shareholders simply request that the Treasury Department respect the capital structure of each company, respect the economic bundle of rights associated with our securities, and respect the law setting forth the rules of a conservatorship as decreed by Congress.

The economist Herbert Stein once famously said: “If something cannot go on forever, it will stop.” Sooner rather than later, I believe the Net Worth Sweep will be halted and a common-sense solution will prevail: Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will transform into low-risk, public utilities with regulated rates of return, just like your local electric company.

— William Carney, Pace

Planned Parenthood

I hereby correct several misconceptions put forth in Cynthia Tucker’s “(Abortion) Foes Caught in Abortion Sting,” (1/30/2016).

First, the videos released by the Center for Medical Progress were independently analyzed by Coalfire Systems, which determined them to be authentic.

Secondly, eight states have found that Planned Parenthood broke the law, as follows:

• Ohio and South Carolina found illegal disposal of aborted baby remains in landfills.

• Florida discovered illegal second-trimester abortions at three killing centers.

• Pennsylvania found two facilities were improperly storing aborted baby remains in a janitor’s closet.

• Missouri halted abortions in Columbia because the abortionist had fraudulently obtained bogus hospital privileges.

• Colorado found the Denver facility did not report sexual abuse of a 13-year old.

• Alabama found killing centers had failed to report rapes of a 14-year old and several violations that posed health dangers.

• Kentucky ordered the unlicensed Louisville killing centers to halt illegal abortions.

Several other states and Congress continue to investigate Planned Parenthood. Planned Parenthood, not the journalists who uncovered its crimes, must be held accountable for crimes in a court of law.

— Harvey Miller, Milton

Guns, terrorists and Zika

The Democratic Administration of President Obama has said it will protect us from domestic terrorists and violence by limiting gun access.

His administration has said it will vet all Middle Eastern immigrants for incoming terrorists.

It will vet all South American immigrants for criminals and diseases. The Democrats’ and Obama's immigration policies have and are failing the American people.

At least four counties in Florida, with Santa Rosa being one of the four, are in a state of emergency for the Zika virus. The newest to North America, Zika virus is a member of the virus family Flaviviridae and the genus Flavivirus, transmitted by daytime-active Aedes mosquitoes, such as A. aegypti.

Its name comes from the Zika Forest of Uganda, where the virus was first isolated in 1947. Welcome to Obama’s and the Democrats’ eight years of hope and change. Hope it changes from threats to the American people to protection of the American people. I hope you can afford Obamacare or you die quickly as the liberal Democrats made the former claims!

— Steven King, Milton

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1Xq7zwe