MacIntyre hopes to improve clock management

With plenty of material to work with and learn from, the University of Colorado football team went back to work Saturday.

It was a short yet focused workout late Saturday afternoon, less than 48 hours after enduring the sting of an ugly season-opening loss at Hawaii.

"We come back and do corrections from the game before, because if you don't correct it, somebody will copy it and it will show up again somewhere down the road in the next three or four weeks," MacIntyre said. "And then we also (started) to get ready for UMass."

Among the corrections MacIntyre noted were a defense that was solid overall but surrendered a critical big play on a 79-yard touchdown reception; the time management issues that cost CU critical timeouts in the second half; and an offensive line that often was unable to keep pace with the stunts utilized by Hawaii's defensive front.

"Every time you come back out to practice after a game, win or lose, you get the corrections done from the last game, and then you move on to the next game," MacIntyre said. "That's how we've always approached it.

"I said after the game I still believe this is a good football team. I still believe we're a lot better than we were last year. Hawaii is a lot better than last year, and the main reason is their quarterback. We're still going to win a lot of football games. I really believe that. We had a couple unfortunate incidents happen to us that we have to make sure we don't do. That kind of turned the tide of the game for us."

Mum's the word

Advertisement

MacIntyre said he received no explanation from the officials regarding the chaotic ending to Saturday's contest, offering only a succinct "No comment," when asked to share his review.

To recap, after Phillip Lindsay was stopped at roughly the 8-yard line with the clock winding down and no timeouts, the line judge marking the spot tossed the ball to the umpire, who inexplicably marked the spot at the six. When the umpire tossed to the ball in to the referee, it deflected off a Hawaii defender and bounced away, allowing precious seconds to tick away.

By the time the ball finally was marked — erroneously at the six, which would have counted as a first down — the Buffs didn't have enough time to get off a final desperate play. Yet much of the chaos could have been avoided had CU not squandered a pair of timeouts early in the second half.

"Both of them were third downs and shorts, and we wanted to make sure we got them," MacIntyre said. "I was thinking they were going to measure them and different things like that, so we called timeout. We got both of them, which was key in the deal, but there's no doubt you would've liked to have those back for sure."

Notable

Running back Michael Adkins remains hopeful of building off his breakout performance (22 carries, 90 yards) after an injury-riddled 2014. "It was good getting back out there and playing in again," he said. "The line was able to spring me a couple times and I could do some good things out there. We just have to keep building on that." ... MacIntyre reported no significant injury issues from game No. 1.

Pat Rooney: rooneyp@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/prooney07