STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. – Once again going against his party, Rep. Daniel Donovan on Monday expressed frustration with Republicans in the U.S. Senate who won't hold confirmation hearings for President Obama's nomination to the Supreme Court.

Speaking after an unrelated press conference Monday, Donovan (R-Staten Island/Brooklyn) said the Senate GOP is doing itself and the American people a disservice in not holding confirmation hearings for Judge Merrick Garland, Obama's nominee to fill the seat of Justice Antonin Scalia, who died in February.

Donovan, a former 12-year prosecutor as Staten Island's district attorney, opposes the GOP block of confirmation hearings.

"I've never thought it was a good idea," he said. "I always thought the Republicans were wrong, they should see who the nominee is — actually, the president nominated Judge Garland — and judge him on his abilities, of his jurisprudence."

Donovan argued it's one in a litany of things the public can point to as evidence of government not working effectively.

"There's a very important seat open on the Supreme Court, people that interpret the rules of our country that we live by and it's unfair to the public and we should entertain ... you don't have to confirm that nomination, but they should hold the hearings and they should judge this person who is the nominee on their credentials," he said.

With the vacancy, the Supreme Court has issued 4-4 opinions, essentially leaving the lower court ruling standing and setting no national precedent.

Recently, the court decided not to hear a case challenging a provision of the Affordable Care Act related to birth control and exemptions for religious reasons.

Donovan was surprised with how the court handled that, saying, "The first time I ever saw them kick a case back and say, 'you guys figure it out below'."

It's not something he wants to see happen often.

Asked whether the court should hear cases that might end with a 4-4 tie, the congressman said, "Yes, absolutely. The country has to move on and the Supreme Court has a responsibility ... there's people waiting for their adjudication of their conflict, of their issue, so yes, they should certainly take cases on," adding that while some cases may end with a 4-4 tie, many others could be adjudicated with a 5-3, 6-2, or 7-1 decision.

The last option occurred on Monday, when the court found evidence that a black man convicted of murdering a white woman had been the victim of racial bias by prosecutors who excluded black people when picking jurors.

Justice Clarence Thomas, the only black member of the Supreme Court, dissented, noting that the defendant, Timothy Tyrone Foster, had confessed to the murder.

Thomas questioned why "the court affords a death-row inmate another opportunity to re-litigate his long-final conviction."

Asked whether he would support Garland if he were a senator, Donovan said, "I haven't looked at his credentials, I know what I've read in the newspapers but during the hearings he'd be [asked] pointed questions, which ... we don't have the advantage of now because they won't hold a hearing. We'd be able to judge the man better if he was able to respond to some of the questions that people have."