The tax gap’s a gulf

BRIDGE THE GAP: The IRS said Thursday that it’s easier to collect taxes when it knows a person’s income, and tougher when it doesn’t. (In other words, sometimes the easy answer is the correct one.)

IRS Commissioner John Koskinen told reporters that the tax gap — the difference between what taxpayers owe and what they actually pay — is up to about $458 billion a year, Tax Pro Brian Faler reports. (That number fell to roughly $406 billion annually between 2008 and 2010 after IRS enforcement efforts like audits.)

Story Continued Below

Some other tidbits via Brian: The taxpayer compliance rate is around 82 percent, or about the same as the last time the IRS tackled the tax gap in 2012. Around 1 percent of the income that the IRS gets reports on, like W-2s from employers, gets misreported. But about 63 percent of the income that isn’t subject to withholding or third-party reporting — like small business income — was under-reported.

"We're famous as a tax-compliant society but that's pretty much as long as we have the information from third parties,” Koskinen said.

But while Koskinen noted that the IRS’ budget has taken a pretty severe chop in recent years, he also said it wouldn’t make much sense to try to recover all of the uncollected revenue, even as the federal debt keeps growing. “Realistically that wouldn't work because the strain on taxpayers, and our resources, would be too great,” he said. More from Brian: http://politico.pro/1qZuKmo

THE RESPONSE FROM THE HILL: “This is money that could be put to good use shoring up critical programs such as Medicare,” said Sen. Ron Wyden of Oregon, the top Democrat on the Finance Committee. “It’s time the IRS put an effective tracking and auditing system in place to locate this lost money.”

THE RESPONSE FROM OFF THE HILL: The National Association of Enrolled Agents noted that the latest statistics are from before the IRS started seeing its budget cut. “Let’s not conclude that a flat tax gap indicates tax compliance hasn’t taken a hit because of reduced IRS resources,” said the group’s Robert Kerr. “We won’t know that for years.”

WELCOME TO FRIDAY, where we’re excited for three to six more games of this Capitals-Penguins series. Quick question though: Have some of the Caps fans around town grown playoff beards too, or are hockey people just more likely to have beards?

Reach out with your scoops, feedback or if you just want to talk playoff beards.

Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com, kodonnell@politico.com.

Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

WE’VE GOT A LAWSUIT: South Dakota, in what could be a sign of things to come from other states, expanded its efforts to collect sales tax on out-of-state retailers — filing a lawsuit just before a new law on those taxes went into effect. (The retail groups who announced and support the suit didn’t say who exactly the state sued.) South Dakota's new law, poised to go into effect on May 1, forces retailers without a physical presence in the state to collect sales taxes if they sell at least $200,000 worth of products or conduct at least 200 transactions.

With online sales tax legislation stalled on Capitol Hill, key proponents like Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.) have predicted that states would file suit if Congress wouldn’t act. That’s in no small part because Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote last year that the Supreme Court should revisit its holding, last stated in the 1992 case Quill Corporation v. North Dakota, that states can only tax businesses that have a physical presence within their borders.

WAIT A SECOND: Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) is none too pleased about what he believes is the excessive secrecy surrounding federal tax regulations — think anything from Treasury’s new inversion rules to all sorts of IRS regulations to even the Affordable Care Act. Congress gets to examine the costs and benefits of most regulations that will have an annual economic impact of at least $100 million a year.

But Hatch said that the White House and Treasury have a “little-understood and non-public memorandum of understanding,” now more than three decades old, that basically says that IRS regulations generally don’t have a major impact on the economy. And now the Utah Republican is pressing Treasury Secretary Jack Lew to make that memorandum public, even as he said he understood why the department might want to avoid interference from the White House and the argument that tax regulations merely implement policies instead of creating new regulatory burdens. “These considerations must be weighed against the public benefit of regulatory transparency and an honest accounting of the affects tax regulations have on families and businesses across the country.” A story from The Washington Times, which had the letter first: http://bit.ly/21idwgQ.

PARTISANSHIP: The House Ways and Means Committee passed on a party-line vote a measure that blocks the IRS from collecting lists of donors that contribute more than $5,000 to nonprofits, as Tax Pro Katy O’Donnell reports. In other words, it was the latest installment of the Koch brothers (for the bill) versus the campaign finance reformers (against). Rep. Peter Roskam (R-Ill.) noted the IRS itself has considered scrapping Schedule B on the Form 990, while adding the agency still isn’t really to be trusted. Democrats warned the bill would take away one of the few protections against ensuring foreign money isn’t used in domestic campaigns. More from Katy: http://politico.pro/1UjNw3v.

Probably no shocker here, but The New York Times’ editorial board is on the Democrats’ side on this one. http://nyti.ms/1SCwRUh

BIPARTISANSHIP: Ways and Means passed two other bills — one to allow the IRS to share taxpayer information to help in missing children cases, and another to battle identity theft — without any real rancor at all. On the tax fraud bill, Republicans even agreed to drop a provision that would make stealing an identity punishable by up to five years in prison, given concerns among Democrats and immigration advocates that the measure might ensnare undocumented workers that use Social Security numbers from friends or family to get jobs. More still from Katy: http://politico.pro/1SvQvVk

OBAMA RIFFS ON THE ECONOMY: The New York Times’s has a big takeout of President Barack Obama’s views on his own economic legacy, and there are a couple of interesting takeaways for the tax wonks among us.

First, Obama basically thinks he got the grand bargain: “Progressives don’t fully appreciate the degree to which the 2011 budget deal not only averted a potential default but actually limited the potential damage of a newly emboldened Congress in imposing austerity on a still-fragile recovery,” Obama said. “And by me winning in 2012 and getting the Bush tax cuts for the upper 2 percent repealed, we ended up getting a grand bargain. It’s just we got it sequentially instead of all at once.” (That idea might grate on some who wanted more of a tax reform out of a big deficit deal.)

And, perhaps not surprisingly, Obama thinks the Republicans running for president have lost sight of reality when it comes to economics. “If we can’t puncture some of the mythology around austerity, politics or tax cuts or the mythology that’s been built up around the Reagan revolution, where somehow people genuinely think that he slashed government and slashed the deficit and that the recovery was because of all these massive tax cuts, as opposed to a shift in interest-rate policy — if we can’t describe that effectively, then we’re doomed to keep on making more and more mistakes.” Full piece here: http://nyti.ms/1Wtg1vL

GUESSING THEY’RE NOT ALONE: The conservative Heritage Foundation said Thursday that Wyden’s efforts to simplify depreciation rules were nice, but not nearly as exciting as the idea of full expensing. Wyden’s plan, Heritage said, “would reduce the administrative and accounting costs for businesses. That would have a modest positive impact. But because it does not reduce the tax-lives of assets or move toward expensing, it does not reduce the cost of capital and would not significantly increase investment, productivity or real wages.” More here: http://dailysign.al/1VWUw7J

ABOUT THAT VAT: You’ve all heard the argument about how a value-added tax can be regressive, or just an ATM for government. (You’ve even heard Ted Cruz swear up and down that his plan isn’t a VAT.) But over at the Tax Policy Center, Bill Gale wants to give assurances that a VAT doesn’t have to be a burden on small businesses, as long as some sort of exemption is included. “A recent study by Treasury economists suggests that the optimal exemption is about $200,000 in sales for a 10 percent VAT,” Gale writes.

LEBRON’S FAIR SHARE: It’s perhaps a bit simplistic, Politifact found, but the outspoken Rep. Alan Grayson (D-Fla.) was basically right with this claim: Basketball uberstar LeBron James “stops paying his Social Security taxes at the beginning of the second quarter of the first game of the season.” In fact, James makes almost $72,000 a quarter, and the payroll tax cap lands at $118,500. (Many Democrats want to restart the payroll tax for income over $250,000.)

Still, Politifact notes Grayson’s construct doesn’t take into account all the practice time James puts in (not to mention his role in "Trainwreck"), that the NBA season actually starts in October and that LeBron pays other taxes outside the income tax as well. Full fact check: http://bit.ly/1NE7g0i

STATE NEWS

BACK IN THE BOX: A trio of Kansas senators wants to bring income taxes back on businesses like limited liability companies, after the state has consistently missed revenue projections since a recent round of big tax cuts. “The fairer we can get taxes the better,” said Jeff King, one of those GOP lawmakers. “The loophole takes away that fairness.” But the business lobby in the state is none too pleased about the idea, and are making the case that money would be better served in the pockets of the businesses rather than the state. More from the Kansas City Star: http://bit.ly/1XXrWkx

QUICK LINKS

A flurry of health mergers shows the acquisition game is about more than taxes. http://bloom.bg/1T8uRT1

The British housing market cooled after investors tried to beat a new tax on second homes. http://bloom.bg/24nC8qc

DID YOU KNOW?

An unfinished Crazy Horse sculpture in the Black Hills of South Dakota — work started in 1948 — will eventually stand roughly 560 feet tall, or a bit higher than the Washington Monument.

How the man in charge of Medicare plans to win back doctors' hearts and minds. In an exclusive interview for POLITICO's new 'Pulse Check' podcast, CMS acting head Andy Slavitt dishes on the Obama administration's dramatic changes to physician payment and talks about how rising drug prices are health care's latest major challenge — and an opportunity. To listen to the full interview and ensure you don’t miss upcoming ‘Pulse Check’ episodes, subscribe to the podcast on iTunes. http://apple.co/1YTVD60