Buy Photo Steve Heronemus is lowered into the special adaptive seat by Tryg Jacobson and Heronemus' caregiver, Alyssa Bragg. (Photo: Gary C. Klein/Sheboygan Press Media)Buy Photo

Steve Heronemus, a Sheboygan native, has only partial use of his left middle finger, jaw and feet, but that just might be all he needs to get back onto a sailboat.

Heronemus, 55, was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, 10 years ago. In the same year he embarked on what would be his last solo sail, or so he thought. ALS also is known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

This summer, the Sailing Education Association of Sheboygan, SEAS, is working with Heronemus to strengthen their Adaptive Sailing Program, which is meant to teach individuals with disabilities how to sail. The hope is that by the end of summer he'll be able to take the helm on his own, but Heronemus would be the first to say this project goes beyond himself.

"This project is not about getting me into a sailboat again," Heronemus, who can no longer speak because of ALS, wrote in an email. "Our purpose is to bring the joy of sailing, the freedom, independence and accomplishment of harnessing the wind and water in Sheboygan's beautiful lakefront to the disabled."

Through working with Heronemus, a 45-year sailing veteran, they are building sailboats that can be crewed by paraplegics, quadriplegics or even elderly sailors, SEAS Program Director Matt Wierzbach said. If successful, they may eventually be able to assemble a 12-boat fleet of disabled sailors using the Sonar keelboats SEAS purchased for their blind match race competition last year.

"The ultimate goal is to give anybody the opportunity. We're not there yet, but if we continue to adjust for anyone who comes through, we'll get there," Wierzbach said. "[Heronemus] will probably be one of the more difficult cases, so it's a great place to start."

A major step

Tuesday, June 16, marked the first major step toward getting the program off the ground. It also marked one of the first times Heronemus was in a sailboat since his diagnosis a decade ago.

Heronemus, some of his family and various SEAS staff gathered at the Sheboygan Youth Sailing Club to test out a lift mechanism that hoists a person from his or her wheelchair into a special chair inside the sailboat.

It uses a lift system similar to a Hoyer lift, which uses a full-body sling to transfer patients with limited mobility in and out of a bed or chair. The chair inside the boat is set up on a swivel on the foredeck of the sailboat on the opposite side of the sails to act as a balancing system so the boat won't keel over, Wierzbach said.

By Heronemus's judgment, it was a success.

"Once I had the sling under me and we started hoisting, I was totally secure and comfortable all the way into the boat seat," he said in an email exchange with the SEAS staff. "The sling was unobtrusive during the sail. I completely forgot it was there. Disembarking was equally simple for me. All told, I have no complaints whatever with the sling/hoist system."

The next phase

Buy Photo Lori Barreau of Mequon, watches the sailboat her brother Steve Heronemus was riding in Tuesday June 16, 2015 in Sheboygan. Heronemus suffers from ALS and was testing a new chair for people like him. (Photo: Gary C. Klein/Sheboygan Press Media)

The next phase is focused on finding a way for Heronemus and others without upper body strength to actually steer the boat and trim the sails. The idea is to create what's called a "bite switch," a device that gives the sailor control of the boat using their mouth, said Tryg Jacobsen, a longtime friend of Heronemus, a SEAS board member and coordinator for this project.

Jacobsen said they are working with Sheboygan native Steve Orlebeke, a senior engineer at Harken in Pewaukee.

"This will be quite an engineering feat, but Steve Orlebeke is very optimistic, and he's got one of the finest nautical engineering firms behind him," Jacobsen said. "If Harken can make this happen, it will open up a whole new world for people with disabilities."

But this may prove to be a race against time for Heronemus.

Heronemus's mother, Lois Heronemus, voiced her concern that he may not have enough strength in his jaw to operate the device if they don't complete it by the end of summer.

"Nothing is wrong with Steve cognitively, ALS just affects muscles," Lois said. "He's incredibly witty. The jaw is a muscle, though, so I just hope he's strong enough physically to keep going when the technology is ready."

A chance

Buy Photo Steve Heronemus arrives back in the marina following his sailboat adventure. (Photo: Gary C. Klein/Sheboygan Press Media)

Steve's journey with ALS has been much longer than most cases, she said, noting ALS is a fatal affliction, with most patients dying only a few years after diagnosis. Over the progression of his disease, he lost function of his arms, then legs, then he started struggling with his breathing and other internal functions.

So against all odds, the chance to sail again holds a lot of meaning for Steve.

"Being on the water, that feeling of the wind, the sound of the water and the sense of unlimited freedom, a world without boundaries, is a joy that is simply beyond words," Steve said.

"There was a time when families hid their members with disabilities from the world, as if there was something shameful in their condition. While society has moved beyond this sense of shame, we regularly encounter pity for a perceived lower quality of life.

"Programs like SEAS' Adaptive Sailing prove that, with a little creative thinking and appropriate technology, the lives of us with disabilities are no less full than those of others."

Reach Rachael Lallensack at 920-453-5130 or rlallensack@gannett.com

Read or Share this story: http://shebpr.es/1MV7YRA