Stings targeting elected officials raise ethical issues

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

HARRISBURG — W. Carl Weddington had a price. With campaign contributions and lavish trips, supporters paid the onetime Ohio lawmaker to introduce legislation on their behalf.

Former Charlotte Mayor Patrick Cannon stands accused of similar flair, jetting to Las Vegas and allegedly accepting more than $30,000 in bribes from people he thought were real estate developers.

They were not.

Backers who befriended Cannon and Weddington are agents for the FBI, which used undercover investigations to snare dozens of local and state officials on corruption charges over the past decade.

The continuing federal prosecutions don't include a relatively few lawmakers targeted in stings by state agencies, which often avoid investigating legislators who control their office budgets, according to political analysts. They believe a failed legislative probe by the Attorney General's Office in Harrisburg was the first such sting in Pennsylvania since the New Jersey-centered Abscam scandal in the early 1980s. Two Pennsylvania congressmen were among 19 convicted then.

A Dauphin County judge last week unsealed voluminous documents in the sting case at the Tribune-Review's request, which suggest the undercover informant's net was much wider than initially believed.

The FBI in Washington confirmed it's using more undercover work nationwide to win convictions, but it would not disclose numbers. Legal experts say the covert operations raise critical questions about when it's legal and ethical for informants to set up and bribe elected officials.

Former state Rep. John Kennedy, R-Cumberland County, called the approach “the bottom of skid row” that “makes us look like a bunch of wild dogs.”

“How do we differ from under-developed countries when it's that bad?” asked Kennedy, chairman of Citizens Alliance for Pennsylvania. His group tries to elect lawmakers who are not career politicians.

Jim West, a former U.S. Attorney in Harrisburg, said stings are valid when they're precise.

“You have to pick your targets carefully. You can't just take a talented informant or con man and turn them loose on the public. That's manufacturing crime,” said West, who prosecuted Mel Weinberg, a famed con man-turned-informant in the Abscam scandal.

Plenty of wrongdoing

Federal authorities established a fake company to help build the Abscam case, which Hollywood resurrected last year for the movie “American Hustle.” The investigation busted senators, House members and others offered bribes by an FBI informant posing as a Middle Eastern sheik.

Corruption since has worsened at the state level, where the public often does not pay much attention, according to Washington-based watchdog groups.

“State lawmakers have a lot of opportunities for corruption. They don't get the attention that members of Congress do,” said Melanie Sloan, a former prosecutor and the executive director at Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics. “There's plenty of room for wrongdoing.”

The FBI relies more heavily on state-level stings since Congress reworked anti-corruption rules several years ago, said Craig Holman, a government affairs lobbyist for the Public Citizen group. He said the revisions make it tougher for prosecutors to pursue corruption cases without concrete evidence, such as recordings that undercover agents can secure through hidden cameras and microphones.

“Stings are really about the only avenue of unveiling and prosecuting official corruption that we have available,” Holman said. “Corruption is so widespread, somebody has got to step up to the plates and start exposing this.”

Though it's tough to gauge the number of corruption offenses, he said, an influx of donations under loosened campaign finance laws will have “a direct relationship to pressuring lawmakers.”

Brian Nadeau, chief of the FBI public corruption unit, said secret recordings “have always been the best evidence.” He said agents go undercover to investigate corruption only under strict ethics policies, and sometimes use informants.

“I don't know if … there's more corruption of public officials now. Twenty, 30 years ago, there might have been corruption that went undetected,” Nadeau said.

Entrapment rare

The Pennsylvania case hinged on claims that 12 lawmakers, lobbyists and public officials took cash, gifts, meals, and sporting and theater tickets. An ex-traffic court judge is accused of taking a $2,000 Tiffany bracelet.

The offerings came from Tyron B. Ali, a undercover informant working for the state under former Republican Attorneys General Linda Kelly and Tom Corbett, now the governor.

A plea deal reached under Kelly allowed Ali, a lobbyist, to escape 2,088 fraud-related charges in exchange for his cooperation with investigators.

Defense lawyers argue such conflicts of interest can make it tougher for prosecutors to win over juries, though prosecutors including Philadelphia District Attorney Seth Williams say successful cases routinely rely on “very bad men” to win convictions.

Attorney General Kathleen Kane, the first Democrat elected to the office, cited Ali's conflict among several factors when she declined to prosecute the case in January 2013. She alleged racial overtones and lack of evidence that targeted Philadelphia lawmakers earlier were inclined to take bribes.

Pennsylvania law allows stings against people with no known tendency for bribery, but investigators in federal stings generally look for evidence of a problem first, said Bruce Beemer, senior counsel under Kane. Nadeau said the FBI needs some indication of a potential crime before it would go undercover.

“You always have to be careful that you don't cross the line to entrapment,” said Jerry McDevitt, a Pittsburgh-based defense attorney. He said undercover agents must avoid offering inducements that “are so overpowering that they created their own incentive to commit a crime.”

McDevitt said targets in stings should have a predisposition to commit the crime — well before informants try to exchange gifts for favors. Otherwise, defense lawyers said, the accused could claim entrapment.

Yet that's a rare argument, said Daniel Feldman, a former New York state assemblyman and sitting ethics professor at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York. He knows of no cases in which a lawmaker proved entrapment.

“The entrapment standard is a very high standard. You have to virtually commit the crime yourself to get the person involved,” Feldman said.

Results justify tactics

To retiree Beatrice Wagg of Middlesex, results justify the tactics in undercover operations. Stings can ferret out lawmakers at risk of corruption, who deserve jail time for taking bribes, she said.

“This is showing if they're willing to accept a bribe. That shows character. That's perfectly OK to do in my opinion,” said Wagg, who called corruption “a black mark on the nation.”

Some lawmakers avoided that dishonor and emerged as “heroes” from the failed sting in Pennsylvania, said Rep. Mike Vereb, R-Montgomery County. He said Rep. Angel Cruz, D-Philadelphia, turned down $1,000 from Ali when he “smelled it was wrong.”

“Sting operations work, and the people who don't like them are the people who get caught, their friends and lawyers,” Vereb said. “Audiotapes do not lie.”

Courts have upheld federal sting prosecutions and tactics since the early 1980s, when the Supreme Court declined to hear appeals from four congressmen convicted in the Abscam case. The men claimed the government depended on unfair luring to build a case.

Public Citizen's Holman said federal agencies since have become more studied in sting operations, mandating so-called committees of outsiders that monitor stings through the Department of Justice. Outsiders can include clergy and civil servants who might raise red flags over questionable methods.

Federal stings avoid the political infighting that can tarnish state-run investigations, observers argued. Kane's handling of a discontinued sting enraged former prosecutors for the office and many elected officials, including Williams in Philadelphia.

“It's hard for people to go after people they're chummy with, or even that they know well,” said Sloan with Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics.

Adam Smeltz and Brad Bumsted are Trib Total Media staff writers. Reach Smeltz at 412-380-5676 or asmeltz@tribweb.com and Bumsted at 717-787-1405 or bbumsted@tribweb.com.