With just a week left to enroll in Obamacare health plans that start coverage on Jan. 1, a walk-in enrollment center has opened in Wayne where staff can provide face-to-face help for the uninsured and others who need insurance.



It’s part of an enrollment push in New Jersey that includes a storefront center in Edison and a radio ad campaign.



The center in Wayne will be open seven days a week through March 31. It is staffed by 20 certified assistance counselors, who can provide help in English or Spanish.



“We signed up one this morning, and have clients” working with counselors now, Latoya Bishop, the center’s supervisor, said on Monday afternoon.



Just 3,259 New Jersey residents had selected a health plan on the federal marketplace as of Dec. 1, according to a recent report from the federal Department of Health and Human Services. About 51,000 applications from New Jersey residents had been received on the federal website, covering 95,800 people.



That’s just a small portion of the 900,000 uninsured people in New Jersey estimated to be eligible for coverage under the Affordable Care Act. Tens of thousands more whose health policies have been discontinued because they aren’t comprehensive enough also need to choose new coverage.



Enrollment must be completed by Dec. 23 for coverage to begin on Jan. 1. The uninsured have until March 31 to enroll or face a tax penalty.



New Jersey is one of 36 states to rely upon the federal government to run its insurance marketplace. The state received much less for outreach and education about the new insurance options than states with state-based health exchanges.



The staff at the enrollment centers uses the same federal website that the public uses, healthcare.gov. That site has been plagued by technical problems, most of which were remedied by Dec. 1, but it continues to produce error messages for some people. Depending on the website’s performance, the enrollment process can take a half hour to an hour or more.



The Wayne and Edison sites are managed by SRA International under a contract with the federal Health and Human Services Department. It also has sites in Texas, Pennsylvania and Florida.



While walk-ins are accepted, appointments are also welcomed.



To draw attention to the resources available for signing up in Obamacare plans, an open house is planned at the Edison center on Wednesday and the Wayne center on Thursday.



Location:



Wayne Enrollment Assistance Center, Suite 301, 1211 Hamburg Turnpike. .



For an appointment, call: 201-414-0465.



Hours: Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.



Edison Enrollment Assistance Center, 1719 State Route 27, Festival Plaza, Edison







Email: washburn@northjersey.com