When Jeb Bush and his allies began helping the “super PAC” supporting him raise more than $100 million last year, his bid for the Republican nomination seemed like a safe bet. But as Bush’s campaign continues to lag, his backers are increasingly turning their frustrations over his floundering candidacy on the group, Right to Rise, and its inability to influence the race.

Interviews with more than a dozen donors and advisers to the candidate revealed a complicated picture of dissatisfaction with the group and its chief strategist, Mike Murphy. Few wanted to openly criticize the group or Murphy on the record, but many raised questions about the role they had played in the campaign.

Some donors quietly worry about how the cash-rich group is spending its money, confounded by how few tangible results the tens of millions it has pumped into the race so far have yielded. Others have expressed dismay with negative advertisements Right to Rise has run and a 15-minute pro-Bush documentary that it produced.

The frustrations spilled into full view at a private meeting Friday at the Palace Hotel in New York between Murphy and roughly three-dozen donors. Barry Volpert, a partner at the private equity firm Crestview Partners, sharply questioned Murphy about ads his group had aired attacking Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, one of Bush’s chief rivals for the nomination.

The concern over the negative ads is shared by some donors who have long worried that if Bush does not win the nomination, such attacks could irreparably harm the eventual nominee. Volpert, who has associates supporting Rubio, specifically raised concerns about damaging him.

The exchange was the only contentious moment of the gathering, but the rebuke was representative of the growing turmoil between Bush supporters and Right to Rise, as well as a general sense of frustration and anger over what many Bush backers see as lost opportunities.

Some in Bush’s campaign wish that the group had done more over the summer to blunt attacks from Donald Trump, who depicted their candidate as “low-energy,” and to highlight Bush’s record as governor of Florida. But Sally Bradshaw, a senior adviser to Bush, said she thought the group had handled its summer spending appropriately.

“I think a strong argument could be made that going on the air earlier than Labor Day would have been a terrific waste of money,” she said. “So I think that argument, if some are making it, is a little unnecessary armchair quarterbacking.”

There is also a belief among some Bush loyalists that supporters of Rubio — who shares longtime friends and donors with Bush, his former mentor — are fanning rumors of dissatisfaction with Murphy and Right to Rise in a bid to muzzle the group before it can broadcast more attacks against Rubio. (Some of Bush’s allies note pointedly that Rubio’s own super PAC has aired negative ads against other candidates.)

Some Right to Rise donors have been worried for months about attacking Rubio, especially after Right to Rise showed a video it had made portraying him as unelectable, because of his hard-line views against abortion, as an example of the type of tough ad Rubio would face in a general election.

Others who have given money to the group have argued that it has not gone far enough in attacking rivals like Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio and Rubio, all of whom are vying with Bush for the same group of establishment-aligned voters, especially in places like New Hampshire. Right to Rise has been most aggressive in its criticism of Christie, focusing on his fiscal stewardship of the New Jersey and making subtle references to the George Washington Bridge scandal, which has helped slow Christie’s climb in New Hampshire.

Bradshaw was quick to dismiss concerns that Right to Rise — which legally cannot coordinate with the Bush campaign — was going too far in its attacks on Bush’s rivals.

“My guess is that many of these same donors may have been concerned when Mitt Romney made the decision to take on Rick Perry or Newt Gingrich,” she said, “and I would just simply remind them this is a presidential campaign, not a beauty pageant.”

While many Bush supporters are surprised at the group’s inability to help Bush rise out of single digits in the polls, others argue that this election cycle, with Trump dominating news coverage, is like no other, with outside money failing to tangibly help any candidate.

“It’s not the super PAC; it’s not any outside donor,” said Jay Zeidman, a Bush donor based in Houston who has raised money for the campaign. “This cycle is just unique in that money is not the driving factor here, and that’s where you’re probably getting a lot of the frustration.”

Or, as Vin Weber, a former Minnesota congressman who supports Bush, said, “We had all thought that the financial advantage would really move us ahead more.”

Donors and supporters have also been puzzled by the performance of Bush, whom they had expected to be a far more capable and nimble candidate than he has proved. Though he is forceful and freewheeling in town hall-style events, he struggles in debates — which are watched by millions — and remains uncomfortable with the often-angry rhetoric that has propelled Trump to the top of the polls.

Yet, partly out of loyalty and deep personal affinity, supporters view Bush more in sorrow than in anger.

“There is clearly disappointment in the polls and there is obviously concern over the front-runners,” said Mel Immergut, a venture capitalist and Republican fundraiser supporting Bush. But, he added, “This group is incredibly loyal, still absolutely has hope and is keeping the faith.”

In addition to concerns about negative advertising, some donors questioned the rate at which the group was spending. Right to Rise has so far spent more than $50 million on ads, and has reserved more than $20 million before the March primaries, according to a review of advertising purchased. (Donors mocked, for instance, the large red billboards featuring quotations from Bush that the group erected in Des Moines).

“We’re proud of our work in support of Jeb, and will continue to work hard to see that he’s elected,” said Paul Lindsay, a Right to Rise spokesman.

Sergio Pino, the president of a home-building company in Florida and an old friend of Bush’s who said he had donated more than $600,000 to Right to Rise, dismissed concerns about the group and its leadership.

“Right to Rise doesn’t have the magic ball but they keep moving forward,” he said. “I have a lot of faith in Mike Murphy, that he’s going to do what’s right and, what’s most important, not lie about it.”

The arrangement between the campaign and the super PAC has always been fraught, from the vantage point of some of the candidate’s allies. Murphy, Bush’s longtime media adviser, is a witty and charismatic image maker who has become an increasingly controversial figure in the 2016 cycle. Though many view him as the maestro helping to prop up Bush as he flails, some worry he is getting carried away, burning his way through a $100 million haul.

In Iowa, Bush declined to weigh in on whether Murphy and Right to Rise were spending wisely.

“I’m so busy I can’t follow all of that,” he said. “I hope they are.”