Senate Judiciary Chairman Chuck Grassley last week relented his holds on 20 Foreign Service nominees, who were then confirmed by the Senate. But he has since added a hold to a State Department official's nomination, citing the department's lag on responding to document requests related to his investigation of Hillary Clinton's private email server and Clinton aide Huma Abedin.

It's an action that some lawmakers say could have major consequences, ranging from the government's ability to help refugees or to fight terrorists. ​

Grassley, R-Iowa, last week placed a hold on the nomination of Thomas Shannon, a career foreign service officer who was nominated in September to become the under secretary of political affairs, the fourth-ranking position at the State Department. Grassley said the holds are not merely a matter of partisan politics

"The department's lack of cooperation has caused me to place 22 holds on its nominees," he said earlier this month. "The State Department has still not produced the materials I've requested. The department has implemented several clever strategies to delay the process."

State officials say they have been overwhelmed by document requests from several committees and private lawsuits, and are turning over the relevant information as quickly as they can. Democrats, meanwhile, say Republicans are doing a poor job of hiding their intentions.

"Why are nonpartisan public service positions being used as political pawns?" Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., asked from the floor. "How much money will Republicans in Congress waste to try to bring down Hillary Clinton?"

Despite a change in rules last year that lowered the procedural bar for presidential nominations from 60 votes to a simple majority, President Barack Obama's nominations have been confirmed more slowly than ever. The Senate has confirmed just 10 judges to the federal bench this year, working at a pace that the Alliance for Justice determined in September to be the slowest in 60 years.

While the backlog of cases makes it relatively easy to gauge the impact of the judicial vacancies, measuring the effect of the lag in confirmations of executive nominees is much tougher.

"It's hard to raise the salience enough to get the [Senate] leadership to put the nominees on the floor," says Sarah Binder, an expert in legislative politics at George Washington University.

That's partly because the work of many departments goes on, either through an acting official, or as lower-level employees continue to work.

"Having an acting director, of course, is not the same as having a permanent director," says Stephen Spaulding, senior policy counsel at Common Cause, a nonpartisan advocacy group. "An acting official can dot some i's and cross some t's, but it makes planning more difficult. You can end up with basically a zombie agency where there is nobody in the corner offices."

Executive nominations also rarely rise to the attention of the average voter, so senators who block them have little to lose.

"Senators know they can do this, particularly in a period of divided government," Binder says. "There is some degree to which senators need to be more careful choosing their hostages, but even then, it's really hard to grab the public's attention."

So Democrats have increased their efforts to do just that.

In a press call last week, senior Democrats accused Republicans of holding up the nominees whose roles would aid in combating the Islamic State group, also known as ISIS, and the humanitarian crisis stemming from five years of increasing violence in Syria and Iraq.

"We should be fighting ISIS with all hands on deck, not with one hand tied behind our back," said Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y. "While ISIS is recruiting additional fighters every day, Republicans in the Senate are twiddling their thumbs and keeping State, Defense​ and Treasury nominees on the sidelines."

One of those nominations, that of Gayle Smith, has now been placed on the schedule for a floor vote next week, when Congress returns from Thanksgiving recess. Smith was nominated in April to lead the U.S. Agency for International Development, which spearheads U.S. humanitarian efforts to address the refugee crisis.

But the nomination of Adam Szubin, to serve as the Treasury Department's under secretary for terrorism and financial crimes, has been stalled for more than 200 days despite bipartisan support.

Banking Committee Chairman Richard Shelby, R-Ala., whose committee is preventing the nomination from moving forward, called Szubin "eminently qualified" in a September confirmation hearing. Earlier this month, Shelby said the hold-up had to do with Obama administration's international sanctions policy, not Szubin's qualifications.



"It's not the nominee. It's the policy," Shelby told Morning Consult.

"Treasury must have in place an experienced watchdog, with the know-how and authority to lead U.S. efforts to track and choke off the financial lifeblood of terrorist organizations," Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, the top Democrat on the Banking Committee, said on the press call last week. "Republicans in Congress need to stop holding our national security apparatus hostage to political demands, and allow Adam Szubin and other national security nominees to be approved as soon as possible."

This month's deadly terrorist attacks in Paris gave Democrats some leverage to pressure Republicans to pass Obama's national security and diplomatic nominees, but any advantage will probably be short-lived.​ With Obama's departure just over a year away, incentives for bipartisanship are few.

"The strategy is, 'We don't have the votes to repeal the Affordable Care Act, the laws that protect clean air and water, so we'll just play around with the nominations to gut the agencies by depriving them of the staff they need,'" Spaulding says. "It's effective politically to keep bollocksing everything up."

Still, Spaulding explains, the problem is the product of the Senate rules, not any one political party.