.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

SANTA TERESA – The first day of school for more than 200 students in southern New Mexico will be fraught with nerves, questions about class schedules, hurried good-byes to parents – and lots of talk about health.

Doña Ana County has suddenly become a magnet for health sciences education.

A new Health Sciences Academy charter school opened its doors Monday in Santa Teresa, serving about 150 students in grades seven to 12, with an eye on integrating health topics into core curriculum and preparing students for careers in health occupations. Later this month, the Arrowhead Park Early College High School launches a new Medical Academy that will prepare 60 students to earn an associate of science degree by the time they finish high school.

The schools are getting off the ground following news that New Mexico State University will host a private College of Osteopathic Medicine on its campus come 2016.

Health Sciences Academy Early College

Location: Santa Teresa

Students enrolled: 150

Grades: 7-12 (initially 7-10)

Affiliation: Las Cruces Public School District charter schoolHigh School Medical Academy

Location: Las Cruces, NMSU campus

Students enrolled: 60

Grades: 9-12 (initially 9th grade)

Affiliation: Las Cruces Public School District magnet school

Local leaders in business and education called the timing of the initiatives both a coincidence and good luck driven by market and student demand for health-related education.

The new programs track students into health careers amidst a longstanding, statewide shortage of health care workers that is poised to widen as Baby Boomers age and the Affordable Care Act broadens Medicaid coverage to an estimated one-third of New Mexicans. The state ranks 31st in its physician-population ratio, according to the Association of American Medical Colleges.

“We’re working with the districts to have business involved in the educational process,” said Stacie Allen, chief executive of The Bridge, a Las Cruces nonprofit that fosters collaboration between business, government and education. “Their problem is our problem. It’s all about employability.”

Students started classes Monday at the Health Sciences Academy to the scraping sounds of remodeling still going on in half the building. At the Early College High School Medical Academy on NMSU’s campus, where classes begin Aug. 18, classrooms are still under construction. Blueprints sit rumpled on freshly installed counters.

Laura Padilla brought her daughter Eddena to her first day of seventh grade at the Health Sciences Academy. Padilla said she enrolled her because of “the great opportunities she is going to have.”

“She wants to be a veterinarian,” Padilla said. “I think it’s a good start.”

Several parents – many arriving in scrubs before they headed to health care jobs – said they liked the idea of the charter school’s smaller class sizes and career-focused curriculum.

The Health Sciences Academy, founded by an Albuquerque couple – Raphael Nevins and Lorna Samraj, who for several years ran a popular tutoring program in Albuquerque public schools – is open to anyone. It draws students largely from southern Doña Ana county.

The Early College High School Medical Academy similarly rolls health sciences into its curriculum but requires an application; spots are limited.

Both schools are free.

The need for health education is due to the population growth in southern New Mexico and corresponding expansion in health care services, said Kiel Hoffman, chairman of the Mesilla Valley Economic Development Alliance and president of Pioneer Bank.

“We are becoming a nice mecca in southern New Mexico for medical care,” he said.