A legislative committee put Democratic Gov. Tom Wolf's death penalty moratorium under the microscope Thursday, a day after Republican lawmakers pushed through a resolution critical of his policy.

The House Judiciary Committee heard from supporters of capital punishment and backers of the moratorium, which Wolf announced about a month after taking office this year.



Testifiers included county prosecutors, defense attorneys, victim advocates and anti-death-penalty advocates.



Members of the Pennsylvania District Attorneys Association argued that the current system is fair and that the death penalty is reserved for the most egregious cases. Murder defendants who face possible execution get rigorous legal protections, particularly during the appeals process, the prosecutors said.



Robert Dunham, executive director of the Washington, D.C.-based Death Penalty Information Center, told lawmakers that Pennsylvania is the only state that does not provide financial aid for lawyers to defend poor defendants in capital punishment cases.



That financial burden is left to counties, and the lawyers who do the job do not necessarily have any experience in defending people who could face the death penalty, Dunham said.



There are also insufficient resources for investigators and mental health assessments, Dunham said. Only Philadelphia's public defenders in capital cases complied with the American Bar Association standards, Dunham said. No other Pennsylvania county did, he said.



"We know that counsel makes a difference, and Pennsylvania has provided its own unfortunate experiment," Dunham said.



There are 181 men and women on death row in Pennsylvania, the nation's fifth-largest as of Jan. 1, according to the Death Penalty Information Center.

PHOTOS: These are Western Pennsylvania's death row inmates

According to Dunham, more than 250 death sentences imposed under Pennsylvania's current law have been overturned. More than half of those were overturned because of the ineffectiveness of defense counsel, he said. Usually, a court found that the ineffective defense lawyer failed to investigate or raise relevant facts about the client's background that could have helped the client, Dunham said.



In Virginia and Texas, among the states that have conducted the most executions, only lawyers with experience in capital cases are used, Dunham said. Some states have the equivalent of a public defender's unit, with offices around the state, and employ lawyers with experience in capital cases, Dunham said.



"You must not, if you want to be fair, place a premium on expediting executions and say that's what's necessary to get the job done," Dunham said.



Wolf has said he will issue a series of reprieves to inmates scheduled to die - he has done so three times already - at least until a legislative task force on capital punishment completes its work and issues a report.



The state Supreme Court has agreed to review a challenge to Wolf's policy by Philadelphia District Attorney Seth Williams, a fellow Democrat.



Pennsylvania has executed three people since the death penalty was legalized in the 1970s, the most recent in 1999. All three of them had voluntarily relinquished their appeals.