About 50 people dive into a 'sound bath'

Otis Taylor is a very soft-spoken man, but all communication barriers are broken when he takes up his guitar , especially in a room with 50 or so other musicians playing together. The blues does not need to annunciate.

Fifty or so musicians filed into a room in the basement of the E-Town Theatre in Boulder, where Taylor hosted a trance blues workshop Saturday as part of his Trance Blues Festival.

Trance music is a type of music that relies on playing the same notes over and over again, and there are no chord changes.

Taylor said this type of rhythm is supposed to put the listener, or the musician, into a meditative state or a trance, causing them to lose track of time.

Taylor said Blues music is probably the "most trance" music.

He opened the workshop with humor.

"It's nice to see black people playing banjos," Taylor said.

The workshop consisted of the various musicians playing a two-note melody while individual performers came up to the front of the room and soloed.

Instruments in the workshop included banjos, acoustic guitars, electric guitars, bass guitars, a steel guitars, bongos, snare drums, a tuba, a violin and a ukulele. The most common instrument among the lot was obvious.

"We have like 8,000 electric guitar players," Taylor said.

Barry Burnett, of Boulder, quite enjoyed the workshop even though it was hard to for him to make his ukulele heard over the other instruments.

"Otis is the best, man," Burnett said.

"I've only been to one of these, but it's sort of like being immersed in a sound bath when it gets going," Burnett said.

Taylor's first Trance Blues workshop took place in 2011 at the Boulder Outlook hotel, drawing about 80 people. Previous workshops have also been held in the Boulder Theater.

The hotel's owner at that time, Dan King, has become a part of the Trance-Blues music festival.

King said Taylor got the idea of a workshop from Gustav Mahler's "Symphony No. 8, a.k.a. the "Symphony of a Thousand."

Rian Hampson, 7, joined the workshop to learn how to play guitar. Boulder Musician, Otis Taylor, held his Trance Blues Festival Workshop and Jam session on Saturday at Boulder's eTown Hall. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"He wanted to do something where it's just people making music," King said.

Taylor said he started the festival because he used to not have any work in November and enjoys playing music with large groups.

"Not everybody gets to play with 60 people," Taylor said. Taylor said this year's crowd about equaled last year's in number.

"Everybody in this room can play music with us. That's why we do this, to make music. It doesn't matter how good or bad you are, just make music," Taylor said.

"It's emotional. Like, 'what did you feel?'" Taylor said.