celeste katz/new york daily news Annie Karni 311 call about ID cards wait time. (Celeste Katz/New York Daily News)

Long waits to get a municipal ID aren't limited to the city's 11 application centers.

It took close to an hour on hold with 311 to get an appointment to register for a municipal ID Thursday morning.

And when an operator did finally pick up, the earliest appointment available at Grand Army Plaza to sign up in person for the city’s new card -- intended to help the city’s homeless and undocumented immigrants gain a government-issued ID -- was February 19, 2015.

“It is very overwhelming,” the operator said, apologizing for the long wait time when she finally picked up after 54 minutes.

“We’re doing our best and handling it the best we can. The information is new, it's different.”

A surge of New Yorkers eager for a municipal ID card flooded application centers when the program debuted Monday, and the city has appeared unprepared for the overwhelming interest.

In response to the high levels of demand the city has been unable to accommodate, City Hall announced Tuesday it would switch to an appointment-based system.

But the Website to schedule appointments on Wednesday was not working, prohibiting New Yorkers from scheduling appointments online and backing up the city's non-emergency help desk.

We're going to fix the website situation,” Mayor de Blasio said Wednesday, denying any comparison to the Obamacare site. “This was a high demand dynamic. That's a good thing. But we're going to fix that situation. That's going to be back up and running soon.”

For now, immigrant groups said they're willing to wait and let the city work out the kinks.

"Rather than frustration, what we've witnessed is persistence, even in the face of some of the hiccups experienced," said Betsy Plum, director of special projects for the New York Immigration Coalition. "People want to wait in line, they'll wait with 311, they'll be excited for that appointment. What were seeing is not only is the demand real, people need this. I have full trust they will find more enrollment sites, New York is commited to this program. We'll wait."

UPDATE: As of noon Thursday, there have been 4,854 enrollments in the ID NYC program, a city spokeswoman said. Another 6,856 had called 311 Thursday to schedule an appointment, and a total of 20,025 New Yorkers had made appointments to get an ID since Tuesday night.

City officials said they had moved quickly to cut down the wait times.

“We have deployed full resources to resolve any issues and have dramatically reduced the wait times on 311 calls,” said Joe Morrisroe, executive director of NYC311. “This has helped increase our efficiency to book IDNYC appointments across the board.”