Two Loveland breweries and five bars participating in pub crawl

Bartenders at Loveland Aleworks Broox Boze, front, and Elaine Whittenberger pour three rounds of taster flights for customers on Sunday. Loveland Aleworks was one of the stops on the pub crawl happening in celebration of St. Patrick's Day. ( Amanda Sutherland / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

In celebration of the drinking-centric holiday and in support of local brewing and bars, Loveland Aleworks and Crow Hop arranged a pub crawl from Friday through Monday for the Irish and even the not-quite Irish.

"It was a huge success," Mike Noonan, a partner and brewer at Crow Hop said Sunday. "Apparently people love beer. Everyone is Irish on St. Paddy's Day."

The goal is simple: Drink an Aleworks or Crow Hop beer at a pub at one of seven locations, get your card stamped and work toward a free beer or pint glass.

"The first 36 people to get the stamps got a free shirt, but we ran out of those last night," Noonan said. "We really just want to promote downtown and local business; keep it in the family."

"It was a good way to get people in here, good way to showcase our food," said Marilyn Hodits, who works at mo'Betta Gumbo, a stop on the crawl. "Everyone was on a mission to get the shirt."

She said many folks had stopped in only needing one of the wide selection of Aleworks beers they have on tap to complete the crawl, but most people decided they might as well stick around for another and some gumbo.

Noonan said the crawl is the brainchild of Nick Callaway, founder of Aleworks.

"He approached us and asked if we'd want to do this and we said, 'Hell yes.'"

Crow Hop debuted a double India pale ale called "Oppo," which Noonan described as an "insanely hoppy beer," one with "enough hops to kill your dreams."

Advertisement

The beer goes from kettle to keg in about 12 days and used Summit and Magnum hops, two of the most bitter hops Noonan has worked with in his 10 years of brewing.

The double-IPA has a calculated international bittering units, or IBU, of 104. Average IPAs are from 60 to 80 on the scale.

The second Crow Hop beer that made an appearance for the event was a peach sour-hybrid that is currently unnamed. He described it as sour, but not overly so, with a peach flavor that transitions into sour.

"I think (the pub crawl) was a great idea," said Hodits.

Before prohibition, there were as many breweries in the U.S. as there were in 2012, according to Noonan.

"One of our goals is to bring back the town pub," he said. "We're bringing it back to a family pub community. I think it's necessary."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer James Garcia at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at Twitter.com/JamesGarciaRH.