It’s been said over and over again since his resignation: History will be kind to John Boehner. Only history will be able to tell what his rocky tenure has really meant.

House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) said it days after Boehner’s late-September bombshell, and again last week: “I think history will be kind to [Boehner] because he kept the word he’s always said, ‘Continue to do what’s right.’ And that’s what he’s done.”

Story Continued Below

“Boehner was dealt a pretty tough hand, frankly,” said Rep. Greg Walden of Oregon, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee. “History will be kinder.”

For “Boehnerites” — the dozens of rank-and-file House Republicans who supported his leadership aspirations over the years — the onetime plastics salesman turned professional politician was misunderstood, underrated and woefully unappreciated.

They admit that as speaker, Boehner was battered from all sides for years, lurching from one crisis to the next, basically forced to resign by conservative hard-liners who had grown weary of him and his backslapping ways. He was easy to caricature and mock: a chain-smoking, merlot-drinking, perpetually tan golf addict and “country club Republican” who was out of place in the modern GOP, an anachronism whose act had gone as stale as his 1990s-era jokes.

Yet the Boehner loyalists insist this unhappy and premature end to the Ohio Republican’s political career masks a string of real accomplishments that will become clearer later, once he is no longer there to kick around. Some of the ones high on their list: ushering in the biggest House GOP majority in eight decades, making the Bush tax cuts permanent and reforming Medicare.

Plus, they say, in time it will become clear that governing is no easier for Paul Ryan than it was for Boehner — and, in some ways, it could be worse. Boehner’s genuine humility and decency in dealing with members will be hard to replicate, as will the strangely durable bonds he had formed with President Barack Obama and other Democrats.

“He doesn’t take credit for his greatest achievements during his time as speaker,” said Rep. Patrick McHenry (R-N.C.), the chief deputy majority whip. “But in the end, he’ll have a number of successes. And he’s lived through some of the most turbulent times in our nation’s politics.”

However — and there is always a “however” with Boehner — unlike some of his predecessors, the Ohio Republican can claim no signature policy achievement that was uniquely his own, one that makes you say “John Boehner” when you think of it. Newt Gingrich had the Contract with America. Nancy Pelosi had Obamacare. Boehner does have the 2001 No Child Left Behind education bill, but that came when he was a committee chairman, long before he became speaker.

Boehner’s oft-told tale — one of 12 children, worked in his family bar growing up, first in the family to go to college — is truly American dream-caliber drama. Boehner worked his way through Xavier College and became a salesman after trying several other jobs. Through hard work and an engaging personal style, Boehner became a successful businessman, building a net worth of several million dollars. Heady stuff for a Cincinnati kid from such humble origins.

Boehner entered politics in 1981 after winning a spot on the Union Township board of trustees. By 1984, he was in the Ohio legislature. After the late Rep. Donald “Buz” Lukens (R-Ohio) was convicted of paying an underage girl for sex in 1989, Boehner decided to run for his seat and won a tight GOP primary. Once in Congress, he exploited the House bank scandal while aligning himself with Gingrich and other GOP upstarts. When Republicans won control of the House in 1994, Boehner jumped into the leadership as Republican Conference chairman.

But in 1997, Boehner joined the unsuccessful “coup” to dump Gingrich, an irony not lost on anyone familiar with the final chapter of Boehner’s congressional career. The next year, Boehner was forced out of leadership. While many politicians would have left office, Boehner stayed put, and he ended up a committee chairman. The experience, in some ways, was good for him. A talented deal maker, Boehner helped assemble the No Child Left Behind bill, working closely with Democrats George Miller and Ted Kennedy on what became President George W. Bush’s signature legislative achievement.

While he was no longer in leadership, and Tom DeLay was running the House with an iron first, other members turned to Boehner for advice and guidance. Boehner would hold court in the back of the Speaker’s Lobby during votes, chatting with anyone who came by, lawmakers or the media. Boehner was never a master of policy, but he was a shrewd judge of people, and he understood that in Congress, people are policy. Boehner also knew what motivated members and how they could be brought together around a common goal or plan. He bided his time and waited, doing the nitty-gritty, political work — fundraising, relationship-building and legislative favors — that leads to real power inside the Capitol.



By 2005, when DeLay was imploding in the Jack Abramoff scandal and had to step down from his leadership post after being indicted in Texas on an unrelated campaign finance charge, Boehner was ready. He challenged then-Rep. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.) for the majority leader job to replace DeLay, and went on to beat Blunt in a close contest. When Republicans lost the majority in 2006 and Speaker Dennis Hastert (R-Ill.) stepped down, Boehner became minority leader. He had finally made it to the top, although the party — and Boehner — would have to bottom out before it found success.

Boehner rallied Republicans after their devastating electoral losses that fall, when the fallout over the Iraq War and a seemingly never-ending wave of corruption and sex scandals ended their control of the House. And in 2008, as Bush’s presidency was stumbling to an ignominious end amid a staggering financial crisis, Boehner was the glue that held them together.

He was unable to get the votes Bush needed to help put together a Wall Street bailout package — members actually ran away from Boehner during the September 2008 vote in what he later admitted was one of his lowest moments as GOP leader — but he came back a week later and won. It didn’t prevent the Republicans from getting wiped out at the voting booth that November, and hard-line conservatives were furious at him for “bailing out” fat cats on Wall Street. Yet Boehner had done what he thought was right. It was an example of why members in both parties always respected him, even when they opposed him politically.

Boehner rallied opposition to an ascendant Obama and Democratic “supermajority” the next year, bitterly opposing Obamacare, a major Democratic economic stimulus package, and the cap-and-trade energy bill. By fanning the flames of the tea party movement during the Obamacare fight, Boehner helped his party recapture control of the House in 2010 — a stunning achievement for a man seen as largely a transitional leader, not someone who could lead Republicans out of the wilderness.

But Boehner was never able to control the forces he helped unleash. He helped set the stage for the tea party movement, and like a Shakespearean character, was done in by the hard-liners.

As speaker, Boehner tried but failed to cut a “grand bargain” with Obama to reform entitlement programs, cut spending and revise the tax code, even after Boehner committed the Republican apostasy of agreeing to a tax increase. Obama blamed Boehner for the setback, Boehner blamed the president and both sides walked away unhappy. Boehner still laments the fact that he couldn’t close that deal.

In 2011, the U.S. government came close to defaulting on its debt after Boehner failed to rally support for boosting the debt ceiling, and the country’s credit rating was downgraded. In 2012, Obama, Boehner and then-Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) squabbled until the last minute over the “fiscal cliff” of tax increases and spending cuts, including an expletive-filled rant by Boehner at Reid outside the Oval Office. The bipartisan agreement that ended that stalemate nearly cost Boehner his gavel as angry conservatives came close to blocking his bid for another term as speaker.

And in 2013, a deeply reluctant Boehner led House Republicans into a 16-day shutdown of the federal government as they unsuccessfully tried to repeal Obamacare. Then-Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) and Senate Republicans eventually forced Boehner to cut a deal with Obama and Reid to end the crisis. Only the disastrous rollout of Obamacare saved Boehner and House Republicans from a huge political backlash.

Yet there were victories, as well. Boehner helped make permanent the 2001 and 2003 Bush tax cuts. He and Pelosi reached an agreement on the “doc fix” earlier this year, permanently changing the way Medicare pays doctors while extending a popular children’s health program. The deal saved hundreds of billions of dollars.

Boehner did help cut government spending overall, and he trimmed Congress’ own budget. He ended spending “earmarks” — special legislative provisions that benefited one company or industry — which had become a source of widespread corruption. He adopted a “zero tolerance” policy for lawmakers facing ethical or legal problems, and he personally forced several of them to leave office, although he often did it in his typical behind-the-scenes way.

Perhaps Boehner’s biggest legacy is the huge Republican majority he presided over at the end, the largest in 80 years. While redistricting and the “six-year itch” that Obama and the Democrats faced in 2014 played a key role in the GOP romp last November, Boehner was critical as well. He was a relentless fundraiser, spending hundreds of days on the road raising money and rallying votes for Republicans on the ballot.







“There has never been anyone who has worked as hard as John Boehner has on the political side,” Walden said. “He has been tireless.” Boehner aides claim the Ohio Republican has helped rake in $300 million since 2009.

“He’s been able to accomplish things that sometimes I’m amazed that people in our party don’t give him credit for,” said Rep. John Kline (R-Minn.), a close Boehner friend and ally. “I am always astonished that my Republican colleagues can say, ‘Yeah, he made permanent the biggest tax cuts ever, cut discretionary spending every year, shepherded in the biggest majority since the 1920s, [but] we don’t want that guy!’”

Kline couldn’t say why that was. He, like others, suggested redistricting — a larger number of members on both sides of the aisle in safe seats — for the increase in partisanship and the difficulties faced by party leaders like Boehner who want to cut deals. “That certainly has changed in John Boehner’s time,” Kline said. Redistricting, of course, has also worked heavily to the party’s advantage, by solidifying an increasing number of seats in the GOP column.

Democrats liked Boehner in a way they never did McConnell or other GOP leaders. When Obama joked that the always-tan Boehner was “a person of color” like him, Boehner laughed and moved on. Reid said Boehner’s word was all he needed to know a deal was done — about as high praise as the Nevada Democrat will ever offer any Republican.

In the end, though, even Boehner’s Democratic admirers aren’t sure what to make of him, or how he will be portrayed when the story of Washington’s early 21st century political wars is written.

“History will be the judge of his success as the leader of his party,” House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer of Maryland said on Wednesday. “But all of us, all of us who have had the honor of serving with him, will judge him as we know him: a considerate and thoughtful individual, who is a patriot and cares deeply about this House and the nation it serves.”