WASHINGTON, D.C. – Rob Portman isn't running for president in 2016 -- not officially, at least. But the Ohio Republican will be at Mitt Romney's Park City, Utah, get-together this weekend with other potential GOP candidates, and Portman has signaled that if the opportunity were right, he could get in.

Here are six factors in his favor as he considers a potential run for the Republican nomination, and four against.

Run, Rob, Run:



1. He is smart – budget-director and trade-ambassador smart. While not just anybody can get a cabinet-level gig, occasional lightweights have, in fact, served (and have been saved by those oft-maligned "Washington bureaucrats"). Then there are those who can pick apart the numbers and argue the pros and cons of taxation on carried interest. Portman is one of those.



2. He is a grown-up. Portman might not win the who-would-you-rather-have-a-beer-with contest (disclosure: we have had a beer with him and it was nice), but if headline-prone possibilities such as Chris Christie and Rand Paul flame out, GOP voters could pine for a grownup. The words "impetuous" and "impulsive" don't fit in a sentence with "Portman."



3. He understands the art of the deal. Throwing rocks might feel good, but that's not Portman's style. He played consigliere for President George H. W. Bush, making nice with Congress on behalf of the president well before Bush's son recruited him for his cabinet. Portman says that Washington is broken, but he wants repairs rather than demolition.



4. Big business and Main Street like him. Portman talks their talk on trade (open but fair), tax policy (simpler and less punitive) and regulation (less of it). Before he was in politics, he worked as an attorney in a button-down firm representing large businesses on international trade. In his side job as fundraising chairman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, he's comfortable asking corporate chiefs for help.



5. He projects gravitas. He rides mountain bikes. He has kayaked through rapids in Chile (where he dislocated his shoulder) and China, and has a picture-postcard family. His Christmas cards, with wife Jane, sons Will and Jed, and daughter Sally, could be out of a Norman Rockwell painting, complete with two dogs, a spaniel and a lab. These may be superficial criteria for picking a president, but optics and image matter – and if they don't, then stop talking about Christie's girth, President Barack Obama's intensity at hoops or Michelle Obama's arms. Americans want to feel good about the First Family.



6. The press likes Portman, and not just those in conservative media. He maintains first-name relations with journalists from the networks and major newspapers, including top opinion and political writers whose work is widely seen by other influence-makers. Portman is comfortable getting into the weeds with the financial press; his loosest TV moments have been on CNBC's Squawk Box. If there is a fault in Portman's press strategy, it is that he doesn't talk in sound bites. His answers can last minutes, not seconds, which sometimes buys him time until he finds the groove. Although he would be far less accessible as a presidential candidate, he would start with a pool of goodwill.



Better to Stay in the Senate:



1. Portman changed his stance and started supporting gay marriage in 2013 after his son Will, then a college junior, came out as gay. The Republican Party is conflicted on gay marriage. Gay-marriage proponents may say it is time to get over it, since that's what federal judges are doing anyway. But the GOP is not aligned with Portman on this, and it could be a problem if he were the party's standard bearer.



2. He has yet to advance fresh, out-of-the-box ideas. He delivered speeches recently about the benefits of prison-recidivism and drug-prevention programs, but these were old ideas of his that he repackaged in an anti-poverty wrapper. Portman tends to vote with the Republican mainstream on trimming social and entitlement programs, cutting government spending and halting the Affordable Care Act, which could be enough for him to appeal to party voters. But his specific "Portman Plan," which has existed since at least his 2010 Senate race, hasn't stood out from the crowd.



3. Big business and Main Street Republicans like him, as noted already. But if the Tea Party is ascendant in 2016, Portman's Wall Street ties and his work this year helping Republican incumbents and party favorites could put him out of favor with the rebellious wing. Portman lives and breathes Ohio – Montgomery Ribs, Skyline Chili, the Reds – and rarely spends a weekend in Washington. But between his White House service, his establishment fundraising and his involvement in the Senate's gang-of-this and gang-of-that, he'd be called a Washington insider.

4. His stage presence is not made for prime time. Portman coached GOP nominees George W. Bush, John McCain and Mitt Romney in debate preparation, yet his own performance was flat in what could have been a take-notice moment: Portman's speech at the 2012 nominating convention in Tampa. His self-deprecating joke about being on Romney's short list of vice presidential candidates was funnier on paper than in his delivery. ("My name is Rob Portman and they say I was on Governor Romney's short list of vice presidential candidates. Apparently, it wasn't short enough.") He was well-received when he addressed an audience of religious conservatives during the convention week, but Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida came next and dazzled the crowd with charm and a wow factor. And Rubio is among those with whom Portman might have to compete for the 2016 nomination. (Inside baseball: Portman's communications director, Caitlin Dunn, and Rubio's press secretary, Alex Conant, wed recently.) Pizzazz isn't a requirement for running the country. But the TV universe helped usher in Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton and, arguably, Obama. Unfortunately for Portman, a little charisma from a competitor could go viral these days.