The Post's Aaron Blake reads between the lines of President Obama's State of the Union address. (Jorge Ribas/The Washington Post)

President Obama's State of the Union address on Tuesday night was long. It was also pretty chock full of complex topics and political language that requires a bit of decoding.

Which is where The Fix comes in. Below, we have isolated some key passages of Obama's prepared remarks and then provided a political translation. (And here's the full transcript.)

“We are 15 years into this new century. Fifteen years that dawned with terror touching our shores; that unfolded with a new generation fighting two long and costly wars; that saw a vicious recession spread across our nation and the world. It has been, and still is, a hard time for many."

TRANSLATION: I was dealt a tough hand. This is my periodic reminder of that.

“Tonight, after a breakthrough year for America, our economy is growing and creating jobs at the fastest pace since 1999. Our unemployment rate is now lower than it was before the financial crisis. More of our kids are graduating than ever before; more of our people are insured than ever before; we are as free from the grip of foreign oil as we've been in almost 30 years. ... The shadow of crisis has passed, and the State of the Union is strong.”

TRANSLATION: We have made tangible progress – so much so that I’m willing to use the b-word, “breakthrough.”

“Will we accept an economy where only a few of us do spectacularly well? Or will we commit ourselves to an economy that generates rising incomes and chances for everyone who makes the effort?”

TRANSLATION: I know the recovery is disproportionately helping the wealthy – something Republicans and Democrats actually agree on. And I know that will temper your view of my economic record. But I’m not done yet.

“In two weeks, I will send this Congress a budget filled with ideas that are practical, not partisan.”

TRANSLATION: Except for that part about raising taxes, of course. (Then again, when has any politician admitted that he or she was being partisan?)



Vice President Biden and Speaker of the House John A. Boehner (R) applaud as President Obama delivers his State of the Union address to a joint session of the U.S. Congress on Jan. 20, 2015. (REUTERS/Larry Downing)

“Seven years ago, Rebekah and Ben Erler of Minneapolis were newlyweds.”

TRANSLATION: This is the part where I provide an anecdote about an all-American couple and their struggle. (After all, who doesn’t love a couple from Minnesota?) Results not necessarily typical.

"We believed that sensible regulations could prevent another crisis, shield families from ruin, and encourage fair competition. Today, we have new tools to stop taxpayer-funded bailouts, and a new consumer watchdog to protect us from predatory lending and abusive credit card practices. And in the past year alone, about ten million uninsured Americans finally gained the security of health coverage."

TRANSLATION: Congress can get things done. Or at least it could when I had two Democratic majorities and we passed Dodd-Frank and the Affordable Care Act before the GOP won the House in 2010.

“At every step, we were told our goals were misguided or too ambitious; that we would crush jobs and explode deficits. Instead, we've seen the fastest economic growth in over a decade, our deficits cut by two-thirds, a stock market that has doubled, and health care inflation at its lowest rate in 50 years.”

TRANSLATION: The Obamacare doomsday stuff hasn’t come true, now, has it?

“So the verdict is clear: Middle-class economics works. Expanding opportunity works. And these policies will continue to work, as long as politics don’t get in the way.”

TRANSLATION: And by "politics," I mean "Republicans."

“In today’s economy, when having both parents in the workforce is an economic necessity for many families, we need affordable, high-quality child care more than ever. It’s not a nice-to-have — it’s a must-have. It’s time we stop treating child care as a side issue, or a women’s issue, and treat it like the national economic priority that it is for all of us. And that’s why my plan will make quality child care more available, and more affordable, for every middle-class and low-income family with young children in America — by creating more slots and a new tax cut of up to $3,000 per child, per year.”

TRANSLATION: Here’s a bona fide, specific thing Congress can do to help middle-class Americans. Republicans, I dare you not to side with me on this.

"That’s why this Congress still needs to pass a law that makes sure a woman is paid the same as a man for doing the same work. Really. It’s 2015. It’s time."

TRANSLATION: C’mon, Republicans. You know you have problems with women.

We still need laws that strengthen rather than weaken unions, and give American workers a voice.

TRANSLATION: I know you unions are struggling -- and especially now that Republican have an almost unprecedented amount of control at the state level. I see you.

“21st century businesses need 21st century infrastructure — modern ports, stronger bridges, faster trains and the fastest Internet. Democrats and Republicans used to agree on this. So let’s set our sights higher than a single oil pipeline.”

TRANSLATION: I'm still not approving the Keystone XL pipeline, but let's talk about some other infrastructure stuff.

“Let’s close loopholes so we stop rewarding companies that keep profits abroad, and reward those that invest in America. Let’s use those savings to rebuild our infrastructure and make it more attractive for companies to bring jobs home.”

TRANSLATION: Obligatory shout-out to tax reform, which (spoiler alert) probably isn't going to happen.

“When we make rash decisions, reacting to the headlines instead of using our heads; when the first response to a challenge is to send in our military , then we risk getting drawn into unnecessary conflicts, and neglect the broader strategy we need for a safer, more prosperous world. That’s what our enemies want us to do.”

TRANSLATION: I’m still the guy who sought to end wars, not start them. Also, I still don't like the media and their "headlines."

“I believe in a smarter kind of American leadership. We lead best when we combine military power with strong diplomacy; when we leverage our power with coalition building; when we don’t let our fears blind us to the opportunities that this new century presents. That’s exactly what we’re doing right now – and around the globe, it is making a difference.”

TRANSLATION: I know you guys are down on my foreign policy. First there was the red line in Syria and then the lingering troop presence in Iraq and now the decision not to send someone high-ranking to the rally in Paris. But give me a chance to make diplomacy work.”

“First, we stand united with people around the world who've been targeted by terrorists — from a school in Pakistan to the streets of Paris.”

TRANSLATION: Figuratively, of course, because we didn't actually send someone high-ranking to the Paris rally. Oops.

“We’re upholding the principle that bigger nations can’t bully the small — by opposing Russian aggression, supporting Ukraine’s democracy, and reassuring our NATO allies. Last year, as we were doing the hard work of imposing sanctions along with our allies, some suggested that Mr. Putin’s aggression was a masterful display of strategy and strength. Well, today, it is America that stands strong and united with our allies, while Russia is isolated, with its economy in tatters. That’s how America leads — not with bluster, but with persistent, steady resolve.”

TRANSLATION: I know you think I wasn't tough enough on Vladimir Putin – in fact, three-quarters of America said that. But look where he is now. This is my victory lap.

“And tonight, I call on this Congress to show the world that we are united in this mission by passing a resolution to authorize the use of force against ISIL.”

TRANSLATION: I’m going to make some news here. I know that my White House has said it didn’t need to seek congressional approval to strike at the Islamic State, or what we call ISIL. But I've heard the objections to that policy from both parties, and I’m going to ask for authorization anyway.

“2014 was the planet’s warmest year on record. Now, one year doesn’t make a trend, but this does — 14 of the 15 warmest years on record have all fallen in the first 15 years of this century.”

TRANSLATION: Climate change is a top priority -- now that I don't have to worry about red-state Democrats losing reelection.

“As Americans, we have a profound commitment to justice, so it makes no sense to spend $3 million per prisoner to keep open a prison that the world condemns and terrorists use to recruit. Since I've been president, we've worked responsibly to cut the population of GITMO in half. Now it’s time to finish the job. And I will not relent in my determination to shut it down. It’s not who we are.”

TRANSLATION: Everyone says it won’t happen, and it probably won’t, but I still say we should shut down Guantanamo.

“Over the past six years, the pundits have pointed out more than once that my presidency hasn't delivered on this vision (of one America). How ironic, they say, that our politics seems more divided than ever. It’s held up as proof not just of my own flaws — of which there are many — but also as proof that the vision itself is misguided, and naïve, and that there are too many people in this town who actually benefit from partisanship and gridlock for us to ever do anything about it. I know how tempting such cynicism may be. But I still think the cynics are wrong. I still believe that we are one people. I still believe that together, we can do great things, even when the odds are long.”

TRANSLATION: Don't believe the mainstream media when they tell you I was overly idealistic. My 2004 Democratic National Convention speech is still how I view this country.

"A better politics is one where we debate without demonizing each other; where we talk issues, and values, and principles, and facts, rather than 'gotcha' moments, or trivial gaffes, or fake controversies that have nothing to do with people’s daily lives."

TRANSLATION: Have I mentioned that I dislike the mainstream media?

“If we’re going to have arguments, let’s have arguments, but let’s make them debates worthy of this body and worthy of this country.”

TRANSLATION: Congress needs to stop being so childish.

"We may have different takes on the events of Ferguson and New York. But surely we can understand a father who fears his son can’t walk home without being harassed. Surely we can understand the wife who won’t rest until the police officer she married walks through the front door at the end of his shift."

TRANSLATION: This is me talking about Ferguson and Eric Garner without taking sides. I still won’t do that.