For the first time since 2010, federal lawmakers are tasked with reauthorizing the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, granting the Republican-controlled Congress an opportunity to overhaul programs and policies that have garnered significant debate in recent years.

Much of that responsibility will fall on the Senate Agriculture Committee and its chairman, Sen. Pat Roberts, a Kansas Republican. School meal programs are overseen by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and reauthorization legislation for those programs undoubtedly will pass through the committee.

Agriculture Committee press secretary Meghan Cline said Friday that Roberts currently is working with Sen. Debbie Stabenow, D-Mich., to write the legislation.

“Chairman Roberts is working with Ranking Member Stabenow to craft a reauthorization package that is bipartisan, increases efficiency and effectiveness, has flexibility in school meal standards, and addresses program integrity, high error rates, and improper payments within the programs,” Cline said in an email.

In 2010, Congress passed and President Barack Obama signed the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act, funding school meal programs for five years. The most hotly debated portion of the legislation, then and now, was its changes to nutrition standards for schools, changes enacted as part of first lady Michelle Obama’s efforts to mitigate child obesity.

The nutrition changes set off years of snarky criticisms. In 2012, a small Kansas school district in Wallace County garnered national attention when students and teachers recorded a video called “We Are Hungry,” a parody of the popular song “We Are Young.” Last year, students began posting unappealing photos of their lunches to Twitter with the hashtag #ThanksMichelleObama.

In an interview Friday, USDA deputy undersecretary Kathryn Wilson said she hopes the 2010 changes remain in place.

“We stand by the nutrition standards,” Wilson said. “I really strongly believe that it’s our obligation to teach children how to eat better.”

Wilson argues children come to schools to learn and thus teaching them how to eat healthier is a natural extension of the schools’ role.

U.S. Reps. Lynn Jenkins and Mike Pompeo, Republicans who represent the state’s 2nd District and 4th District respectively, disagree.

“I don’t think the federal government should be involved in that whatsoever,” Jenkins said last week, referring to school meal nutrition standards. “I think there is a lot of intelligent people here locally that know what kids need to eat to thrive and decisions are better made closer to the people than by some bureaucrat in Washington.”

“The Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act is yet another example of a failed one-size-fits-all federal education policy,” Pompeo said in an email Friday. “From what our kids read to what our kids eat — these are all decisions that should be made by parents, teachers, and administrators.”

Roberts, meanwhile, seems to have a more moderate opinion, placing himself between the USDA and his Kansas colleagues. The state’s senior senator said school districts have made gains but deserve flexibility when crafting menus.

“I have traveled all over Kansas, eating school lunches with students and meeting with nutrition directors,” Roberts said in an email. “I keep hearing one word over and over again — flexibility, which means that we need (to) protect the tremendous gains already achieved by many school districts and provide assistance to others so they too may achieve success.”

Wilson said children need time to adapt to change. In Kansas, she said, great strides have been made in recent years.

“Nutrition as a whole has come on people’s radar screens,” Wilson said. “Parents are more involved.”

While she hasn’t spoken to him directly, Wilson said Roberts “believes in good nutrition.”

Despite Wilson’s proclamation there is bipartisan support for the school meal programs, political divides exist over how best to implement them. The Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act passed in 2010 with the support of only 17 House Republicans. Jenkins joined fellow Kansas Republicans Jerry Moran, then a member of the House, and Rep. Todd Tiahrt in voting against the bill. Rep. Dennis Moore, a Democrat representing Kansas’ 3rd District, voted in favor.

On Monday, Jenkins stopped by an Overbrook elementary school participating in a less controversial component of the school meals program, one that provides meals for all children under the age of 18 during the summer months.

“The federal government does a whole lot for us that we don’t need them to do or want them to do, quite honestly, but feeding hungry kids and being a safety net, helping folks get back on their feet, is always a worthy cause and, I think, one that conservatives support,” Jenkins said.

Share Our Strength, a group aimed at ending child hunger, is advocating on behalf of the summer meals program as its reauthorization looms in Congress. Lucy Melcher, the group’s associate director of advocacy, said the program has “overwhelming bipartisan support.”

“Interest has been so strong from Republicans and Democrats in the House and the Senate,” Melcher said. “With the summer meals program, we haven’t seen a lot of significant challenges.”

Melcher views the next few months as an opportunity to expand the summer meals program by allowing its organizers to give children enough food to last several days and grant families an extended grocery tax credit during the summer months.

Melcher, like Wilson, sees Roberts as an ally.

“I think he understands, coming from a rural state like Kansas, that we have a huge opportunity ahead of us,” she said.

But fiscal conservatives, like Jenkins and Pompeo, will be keeping an eye on the reauthorization package’s price tag.

“As Congress looks to reform and strengthen the safety net, I will remain focused on increasing efficiencies and making sure we are efficiently targeting limited taxpayer dollars to those most in need,” she said in an email.

The Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act expires Sept. 30, leaving Roberts and the rest of Congress 87 days to replace it.

“The anticipation is we would get reauthorization,” Wilson said. “But you never know.”