A Bend man has been recognized for his work at Ponderosa Elementary School with a 2015 Governor’s Volunteer Award.

Bill Ruiter, 73, is one of eight to receive the state-level award; he’s being acknowledged for introducing students at Ponderosa Elementary to a website that teaches computer coding. He will be honored next month at a luncheon in Salem.

Ruiter’s volunteer work in schools began when he retired 11 years ago. He became a volunteer reader in the Start Making a Reader Today program at the elementary schools where his daughter taught over the years.

But on Halloween in 2011, a fifth-grade neighbor showed up with her mom at Ruiter’s door trick-or-treating. Ruiter asked the girl’s mother how reading was going, and the mom suggested the girl needed some extra one-on-one time. The girl wondered whether Ruiter could be the one to provide it.

He agreed and began volunteering at her school, Ponderosa Elementary, where he felt at home.

“I’ve been at a few other schools,” Ruiter said. “I’ve never felt as much a part of the staff.”

Now in his fifth year volunteering at Ponderosa, Ruiter has moved on from helping with SMART. Ruiter introduced Ponderosa Elementary to Khan Academy, a free website that offers lessons in subjects such as science, math and computer programming.

Students can sign on to Khan Academy at home to challenge themselves, and Ruiter has encouraged the kids to learn to write computer code.

Ruiter wasn’t a coder himself, though, until now.

After earning a degree in speech and hearing therapy, Ruiter taught for a couple of years. But he said he couldn’t support his family on a teacher’s salary. He worked in insurance until his retirement.

Once Ruiter started volunteering, he remembered the passion he had for interacting with children, or as he calls them, “kiddos.”

“I didn’t realize I missed it until I started doing it again,” Ruiter said.

The staff at Ponderosa Elementary is thrilled with the work he’s doing. Principal Steve Austin said the school is lucky to have an engaged staff and that Ruiter just adds to the productivity.

And Khan Academy can help students who are behind review their skills or test students who are ahead.

Austin nominated Ruiter for the governor’s award; he sees the positive effect Ruiter has on the kids and also the positive effect they have on him.

“It’s just energizing to him,” Austin said.

The award came as a surprise to Ruiter. Austin said Ruiter was honored by it but is determined to keep the focus on the students and school’s staff.

“He doesn’t do it for any kind of extrinsic reward,” Austin said. “But it was a natural fit.”

Nicole Ricketts, a reading teacher at Ponderosa, has worked closely with Ruiter during his time there. When she was teaching fourth grade, Ruiter began working with some of her students who needed help with math.

“He’s the one that’s the cheerleader,” Ricketts said, explaining how Ruiter is constantly thinking of innovative ways to engage kids.

In a write-up about the governor’s award winners on the Oregon Volunteers website, Ruiter is described as someone who “always looks for ways to help students and their families,” and that he “meets with countless parents explaining how to help their children at home. … He does all this with a passion and enthusiasm for learning that is contagious.”

Many of the students on campus know and recognize Ruiter. Fourth-graders Reid Abrahamson and Mason Bergler, both 9, have been working with “Mr. Bill,” as they call him, since second grade.

“He’s just really helpful,” Reid said, launching into an excited description of the kind of coding he’s learned from Khan Academy, thanks to Ruiter.

It’s clear to the students why Ruiter gives up his free time to volunteer at the school, sometimes five days a week.

“He likes kids,” Mason said.

Reid and Mason have advanced from basic coding to making their own animations over time. And although at first some students were surprised to see someone their grandparents’ age taking on computer coding, they now acknowledge Ruiter knows his stuff.

“A lot of people who are his age are intimidated by technology,” Austin said. “He embraces it.”

— Reporter: 541-383-0325, kfisicaro@bendbulletin.com