Stamford Hospital: Our journey

Photo: Jason Rearick Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Buy photo Brian Grissler, CEO of Stamford Hospital, speaks during the topping off ceremony of the new wing of Stamford Hospital in Stamford, Conn., on Wednesday, May 14, 2014. Brian Grissler, CEO of Stamford Hospital, speaks during the topping off ceremony of the new wing of Stamford Hospital in Stamford, Conn., on Wednesday, May 14, 2014. Photo: Jason Rearick Buy this photo Stamford Hospital: Our journey 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

This is the first in a series of three op-eds by Brian Grissler, the president and CEO of Stamford Hospital, discussing the challenges, solutions, and future of a community hospital in an era of overwhelming change in health care.

All journeys are legs of a longer journey. A kind of ongoing relay. We're handed a set of conditions. We make of them what we can. We hand off to the next generation. We hope we have done our best.

A crucial leg of the journey of Stamford Hospital began 12 years ago with a new leadership team and a reality check. I know this well. I was the incoming CEO. And the reality was daunting.

Despite the dedication of caring physicians, nurses, administrators, support staff, and board members, Stamford Hospital found itself on an uncertain road in the rapidly changing landscape of healthcare. So did many other hospitals across the country, many in great distress. We all faced an array of formidable challenges:

A shaken economy and an outmoded business model.

Revolutions in digital and biomedical technology.

Seismic realignments in the public and private sectors.

The tectonic plates were shifting beneath our feet, but we didn't have the luxury of waiting for them to settle. And who was to say they would ever truly settle? If we were to endure, we had to act.

Stamford Hospital embraced the challenge. We took a long, penetrating look at ourselves. We looked unblinkingly at a physical plant that had fallen behind the curve. We looked frankly at our relationship with the communities we serve. We looked deeply at the very nature of health and health care and healing.

And we looked candidly at our financial realities. Because if we didn't get the financials in order, nothing else would be possible.

We climbed back from the fiscal brink. It took an unswerving insistence on accountability and transparency. It took a willingness to make tough decisions. Many involved difficult trade-offs. All required follow-though. In four years, the financial turnaround was complete. Except for one thing. It could never be complete. Accountability has no sell-by date. Our finances are now sound -- and must remain sound. Even in the face of unprecedented responsibilities and unrelenting pressures.

Among our current responsibilities and pressures:

Community. Stamford Hospital proudly bears an $80 million annual responsibility of caring for underserved people in our communities. These include low-income, uninsured, and otherwise vulnerable residents and visitors. We shoulder the expenses of charity care, unreimbursed services, and nearly 9.5 percent of net revenue written off as bad debt. We are there for everyone -- not some, but all.

Government. The Affordable Care Act has driven more patients to federal and state programs that set disruptively low reimbursement rates. There has been no discernible financial benefit as yet from the health care exchanges, no apparent increase in the number of insured patients. In the realm of Medicare, Stamford Hospital stands among a mere 23 percent of Connecticut hospitals with readmissions rates low enough to avoid penalties. Nonetheless, Medicare reimbursements fall short, and state-funded Medicaid reimbursements fall even shorter. To the considerable extent that all of this affects our balance sheet, we must make up the difference. We are experimenting with a variety of solutions to help lighten the financial complexities for our patients so that they can better concentrate on getting well.

Insurance industry. No portion of the health care sector remains unaffected by the recent upheavals. Insurance companies now undergo new pressures such as the elimination of lifetime caps, the removal of restrictions on pre-existing conditions, and the extension of childhood coverage to age 26. In turn, insurance companies radiate more pressure onto other parties such as hospitals. Unless a hospital bridges the gap between insurance shortfalls and medical realities, patients and communities suffer. In doing our utmost to catch those who tumble between the cracks in the system, Stamford Hospital serves as the ultimate safety net.

But who is the safety net's safety net? We must be our own. And we are.

We now mark our ninth straight year with positive operating income. We rank as Connecticut's second strongest hospital in terms of operating income before philanthropy, second only to the much larger Yale-New Haven health system.

The numbers reflect the means, not the end. We must never forget this.

Over the past decade, we've reinvested more than $300 million in our people, programs and facilities. And with solid finances, we can meet today's challenges and tomorrow's. We can amplify our capabilities as the region's go-to health care resource. We can invest in 21st century medical technologies. We can strengthen our outreach to the underserved.

We can build a desperately needed new hospital.

The need is unmistakable.

When we began to reconsider our facilities, we quickly realized that our physical plant was living on borrowed time. Stamford Hospital was stretched beyond its limits and constrained by an aging infrastructure. The costs of ongoing maintenance and further renovation would outweigh the costs of new construction.

We started paving the way toward creation of a new facility.

Logistically, there were numerous critical issues to address. For instance, did we have enough land? Did we need more beds, or fewer? Should we invest in inpatient services, outpatient services, or both? Should construction be done in phases? What were the precise financial requirements?

As a civic-minded institution, we examined ways to strengthen the hospital-community relationship. How were we delivering health care to our communities? How could we take our clinical excellence to another level? How best to reach out to our regional neighbors? We drew valuable lessons from our experience creating the Tully Health Center and developing affirmative links with the communities it serves.

Conceptually, we asked ourselves the bedrock questions. What is health? What is health care? We took nothing for granted. We came to understand that a great community hospital must deliver a continuum of care. In sickness and in health. From wellness and integrative medicine to acute care and rehabilitation services.

We arrived at a game-changing insight -- our work is about healing in its most empowering, most fully reimagined sense. We determined that our new theme, "Healing ReimaginedTM," will become our heart and soul. Our inspiration. Our strategy. Our proactive philosophy. Our driving force.

Our journey had now truly begun.

For Stamford Hospital, tremendous things lay ahead.

Grissler's subsequent op-eds, to appear on July 4 and July 11, will examine the ethos that makes Stamford Hospital different and discuss the rise of a new facility designed to realize the vision of Healing Reimagined.