Buy Photo UAW leaders at GM are trying to learn from mistakes made at Fiat Chrysler in communicating details about a proposed health-care co-op. (Photo: Free Press staff photo)Buy Photo

Trying to learn from a botched communication effort with a rejected agreement at Fiat Chrysler, GM's UAW department distributed a primer explaining in some detail how a proposed health care co-op would work and how members could avoid higher insurance premiums.

UAW President Dennis Williams made it a priority to help the Detroit Three automakers control or reduce health care costs. Because the traditional medical coverage for veteran UAW members is so good, without changes there's a chance it could be hit with a new tax in 2018 that's part of President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act.

The union and FCA agreed to establish a health care co-op to study best practices for improving treatment results at the lowest feasible prices. As the majority of union members at FCA voted against the agreement many complained they didn't understand the co-op and that they weren't satisfied with explanations.

There was a fear among workers hired before October 2007 that they might have to pay deductibles or cover a designated percentage of hospitalization or surgical procedures that so far have been 100% covered. The highlights of the agreement didn't address that concern.

The Free Press reported on a letter that was part of the full agreement that raised the possibility that veteran workers could face deductibles of $400 a year for single people and $800 a year for families, beginning in 2018, if the annual cost to the companies was greater than $10,200 for a single person or exceeded $27,500 for family coverage.

Because of the complexity of health care insurance and the confusion at FCA, Cindy Estrada, vice president for the GM department, began work last month with staff members to clarify questions before taking a tentative agreement to members for ratification.

So far it has been distributed to UAW locals at some GM plants.

Under the heading "Co-op Talking Points," the two page document begins by stating that the co-op is not a pool of money and it will not cover workers from all three companies.

It also is not the same as the UAW Retiree Medical Benefits Trust, or VEBA, that covers more than 750,000 UAW retirees.

The co-op will not have authority to modify benefits. All active members will remain insured by the health plan sponsored by their company.

"The co-op is a forum to share information, data, knowledge and expertise in an effort to improve delivery and value of health benefits," the document states.

The automaker and union would designate a "centers of excellence" network, based on what the research showed to be the best hospitals for such costly procedures as organ transplants, joint replacements or other common surgeries.

"For example, after extensive research, it may be decided that there are three hospitals in Michigan than have better quality outcomes for hip surgeries," it said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1Lg1L4P