By Brandon Macz

Swedish Medical Center made substantial changes to its financial assistance program at the beginning of the year, increasing awareness of charity care availability, simplifying the application process and expanding the scale for those who qualify.

“It’s a pretty big project,” said Iris Mireau, customer service and financial counseling manager for Swedish Medical Center. “There’s a lot of moving parts, so it took quite a few months.”

While the Washington Community Action Network is taking credit for pushing the medical group to change the way it runs its charity care program, Mireau said a number of factors played into the changes.

“It was kind of a hodge podge of all these different things that made us make these changes,” she said.

Washington CAN began a campaign to push Swedish to improve its charity care program back in 2014, after learning a number of patients were struggling with medical debt at the hospital.

Among the demands made during several protests at Swedish campuses was making it easier for patients to access information about the organization’s financial assistance program. Swedish filed a cease and desist against the advocacy group last January, demanding its members stop harassing hospital staff, patients and visitors at its Cherry Hill campus.

“I think in the beginning they really tried to ignore us and hope it would go away,” said Xochitl Maykovich, Washington CAN community organizer.

Joelle Craft, who suffers from multiple sclerosis, became involved with Washington CAN when her debt with Swedish became unmanageable. She said hospital staff did not make her aware that charity care was an option, her debt eventually leading her to file for bankruptcy.

“I never would have to have gone bankrupt if they had told me,” Craft said. “They didn’t even have signs anywhere, and I hadn’t heard about it.” Then she found out about Washington CAN and joined the cause. “That’s when they were starting the campaign and talking about how the application was very difficult, and if you have cognitive issue, it’s even harder, and when you’re sick it’s even harder.”

Not only was information about Swedish’s charity care hard to find, Maykovich said, the application process was also complex and tedious. Craft said she struggled to provide all of the documentation, and a letter to Swedish explaining difficulties acquiring pertinent tax information went unanswered; her debt was turned over to collections.

Last April, Washington CAN secured signatures from state and local elected officials on a letter to Swedish CEO Anthony Armada, which requested the nonprofit medical organization not only make its charity care program more transparent and easier to apply for, but also adjust income requirements to make the program accessible to more low-income patients. That list of officals included Seattle City councilmembers Kshama Sawant, Nick Licata, Mike O’Brien and Bruce Harrell and state Sen. Pramila Jayapal.

“After that we were able to get a meeting with Swedish,” Maykovich said. “At our first meeting, we presented our model charity care policy.” That was based on Affordable Care Act requirements and comparisons to what other hospitals were offering. “That pretty much was what our demands were centered around.”

Maykovich said Swedish officials told Washington CAN members during a second meeting their concerns had been heard, but no “concrete commitments” were made. Washington CAN communicated its campaign would continue, she said.

Then Swedish made changes in January that satisfied most of Washington CAN’s requests, which happened quietly, Maykovich said.

“To be honest, they didn’t tell us; they just posted it on the website in January,” she said. “They don’t want to give people credit for pushing them.”

Mireau said Swedish had always been very public about its charity care program, but there had been “some feedback from patients and some external groups and some caregivers” that “having more information out there on the website seemed like a good idea.”

As of Jan. 1, the Swedish website began providing a more user-friendly interface, with a flyout to the right of the homepage advertising tools for patients that includes a link for financial assistance.

“We put a lot more information out on the Internet than had been there before,” Mireau said, adding accessing information about financial assistance went from several clicks to just one. “Definitely what I’m hearing is people are finding it easier. … They’re getting the necessary information, now that we’ve simplified things, and finding things easier now that we’re pushing it out there.”

Swedish also took the scale it uses for determining financial assistance and made it available online for patients to see where they fall in regards to income eligibility.

Mireau said people at admissions to Swedish hospitals now automatically receive a form detailing billing and financial assistance, and patient financial advocates are provided on site. Financial assistance information is available in 10 languages online.

While there was input from patients, care providers, staff and community groups, Mireau said Swedish also made changes to meet IRS and ACA requirements for the hospital.

Prior to Jan. 1, Swedish’s charity scale fully covered qualifying patients at 0-200 percent of federal poverty guidelines and had a sliding scale of 30-90 percent for those at 201-400 percent. Now patients can receive a full write-off at 0-300 percent of poverty guidelines and 75 percent for those at 301-400 percent.

“The coverage is a lot better and the transparency is through the roof,” Craft said about the changes. “Before, it was very hidden and they were trying not to let people know about it.”

The ACA guideline for full charity coverage is 250 percent, Mireau said.

“Not only are they following requirements of the Affordable Care Act, but they’re going above and beyond,” Maykovich said.

One IRS requirement is for hospitals to make it clear to patients which third-party care providers within the hospital will accept charity care, so they can “make more of an educated decision,” Mireau said.

Maykovich said she doesn’t expect Washington CAN will ever receive credit for affecting changes to Swedish’s charity care program, but the group feels the main goal of improving transparency and access to financial assistance has been accomplished.

“I think it’s probably the best in the city, right now,” she said of Swedish’s revised financial assistance program. “I would say even better than Harborview.”

Maykovich said Washington CAN will continue to monitor Swedish’s charity care program for now, and expects patients to notify them if policies are not being followed.

Craft said Swedish’s new guidelines means she’s 100-percent covered through charity care after insurance. She’s convinced Washington CAN had a hand in the change.

“It was obvious that if we didn’t continue the pressure, this wouldn’t have gone anywhere,” Craft said. “Me, I’m like, ‘Yay, I can go back to Swedish now, because their care is amazing.”