The aging population combined with new patients who are signing up for health insurance plans through the Affordable Care Act is expected to strain the thin ranks of family care doctors, or primary care physicians, as medical schools try to recruit and train new doctors to keep up with that demand.

Although patient care and public health are at the forefront of efforts to increase the number of doctors going into family practice rather than a more lucrative specialty, the Missouri State Medical Association and American Medical Association recently reframed the picture of shrinking numbers of primary care physicians by pointing out substantial dollars-and-cents reasons to address the problem.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

The associations reported that Missouri's 13,735 primary care physicians fulfill a vital role in the state's economy by supporting 143,424 jobs and generating $20.3 billion in economic activity.

Each physician in Missouri supports an average of 10.4 jobs and more than $1.5 million in economic output, according to figures the associations released last month. The economic impact also includes an average of $839,000 in annual wages and benefits supported by each physician.

"Economically, there's no question that medicine is a big driver," said Scott Schultz, who started Providence Urgent Care in 2009 with fellow University of Missouri School of Medicine graduate Jason Zerrer.

Schultz and Zerrer opened a second facility in January and already have "taken more than the first step" toward adding a third location, Zerrer said. The business has 20-some employees, including seven physicians, and supports a number of ancillary services, from cleaning crews to billing staff.

"The economic impact is millions of dollars in Columbia," Schultz said.

■

The medical associations' economic impact report came a month after Thomas Holloway, executive vice president of the Missouri State Medical Association, and Herb Kuhn, president and CEO of the Missouri Hospital Association, co-authored an op-ed piece in the Tribune that warned Missouri was sending signals to health care professionals that the state is not entirely friendly to physicians when it comes to failing to cap noneconomic damages in medical liability cases and other factors.

Public health factors such as low immunization rates, a higher prevalence of smoking, obesity and some chronic conditions also are signals the state isn't committed to health care to the extent that the General Assembly would take stronger steps to help make Missouri "more attractive to physicians," Holloway said.

Tort reform, Medicaid reform and expansion, and better support for medical education are steps the legislature could take, he said.

Even more urgent, Holloway and Kuhn said, is the need to attract physicians to rural communities. A 2012 report from the National Center for Rural Health Works said each primary care physician serving a rural area generates $1 million in annual revenue and creates 23 jobs, and a rural general surgeon — who needs a rural hospital to work in — creates 26 jobs and adds $1.4 million to the economy.

When Michael LeFevre graduated from the University of Missouri School of Medicine in 1979, roughly 40 percent of his 114-member graduating class became primary care physicians — family doctors — with the balance opting for residencies and careers in a specialty such as cardiology, pediatrics, dermatology and others.

The School of Medicine will confer the title of "doctor" on 97 graduates today with LeFevre, one of their instructors, looking on as vice chairman of the Department of Family and Community Medicine. The percent of the new doctors going into family medicine or primary care will be around 8.5 percent, a better rate than just four years ago but still far from the level needed to replenish the ranks of family care docs leaving the profession and to meet the growing needs of a rapidly aging population.

LeFevre said medical schools across the country need to return to the 40 percent mark for new docs going into primary care.

"We're doing a reasonable job of meeting the needs of people" in Columbia and Boone County, LeFevre said, but outside the city and county — especially in more rural areas — "the picture starts to grow a little bleaker."

MU was in the national top 10 of medical school graduates for each of the past three years, "but we're still not meeting the needs of the" overall "population."

■

LeFevre said that most of the family physicians whom he graduated with remained in primary care "because they love their job."

"I love seeing the patients. I love taking care of them," he said. "But the feeling is different for all the paperwork that is now required.

"We're in a very tightly controlled regulatory environment," he said. "A lot of I's to dot and T's to cross. Very clearly things are harder about practice today than 25 years ago."

The expenses of the business of medicine also continue to grow. That $20 or $30 co-pay at the doctor's office doesn't automatically go into the doctor's pocket. LeFevre said that up to 70 cents of every dollar spent at a primary care office is for overhead and other expenses of the practice.

Despite the burgeoning regulatory requirements and continuing gap in salary — primary care doctors earn less than half of what the highest-paid specialties offer — LeFevre said there aren't many signs that the allure of medicine has faded for students. The MU School of Medicine continues to receive "many more qualified applicants than positions" that are available.

The reality is that most doctors leave medical school with debt of $100,000 to $200,000, LeFevre said, and must decide which income level will be best for meeting that debt and having the quality of life they desire.

The 2014 Physicians Compensation Report produced for WebMD listed orthopedic surgeons as the top earners in the medical field with an average annual income of $413,000. Cardiologists earn on average $351,000, and dermatologists make $308,000. Family care physicians are at the bottom at $174,000.

Reducing the income gap between higher-paid specialists and family or primary care doctors would be one step, but not the only step, toward attracting and retaining more family care docs, LeFevre said.

"I don't make nearly as much money as my subspecialty colleagues," he said, but then pointed out that primary care physicians are still in the upper 3.5 percent of American incomes and the upper 10 percent of world incomes.

"Count our blessings," LeFevre said.

■

Ashley Jenkins, 26, and Alex Zweig, 28, are among today's MU medical school graduates. They're taking their "doctor" titles to different career paths and residencies. Zweig wants to go into family medicine and primary care. Jenkins is headed for residency at the University of Chicago Hospital on her way to becoming a dermatologist.

"I saw how physicians can affect patients very directly," said Zweig, whose father is the chairman of the Department of Family and Community Medicine at MU School of Medicine. "I thought it would be a lot more fun."

Even though both of his parents are primary care docs — his mother practices at the MU Student Health Center — Zweig was a college senior majoring in political science and leaning toward law school, but his experience working in health care policy and as a unit clerk in the intensive care unit at University Hospital changed his career course.

"I kind of avoided anything my parents were doing," he said. "They never pushed me into medicine."

Zweig was attracted to family medicine because of a focus on prevention as well as the opportunity to tackle complex medical problems. Knowing he would have a chance to build relationships over a long period of time, "continuity from knowing patients for many years," was going to be more satisfying, he said.

He begins an at-least four-year residency in June in Portland, Ore., but anticipates returning to Columbia to practice.

Jenkins initially leaned more toward a surgical field but also liked the continuity of care more likely in a clinical setting. Her mother was diagnosed with melanoma when Jenkins was growing up, so "dermatology holds a special place for me."

Both Zweig and Jenkins graduated from Rock Bridge High School.

"We've had to sacrifice all of our 20s — and into our 30s" knowing that the day would come when they could enjoy a lifestyle afforded by being physicians, Jenkins said. She and her husband have been apart for a year now and she is eager to reconnect. He also is in residency near Chicago at Northwestern University in pursuit of a career in orthopedics.

Zweig said the dollar signs of physician pay had little to do with his decision to pursue a career in family medicine.

"All doctors make plenty of money to have a comfortable lifestyle and pay off their debts," he said.

"I feel blessed to be here," Jenkins said, pointing out that others were "not as lucky" to be accepted and admitted into medical school, although she and her husband have half a million dollars in student loan debt, "which is a scary number," she said.

■

The challenges of the Affordable Care Act, changes in reimbursement models for Medicare, electronic medical records, the aging population and numerous other factors continue to not only change the landscape of health care professions but also create new opportunities.

Three Columbia physicians have signed on with MDVIP, a Florida-based company that offers direct care, or "concierge," medicine, where patients pay a membership fee — starting at $1,500 a year — that guarantees them access and longer visits with their physicians. That model also caused participating physicians to downsize their patient rosters, leaving hundreds of local residents looking for new doctors who accept their health insurance plans.

The list of companies specializing in in-home and home health care also is growing, in part because of the aging population and because an increasing number of family members are becoming caregivers for their loved ones.

Schultz and Zerrer, founders of Providence Urgent Care, graduated from MU's medical school in 2001 and spent nearly a decade as emergency room physicians before deciding to become entrepreneurs, unaffiliated with a hospital or larger health care system.

"It lets us be free agents," Zerrer said, with Schultz adding that their urgent care physicians can send patients "where we feel it's going to be best" if they need specialized care or hospitalization.

"Take care of the patients first, and everything else will take care of itself," Zerrer said.

Schultz did his residency with a founder of MedExpress, now a franchise of urgent care clinics spread across 11 states.

"I saw the business model work," Schultz said, "and we saw the need in Columbia."

Not only does Providence Urgent Care focus on getting walk-in patients in and out the door in less than an hour, Schultz and Zerrer also offer employee profit-sharing, retirement savings, health insurance and other perks.

"We didn't reinvent the wheel," Schultz said. "We just brought it to Columbia."