'People in red states don’t even know who I am,' Reid says. | John Shinkle/POLITICO Reid's plot to keep the Senate

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid believes Republicans have walked into his trap.

As he’s tightened his grip on the Senate and protected vulnerable Democrats from casting politically tough votes, furious Republicans have made the mantra “fire Reid” a rallying cry and major fundraising push ahead of the midterm elections.

Story Continued Below

But in Reid’s mind, Republicans are training all their fire on a guy most voters barely even know.

( POLITICO's 2014 race ratings)

“I’m meaningless,” Reid, a three-decade Hill veteran and the most powerful Democrat in Congress, told POLITICO Thursday. “People in red states don’t even know who I am.”

If Democrats keep control of the Senate this year, they believe, it will be because they have prevented Republicans from nationalizing the midterm elections, keeping the focus squarely on the two candidates in their respective states rather than an unpopular President Barack Obama. For that reason, Reid has been more than willing to shield his vulnerable Democrats from casting votes on politically charged amendments even if he takes sustained fire from the GOP for running a dysfunctional Senate.

While Republicans say Democrats are still saddled with backing much of Obama’s agenda and helping enact controversial laws over health care and financial services, some Republicans wish they could make Reid’s handling of the Senate an even bigger focus this midterm season.

( Full 2014 election results)

“It should be a bigger issue,” said Sen. Rob Portman of Ohio, a top official at the Senate Republicans’ campaign arm. “I wish it were something that more people are interested in, it’s partly our fault in not having a way to describe it in a way that makes sense to people and how it affects their lives.”

The Senate plans to adjourn Thursday until after the elections, avoiding many hot-button votes over changing Obamacare, illegal immigration and taxes. It caps a yearlong effort by Senate Democratic leaders who have the singular focus aimed at bolstering the reelection chances of senators from battleground states — namely Louisiana, Arkansas, North Carolina, Alaska, New Hampshire and Colorado.

With the race for the Senate still very competitive, the pressure has grown on Reid’s inner circle to amp up fundraising.

Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), the No. 3 Senate leader, quietly transferred $1 million out of his campaign account this week to the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, according to a source familiar with the matter. (He had $13.3 million in cash through the end of June.)

( See more from POLITICO's Polling Center)

And in addition to headlining a slew of fundraising events for the DSCC and Senate candidates, Reid has attended a staggering 81 meetings in 13 cities with big-dollar donors for the high-spending Senate Majority PAC, a super PAC spending more than any other Democratic outside group to save its party’s majority, a source said. Reid will attend even more in the final stretch of the season.

Republicans need to win a net of six seats to take back the majority and already essentially have three in the bag: Montana, West Virginia and South Dakota. But holding all the GOP seats and picking off three of those six Democratic seats in battleground states — as well as Iowa — is anything but a sure bet.

With less ammunition to use against their incumbents, Democrats hope that enough of their members will survive.

“The two overriding issues that the public cares about are obstruction and bipartisanship but I don’t think the specifics of what happens in the Senate affects them as much as those two,” said Schumer, blaming the GOP for obstructing hot-button economic issues.

For that reason, Reid has scheduled votes on a politically populist agenda devised by Schumer aimed at forcing Republicans to block bills aimed at wooing students, women, seniors and the middle class. Democrats have repeatedly put forth bills that have little chance of passing — like on increasing the minimum wage, gender pay equity, contraception access and student loan assistance. And even when there are efforts they actually support — such as Obama’s executive action on immigration — Democratic leaders have lobbied the White House to punt on the issue to avoid hurting their vulnerable incumbents and candidates in red states.

Behind the scenes, the fundraising game has stepped up.