America under Barack Obama has seen the largest expansion of the welfare state since President Lyndon B. Johnson launched the Great Society in 1965. We have also seen the largest decline in the labor force participation rate in 30 years. And we’ve experienced the worst post-recession jobs recovery since the Great Depression.

It’s time to ask whether welfare has contributed in a direct way to the reduction in the percentage of Americans holding a job.

Let’s start with the welfare state expansion. We now have more than 45 million Americans on food stamps. We have seen a record increase in the number of Americans on disability. (Does anyone really believe Americans are getting hurt on the job more than ever before at a time when workplace safety is at an all-time high?) Unemployment insurance from 2008-12 was made more generous and, workers in many states were able to get benefits when they were laid off from a job for almost two years (99 weeks). Medicaid rolls expanded by millions and Obamacare has added millions more to the dole.

Living on welfare is no picnic, for sure, but in many states it can be more rewarding than working at a low wage. A Cato Institute study on the work-versus-welfare tradeoff finds that in many states the full range of welfare benefits pays the equivalent of a $30,000 a year job when taking into account taxes paid on earnings, but generally not paid on government welfare benefits.

In 1996, a Republican Congress and Bill Clinton, a Democratic president, reached a historic bipartisan agreement that work should be a requirement for welfare. After those workfare laws were enacted, the number of people on welfare fell by about half, and the earnings of these mostly single mothers rose, as paychecks replaced welfare checks.

But under Mr. Obama those work requirements have mostly been rescinded. The old cash welfare programs that required work have been replaced with food stamps and unemployment insurance, which generally do not demand work for the benefits.

The Left argued, absurdly, in 2009-10 that welfare benefits were a “stimulus” to the economy and that the more generous the benefits were for not working, the more jobs America would have. The White House said this many times, and House Democratic leaders like Nancy Pelosi and Steny Hoyer even declared that “the best way” to reduce unemployment was to expand unemployment insurance and food stamps.

Now we know that hasn’t been the case. University of Chicago economist Casey Mulligan has shown in his seminal work that “welfare expansions in the last several years have replaced work and help account for the reduction in the labor force.” He notes that the poor can face a situation where the benefits from a paycheck or a pay raise can be nearly completely offset by reductions in benefits. He also finds that Obamacare subsidies make this bias against work even more severe.

This work and welfare tradeoff has long been a bone of contention in academia, but recent events appear to bear this out. Over this past year, long-term unemployment benefits have run out. In most states benefits are now 26 weeks or less – down from as high as 99 weeks. We’ve also seen this year a big and welcome decline in the percentage of Americans who have been out of a job for more than six months – the so-called “long-term unemployed.” Over the past year, the number of long term unemployed have fallen by 1.1 million, according to the jobs report released Friday.

It’s true that the job market has picked up, but, at least circumstantially, it appears that cutting the weeks of benefits hastens the job search for those who get laid off.

One state, North Carolina, cut its unemployment benefits sharply, and the duration of benefits has been lowered. At the time, this reform was denounced as cruel and counterproductive. Instead, the work participation of North Carolinians has risen and the unemployment rate has fallen faster than the national average. Why doesn’t California try this?

The typical response to work requirements is that there are no jobs for these unemployed workers to fill. It is certainly true that jobs are still scarce in America due to a cascade of anti-growth policy mistakes in Washington. But jobs are out there for those willing to work and, perhaps, take a pay cut. The Wall Street Journal recently reported that there are tens of thousands of trucking jobs for which the industry can’t find workers. My discussions with the industry leaders indicate that many truckers don’t go back on the job until the welfare benefits run out.

The Obama administration has openly encouraged Americans to go on food stamps and tells low-income recipients that when they enroll in foood stamps and spend them at the store, they are stimulating the “local economy.” Obama ad campaigns in Spanish tell Latinos they should not feel “shame” by going on food stamps. Maybe we should put everyone on food stamps and the country will magically get rich.

There is a basic dignity and a direction out of poverty from work. Welfare has the opposite corrosive effect on the human spirit. Half of the households in the bottom 20 percent of income have no one in the family working. We talk about a poverty trap. This is it. If no one is working, there is no possible way to economically advance.

Welfare was always meant to be a hand up, not a hand out. We need a new round of welfare reform in America that greatly rewards work (through income supplements to the working poor) and greatly discourages welfare dependency. It is a false compassion to put tens of millions of Americans on the dole, with little prospect for economic success. A job is the first step on the road to economic independence and success. It’s no accident that California has some of the highest welfare benefits and yet some of the highest rates of poverty and unemployment. It’s not so hard to connect these dots, and it’s a wonder why no one in Sacramento or Washington, D.C., has been able to do so.

Stephen Moore is chief economist at the Heritage Foundation.