Christianna Capra, co-founder of "Spring Reins of Life," has been using horses to bring emotional therapy for bereaved children, at-risk/high-risk youths and PTSD veterans.

Spring Reins of Life, named after a horse, Spring Thaw, serves bereaved children, at-risk/high-risk youths and veterans suffering with post-traumatic stress disorder using a ground-based equine assisted psychotherapy (EAP) model of emotional healing. (Photo: Courtesy of Christianna Capra) Story Highlights Spring Reins of Life offers emotional therapy for trauma survivors.

The group uses the EAGALA Model that certifies similar programs in all 50 states and 49 countries.

Spring Reins of Life is hosting a benefit concert, "Swing into Spring," on March 21.

For years, Christianna Capra, has had a philosophy: A good therapist is one who listens and roots for sugar cubes in your back pocket. Capra, co-founder of "Spring Reins of Life," a 501(c)(3) volunteer-based nonprofit organization that translates the snuffling snorts and gentle blinks of horses into emotional therapy for trauma survivors who are hurting New Jersey residents.

The nonprofit uses the Equine Assisted Growth and Learning Association (EAGALA) model, that certifies similar programs in all 50 states and 49 countries. Spring Reins of Life, named after a horse, Spring Thaw, serves bereaved children, at-risk/high-risk youths and veterans suffering with post-traumatic stress disorder using this ground-based equine assisted psychotherapy (EAP) model of emotional healing.

"There's no riding, not that riding is bad — there's a lot of therapy in riding," Capra said. "But we feel that we get a lot more information from the horses if they are allowed to interact with the clients on the ground in an enclosed space."

On the ground, the treatment team, comprised of an equine specialist, a licensed mental-health professional and horses guide clients who come from Bonnie Brae, Hunterdon Youth Services, Lyons VA Hospital (PTSD Unit), Lakewood Vet Center, among other facilities.

Irrespective of location, Capra arranges activities meant to gradually bond human and animal by asking clients to fetch a horse with which they feel a connection.

This request can elicit some alarm, Capra said.

"Most of our clients have zero horse experience," she said. "So if you've never been around horses and now you're in an arena with a thousand pound animal and you're asked to go get it and bring it back, it makes you very present for your surroundings. And one thing trauma does — it takes away your present moment."

Just as clients apprehensively approach the horses, the horses are similarly acutely perceptive at sensing trust and gauging reaction, Capra said.

"Trauma survivors have almost zero trust in anyone or anything," she said. "So to be able to interact with a loose horse you need to build trust on both sides. And in accomplishing that by being able to bring the horse, there's some ground that's been covered on a deep level, all without having to say a word."

Once trust is established between the client and horse, there's a very "in the moment experience," said Daria Pampaloni, a team leader at Lakewood Vet and a service-connected disabled retired military veteran from Operation Desert Storm.

Pampaloni, who works to provide mental-health assistance to more than 200 veterans living in Ocean and Monmouth counties, encourages her clients to rest their heads against the sides of horses' bodies to listen to their diaphragms and practice synchronized breathing exercises with them as a way to mentally and emotionally disconnect from fear and pain.

"I can still connect with that sense of calm that the exercise generates," she said. "You're not thinking about the bad, the trauma (or) what (you're) making for dinner."

Veterans sometimes are intimidated approaching horses and are reluctant to continue participating, Pampaloni said. But when veterans overcome fears and ease into the breathing exercise the clients later return to Lakewood Vet Center feeling they left the farm with a lasting connection to the animals.

Like veterans, some younger clients return home from "Spring Reins of Life" pleasantly surprised, Capra said.

Three years ago, Capra recalled receiving nine boys from New York City, all part of a three-strike program to curb gang recidivism via the Misunderstood Youth Development Center (MVDC).

In an arena with four horses, eight of the nine boys participated in the obstacle course activity up for them, albeit slowly.

The group's remaining 17-year-old peer straggled until the end of the day where he approached the brown thoroughbred mare, whom the group labeled a sensitive, reactionary and difficult horse.

At the end of the group activity, the teen took a piece of yarn and placed it around the mare's neck, Capra said.

He started to walk with the mare, and she stayed next to him, she said. And when the boy broke into a trot with one hand on the piece of yarn and the other on his pants to keep them up, the mare willingly kept pace.

The duo slowed to a walk and then stopped, where the mare wrapped her head and neck around the boy in what Capra called a "horse hug," demonstrated to show trust and affection.

The impromptu run was already unique, Capra said. She didn't expect to be surprised further.

The boy approached Capra — he called her 'Ms. C,' she recalled — asking her if he could keep the yarn he looped around the mare's neck.

To anyone else, asking to keep a piece of string might have seemed like an unnecessary request. Yet to Capra, who said she knew the boy had a history of theft, the question "spoke volumes."

A week later, Capra received one of her regular phone calls from a counselor at MYDC responsible for overseeing the boys Capra hosted at the farm.

The boy had told his counselor he had reservations about going to the farm, thinking it was going to be "really stupid," but instead had a moment with the mare.

He told his counselor when the mare acknowledged him he "came to the epiphany, somehow on his own," that he was going to have o be a father to the child his girlfriend was expecting in two weeks.

"When I found this out, I went to the mare's stall," Capra said. "I gave her an apple and hugged her and kissed her and I said, 'You have a job for the rest of your life. God bless you, girl.' "

EAP has a growth rate of more than 400 percent in the past three years and offers a way to find solutions and answers to some complex core problems with minimal talking, Capra continued.

Because demand is high, constant funding is needed, she said.

This year, one day after the Spring Equinox, Spring Reins of Life is hosting a benefit concert on March 21, "Swing into Spring."

The festival will be be held at 6 p.m. at Flemington Elks Lodge, 165 Route 31 South, Flemington.Five live bands are expected to perform: Danny Rongo, Williamsboy, SONiA, disappearfear, Gina Leigh and Alvis 'n' Friends. There also is a buffet dinner, door prizes, a cash bar and some surprise guests.

Tickets are $25 per person. Additional donations to benefit bereaved children, at-risk and high-risk youths and PTSD veterans are welcomed.

More information and online ticket purchase can be found at the following website: http://www.springreinsoflife.org/2015/01/20/swing-into-spring-music-festival-march-21st/

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1AwSCL5