'What we can always use is financial support'

From left: James Peebles and Laurie Lee look through bags of food donated by HOPE, Friday, at Front Range Christian Fellowship's Agape Family Services in Longmont. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

To donate goods or volunteer for Agape Family Services: Send an email to agapefamilyservices80501@gmail.com or call 303-774-7994 to inquire. Donations can also be made on paypal and popmoney.com. For paypal use the Agape email to donate and follow the instructions on popmoney.

To donate goods or volunteer with Homeless Outreach Providing Encouragement: Call 720-210-7217 or go to hopeforlongmont.org.

Agape Family Services Executive Director Paula Saxon had a problem on Wednesday night.

It was just before 8 p.m. and the primary warming center at Agape's Front Range Annex — a temporary shelter for area homeless — had filled up with people trying to get out of the cold. The back-up shelter was also nearly full and two more men working late were expected at about 10:30. That would bring the total to 51. Once it hit 53, they would have to open the third shelter, quickly.

Fortunately, the flood of people tapered off and it never came to that. Nevertheless, Agape has had a busy season so far this fall and winter. They have opened warming centers 29 nights since Nov. 10 and hit a nine-night stretch in November.

Warming centers open when the temperature dips below 20 degrees on clear nights and 30 degrees on snowy nights. They will be open every night through January, however, and Saxon said the weather has been cold enough they probably would have been open anyway.

"The weather says it's going to be 27 or 28," Saxon said. "But if I wake up in the night. . .it's always 21, 20, 19."

Homeless Outreach Providing Encouragement Executive Director Lisa Searchinger — which provides transportation for the warming centers — said her outfit has seen a 30-40 percent increase in meals, contacts and requests for service this winter season.

"That's everything from filling a tank of gas for someone living out of their car to bus passes and laundry vouchers," Searchinger said.

Searchinger said HOPE is partnering up with Agape, Heart of Longmont and St. Benedict Health and Healing Ministry to provide sheltering from Christmas Eve through Friday morning, a service called "Room at the Inn."

She said the service used to provide motel vouchers for people but that has become unfeasible as the need has risen dramatically. This year they are housing the needy at Heart of Longmont — in part to take some of the strain off of Agape — and providing food, medical clinics and haircuts.

She said HOPE can always use more blankets, sleeping bags, warm coats, gloves, thermal underwear and other warm winter clothing as well as volunteers, particularly to help with transportation.

"What we can always use is financial support so we can provide those emergency services which cost us money," she said, adding that it needs volunteers to help drive people to the warming centers and drive around looking for people in need.

Agape always needs more volunteers and supplies. Right now, Saxon said, many of their regulars are getting sick and they are scrambling for more help. The outfit is also seeking PayPal donations to help with paying underemployed, unemployed or homeless overnight staff, which also reduces the strain on volunteers. The organization is asking for donations of $70 and $140 to help cover shifts — but any amount is acceptable, Saxon said.

When donating through PayPal, people shuld specify Silent Night Project.

Supplies are also of concern. A warming center typically goes through two gallons of milk a night and a gallon of juice, she said, adding that the group needs ramen noodles (the kind in a cup), oranges, tangerines, bananas, and items the guests might not be used to getting, like lunch meat and condiments.

"We do not need bagels," she joked. "We have four refrigerator freezers full of bagels. No bagels, please."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme