CareNet Navigator Heidi Trombly works in a cubicle at the West Toledo Library while she waits for consumers to come and get help on January 25, 2016. This is the final week for people to sign up for health plans in the ACA marketplace.

Published: Tuesday, 1/26/2016 - Updated: 4 months ago



AFFORDABLE CARE ACT Deadline nears for health-care enrollment After Sunday, people face fines

The open-enrollment period for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act exchange ends Sunday, and people who miss the deadline to sign up for insurance this year face stiff penalties.

People without coverage may face a penalty of $695 or 2.5 percent of their income when they file 2016 income taxes.

Health-care navigators will be available in various sites this week to assist people who don’t feel comfortable using the healthcare.gov website to enroll, said Julie Grasson, assistant director of Toledo/​Lucas County CareNet, the local agency that oversees the navigator program.

Health insurance coverage begins March 1 for anyone enrolled by Sunday, she said.

Nearly 18,000 consumers in Lucas and neighboring counties selected or renewed plans in the marketplace since Nov. 1, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

About 26,000 people in Lucas County alone still could qualify for tax credits or subsidies in the plan, Ms. Grasson said.

Not everyone will qualify as the tax credits are designed for low-income people. For example, a household with two people with a yearly income greater than $63,720 would not be eligible, she said.

“For individuals that are over income for the tax credits, I would strongly encourage them to contact an insurance agent or broker and not just narrow their search to the marketplace,” Ms. Grasson said.

Independent brokers might find a better, more affordable plan for those whose income disqualifies them for credits or subsidies.The marketplace is designed for those with incomes below 400 percent of the federal poverty level, she added.

A recent study published by the Urban Institute, a Washington-based think tank, found that although the ACA has expanded health insurance coverage and decreased the number of uninsured plans, people of higher incomes have problems with affordability.

The study noted that even though they qualify for subsidies, those with incomes between 300 and 400 percent of the federal poverty level still can face high out-of-pocket expenses when the costs of premiums and deductibles are combined.

Ms. Grasson acknowledged that questions about the affordability of the plans in the marketplace are keeping some uninsured on the sidelines.

“I think a lot of it is word of mouth and believing that they are not eligible. People have heard from their friends and neighbors that it’s too expensive or the rates have gone up, but each family is unique,” she said.

This is the third year the health marketplace has been available. During the past two enrollments, registration surged near the deadline. This prompted HHS officials to extend the sign-up period well beyond the original cutoff date. Ms. Grasson said, however, there has been no indication from Washington that the deadline will change this year.

“Don’t wait until Sunday to try to sign up — get in to see someone sooner rather than later,” she said.

Lucas County residents who need enrollment assistance can call United Way at 211 to set an appointment with a navigator. Residents outside of Lucas County can schedule an appointment at AreyoucoveredOhio.org.

Contact Marlene Harris at: mtaylor@theblade.com, 419-724-6091, or on Twitter @marlenetaylor48.