Deborah DiSesa Hirsch: Seeing your partner as a friend

My husband watches Fox News. He loves Bill O'Reilly. Mike Huckabee, too. He's against allowing immigrants to remain in this country. And he's not too crazy about the Affordable Care Act, or President Obama.

We don't see eye-to-eye on anything.

So how are we still together? I began seeing him as someone else.

But let me back up a little.

In the beginning, there were many years when it was a competition. Who could win the most? Swim and sit by the pool on the Fourth of July (and Memorial Day and Labor Day) or stay at home and watch the French Open, Wimbledon or the U.S. Open? Dance at our niece's wedding? Or sit in a chair and watch? You're probably guessing who won.

But then, life intervened. We had a child, I got cancer, our mothers both developed serious illnesses and died.

And suddenly, winning didn't seem the point anymore.

Of course, everything isn't perfect. He still makes me furious, pretending he doesn't hear when I ask him to take out the garbage or vacuum the family room floor. He still comes home and drops his coat on the floor (as does our son now, too). And his idea of a birthday gift (even a big birthday) is well, a card, if I'm lucky.

But something has happened. No question, the honeymoon is long over. (To be truthful, I was afraid of him at that time, terrified he'd leave.) I didn't like him very much -- he was spoiled and selfish and thought mostly about himself. But I was very attracted to him and euphoric that he felt the same way.

Marriages change, of course, over time. But a new study has found that it's good to get -- and yes, stay -- married, in the first place. Turns out being married makes people happier and more satisfied with their lives than those who remain single -- particularly during the most stressful periods, like midlife crises.

I'm not going to lie and say I didn't think of divorce, not once, but many times, especially right after our son was born and, as new old parents, we couldn't seem to handle the stress. We fought constantly.

Thankfully, these terrible times ended as our son grew older and we adjusted to having another person in the house (even if he did cry a lot).

But here's the real reason so many people are happy being married. Those who consider their spouse or partner to be their best friend get about twice as much life satisfaction from marriage as others.

I never thought of Larry as my friend. He was my romantic partner, then my son's father, then someone I knew but didn't want to spend much time with.

Growing up as a Baby Boomer, I was taught to regard men as Other. Boys were not for liking. They were for asking you to the Junior Prom (not). Or deciding whether you'd spend your 30s in bars or at singles' functions (no match.com in those days). Or whether -- biggest card of all -- you ever got married, or had to spend the rest of your life alone, with cats, giving great gifts to your nieces and nephews.

They held all the cards.

All my life, boys (and men) had the power. Were you pretty enough? Worth asking out for a date? Getting married to? Though I was the one, in the end, who decided that. (I told him he had three months to propose or I was evicting him; only I was on the lease!)

I spent most of my life if not fearing men, then at least giving them a lot of my power. I did have a lot of male friends (still do), but having my husband as one? Not so much.

Then a strange thing happened. Our teenage son stopped going places with us and we began going out together, just the two of us. We started to get to know each other again. And then an even stranger thing happened.

One night over dinner, Larry was talking on and on about some Fox News thing and I realized, OK, so I didn't really care about it, but it wasn't making me mad anymore. It was just a friend talking about something that meant a lot to him.

Of course, I do still get aggravated when I ask him five times to get milk and he comes home without it, or insists on asking me to listen to the latest great thing Bill O'Reilly said (um, no).

And I do miss our marriage, when it was exciting. But it's like the smoke has cleared. I can now see my husband for who he is, not someone with power over me. And you know what? I like him.

Writer Deborah DiSesa Hirsch lives in Stamford. Her blog is http://hotmedfax.blogspot.com.