What Justice Scalia's Death Could Mean For Healthcare

By Christine Kern, contributing writer

Antonin Scalia’s death means the court’s balance will be altered, leaving healthcare cases in limbo.

Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia’s death could complicate matters for the rest of the court’s term, altering the balance of the court and leaving several major healthcare cases in limbo, according to the New York Times.

Scalia’s death has created a tumultuous scuffle over the naming of his successor during an election year, with Republicans vowing to block any nominee put forward by President Obama. Scalia, a stalwart conservative, famously said the Affordable Care Act should be called “SCOTUScare.”

According to Modern Healthcare, Scalia joined a dissenting opinion in the 2012 case that upheld the ACA’s individual mandate and penned the dissenting opinion in last year’s King v. Burwell decision which allowed Americans in all states to receive insurance premium subsidies.

The Supreme Court is slated to consider a number of major cases this term, including a big abortion case, a challenge to the contraceptive mandate, Gobeille v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co— a case on whether a self-funded insurer should have to turn over certain informationsuch as on claims and member eligibilityto the state of Vermont for its all-payer database cases, and Universal Health Services v. United States ex rel Escobar— a case challenging the validity of a legal theory now used to bring many fraud lawsuits against healthcare organizations which case has the potential to reduce the number of False Claims Act suits brought against providers and other companies. Each of these cases have important implications for healthcare.

Stephen Vladeck, a CNN contributor and law professor at American University Washington College Law said,“The entire tenor of this term has now changed. The court can try to go ahead, but on cases where they are split 4-4, their only options are to leave the lower court decision intact or to hold the case over until Justice Scalia’s replacement is confirmed.”

Tim Jost, a law professor at Washington and Lee University, told Modern Healthcare that, in strongly divisive cases, conservatives will have a harder time carrying a ruling without Scalia. “On really controversial cases where there would have been a 5-4 split, the business of the court essentially stops because you won’t have a precedential decision from the court,” Jost said. “You won’t have a decision from the court binding on the whole country.”

In the case of a 4-4 split among the remaining justices, the lower court’s decision would remain in place, but only for the area of the country served by that circuit. This would mean messy results, including the challenge over the ACA contraception mandate.A 4-4 split could mean different rules in different parts of the nation, since seven circuit courts have sided with the government, while one has sided with the religious not-for-profits.

In the abortion case, however, a 4-4 split would mean that the Texas law that requires doctors at abortion clinics to have admitting privileges at local hospitals and providers to comply with the same standards as ambulatory surgical centers would remain in effect.That case is known as WholeWoman’s Health v. Cole. The case has potential broader implications when it comes to how all states may regulate abortions.