This week, the Senate is debating the National Defense Authorization Act, which outlines the U.S. Department of Defense budget for fiscal year 2016.

The legislation covers a broad scope of U.S. military policies and has been passed for 53 consecutive years.

This year’s bill currently has over 500 amendments, ranging from military child care, funding for military commissaries and a variety of foreign policy initiatives. Although this bill typically receives bipartisan support, there are several controversial amendments in this year’s legislation sparking debate.

Here are some of the most important amendments the Senate is evaluating:

‘Buy American’ Amendment

Last week, Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., introduced an amendment that enhances “Buy American” requirements for the Department of Defense. Essentially, his proposal prevents American taxpayer dollars to be spent on foreign military goods, even if those goods will be used overseas.

“The Pentagon should be required to buy American-made goods unless there’s a genuine budgetary or national security reason they can’t do so,” Murphy said in a press release. “This amendment would help break the Pentagon’s addiction to ‘Buy American’ waivers and provide a boost for American manufacturing.”

However, Justin Johnson, senior policy analyst for defense budgeting policy at The Heritage Foundation, said this amendment would not be cost-efficient.

“In effect, what it would do is drive up costs for the military and take longer for the military to get things they need,” Johnson said.

Johnson also said that if the amendment were passed, it would be a “slap in the face to our allies.”

ISIS Amendment

Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., and Sen. Jeff Flake, R-Ariz., added an Authorization for Use of Military Force amendment—related to the U.S.’ military actions to confront the ISIS terrorist group—which may gain bipartisan support.

“Our military has been waging war against ISIL since last September, and Congress has been appropriating funds to pay for those operations,” Flake said in a statement. “It’s past time for Congress to formally voice its support of the mission itself.”

Primary provisions of this amendment include repealing the 2002 Authorization for Use of Military Force in Iraq, a provision that was not present in President Obama’s proposed Authorization for Use of Military Force last year.

Additionally, it includes a clause granting this new authorization as the only authority for military action against ISIL. This nullifies the 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force, which authorized the use of troops against terrorists after the 9/11 attacks.

Murray Amendment

The Murray amendment, proposed by Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wa., addresses cuts to civilian personnel working for the Department of Defense. As a result, the Murray amendment outlines several provisions to determine who should be released and who should remain working for the Department of Defense.

The criteria described in the Murray amendment causes seniority to be the most important factor when determining civilian personnel cuts, while performance is last.

Critics of the Murray amendment, like Johnson of Heritage, support performance as the most essential provision, not seniority.

Guantanamo Bay Amendments

The Obama administration has outlined its goal to close Guantanamo Bay and the National Defense Authorization Act includes numerous amendments concerning the future of the base. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., proposed two amendments concerning Guantanamo Bay—one that would prohibit funding to go toward closing the base and another to continue operating the base.

Additionally, Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Okla., submitted amendments that prevent Guantanamo Bay detainees to be released or transferred to the U.S., even in cases of medical treatment.

Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, also included an amendment that would prevent detainees from being transferred to countries with Department of State travel warnings.

Nuclear Weapons Amendments

Several amendments related to nuclear weapons are on the table for debate.

Sen. Ed Markey, D-Mass., proposed a few amendments to update the cost to replace nuclear ballistic missile submarines and require a “25-year cost estimate for the U.S. nuclear modernization program.” Additionally, Markey wants to establish limits to nuclear cruise missiles and reduce nuclear expenditures overall.

Sen. John Hoeven, R-N.D., added an amendment promoting nuclear missions as a “top priority” for the Air Force.

Also, Rubio added several amendments to “prohibit the nuclear nonproliferation funding” to Russia, unless Russia agrees to several treaties, including the Intermediate Range Nuclear Force Treaty, New START Treaty and Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.

Amendments Bring Tension

Tension between the White House and Congress exists and President Obama said on Tuesday he may veto the National Defense Authorization Act.

The White House is opposed to some amendments, including those related to Guantanamo Bay and ones that would decrease federal spending.

The House of Representatives passed their version of the bill on May 15 and the Senate will continue debating amendments—and potentially vote on the legislation—this week.