The Arena de Amazonia in Manaus, Brazil cost $300 million to build. (Bruno Kelly/Reuters)

Salacious rumors swirled after Qatar won the contest to host the World Cup in 2018. Two members of FIFA's executive committee were said to have taken $1.5 million in exchange for their votes on Qatari bid, and an English official said a member of the committee had asked him to trade television rights to a match for the member's support of an English bid, as NPR reported.

After an internal investigation, FIFA announced Thursday (perhaps somewhat unsurprisingly) that there had been no real wrongdoing. The governing body of world soccer wanted to declare the matter closed. Right away, though, the American prosecutor whom FIFA retained to lead the investigation said he was being muzzled, and law enforcement officials told CNN that the Federal Bureau of Investigation is involved as well.

It looks like this match is headed into extra time.

These developments might not have been especially surprising for those who follow international soccer -- FIFA has repeatedly confronted questions about its ethics since Sepp Blatter became president of the organization 16 years ago -- but it is odd that U.S. law enforcement is investigating as well, since it isn't yet clear whom the FBI is investigating or what specific crimes its agents believe they committed.

After a similar scandal involving allegations that Salt Lake City officials had bribed the International Olympic Committee to let them host the Winter Games in 2002, the FBI conducted a probe. In that case, however, there were Americans whom the FBI could charge with various counts of conspiracy and fraud -- and even so, both defendants were eventually acquitted by a judge who felt the government had no case.

All of this controversy feels a little bit comical, because hosting the World Cup or another major sporting event is usually a bad idea as a matter of policy. Countries spend lavishly on new stadiums and receive very little in return, beyond prestige. "My basic takeaway for any city considering a bid for the Olympics is to run away like crazy," one economist told Wonkblog. That any country would go to the trouble of doling out millions of dollars in personal bribes to soccer officials just shows how crazy people are about the game.

Welcome to Wonkbook. To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. Follow Wonkblog on Twitter and Facebook.

What's in Wonkbook: 1) Obama's forthcoming immigration order 2) Opinions: 3) Health care reenrollment opens 4) Justice Dep't locates Americans' cell phones 5) Student loans, mine safety and more

Chart of the day:

National annual cigarette consumption per capita climbed from close to zero at the beginning of the 20th century to 4,345 in 1963. Smoking has since declined by about three quarters, giving an estimated 8 million people each twenty more years to live on average. But if public health officials want to get Americans to smoke any less, they might have to come up with new ways of thinking about the problem. Kenneth Warner and Harold Pollack in The Atlantic.

Number of the day: 2 percent. That's the rate at which people quit their jobs in October, according to the Labor Department's monthly report. People are now quitting as frequently as they did before the financial crisis six years ago, which suggests that workers are feeling more confident about their finances and their future prospects. Justin Wolfers in The New York Times.

1. Top story: Obama's executive order on immigration could come next week

The executive order will protect several million undocumented immigrants. The order to delay deportations could include parents of citizens who have lived in the country for a certain period of time, and possibly to families who came into the country with small children. The immigrants would also receive work permits, according to unnamed administration officials. Michael Shear, Julia Preston and Ashley Parker in The New York Times.

Latinos aren't exactly dancing in the streets. "The Dream Action Coalition, a group which advocates for undocumented youth, said in a statement that it was cautiously optimistic, while also warning that the official leak could be nothing more than a trial balloon." Another group said it had been hoping the order would "provide relief to a broader population than is currently being reported as what the Obama administration is considering." John McCormick for Bloomberg.

Republicans, once again, are now divided over how to respond (and whether to shut down the government). Conservative lawmakers such as Ted Cruz are agitating to shut down the government until the president gives up on his plan. Mitch McConnell said twice on Thursday that doing so would be too extreme. The executive order will probably also contain a provision for highly skilled immigrants, which would please the business community, an important G.O.P. constituency. Robert Costa and Ed O'Keefe in The Washington Post.

"All of the options are on the table," John Boehner said. If shutting down the government counts as an option, then the speaker's remarks appear to contradict McConnell's, but in a press release, Boehner's office said that his goal is "not to shut down the government." Elise Foley in The Huffington Post.

"And just like that, Boehner says 'all options are on the table' to stop Obama on immigration, including a gov't shutdown." -- @sahilkapur

GERSON: Obama's approach risks hurting moderate Republicans. An executive order would lead ordinary voters to associate immigration reform with a radical, undemocratic progressive agenda. In fact, reforming the system is something that Republicans and Democrats should be able to agree on. The Washington Post.

2. Top opinions: Obamacare, climate change, betting on basketball

PONNURU: If the Supreme Court overturns Obamacare, Republicans should have a sensible response ready. Yes, Congress could easily fix the few lines that the court might find objectionable, but another approach would be to advance conservative reforms. Bloomberg.

KRAUTHAMMER: "Obamacare was sold on a pack of lies." Economist Jonathan Gruber's statements reveal that the law was written to hide its effects from voters. The Washington Post.

KRUGMAN: The deal with China destroys Republicans' last argument on climate change. Conservatives have often argue that U.S. action to prevent global warming is worse than useless without an agreement from other countries to cooperate. Now, we have an agreement. The New York Times.

LITHWICK: The Supreme Court's problem is that none of the justices have real-world experience. All of them went to Ivy League schools, and none of them have really done anything interesting with their lives. What's worse, they seem set on closing themselves off from the rest of the world, which is a new development in the history of the court. The New Republic.

ADAM SILVER: Legalize betting on sports. Making gambling on games illegal hasn't stopped anyone from doing it, argues the commissioner of basketball. Regulation would help protect gamblers, especially those with an addiction, as well as the integrity of competition. The New York Times.

It's Friday interlude: "Bang Bang" by Jessie J., Ariana Grande and Nicki Minaj.

3. Obamacare open enrollment begins Saturday

There will be no splashy publicity campaign this time. Obama isn't even in the country -- administration officials are relying on targeted digital advertising instead. Meanwhile, they're wary of a political environment rendered toxic by Gruber's tapes. Colleen McCain Nelson in The Wall Street Journal.

Enroll America has raised less money. The not-for-profit group that helps people sign up for Obamacare raised only $20 million this year, compared to $27 million last year, but it has only a few weeks to get people to sign up this time around. Reuters.

The small-business component of the marketplaces is still falling short of its goals. Premiums for small-business plans are too high, and relatively few businesses are likely to enroll their employees. Joel Gehrke in National Review.

4. How the DOJ tracks your cellphone with small planes

The Justice Department is using Cessnas equipped with special hardware to locate cell phones. The devices, called "dirtboxes," mimic cell phone towers and can locate someone's phone within a few feet, according to anonymous sources. The Marshals Service, which is running the program, is supposed to "let go" of data from people who aren't suspects, but advocates for civil liberties call it a "dragnet." Devlin Barrett in The Wall Street Journal.

The dirtboxes are similar to the StingRay devices used by cops. Sources say the Marshals Service is acting consistently with federal law. Ellen Nakashima in The Washington Post.

Observers have long suspected that government officials were following Americans' phones somehow. "U.S. officials have routinely denied that the NSA collects phone location information in bulk, but they frequently add the caveat 'under this program,' leading to widespread suspicion that other government programs perform that function." Spencer Ackerman, Dominic Rushe and Paul Lewis in The Guardian.

5. In case you missed it

Mark Udall is considering making the torture report public. He could release classified details without fear of prosecution, using his privileges as a senator before he leaves office. Mark Matthews in The Denver Post.

Kocherlakota calls for the Federal Reserve not to raise interest rates until 2016. The Minneapolis Fed president says the central bank must achieve its target of 2 percent inflation. "Monetary policy has proven to be insufficiently accommodative to offset either the price or employment effects" of the financial crisis, he said. Pedro Nicolaci da Costa in The Wall Street Journal.

The Obama administration could cut out its collection agents for student loans. Under a pilot program, federal employees would collect debts from delinquent alumni instead of private contractors, according to anonymous sources. The idea is to save the government money without making life unpleasant for borrowers. Shahien Nasiripour and Ryan Grim in The Huffington Post.

A mining company chief is indicted in a fatal accident in 2010. A grand jury indicted Don Blankenship, the former head of Massey Energy, on various charges of conspiracy and fraud in connection with the accident at Upper Big Branch Mine that killed 29 coal miners. Prosecutors say he helped the mine to shirk safety requirements. John Raby for the Associated Press.