Friday, November 14, 2014

There are nearly one million Tennesseans without health insurance in spite of the Affordable Care Act. A new Knoxville-based company, Enroll Health, plans to reduce that number by making the process fast, easy and affordable for everyone, said officials.

Enroll Health is a division of Enrollment First, Inc., a national company that has provided health care solutions to more than 200,000 people over the past decade. Working with major health insurance providers (Cigna, Humana, Blue Cross/Blue Shield, Aetna, etc.), Enroll Health will review a person's situation and show them all of the options available to them for free. They will determine if that individual qualifies for subsidies to offset the cost of their coverage. The entire process takes only minutes and costs nothing.

"People really don't understand the Affordable Care Act," said Hazen Mirts, president and CEO of Enroll Health. "We're helping people who have had insurance for years and we're helping people who have never had health coverage. We make it simple, fast and affordable. Enroll Health can get health insurance for someone for as little as $50 per month, and many people qualify for monthly premiums lower than that.

"We're also seeing too many people who have plans that don't fit their needs. Even if someone has coverage, they should visit Enroll Health to review their coverage and to take a look at their options. Many times we can find better coverage at a lower price."

Mr. Mirts said the goal of Enroll Health is to show people how easy and affordable it is to get health coverage. His company is opening four new East Tennessee locations - one in Cleveland, two in Knoxville and one in Maryville - to make it convenient for people to stop by and review their coverage.

"There are few things in life as important as someone's health," Mr. Mirts said. "Enroll Health was started to ensure that people understand their options and get quality health care coverage at an affordable price."

Enroll Health hired 22 new licensed representatives and opened four new locations this month. They are located in Bradley Square Mall in Cleveland, West Town Mall and the Gallery on Kingston Pike in Knoxville and inside Foothills Mall in Maryville. Enroll Health will also conduct a free review of health care options by phone at 865.243-3900. For more information, visit www.EnrollHealth.com.