Fleming girls defeat Lady Falcons 49-41, take control of North Central League

Fleming freshman Alli Keisel (No. 25) gathers to go up for a shot during Saturday's game against Briggsdale. Keisel had seven points in the Wildcats' 49-41 win. ( David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

FLEMING — It's a phrase almost as old as basketball itself: you can't score if you don't shoot.

On Saturday, neither the Fleming girls basketball team nor the visiting Briggsdale Lady Falcons had a problem scoring once a shot left a player's hand.

But getting shots up was an entirely different problem for Class 1A No. 6 Briggsdale.

Despite Briggsdale shooting 16-of-34 (47 percent) from the field, it was the 22 turnovers forced by the Fleming defense that decided its 49-41 upset victory.

With the win, the Wildcats (10-3 overall, 6-1 North Central League) took a half-game lead over second place Prairie, putting them in the driver seat to win the regular season championship and No. 1 seed for the district tournament with three league games remaining.

"We talked in the locker rooms before the game that we knew this was a big one. And one we had to have to take control of the league," said Fleming head coach Ken Bretz. "And after we got the win, the final comment made to the girls was that this was a great win, and a great way to play in our house. This is the way we should play every night we are in our house. Tonight we played Wildcats' basketball."

While Briggsdale struggled to find its handle on the basketball, Fleming had no such issue, committing just 11 turnovers on Saturday and shooting 19-for-40 (48 percent) from the floor.

Advertisement

The low turnover total for Fleming wasn't due to a lack of trying to force them by the Lady Falcons. Briggsdale opened up the game in a full-court zone press. But the Wildcats handled the pressure — they committed four turnovers in the first half — kept the ball in the middle of the floor, and took advantage of numbers in transition to get easy layups en route to building a comfortable 29-18 lead at the break.

Fleming sophomore Kalyn Serrato (No. 22) drives baseline during Saturday's game against Briggsdale. Serrato had 14 points in the Wildcats' 49-41 win. (David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

"With the leadership we have in Megan (Chintala), Kalyn (Serrato) and our other guards, and with our bigs breaking the press, we were able to just get the ball in bounds, turn and face, and keep the ball in the middle," Bretz said. "When we keep the ball between the volleyball lines on floor against pressure, then attack, good things happen. And that's what we were able to do in the first half."

Fleming would go on to lead by as many as 15 on a offensive rebound put-back by Serrato, who scored a team-high 14 points, and carried a 38-25 lead into the fourth quarter.

The Lady Falcons, led by their leading scorer in junior Darian Hale (14.9 points per game), wouldn't go away quietly.

Hale, who had been limited to just three points in the first half, scored all nine of her second-half points in succession to bring Briggsdale back within five at 44-39 with 2:40 remaining.

"Darian is one of those shooters who you cannot give her space," Bretz said. "Briggsdale started to set that ball-side screen for her (in that run) and we didn't get out quick enough to jump it and that was all the time she needed to set and shoot."

The Wildcats were able to stop the bleeding, though, as their defense tighten, switching between man-to-man, zone, and a triangle-and-two, over the final few possessions to disrupt Briggsdale into 1-of-4 shooting and three turnovers over the final 2:40.

"They (Lady Falcons) didn't see the same defensive look from us on every possession," Bretz said. "Then they'd make a pass that wasn't there that led to those turnovers. And we were able to make enough free throws down the stretch to keep the gap there."

Fleming was led by Serrato, the lone Wildcat in double figures with 14 points, while three players — Chintala, Alli Keisel and Teisha Coffield — tallied seven points, Timmi Keisel had six points and Elayna Muller added five points to pace the offense.

The Wildcats will look to build off their current mini two-game winning streak when they travel to take on Weldon Valley at 6 p.m. on Friday.

David Wilson: 970-526-9285, dwilson@journal-advocate.com