J.R. Superstar. How awesome would it be if J.R. “Swish” Smith made a big impact for Cleveland in the NBA Finals. The sports world, specifically fans in Colorado, would lose it. LOL.

Jeremiah, Fayetteville, Ark.

Kiz: Without the presence of Kevin Love and Kyrie Irving, both felled by season-ending injuries during Cleveland’s run for a championship, the Cavaliers are way too reliant upon LeBron James, in the same way the banged-up Broncos were way too dependent on Peyton Manning in that ugly Super Bowl loss against Seattle. For every 3-pointer J.R. swishes, he makes two bonehead plays. I originally believed Golden State would win the series in six games. Now, it might be impossible even for a player as great as James to steal more than one victory.

No action on Jackson. How come there’s never any mention of Mark Jackson as head coach of the Nuggets? He would be able to attract stars to Denver.

Jesse, Colorado proud

Kiz: During the 2013 NBA playoff series that helped Golden State grow into the championship contender we see today and saw a 57-victory Denver team exposed as not ready for prime time, there were whispers from Nuggets personnel that Jackson was a little more than a figurehead on the Golden State bench and Warriors assistant Michael Malone was the real brains of the basketball operation. Malone had a brief stint as head coach of Sacramento. He’s not as famous as Jackson, known for exclaiming “Mama, there goes that man!” on NBA telecasts, but Malone has been interviewed for Denver’s coaching vacancy.

Root for the home team. Kiz, critical columns like yours take the pure joy out of rooting for our Rockies. There are a million reasons not to believe in them, and you are never shy about pointing them out. For those of us who believe in supporting our local ballclub, it’s sad to read your bashing of a team we didn’t have not so long ago.

Ron, Westminster

Kiz: The Rockies were born in 1993. During their existence, I’ve had a child learn to read, learn to drive, learn how to do laundry at college and learn how to get full-time job. And, in those 22 years, the Rockies still have not learned how to win a division title.

Rockies’ big decision. And today’s parting shot asks our local National League team to think outside the box in the Major League Baseball draft Monday.

Whom do the Rockies draft at No. 3 in the first round? Which position? Maybe draft a new owner?

Mike, likes beer for breakfast

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla