Grace Medical Home raised more than $300,000 at its seventh annual fundraiser Let's Say Grace 2015, a 10 percent increase from last year.

The medical home provides primary care for low-income and uninsured Central Floridians who don't qualify for Medicare, Medicaid or financial help through the Affordable Care Act.

"These are people who now have a place to go for comprehensive health needs," said Stephanie Nelson Garris, executive director of Grace Medical Home, in a news release.

Of the women who have enrolled at Grace in the last two years, more than 60 percent had never had a mammogram or routine pap test in the past 10 years, said Garris. After becoming a Grace patient, 83 percent of these women have received these services.

"We find cancer early, save money and save lives," she said.

Donations from the fundraiser will go toward programs, including Transforming Prediabetes Care Initiative. The clinic is among six health centers in the nation selected to provide a 16-week program to delay the onset of type 2 diabetes in low-income patients.

Places

West Orange Health District awarded a $13.8 million grant to Health Central Hospital to expand bed count and specialized care. The grant makes up 75 percent of the total $18.3 million needed for the four-story and 40-room addition, which will be above the new emergency department. Orlando Health is funding the rest.

"Our board believes the contribution we have made in Health Central through this expansion project is an investment in the healthy future of west Orange County," said district board chairman John Murphy in a news release.

South Seminole Hospital and Osceola Regional Medical Center were among three hospitals in Florida to be recognized among the 2015 Top Hospitals, chosen by the nonprofit The Leapfrog Group. Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children was the only children's hospital in Florida to receive that recognition.

Community Health Centers is hosting a job fair on Thursday from 4 p.m. to 8 p.m. at 1800 Mercy Drive, with job openings for licensed practical nurses, medical assistants, dental assistants, call center nurses and more.

People

Dr. Kevin Sherin, health officer and director of Florida Department of Health in Orange County, is one of 13 appointees to the state's Physician Workforce Advisory Council. His appointment will last through Nov. 25, 2019.

Dr. Debra Andree has been promoted to vice president/chief medical officer at Community Health Centers. She joined CHC as a pediatrician in 2002, was promoted to chief of pediatrics in 2013 and associate medical director in 2014.

Dr. Robert Holloway, medical director of Florida Hospital Gynecologic Oncology, received an honorary degree Doctor Honoris Causa from the Medical University of Pleven in Bulgaria, for his contributions to development of robotic surgery and scientific research activities. Among the previous recipients of this award is a Nobel Laureate.

nmiller@tribune.com