Beloit Republican considers primary run at Ryan

Mike Zoril

BELOIT -- Rep. Paul Ryan may have achieved his goal of getting government moving again, but now he's raised the ire of conservatives within his party over the more than $1 trillion tax and spending measures passed Dec. 18, 2015.



As a result, Ryan may be facing a primary challenge from the right for the 1st Congressional District seat.



Mike Zoril of Beloit announced on his Facebook page on Christmas eve that he may mount a primary challenge to the Speaker.



Zoril said that he receives enough support, he's "in it to win it."



Zoril, a Republican activist, is chairman of Beloit's Equal Opportunities commission. He attempted a run for Beloit City Council last spring but failed to gain a spot on the ballot because he didn't have enough valid nomination signatures.



Zoril changed the name of his Facebook page Dec. 24 to "About Primary Challenge Paul Ryan - Republican Mike Zoril for Wisconsin Congress."



He describes himself in the about section as Christian and very conservative.



Ryan, of Janesville, was named speaker of the House in October, and since then spent his time finalizing a deal that would fund the government and avoid a shutdown similar to 2013.



Ever since the House and Senate passed a tax package and $1.1 trillion spending plan, Ryan has been defending the plan to conservatives within the Republican party.



The deal made permanent a series of tax cuts as well as removing a decades old ban on exporting domestic oil.



However it included $700 billion in unpaid tax cuts, although Ryan maintains it simply keeps in place already approved tax measures.



Conservatives seem most upset that the deal included neither a defunding measure for Planned Parenthood nor a repeal of the Affordable Care Act.



Ryan said the House will pass a measure including both when it returns in January, and send it to the presidents desk.



President Obama likely will veto the measure, but in an interview with CSI Media last week, Ryan indicated he thought there was a chance for a veto override.



Ryan also will face at least one Democrat in the fall 2016 election.



Tom Breu of Janesville quit his job in October at the Wisconsin Banking Commission as a consumer credit examiner to devote himself full time to his campaign.