In an attempt to reach underserved children in Hampton County, Beaufort-Jasper-Hampton Comprehensive Health Services, Inc. has recently begun utilizing their newly acquired $420,000 mobile health clinic. The state-of-the-art mobile health clinic will be able to provide extensive medical and dental services to area youth whose parents may not be able to take them to the doctor, for an array of reasons.

According to Roland Gardner, CEO of BJH Comprehensive Health Services, Inc., the company chose to focus on Hampton County because records show that children in Hampton County schools are the most underserved children, with regards to medical care, in the entire state.

Two years ago in Hampton County, only one-third of the children eligible to receive dental and medical services under Medicaid did so. “There were 9,000 children eligible for medical services under Medicaid, but only 3,000 children received care,” Gardner said. This is a number which he cannot accept.

According to the medical professionals on board the clinic, dental hygienist Fallon Gordon and nurse practitioner Andrietta Wright Barnett, it is vital for parents to have their children screened by both a dental and medical professional at a young age.

“It is very important for children to be seen by a dentist as soon as they start getting teethe,” said Gordon. “Preventative care will keep you from getting that tooth pain or having to receive emergency care. You don’t want that to happen and if you go to the dentist every six months, you can catch cavities early.”

Barnett stated that on top of providing dental and medical care, the mobile health unit also began, for the first time, offering sports physicals to students this year. “I had more kids and parents show up this year thanking me for offering the service because they don’t have a doctor to go to and they usually use the emergency room for their primary care. Now they have a medical home being formed right here and when I leave here in when school is out I’m in the center so if your child becomes sick in the summer you can come see me there,” she said.

The clinic is a great way for working parents, or those who do not have medical insurance, to receive medical care for their children. Both Medicare and Medicaid are accepted at the walk-up clinic, with cash being accepted for visits, as well.

“I’m from Estill so it feels good to me to come back home and help the kids in the community,” said Gordon. “There are a lot of kids who have not been to the dentist or that have a dental home. Sometimes you can see the smile on their faces when their teeth feel so much better after they get their teeth cleaned,” she said.

Parents who would like their child to be examined should have their children or themselves speak with the schools nurse, who will have paper work for the parent to fill out. This will allow the child to be seen subsequently throughout the year, without the need for additional paper work to be completed.

According the Ethel Denmark, Rural Health Outreach Coordinator for Comp. Health for Hampton County, states that there are unique aspects of providing specific health care services in Hampton County.

“One of the challenges we face is that some local providers felt that we are trying to take patients away from them. This is not the case, we are not trying to take their patients. We are only providing care to children that do not have a permanent primary care physician,” said Denmark.

According to Gardner, funding for the unit was provided by President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. BJH Comprehensive Health Services, Inc. has been operating in Hampton County since 1978. They are one of over 1,000 medical care providers in the nation that are federally funded and provide much needed services to rural areas, often lacking in medical service availability.

The mobile health clinic will make several stops at local elementary schools throughout the school year. The clinic will be at Hampton Elementary Oct. 5-8 and Nov. 23-24, Fennell Elementary on Oct. 19-22 and Feb. 8-10, Estill Elementary Nov. 2-4 and Jan. 5-6, Estill Middle/High on Oct. 26-29 and Dec. 14-17 and at Varnville Elementary on Oct. 12-15 and Nov. 30-Dec. 2. The rolling clinic will be making several stops at each school throughout the year, including more stops than listed above. Please check with your child’s school nurse for additional dates and times.