New York Mayor de Blasio plans to release a “Liberal Contract with America.” He said he was inspired by the 1994 Contract with America, of which I was the lead architect, and which led to the first House Republican majority in 40 years.

I’m flattered, Mr. Mayor. But allow me to offer a few cautionary thoughts.

De Blasio is clearly trying to pressure the Democrats to move to the left. But that is the exact opposite of the Contract with America model. The purpose of the Contract was not to pick a fight within the Republican Party. It was to define a center-right majority with a platform that commanded the broad support of the American people.

Before he writes his Contract with America from the Left, Mayor de Blasio should call Ed Miliband, who resigned as leader of the British Labour Party after the party was wiped out in elections last week.

The stunning and totally unexpected victory for Prime Minister David Cameron and the Conservatives holds lessons for both Democrats and Republicans.

The historic collapse of the Labour Party and its dramatic underperformance is a warning for those who believe a “true” left-wing agenda is the key to electoral victory.

The historic collapse of the Labour Party … is a warning for those who believe a ‘true’ left-wing agenda is the key to electoral victory.

From Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher’s first victory in 1979, the Conservatives dominated British politics for 18 years until Tony Blair deliberately and methodically moved the Labour Party to the center and won the election in 1997. Blair was so decisive in remodeling the formerly hard-left party that historian Paul Johnson called him Thatcher’s adopted son and said he understood her policies better than her Conservative successor John Major.

The Labour Party governed from the center under Blair and was amazingly popular. After a decade in office, Blair was succeeded by Gordon Brown in 2007, who moved the party back toward the left. Hammered by the economic crisis in 2010, the Labour Party suffered its biggest loss in 79 years and Brown resigned.

Yet the lesson Labour learned from this defeat was the de Blasio lesson. Ed Miliband became leader and moved Labour toward its militant left, redistributionist, big-government base.

The result is that Conservative Prime Minister David Cameron has governed a center-right coalition that the British people decisively reaffirmed this week.

Mayor de Blasio has to come to grips with some powerful realities that will increasingly dominate American politics and government. None of them come from the left.

British Conservatives emphasized their concerns for “working Britons.” In the United States, Maine Gov. Paul LePage, a Republican, won reelection last year on similar themes.

Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan won big in a blue state by emphasizing high taxes and the needs of working Marylanders.

Mayor de Blasio wants higher taxes and bigger governments.

Polls indicate Americans want more take-home pay and smaller government.

Mayor de Blasio wants to blame the rest of America for the Baltimore disaster. Most Americans know that the Baltimore mayor telling the police to let people have “space to destroy” is the real disaster.

Mayor de Blasio wants government to take more from some Americans to give it to others.

Most Americans want government to quit killing jobs and opportunity. They want to join in creating wealth, not in redistributing it.

It’s impossible for Mayor de Blasio to create a document in the mold of the Contract with America — ideas supported by large majorities of Americans — if it is based on far-left ideas.

In addition, the 1994 Contract with America was a very specific document committing to specific steps we promised to take.

House Republicans had already written implementing legislation for every pledge.

As President Obama taught us with the stimulus and ObamaCare, the Left can’t write its bills out in the open because the American people would repudiate them as soon as they understand them.

I look forward to Mayor de Blasio’s effort to practice the self-destruction and self-delusion of the British Labour Party, and I would be delighted to debate the merits of our conservative Contract with America compared to his Contract from the Left.

Perhaps we could charge admission for the debate and give the money to our favorite charity or nonprofit. My charity would be the American Museum of Natural History in New York — so Mayor de Blasio could help raise money for his own city by accepting the challenge.

Newt Gingrich is a former speaker of the US House of Representatives and a CNN contributor.