Tank on schedule to be in service next year

Jesus E. Lopez, of Moltz Construction, works to remove and clean shoring after pouring concrete inside Erie's new 4 million gallon above ground water storage tank on Friday. ( Jeremy Papasso )

It may not fit the cliché of the tall, classic water tower bearing the town's name and serving as a landmark for miles around, but the 4 million gallon water storage tank being constructed in Erie will still be a very important addition to the growing town.

The $3.8-million structure—which will hold potable water — is about 190 days into its 355-day construction schedule and is expected to be ready to go in time to help the town meet peak summer water demand in 2015, Fred Diehl, assistant to the town administrator, said this week.

The tank, being erected near the town's existing 1.5-million gallon tank on a patch of earth roughly located between Weld County roads 4, 5, 6 and 7, northeast of Colorado National Golf Club, is part of Erie's capital improvement strategy. It will serve the town's "zone three," Diehl said, a largely residential area that includes the existing Vista Ridge, Vista Pointe, Orchard Glen and Canyon Creek neighborhoods, and will eventually be home to the large-scale Colliers Hill and Compass developments.

With officials anticipating Erie's population to grow from the approximately 22,000 people who live there today to about 40,000 people by 2025, the tank was an important capital project, Diehl said.

"At the end of the day we need to be able to deliver a clean, reliable water supply to our residents and businesses and this is just one component of that," he said. "We've planned for it and it's on schedule to be in service for next year."

Large-scale water tanks common on Front Range

The town serves more than 7,000 residential water customers in addition to around 130 commercial users, Diehl said. Its Lynn R. Morgan Water Treatment Facility has a firm capacity to churn out 9.9 million gallons of potable water each day, but can be ramped up to produce 12.2 million gallons per day.

The town's average daily water usage is around 2.95 million gallon per day. Its peak flow this year was 6.4 million gallons per day, reached in July, Diehl said.

"This water storage tank will be a huge asset in terms of that," Diehl said of keeping up with heavy summer usage.

They may not be particular visible these days, but large-scale water tanks are common along the Front Range.

"I think pretty much every municipal provider has this kind of storage capability somewhere in their system," said David Nettles, a division engineer with the Colorado Division of Water Resources. "Some cities may partially bury them or even go close to a total burial just so they are less obvious."

Nettles said that Greeley has a large water storage tank near the water resources division district office in town and unless you know what you're looking for, the large tank is all but hidden from public view.

Their value in adding distribution capacity can be valuable in public safety situations as well, Nettles said.

"The basic idea behind them is it does give you some storage of treated water within the system so that if demand exceeds supply, for example, if you have a fire, you have some reserve that you can draw from," Nettles said.

"Also, it helps to just have the volume there so that you can fight the fire without causing a disruption to service."

Longmont's last tank added in 1991

The city and county of Broomfield has six tanks, including two highly visible 3-million gallon tanks near the intersection of West 136th Avenue and Daphne Street. The city, which had a 2010 population of approximately 56,000 people, also has a trio of brightly painted tanks near the Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport as well as a 6-million gallon tank in the area of the Interlocken business park that is completely buried, according to public works director David Allen.

Allen said the tanks actually save the city money during times of high demand. Instead of pumping extra water during peak demand, the city can slowly fill its tanks and use water from them to supplement the system. The key is gravity, Allen said.

"General tanks are located at a higher elevation than the area they serve to provide adequate pressure," he said.

Longmont Public Works and Natural Resources Operations Manager Bob Allen said the city has four different tanks in various places around the city, ranging in size from 4 to 8 millions gallons. The last and largest tank, known as the "North Tank," was constructed in 1991.

The city's population is around 90,200 right now, Bob Allen said, but projections call for a population of 113,000 at buildout, which will likely require the construction of a fifth tank at some point.

The town of Erie announced in April that it would not be refilling its Prince One Reservoir, a 65-million gallon capacity man-made lake southeast of the corner of U.S. 287 and Arapahoe Road. Diehl reiterated that decision was not related to the construction of the potable water tank, and that the reservoir was no longer needed for raw water storage.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328 or rubinoj@dailycamera.com