Kathleen Klobucher was looking for a duplex that she could live in forever when her real estate agent called her and said, “I found a great house for you. Meet me there right away.”

She hopped in her car and high-tailed it over to 202 N. Highland Ave. in Cheswick.

“I fell in love with it. It is beautiful and stately, like a mini-mansion. I said, ‘This is my house, I love it!’”

Since buying the four-unit, brick-and-stone building in 2004, she has been very busy renovating it. She likes being a landlord. “It was something I always wanted to do. It has been a wonderful experience.”

But now she is downsizing and relocating, so she has put the eight-bedroom building on the market for $369,900 (MLS No. 1033977) with Jhonniecq Sims of Howard Hanna Real Estate Services (412-963-6300 or www.howardhanna.com). An open house will be held at 1-4 p.m. May 3.

The house was built in 1896 by Jesse C. H. Groomes, owner of Groomes Construction Co. Mr. Groomes and his wife, Hazel, raised two children in the sprawling home sitting on a half-acre lot.

“Mrs. Groomes loved to plant hosta and peonies. Several heirloom varieties are still growing here today,” Ms. Klobucher said.

Known as the Groomes Mansion, the house is featured in the 2002 Cheswick Community Historic Guide available at the borough building. But it has always been more than a single-family home. In fact, there has been a business on-site since the day it was built.

Mr. Groomes ran his construction business out of the lower level. He made sure that there was level access to the grounds from those entrances. Ms. Klobucher said the main office area was soundproofed with lead walls so that no one could hear the business deals being made there. Local sources have indicated that Groomes Construction was one of several local companies involved in the building of the original Pittsburgh Airport that opened in May 1952.

For almost seven years, the building housed the Cheswick borough offices and police department. “The police used the lead-lined back room for privacy and interrogations,” Ms. Klobucher said.

(Click image for larger version)

Records show that in 1994, after the borough offices were moved, an estate attorney took possession of the property and ran his business there as well.

The building has three active levels with various porches and outdoor seating areas. A wide driveway lined with plantings leads to the house, and a three-car detached garage.

Inside, the four units include one retail business and three living spaces. Ms. Klobucher runs a vintage clothing store, Boutique 202, in part of the first floor.

That space, known as Unit 1, also includes three bedrooms and 2 1⁄2 baths. The 15- by- 12-foot kitchen has black appliances, oak kitchen cabinets, Vangura solid surface counter tops and an American Standard sink with brushed-nickel faucets and hardware.

The living room measures 18 by 17 feet and has its original brick fireplace, leaded-glass windows and built-in bookcases. Original hardwood floors run throughout the first floor. Bedrooms range from 13 by 15 feet to 14 by 10 feet.

The lower level, which had been used by the borough, eventually became two rental units: Unit 3 with two bedrooms and one bathroom, and Unit 4 with one bedroom and one bath.

While renovating the building, Ms. Klobucher removed dropped ceilings, installed new wiring, windows, walls and carpeting and updated the kitchens with recessed lighting, new appliances and solid-surface counter tops. Original details such as stone fireplaces were preserved.

On the second level, the two-bedroom, one-bath unit could be expanded to the attic or could be turned into a fifth apartment. A new white kitchen with center island is the centerpiece.

A second home was built for one of the Groomes’ sons after he was married. That property was sold off years before Ms. Klobucher bought this one. It is occupied and maintained as another four-unit residence nearby.

The property’s county assessed value is $177,100 (www2.county.allegheny.pa.us/RealEstate/Search.aspx). Over the past three years, six properties have sold on North Highland Avenue for prices ranging from $50,000 in November 2013 to $105,000 in November 2011. (www.realstats.net).

All of the utilities are separate. Two units are all electric and two have gas-fired boiler heat. Air conditioning is via window units. There is a laundry center on the lower level for tenants to use.

“I have been very lucky. I’ve had great tenants,” Ms. Klobucher says. “We have a very family atmosphere. We meet on the porches for evening wine and everyone is respectful.”

There will be a multi-family yard sale from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. April 23-26.

“Mostly current and prior tenants come,” Ms. Klobucher said. “We had such a blast doing it last year that we decided to do it again.”

Rosa Colucci: 412-263-1634 or rcolucci@post-gazette.com; Twitter; PgRosa_Colucci.