On Media Blog Archives Select Date… December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015 April, 2015 March, 2015 February, 2015 January, 2015

The New York Times' digital memo

An internal New York Times report circulated weeks before Jill Abramson's termination outlined the paper's deep struggles with digital journalism, warning that its unshakable preoccupation with the print product was causing it to fall behind online.

"The newsroom is unanimous: we are focusing too much time and energy on Page One,” the report states, referring to the front page of the print newspaper.

The 96-page report, which was obtained by BuzzFeed and published on Thursday, was led by Arthur Gregg Sulzberger, the son of publisher Arthur Sulzberger Jr. While not directly responsible for Abramson's ouster, it fueled the elder Sulzberger's belief that the Times was lagging on the digital front and needed swift change.

"The New York Times is winning at journalism," the report begins. "At the same time, we are falling behind in a second critical area: the art and science of getting our journalism to readers. We have always cared about the reach and impact of our work, but we haven't done enough to crack that code in the digital era."

The report then warns that new media organizations like First Look Media, Vox, Huffington Post, The Guardian, and others are pulling ahead in digital growth while the Times is getting left behind.

"Our journalism advantage is shrinking as more of these upstarts expand their newsrooms," the report states.

Whether Dean Baquet, the new executive editor, takes the report to heart is an open question. Several sources have previously told POLITICO that, like Abramson, Baquet often seems more concerned with what's on the front page of the paper than with what's leading the website.

In a statement, Times spokesperson Eileen Murphy said the Times has embraced the report.

“The full report was an internal document, meant for newsroom management as a candid assessment of where the The Times newsroom was in its digital transformation," she said. "The key findings were distilled into a shorter report and released publicly last week. That report reflected the findings and recommendations of the task force accurately, and as we have said publicly, we have embraced it and promised to act on many of its recommendations."

Read the full report at BuzzFeed.

Authors: