EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The conundrum formerly known as Ronnie Hillman finally starts his first game in his third NFL season.

Perhaps.

Rather, the Broncos’ offense could begin with four wide receivers and a tight end, or three wides and two tights, or with Juwan Thompson or C.J. Anderson at running back, or with Virgil Green or Julius Thomas lined up in the backfield.

The Formerly Known As could even wind up on the inactive list.

Nobody can ever predict where this young man will be or what he’s going to do. Winston Churchill would suggest Hillman is a poser wrapped in a puzzle inside perplexing potential.

When the Broncos selected Hillman in the third round, as the fifth overall running back, of the 2012 draft, John Elway, who was primarily responsible for the choice, said: “Every time he touches the ball, he has a chance to go all the way.”

Trouble is, Hillman hasn’t touched the ball very often, and he never has gone all the way.

Now into his third season, Hillman has been a healthy scratch in 13 games. He appeared in one postseason game, in his rookie season (2012), and none last season. In the 26 games he has played, he’s rushed five times or fewer in 16 of those games.

Two games ago, in Seattle, Hillman was given the handoff twice and gained 2 yards. He was merely a witness in the Broncos’ last game at MetLife Stadium — the Super Bowl.

He has twice as many fumbles as touchdowns (two).

Alfred Morris, a running back drafted 106 slots below Hillman, already has crunched out a pair of thousand-yard-plus seasons. Hillman’s had a 799-yard career.

This is the Hillman who ran for 3,243 yards and 36 touchdowns in his two years at San Diego State. He’s had momentary flashes of brilliance with the Broncos. In his fourth NFL game, against New Orleans, Hillman carried 14 times for 86 yards, including a 31-yard dash. Those are his individual highs. The next week, he ran once for 4 yards. In a game at Oakland last season, he had nine rushes for 66 yards, a 7.3-yard average. A month later, his critical fumble near the goal line cost the Broncos a chance to win at Indianapolis, and he was benched for most of the rest of the season.

Last Sunday, when Montee Ball suffered a groin injury, up popped Hillman. He ran 15 times against Arizona and earned the start (supposedly) against the Jets. In all three training camps, he’s been considered, according to coaches, a player on the brink of being a major contributor. Then he vanishes.

What’s With The Conundrum?

Despite being in his third season, Hillman, at age 23, is one of the Broncos’ five youngest players. Six years ago, he was working full time at Applebee’s.

He’s short (5-foot-8½) and lean (180 pounds when holding a slab of concrete) and not durable. He isn’t a quality blocker. He doesn’t always comprehend the checkdowns, and he doesn’t fully utilize his running lanes.

He’s also immature. After the Broncos arrived for the Super Bowl, Hillman was photographed in a Bronx strip club. Rumors continue to swirl about what actually happened to Hillman and Kayvon Webster when the Broncos played an exhibition at Dallas in late August. Both ended up at a hospital, and the reason was covered up by the organization. Neither played in the season opener.

Hillman isn’t one of the league’s bad- fellows. He just performs occasional stupid human tricks.

He has talent, with a burst of speed and elusiveness that can lead to big gains. In the second half last Sunday, Hillman produced impressive runs for 12, 16, 13 and 9 yards, and wasn’t overrun by the Cardinals’ blitzers. He averaged 4.3 yards per carry, which is what the Broncos’ prolific play- action passing game needs as a diversion against the Jets, who, like the Cardinals, have assembled a terrific pass rush.

Hillman had a very good half last week. The Broncos have seen the thrill-man sizzle in a half-dozen games and the Hillman fizzle in another half dozen. Hillman remains the unknown conundrum.

But he gets a fresh start Sunday.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or twitter.com/woodypaige