For many years, the world’s greatest power faced two grave external threats: from irregular groups of non-state actors and from large, newly empowered, rising states that wanted to displace it. Massive amounts of national treasure were expended on military operations ranging from tactical raids to full-scale war. Negotiation alternated with conflict, thousands of troops were deployed permanently abroad and allied states were built up as a buffer against both threats. But in the end all this wasn’t enough: National exhaustion and a breakdown of political legitimacy led to the eventual collapse of the state. Why? Because it never fully realized that its security crisis was ultimately as much a domestic issue—a question of getting its politics in order—as it was an external one.

The power described above is not 21st century America, but rather ancient Rome. And today, nearly a decade and a half after the terror attacks of 9/11, the United States appears to be entering an environment analogous to the one in which Rome found itself. On the one hand, terrorism is more dangerous today than it was in 2001, with the Islamist non-state actors who practice it metastasizing around the Middle East and North Africa. On the other hand, great-power competition has re-emerged with the disruptive actions of Russia in Europe and China in East Asia, and a possibly a nuclear Iran in the Middle East. Just like Rome, America faces a two-front conflict to preserve its power and prestige—and as with Rome, these threats are not going away. They will last at least a generation, and most likely more.

Story Continued Below

And so we need a strategy that will last for a generation or more as well. After a long delay—during which he rather peevishly declared that “we don’t have a strategy yet” for the Islamic State—President Obama apparently intends to make a start in his speech to the nation Wednesday night. But even here he appears to be looking at the world in separate chunks, rather than delivering up a unified concept. He will speak about the Islamic State, but not about the threat from Russia, which he dismissed earlier this year as a mere “regional power”—just as he once underestimated the Islamic State as al Qaeda’s “jayvee team.”

Here too, Americans would be well advised not to do as the Romans did. For more than 250 years, spanning from the end of the Republic through much of the Empire, Rome’s policy of expansion resulted in a condition of semi-permanent warfare against two very different threats. In what is today’s central Europe, along the Rhine and Danube Rivers, Rome struggled to protect its borders from depredations and incursions by various Germanic tribes, colloquially known to history as “barbarians.” Meanwhile, along its far eastern extent, primarily in today’s Levant and Central Asia, and also along the lower Danube, Rome contended with strong states, most notably the Parthian Empire. These states could never displace Rome, but regularly threatened its borders and trade routes, disrupting the Roman idea of global order. Warfare was the endemic, permanent condition for much of Roman history, and the rulers in Rome did little but to deal with these successive crises as they came along, one by one.

The United States is in danger of doing the same. For Washington, which has already spent at least $2 trillion on relatively limited wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the prospect of decades more competition, deterrence and fighting at an unknown cost represents the greatest security challenge since the Cold War, and perhaps since World War II. It is just as much a domestic political issue, and will figure as prominently in the debates over the future direction of the country, as do the battles over Obamacare, the regulatory burden or the transformation of the economy. Yet so far, it does not seem that either the country’s political elites or ordinary citizens have fully appreciated both the scope and, more importantly, the nature of America’s new two-front conflict. They soon will, as the country’s economic health and domestic political stability will be directly affected by rising global risk. To quote Leon Trotsky, “You may not be interested in war, but war is interested in you.”

Americans must accept the fact that, while their country may not be engaged in daily fighting, neither will it know peace for the foreseeable future. The world will become far more insecure and unstable over the next decades, and the amorphous yet crucial idea of global “order” will be strained, perhaps to the breaking point.

This two-front conflict, while not quite yet an all-out “war” by any traditional definition, is threatening more and more to become exactly that. Russia has engaged at least twice in limited war in Eastern Europe, China edges ever closer to the same in the South China Sea, and Iran is making mischief not just with its nuclear program but with its support of terrorist groups abroad.

The United States has fought and prepared for multi-front conflicts in the past, of course. In the decades from 1945 to 1990, America fought two major land wars in Asia, in Korea and Vietnam; permanently deployed hundreds of thousands of U.S. military personnel throughout Eurasia; and used thousands of regular troops and Special Forces to counter guerilla groups and to train partner militaries around the globe to fight insurgencies. Through it all Washington was also waging a larger (if mostly cold) war against the Soviet Union.

Yet to gain political support for its various wars, whether during WWII or the Cold War, Washington created an overarching ideological concept—precisely what we don’t have now. In the 1940s it was the “fight against totalitarian fascism,” while in the Cold War is was the “struggle against global communism.” Since 2001, it has been the “global war on terror,” although the Obama administration has sought to more narrowly define that concept to focus on al Qaeda and its closest affiliates.

Today’s two-front conflict shares no such ideological or conceptual unity. There is no substantive link between non-state jihadist groups and great-power challengers like Russia or Chinese coercion. Even Iran, with its pursuit of nuclear weapons, is a completely different actor from Shiite jihadists, despite what connections they may have. For Americans comfortable thinking in universal absolutes – global communist threat or Islamist terrorism – the parochial and variegated nature of our current threats is intellectually and ideologically difficult to absorb.