Chris Webb of Lake Forest was recently recognized as one of the top producers in the country by Insurance Business America magazine.

Q. Where are you originally from?

A. Shreveport, LA.

Q. How did you end up in the Chicago area?

A. After college I worked at a golf resort in Florida. I was the golf pro. I met my ex-wife. They said not to fraternize with the guests but I ended up hanging with her. Then we started to date long distance. Then a year later I moved up here. We ended up getting divorced but I stayed.

Q. How did you get into the insurance business?

A. When I moved up here I got a job at MCI. I worked there for a year and ran into a guy I had played golf with who was in the insurance business. The guy who ran the insurance office was a well-known golfer and there were several golfers in the office and I felt attracted to that. I also liked building relationships with people.

Q. When did you start Webb Financial Group?

A. 2008.

Q. You've grown the business quite a bit according to Insurance Business America magazine. How did you do that?

A. I branched out four years ago into property and casualty. I had only been in life and health insurance. When Obamacare came down the pike, I felt I had to diversify my business. Its grown about 350 percent over the last four years, all in.

Q. How has Obamacare impacted you as an insurance broker?

A. Our commission on individual health insurance has dropped. Now we're transitioning on individual health care to an hourly fee because we're getting paid such a small percentage or nothing at all. We have to reinvent the business.

Q. Any tips for those looking for insurance?

A. It's self-serving, but we're an independent agency. We work with many different insurers. There are many people out there who are captive agents and represent (one large insurer). We call them the Barney Fife's of insurance because they have one bullet in their gun. Sometimes you lose business to Barney Fife because they have a niche in some area.

Q. Besides insurance, what are you interested in?

A. I still love to play golf. I'm involved with First Tee that helps introduce golf to underprivileged kids. Golf is still my big passion although my handicap and my waist size have gone in the same direction in recent years.

—Mark Lawton, Pioneer Press

mlawton@pioneerlocal.com

Twitter: @reporterdude

Shout Out is a weekly feature in which we get to know and introduce our readers to their fellow community members and local visitors throughout suburban Chicago. Check out more online at ChicagoTribune.com/ShoutOut.