The breast cancer screening recommendations proposed by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force earlier this week are basically unchanged from the 2009 version.

WARNING: a reader’s yawn at this juncture would be misplaced.

The recommendations proposed and put in place five years ago were so politically radioactive that they could have jeopardized the passage of the Affordable Care Act.

Indeed, the ACA specifically excluded the task force’s 2009 recommendation on mammography.

Immediately after the 2009 draft recommendation was published, then HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius in effect urged women between 40 and 49 to disregard the panel’s evidence-based guideline. An amendment to the ACA, called the “Women’s Preventive Health Amendment,” finished the job of invalidating the guideline. (This made the ACA politically viable.)

Some folks in Congress launched efforts to eliminate funding for the independent USPSTF. Today, Congressional efforts to broaden the panel to include subspecialists and even the industry are ongoing.

The 2015 guideline, published April 20, resurrects the controversy—and if anything, the situation today has even greater thermonuclear potential: while the 2009 guideline is specifically excluded from ACA, the 2015 document isn’t. At least not yet, some say.

Under the provisions of ACA, a low grade—in this case a “C”—for mammography screening among younger women could mean that private insurers wouldn’t be obligated to cover mammography for women between ages of 40 and 49.

Will insurers be obligated to pay, or will they be allowed to cite USPSTF’s recommendations as a basis for refusing to pay? Ultimately, the stakes are higher than breast cancer screening. If some of the USPSTF recommendations are to be disregarded while others get implemented, then why pretend that evidence-based medicine has a role in determining U.S. health policy?

“So why does it appear to be the situation in the ongoing polemic about breast cancer screening guidelines that an evidence-based approach is abandoned when it does not result in guidelines which are those which are not liked or welcomed?” said Peter Boyle, president of the International Prevention Research Institute, professor of global public health at Strathclyde University, and lead author of the State of Oncology 2013 report.

“Is this just a U.S. phenomenon?” said Boyle. “Guidelines for breast cancer screening in Europe have changed little in the last 25 years.

“Some things are clear,” he said. “There is more to screening that finding more, smaller cancers. An effective screening test, within a screening program, needs to be shown to reduce mortality from that cancer without creating a large, false positive pool of patients. Lack of a consistent reduction in mortality from large trials, and a large over-diagnosis rate, has led to moves against the widespread use of PSA testing for prostate cancer.”

Another “C”

The 2015 recommendations—again—give a “B” to mammography screening of women between ages 50 and 74.

For women between 40 and 49, “the decision to start screening mammography in women prior to age 50 years should be an individual one,” the 2015 draft guideline states. “Women who place a higher value on the potential benefit than the potential harms may choose to begin biennial screening between the ages of 40 and 49 years.”

The public comment period will end May 18. It is not known when the final recommendation will be published.

On April 20, Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.) sent a letter to HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell, urging that the 2015 guideline be overruled in the same way as the previous version.

“We know that early detection of breast cancer offers women their very best chance at a cure and at survival,” Mikulski wrote to Burwell. “Mammograms are essential for that early detection. I am requesting that your Department take swift action to reassure the American public that you will do everything within your power to ensure the continued availability of free mammograms for all women aged 40 and older.

“Further, should the USPSTF’s recommendations be finalized, I would strongly urge that all appropriate actions be taken by the Department of Health and Human Services to ensure patients’ previous access to breast cancer screening is not impeded, discouraged, or eliminated. Finally, should the draft recommendation be finalized, I will actively and aggressively pursue all legislative options available to ensure that women aged 40 and older are able to continue receiving free annual mammograms.”

The letter is posted here.

Mikulski last month announced that she wouldn’t seek reelection in 2016.

Efforts to defang the USPSTF have been renewed on the Hill.

The American College of Radiology and the Society of Breast Imaging, are supporting a bill called the USPSTF Transparency and Accountability Act of 2015 (H.R. 1151), which seeks to change the composition of the task force by including “individuals that collectively have appropriate scientific expertise, including in fields of health sciences research, health economics, health promotion, disease prevention, and clinical care.”

Under that bill, USPSTF “shall include balanced representation of practicing primary and specialty care providers, patient and health care consumers, and relevant stakeholders from the medical products manufacturing community.” The measure was introduced in the House of Representatives by Reps. Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.) and Bobby Rush (D-Ill.).

The task force now includes generalists, primary care physicians, epidemiologists, statisticians and other experts on preventive services.

The idea was suggested by a committee of the Institute of Medicine as a way to remove professional, financial and emotional conflicts of interest from the guidelines process. The process specifically allows the expert organizations to have the ability to communicate what they believe should be recommended and why.

The USPSTF’s role is to serve as an objective grand jury.

The issue of mammography screening is even more complex because a recent study, published in Health Affairs, used real insurance billing data to quantify the cost of false positive mammograms and overdiagnosis (The Cancer Letter, April 10).