WATCH: Six men steal $52K in seafood from S. Philly market, police say

WATCH: Six men steal $52K in seafood from S. Philly market, police say May 26

Tommy Rowan is a general assignment digital reporter. While his stories are designed for the web, they also appear in both The Inquirer and Daily News. He is a native of Northeast Philadelphia, and graduate of Temple University.

Rudolph Keitt, the 47-year-old man accused of injuring four officers in the course of a police pursuit in Olney last week, was charged with attempted murder, police announced Monday (Courtesy of Philadelphia Police).

Rudolph Keitt, the 47-year-old man accused of injuring four officers in the course of a police pursuit in Olney last week, was charged with attempted murder, police announced Monday (Courtesy of Philadelphia Police).

The 47-year-old man accused of injuring four officers in the course of a police pursuit in Olney last week was charged with attempted murder, police announced Monday.

Rudolph Keitt, of the 6300 block of Ogontz Avenue, was found sitting inside an early-2000s red sedan smashed against a concrete wall at Wagner and Olney Avenues just after 2 p.m. last Tuesday, according to a police report.

When responders attempted to remove Keitt from the vehicle he became combative, according to a police report. Keitt allegedly struggled with several officers and jumped back into the sedan and sped off toward 7th Street and Chew Avenue where he hit an officer, a parked car and a police cruiser.

Keitt swiped another cruiser and a firetruck on Olney Avenue before meeting a group of officers who attempted to trap him at the intersection of Stenton and Ogontz Avenues. After backing up and striking a cruiser, he drove forward and hit a second officer.

He again excelerated and hit another cruiser before fleeing the scene, according to the police report.

Two officers opened fire on Keitt's sedan as he fled the scene, according to the report.

Keitt was hit once in the chest.

Police caught up with Keitt on the 1900 block of Colonial Street, where he was arrested.

Keitt was taken to Einstein Medical Center, where he was listed in critical condition.

A female passenger later told police that Keitt suffered a seizure. The woman said she exited through a rear door at the original crash scene before first responders arrived.

A total of four officers were injured in the pursuit.

"In the course of him driving he did hit four," said Officer Tanya Little, a police spokeswoman.

The officers were admitted and later released from Einstein Medical Center.

Keitt also faces charges of attempting to flee, aggravated assault and reckless endangerment, among others.

According to police, Keitt has seven prior arrests.

The officers who discharged their weapons were placed on administrative duty pending the outcome of an investigation.