Entertainment

Shop Pin it (Photo : Youtube) The new trailer for James Franco and Seth Rogen’s movie “The Interview” has just been recently released but it didn’t take long for North Korea to once again blast the film and the people behind it.

The new trailer for James Franco and Seth Rogen's movie "The Interview" has just been recently released but it didn't take long for North Korea to once again blast the film and the people behind it.



The movie's plot has James, who plays television tabloid news reporter Dave Skylark and Seth Rogen, who plays his producer Aaron Rapoport, travelling to North Korea to assassinate Kim Jong-un portrayed by Randall Park, according to Just Jared.



Apparently, the country's government wasn't pleased with the comedy's plot that it even released a statement on Friday condemning "The Interview" and its makers ahead of its December opening.



Published under a pen name in the North Korean government-controlled website Uriminzokkiri, the statement rebukes the flick calling it an "evil act of provocation" that warrants "stern punishment," The Hollywood Reporter has learned.



"The cheekiness to show this conspiracy movie, which is comprised of utter distortions of the truth and absurd imaginations, is an evil act of provocation against our highly dignified republic and an insult against our righteous people," the statement read as it continues to blast the film makers.



"The trashy filmmakers, who, won over by a few dollars thrown to them by conspirators, have compromised the dignity and conscience of filmmaking and dared to produce and direct such a film. They must be subject to our stern punishment," it added.



Even the U.S. didn't escape North Korea's criticism as the latter expressed pity on the former for allegedly attempting to "threaten" the state's authority to little avail.



"How pitiful the U.S. is, desperately scrambling to tear down the authority of our republic that grows mightier by the day, with a shabby movie, now that no pressure or threat has worked."



This is reportedly not the first time that North Korea has expressed displeasure towards James Franco and Seth Rogen's film. The country has previously complained to the United Nations about the flick, Den of Geek reported.