POLITICO New Jersey Playbook, presented by Nuclear Matters: CHRISTIE’s crowded desk -- Bridgegate contributes to D grade -- SCHEPISI’s recovery

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj)

Good Monday morning!

Story Continued Below

Busy day. Thirteen Senate and Assembly committees meet at the Statehouse, while dozens of bills that have been on Christie’s desk for months — including the Atlantic City rescue package and the “Democracy Act” — are due for action. Here’s my primer on that: http://politi.co/1NYcj8j

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “The unions in our state decided that they were going to spend millions and millions of dollars, so I think the combination of the second term for a governor, which is always one that loses seats, and the huge way we got outspent, I think, are the two things that contributed the most to it and there's nothing I could do about either of those things” — Chris Christie http://bit.ly/1kDaHHf

WHERE’S CHRISTIE? No public schedule but he’s doing the full circuit this morning on Fox News (7:00), MSNBC (7:30), CNN (8:00) and CNBC (8:30). Yes, CNBC.

PREZ POLLS

Iowa: CNN/ORC poll released Friday shows Christie in 8th place at 3 percent — unchanged from August poll.

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — Democratic State Committeewoman Jan Bidwell, Glen Rock Councilman Arthur Pazan, WNBC news photographer/editor Howard Gowa. Sunday for lobbyist A.J. Sabath and Democratic political consultant Victoria Mayer.

STATE NEWS

AT LEAST WE’RE STILL IN THE TOP HALF — “New Jersey gets D grade in 2015 State Integrity Investigation,” by Ian Shearn for The Center for Public Integrity: “Bridgegate is perhaps the most brazen of a series of controversies, including lavish all-expense-paid trips and an ongoing battle with the press over public records, that have engulfed the Christie administration in recent years. All of this has contributed to the state earning an overall score of 65, or a grade of D, in the State Integrity Investigation, a data-driven analysis of state government accountability and transparency conducted by the Center for Public Integrity and Global Integrity. The report also found in New Jersey a significant “enforcement gap,” which measures the difference between the laws on the books and how they're actually implemented. The score places the Garden State 19th overall, a precipitous drop from 2012, when it earned a grade of B+ and the top rank in the nation. The two scores are not directly comparable, however, due to changes made to improve and update the questions and methodology, such as eliminating the category for redistricting, a process that generally occurs only once every 10 years.” http://bit.ly/1NYcMY9

NOT EASY FOR SCHEPISI — “Mountains to climb: North Jersey lawmaker tells of her road back after brain aneurysm,” by The Record’s Lindy Washburn: “Schepisi, 43, knows that “on the lucky spectrum” she’s off the charts: After her brain surgery, she has no complications. She has returned to work full time, run an active political campaign and — as of last week — been reelected to a third term in the Legislature. But that luck came with a price — a financial one. As she dealt with her medical expenses, she needed all the skills she uses as a lawyer to navigate the billing maze: untangling what was charged and what was owed, what was in-network and what was out-of-network, what was her insurer’s responsibility and what was her own. It hasn’t been easy.” http://bit.ly/1Muliiy

LEMONADE — “Is debate demotion an obstacle or opportunity for Christie?,” by The Record’s Charles Stile: “Christie just might turn the debate into one of his town-hall events, the highlights of which are quickly cut-and-pasted by his media staff and instantly pumped to news outlets for the post-debate buzz. More people might hear about Christie’s performance in the debate than those who might actually watch it, his supporters argue. “I’ll show up wherever I’m told to show up on Tuesday night, and I will debate and I will make an impression because that’s what we’re doing,” Christie said Friday in an interview with conservative talk show host Laura Ingraham. Yet, that confident, pre-debate spin cannot entirely conceal the damage of the demotion to the Christie aura. The onetime front-runner and the promising, pragmatic face of the GOP’s future is now saddled with the stigma of a candidate who has edged closer to the exit door of the 2016 race.” http://bit.ly/1kD9Y8J

—From the New York Times’ Alexander Burns: “The demotion highlighted Mr. Christie’s transformation from a dominant figure in the Republican Party — a favorite of national campaign donors and a master of projecting his personality through the New York-area television media — into a pugnacious underdog, jostling for attention with candidates who lack his political agility and raw charisma.” http://nyti.ms/1kDanrK

—“Fox got it wrong in how it set main GOP debate that excludes Christie, pollsters say,” by NJ Advance Media’s Claude Brodesser-Akner http://bit.ly/1NYw8wn

—From 538’s Harry Enton: “What if a mainstream Republican wins neither Iowa nor New Hampshire? I’m not talking about a Donald Trump sweep. I’m talking about two factional candidates within the party trading victories: A social conservative (Ben Carson, say) wins Iowa, and a moderate (Chris Christie) wins New Hampshire. That eventuality seems more likely than usual in 2016 because so many candidates are running, and the party establishment can’t seem to ‘decide’ which candidate to back. To be clear, such a scenario isn’t likely, but it’s at least possible. And it could mean chaos...that disarray could lead to a nominee who is much more moderate than the median Republican voter — like Christie.” http://53eig.ht/1XVx5Kw

—WaPo: “As GOP voting looms, long-shot candidates bet on a single state” http://wapo.st/1NYb74T

SHAMELESS SELF-PROMOTION: My wife Emily Helck and I are interviewed on the latest episode of “The Backgrounder” podcast, hosted by Paul Brubaker. We didn’t talk politics. We talked about what it was like to both have cancer in our 20s and to be together through both experiences. I was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma in late 2008 and treated 2009, when we were dating (well, living in sin together). We married in 2010, and two years later she was was diagnosed with breast cancer. You can listen here: http://bit.ly/1NY8NLk

GO AHEAD. GIVE HIM A HUG — “Drug Czar Approves Of Gov. Chris Christie's Viral Message On Addiction,” by The Huffington Post’s Jason Cherkis: “Drug czar Michael Botticelli told The Huffington Post in an interview that he watched the Christie video Friday morning. ‘I thought it was quite moving and impassioned,’ Botticelli said. ‘I also thought that it was great that Governor Christie was articulating what are the prime principles of our national drug control policy.’” http://huff.to/1NY2V4C

PENSION PROBLEMS — “Now that election is over, focus on the pension, union says,” by The AP’s Michael Catalini: “The new and bigger Democratic majority in New Jersey, expanded with financial help from the state's largest teachers union, must pay more toward the public pension in 2016 than Gov. Chris Christie has this year, the labor group says … ‘Follow the state's commitment to achieve full funding and to the honor the commitment made by every public employee who’s been making their contribution in every paycheck,’ said NJEA executive director Ed Richardson.” http://sfg.ly/1NY373G

HE’S READY FOR HIS CLOSEUP. ARE YOU DUMB, MR. DEMILLE? — “Christie’s behind in the polls, but a TV attraction,” by The Record’s Salvador Rizzo: “It’s a sign that television and ground-level politics can veer off in starkly different directions sometimes. Rarely in history has a presidential candidate gotten so much airtime with so few signs of voter support. And rarely has a candidate gotten 7 million views for a video posted online, as Christie did last week by speaking compassionately about addiction.” http://bit.ly/1NYadFo

GATEWAY — “Governors, senators hammering out a framework for new rail tunnel,” by POLITICO’s Dana Rubinstein and David Giambusso: “In August, U.S. Sen. Chuck Schumer called on the region to create a separate ‘development corporation’ to build a new rail tunnel connecting New Jersey commuters to their jobs in midtown Manhattan. Multiple sources have told POLITICO New York the two states, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and federal officials are now hammering out a framework for a new entity dedicated solely to building the project.” http://politi.co/1NYYJ4A

** A Message from Nuclear Matters: Providing more than 62% of America’s carbon-free electricity, existing, state-of-the-art nuclear energy plants play a vital role in achieving our clean-energy and carbon-reduction goals. The industry also supports more than 475,000 jobs nationally and provides critical tax revenue locally for roads, schools and other public priorities. Learn more at NuclearMatters.com. **

THINGS ARE GOING GREAT — “Five years after donation, Facebook creator sees improvement in Newark schools,” by The AP: “Five years after donating $100 million to remake education in Newark, Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg says he's using lessons learned about the need for community involvement in his next effort in California. He also highlighted some successes in New Jersey's largest city. In a Facebook post Friday, Zuckerberg acknowledged increased graduation rates in Newark and successful charter schools, but also noted the "challenges, mistakes and honest differences among people with good intentions.” http://7ny.tv/1NY3D1H

BECAUSE RIGHT NOW DEMOCRATS WANT A NOMINEE WHO COULDN’T BE CLOSER TO CHRISTIE — “Sources: The Joe D. 2017 Second Choice Power Brokers’ Option,” by PolitickerNJ’s Max Pizarro: “Buzz this week attended Essex County Executive Joe DiVincenzo as a potential 2017 candidate for governor, with sources telling PolitickerNJ that the veteran Democrat has increasingly avidly entertained the idea of a guv run in conversations with other Democrats. DiVincenzo flag-poled the idea in at least two recent conversations, the sources said.” http://bit.ly/1kDb0la

CARTOON BREAK — “The Great Debate over debates,” by Drew Sheneman: http://bit.ly/1kD8wmY

PEDALS — “N.Y. won’t allow relocation of ‘Pedals,’ the injured walking bear,” by NJ Advance Media’s Dave Hutchinson: “‘Pedals,’ the injured walking bear, has just had another hurdle thrown in his path — even if New Jersey wildlife officials allowed him to be relocated to a wildlife center in New York, the Empire State environmental agency says it, too, would stand in the way of the move. Benning DeLaMater, a public information officer with the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, said there's no scenario in which the agency would allow the Orphaned Wildlife Center in Otisville, N.Y. to take in the bear.” http://bit.ly/1NYarws

HOLY MAN — “You’ll never believe who got Jim McGreevey to join Twitter,” by NJ Advance Media’s The Auditor: “Former Gov. Jim McGreevey recently created his own Twitter page — but he still doesn't have a profile picture, nor has he tweeted anything yet. Maybe that's because he joined only for one reason: the pope. McGreevey told The Auditor that he launched his account simply to read Pope Francis’ feed. ‘My sole purpose was to access the pope's sayings during the course of the day — to remind myself what’s important.’” http://bit.ly/1kD8E5W

ABOUT THE TIMELINE ON CHRISTIE’S TURNING AGAINST ABORTION... — “Chris Christie On Ben Carson: Candidates Have To Back Up Personal Stories,” by BuzzFeed’s Christopher Massie: “Asked by radio host Michael Medved about a Politico story that raised questions about Ben Carson’s claim that he was offered a ‘full scholarship’ to West Point, Christie said, ‘I’ve been campaigning for the last two days, so I haven’t followed it as closely as I might have otherwise. But what I will tell you is we’re all responsible for our personal story, right? We put our personal story out there, we tell folks our history, that’s part of our candidacy. And we have to be able to back that up.’” http://bzfd.it/1kD9dws

HE’S GOT AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN NH FIGURED OUT, TOO — “Christie offers a fix for U.S. roads, not Jersey’s,” by The Record’s Herb Jackson: “Christie is more willing to talk about how he’d deal with a cash-starved federal transportation system than with the same situation in the state where he is governor.” http://bit.ly/1NYY1Es

WORK SMARTER NOT HARDER: LEGISLATIVE COMPASS — POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium subscription service, arms policy professionals with the ability to do more than just track bills. With Legislative Compass, Pros can quickly compare bill language, get whip counts, understand where bills originate and track who supports specific legislation in Congress. Become a Pro and empower yourself to make smarter decisions. Schedule your demo today.

THE CHRONICLES OF OMNIA —“N.J. hospital sues Horizon to stop new discounted insurance plan,” by NJ Advance Media’s Susan K. Livio: “Arguing it was ‘wrongly excluded’ from a line new of discounted insurance plans, Saint Peter’s University Hospital Friday sued to stop Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey from selling the policies without giving the New Brunswick hospital a chance to participate. The hospital’s attorney, Jeffrey Greenbaum, confirmed he filed an injunction in state Superior Court in Middlesex County asking a judge to prevent the state’s largest insurance company from selling OMNIA Alliance policies that will offer consumers a 15 percent discount from their other products in 2016. A hearing is scheduled for Monday morning.” http://bit.ly/1SayAkg

#TELLINGITLIKEITIS — “Christie is a believer in the ‘Ferguson effect’,” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s Maddie Hanna: “The subject of debate: the ‘Ferguson effect,’ a theory that officers are responding to backlash by pulling back from proactive policing, potentially resulting in increased crime ... Noting that some cities had no crime increase this year, Jeffrey Fagan, a professor at Columbia Law School, said there was ‘no evidence other than a few unconfirmed anecdotes that there is de-policing in U.S. cities, or that police actions have led to a rise in homicide in a handful of cities.’ … While Christie has said the Ferguson effect is real, he has also said it isn't happening in New Jersey … Several New Jersey police departments also denied any impact.” http://bit.ly/1NYXLVS

IS THIS WHAT CHRISTIE MEANT BY ‘TAKE THE BAT OUT’?—“N.J. bats’ future looks bleak,” by The Record’s James M. O’Neill: “New Jersey’s population of little brown bats — once the most prolific bat species in the state and one of the smallest, measuring 2 to 4 inches from nose to tail — continued its steep decline this year, but scientists are holding out hope that they are closer to figuring out how to combat a devastating disease that has caused the loss of 95 percent of the animals in just six years.” http://bit.ly/1NYYsyI

OBAMACARE — “Feds focus on Obamacare enrollment in North Jersey” by POLITICO’s Katie Jennings: “U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell...met on Friday with elected officials, providers and community partners to discuss open enrollment efforts at a roundtable event in Jersey City. Northern New Jersey is one of the agency’s five target areas across the country, due to the region’s high number of uninsured people who are eligible for coverage on the health insurance marketplace established by the Affordable Care Act.” http://politi.co/1PwoVVV

—“The list: New Jersey companies that appoint women as top executives" http://bit.ly/1NYXTES

GAS — “Proposed ocean gas terminal off NY, NJ faces opposition,” by The AP’s Michael Balsamo: “The federal Maritime Administration is currently reviewing Liberty's application, but environmentalists are urging Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Chris Christie to veto the proposal, arguing it is dangerous and unnecessary. If either governor objects, federal regulations require the agency to deny Liberty's application. The timing for a final decision remains unclear. Christie vetoed a prior version of the proposal in 2011 and vowed at the time that his ‘opposition to this will continue as long as I'm governor.’ Cuomo said last month there were ‘serious questions’ lingering around the project. A spokeswoman for Cuomo told The Associated Press on Friday that the project is ‘still under review.’” http://bit.ly/1kD9uj3

THIS IS DEFINITELY NOT AN ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN FOR HIS RESTAURANT CHAIN — “Muscle Maker founder Rod Silva, a Piscataway resident, enters presidential race,” by NJ Advance Media’s Anthony G. Attrino: “He wants to make America healthy again. That's the message from Rod Silva, a Piscataway resident, who started the popular Muscle Maker Grill franchise in Colonia nearly 20 years ago. He's running for president now and is making health care his main talking point. ‘I really believe America needs to be made healthy again and I'm the one who's going to beat the drum,’ Silva, 43, said Friday.” http://bit.ly/1kD9IGV

WOW SO CONFRONTATIONAL — “Re-elected Hamilton Mayor Yaede confronts Gov. Christie on taxes as NJ GOP declines,” by The Trentonian’s Sulaiman Abdur-Rahman: “With Christie campaigning in New Hampshire in pursuit of the 2016 Republican presidential nomination, [Hamilton Mayor Kelly] Yaede has made good on her campaign re-election promise Thursday by sending a letter to Christie demanding he do his part to reduce the property tax burden on Hamilton taxpayers. ‘I am writing to urge your consideration in working to begin the restoration of the aggregate amount of gross energy receipts and CMPTRA revenue reductions back to 2008 levels,’ Yaede wrote in her letter to the governor, referring to the consolidated municipal property tax relief and utility-generated financial aid that municipalities traditionally receive from the state.” http://bit.ly/1NY6K9X

GIVE NJ ADVANCE MEDIA THE PULITZER RIGHT NOW — “QUIZ: Unlike N.J. motorists, can you tell a sheep from a goat?” http://bit.ly/1NY7k7C

WHAT DO YOU CALL A BOOMERANG THAT DOESN’T COME BACK TO YOU? A STICK — “Freeholder Romano warming up in Hoboken mayoral hopeful bullpen,” by The Jersey Journal’s Agustin Torres: “Hoboken recognizes itself as the birthplace of baseball, so let's use baseball terms to explain Freeholder Anthony [“Stick”] Romano's chances of defeating Mayor Dawn Zimmer in 2017. To come away with a victory, Romano would have to pitch a perfect game. Tuesday's election results made this a solid fact.” http://bit.ly/1NY7Jaa

THANKS MOTHER NATURE. OH, WAIT — “Sandy who? Banner year for most every beach,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Dan Radel and Jean Mikle: and “Up and down the Jersey Shore, towns raked in record revenues from beach badge sales this summer. Mother Nature, which delivered dry and hot weather all summer, was a key contributor to the bounty.” http://on.app.com/1NYXvX2

—According to one of those online survey things, New Jersey is the third least overweight state in the country. http://on.app.com/1NYXzpN

ROASTED — “What went wrong for Marotta in Vernon mayoral election,” by The New Jersey Herald’s Rob Jennings: “Vernon Mayor Vic Marotta losing to Harry Shortway was the biggest election night story in Sussex County … Marotta offered a dramatic contrast to what is ordinarily seen in Sussex County. While most opt for a reserved public image, he reveled in flamboyance. He debuted a television show, ‘Vernon Vibes,’ in 2012, on which he routinely skewered his critics. He launched his re-election campaign with a Dean Martin-style roast and later broadcast much of the hilarity, including Vernon's business administrator mocking Marotta's extended vacations, on his show.” http://bit.ly/1NYYerb

WOODBRIDGE — “How the testing craze scandalized Woodbridge schools and cheated kids out of learning,” by MyCentralJersey.com’s Sergio Bichao: It upset Lois Rotella that her fourth-grade son scored poorly on a district test. But Rotella was no ordinary parent. She was the principal of an elementary school in her son's district. So she went to the school and had a teacher retest her son. This incident, dating back more than 20 years, is one of many that a four-year Department of Education investigation used to conclude in September that Rotella ‘demonstrated conduct unbecoming a school administrator.’ The report relies on testimony from numerous current and former teachers and principals to depict Rotella as an iron-fisted assistant superintendent whose feverish focus on exam scores helped foment the district's test-obsessed culture.” http://mycj.co/1NYYFBQ

QUICK HITS

—“Obamacare czar in Jersey City: High deductibles mirror trend in private insurance” http://bit.ly/1NY7Dzf

—“NJ delegation calls for federal agency to correct joint base pay disparity” http://bit.ly/1NYXN09

—”“Fine print: State wants to help private-sector workers save for retirement”

—“2K mourners remember Pastor Ronald Christian during rousing memorial service” http://bit.ly/1NYaPLn

—“Fulop is guest of honor at Marine Corps Ball” http://bit.ly/1NY3I5A

—“Why is enrollment falling at Rider and other N.J. private colleges?” http://bit.ly/1NYaFUg

—“Federal probe found Title IX problems at Mercer County Community College” http://bit.ly/1NYaNmO

—“Little Egg Democrats get 'death card'” http://on.app.com/1NY7wnf

—“Kelly: It’s past time to overhaul the way we vote” http://bit.ly/1NY47oG

— “N.J. fantasy sports bill would allow games, with a catch” http://bit.ly/1kD9OhM

— “Rally held to save Liberty State Park from commercial development” http://bit.ly/1NY4csm

—“Cheng’s win in A.C. challenged by Zappia” http://bit.ly/1NYaAA3

—“Group files appeal to stop demolition of Duke Farms mansion” http://bit.ly/1NYXous

** A Message from Nuclear Matters: Some of America’s existing nuclear energy plants face early closure due to current economic and policy conditions. Providing more than 62% of America’s carbon-free electricity, existing, state-of-the-art nuclear energy plants play a vital role in achieving our clean-energy and carbon-reduction goals. The industry also supports more than 475,000 jobs nationally and provides critical tax revenue locally for roads, schools and other public priorities.

If we want to keep America working, we need policymakers to support policies that will keep safe and reliable nuclear energy plants working for all of us. Voice your support for sensible policies that drive our national economy and join us at NuclearMatters.com. **

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw