UnityPoint Health-Finley Hospital will purchase Women’s Wellness Center in Dubuque and open a pair of clinics at the site this summer.

“We have spent the last several months in discussion with Kelly McMahon, the president of Women’s Wellness Center, on what turned out to be a mutually beneficial acquisition for Finley Hospital to acquire the practice,” said Finley President and CEO David Brandon.

Located at 4170 Pennsylvania Ave., the center will close June 1 for two months for renovations. It will reopen Aug. 1 as UnityPoint Clinic-Women’s Health.

Also opening Aug. 1, adjacent to the women’s health clinic, will be UnityPoint Clinic-Family Medicine.

The cost of the project is about $500,000, including the acquisition of McMahon’s practice, according to Brandon. He said the building is ideally suited for medical practices, both in terms of the facility and its location.

“With the start of our Peosta clinic, we’ve identified the western part of Dubuque to be a very attractive area because of a lack of Finley- related medical services, and it is a high -growth population area for Dubuque County,” he said.

McMahon established Women’s Wellness Center in May 2004.

“We grew it from the grass-roots to 12,000 patients,” she said. “It’s been a gift to be able to be involved in the lives of so many patients and their families.”

However, she said, changes in health care, including the federal Affordable Care Act and Iowa’s traditionally poor federal reimbursement rates, have impacted how she delivers care.

“It’s become more of a challenge to provide the one-on-one attention that people deserve,” she said.

McMahon will leave the women’s wellness practice with its sale.

Brandon said other current staff would be approached as Finley seeks employees for the women’s clinic when it reopens. The clinic will be staffed by two nurse practitioners, including Gretchen Hong, and six other employees.

The adjacent family medicine clinic will be staffed by Dr. Kenneth Martin, a physician currently in family practice at UnityPoint Health-Trinity in the Quad Cities. Brandon said Finley will add a second provider at the family medicine clinic, along with six additional staff members.

Both clinics will include exam rooms and radiology services, as well as laboratory services.

“We look at this as benefiting the community,” Brandon said.

Finley will open two urgent-care clinics later this year in Dubuque — at Asbury and Kennedy roads on Aug. 1 and in Babka Wellness Center, 1550 University Ave., on Oct. 1.

“We feel very confident that patient demand for access to health care will be greatly enhanced,” Brandon said.