Colorado's Division of Motor Vehicles website shut down briefly Wednesday night as a result of an influx of noncitizens making appointments to get driver's licenses.

Daria Serna, spokeswoman for the Department of Revenue, which includes the DMV, said Thursday that the website had been shut down but was back up and running as of 5 a.m. local time, with 823 appointments scheduled. That's 100 appointments an hour specifically due to Senate Bill 12-251, the Colorado Road and Community Safety Act, Serna told Fox News.

Beginning Aug. 1, SB 12-251 allows those who "cannot demonstrate lawful presence in the U.S." or "can only show temporary lawful presence" to obtain a state driver's license. State officials pointed out that the driver's licenses issued under the program will include a banner indicating their limited uses, Fox reported. Colorado's DMV website reports that the banner will read: "NOT FOR FEDERAL IDENTIFICATION, VOTING, OR PUBLIC BENEFIT PURPOSES."

The agency's "Schedule an Appointment at a Driver's License Office" page averaged 70,000 hits per hour Tuesday, compared to the regular hourly average, 8,126 hits, and hit a high of 107,500 hits per hour.

"There is clearly a great deal of interest by the community to obtain these services," Colorado Department of Revenue Executive Director Barbara Brohl told Fox in a statement.

Those seeking such driver's licenses must make an appointment at one of only five offices in the state issuing them: Aurora, Colorado Springs, Denver, Fort Collins and Grand Junction. Workshops that guide individuals through the process start this month.

American Friends Service Committee regional organizer Gabriela Flora has insisted that the state enable more DMV locations to serve noncitizens' license requests.

"Having a system where people have to wait months or years to get a license doesn't stand up to what the law is meant to do," Flora told KMGH, Denver's ABC affiliate.

A 2010 report from PewResearch reported 180,000 unauthorized immigrants resided in Colorado in 2010.

California and Illinois passed similar legislation last year.