GRAND RAPIDS, MI – The enrollment navigators who helped people get insurance under the Affordable Care Act began a new task Tuesday, April 1: helping people sign up for Michigan’s expanded Medicaid program.

On the first day of enrollment in the plan, called Healthy Michigan, Cherry Street Health Services received a steady number of visits and calls from people seeking information, said lead navigator Michelle Fitzgerald.

“We’ve had so many requests, we are scheduling appointments throughout the week,” Fitzgerald said.

Related: Six things to know about Michigan's expanded Medicaid program

She said navigators also were busy help people who qualify for an extension for their application for insurance through the ACA’s Health Insurance Marketplace.

Unlike the Affordable Care Act plans, there is no deadline for enrolling in Healthy Michigan. But Fitzgerald advised people to “apply as soon as possible so they can get that coverage.”

Healthy Michigan is available to residents, ages 19 to 64, who are not currently eligible for Medicaid and Medicare and who earn up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level. That is about $16,000 for individuals and $33,000 for a family of four.

Information about eligibility and enrollment is available at healthymichiganplan.org or by calling 855-789-5610.

Help is also available from navigators by calling Cherry Street Health Services at 866-299-1339 or by visiting the center at 100 Cherry St. SE.

About 477,000 Michigan residents are expected to qualify for the program, which includes incentives for healthy behaviors. Participants have premiums and co-pays, but costs can be reduced by completing an annual risk assessment and changing unhealthy behaviors such as smoking.

In some cases, Fitzgerald said residents who signed up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act will qualify for Healthy Michigan. In that case, she said they should notify their insurer and the health insurance marketplace once they are enrolled in the expanded Medicaid program.

She cautioned residents to get information about coverage based on their individual circumstances, rather than relying on the experience of others.

“I think, as always, there’s a lot of information out there. It’s important to keep your personal situation in mind,” she said. “There are resources to help you find your way.



Sue Thoms covers health care for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her at sthoms1@mlive.com or follow her on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.