Maggie Higgins' third-grade bilingual classroom at Longmont's Rocky Mountain Elementary is filled with examples of written English and Spanish, from the date to school rules to common words.

By about noon, she said, she's usually starting to go hoarse from talking so much in both languages. Her goal is to give her second-language students as much English — understood, spoken and written — as she can for a smoother transition to all English in fourth grade.

Math is already taught completely in English in third grade, but her class includes new students from other school districts who speak and understand mainly Spanish. So she's adding explanations in Spanish, working with them in a small group.

"I know it's hard, it's big numbers," she tells the group as she works with them on place values. "We need to practice, practice."

Since 2011, the St. Vrain Valley School District has been changing the way it teaches English-language learners, requiring teachers to introduce English earlier and teach more content in English. And district officials said St. Vrain is on the right track, based on results of a statewide test.

"We've changed things around considerably," said Regina Renaldi, assistant superintendent of priority schools. "We're keeping the pressure on over here."

All English by fourth grade

Advertisement

Renaldi said every teacher — not just those who work in bilingual schools — is trained on research-based intervention strategies for English-language learners, strategies that are effective in helping all students, not just those learning English.

"Every classroom teacher has strategies to help students access the core curriculum," she said. "It's not a lowering of the bar; it's actually a raising of the bar."

Gabriela Medina writes math equations on the board during Cynthia Montanez's first-grade class at Rocky Mountain Elementary in Longmont on Wednesday. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

About 70 percent of the district's English-language learners attend the district's six bilingual schools — Thunder Valley K-8, Columbine Elementary, Rocky Mountain Elementary, Indian Peaks Elementary, Northridge Elementary and Timberline K-8.

Tori Teague, assistant superintendent for assessment and curriculum, said bilingual schools teach students to read and write in both languages, developing literacy in Spanish and transitioning to reading and writing in English. By fourth grade, students generally are expected to work in English.

"Teachers are systematically introducing skill sets in both languages," she said. "They're teaching the academic language students need to be successful in a science classroom or a language arts classroom."

Proficiency levels on the rise

On the Access test, given in January to measure English language proficiency for second-language students, the percentage of students achieving proficiency was above the state in four of the five grade-level clusters, with all five maintaining or improving from the previous year.

St. Vrain saw proficiency improve 23 percentage points, to 51 percent, for grades three through five. Those grades are a focus area for St. Vrain, with a goal of getting students to proficiency before they enter middle school.

"We're seeing those kids really perform well at lower grades," Renaldi said. "They need that academic language to perform well at higher levels."

At Rocky Mountain Elementary, where about 90 percent of students are from low-income families, Principal Stephen Hoel said students previously spent most of their day in Spanish instruction in the primary grades.

In the last four years, he said, teachers have significantly increased the amount of English instruction and are focusing that instruction on learning English content, not just acquiring the language. Writing in English, a more difficult skill to learn than speaking, is another focus.

"How kids are prepared for fourth grade has definitely changed," he said.

Boulder Valley looks at its programs

In the neighboring Boulder Valley School District, there are three bilingual schools.

Kiana Melgar answers a math question in Cynthia Montanez's first-grade class at Rocky Mountain Elementary on Wednesday. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Boulder's University Hill Elementary and Lafayette's Pioneer Elementary use dual-immersion programs and require students to open-enroll. In those two schools, all students, both native English speakers and native Spanish speakers, learn in both languages.

At the third bilingual school, Boulder's Columbine Elementary, students learn to read and write in both languages but learn everything else in English.

Second-language students not in those three schools receive 45 minutes of direct English-language instruction a day, along with classroom support, district officials said.

Ron Cabrera, Boulder Valley assistant superintendent, said the district is taking a closer look at all its programs, including its bilingual programs, to ensure they're effective.

He added that the bilingual schools have worked more closely together in the last few years and use similar instructional approaches, though they may vary in the proportion of time students spend learning in each language.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.