Topics: 2014 elections, 2016 Elections, Mary Landrieu, Mitt Romney, Morning Joe, President Obama, Reince Priebus, Rush Limbaugh, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, Elections News, News, Politics News

The leaderless GOP has two men who can reasonably be considered the head of the party: Mitt Romney, its last presidential candidate, and Rush Limbaugh, the guy who enforces party discipline on the radio every day. It’s worth noting their two different but complementary approaches to the 2014 midterms.

Romney appeared on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” Wednesday and shared the respectable GOP line: When Republicans win back the Senate, they’ll “pass bills” and “end gridlock.” Of course, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell has repeatedly promised that his party will pass bills they know the president will veto, first and foremost a repeal of the Affordable Care Act. “Gridlock” is guaranteed to continue with the GOP in charge; it will likely get worse if Senate Republicans tie the administration up in phony investigations aping their friends in the House.

Romney is lying about his party’s governing agenda – it doesn’t have a governing agenda – but it’s a respectable lie, so he got a pass.

Meanwhile, the party’s other leader, Rush Limbaugh, is having a lot of fun with the racial undercurrent of the race, in which the party without an agenda is appealing to white voters based on their hatred of our first black president. On Tuesday Limbaugh crowed to his listeners about the way President Obama is threatening “five white women” in tough red-state Senate races.

Here you have five white women seeking reelection, they desperately need the black turnout. We just had a story today that in New Orleans only 5% of the black vote’s voted in early vote for [Louisiana Sen.] Mary Landrieu…if that’s all they get then it’s sayonara. And yet here’s the first black president, Barack Hussein Obama, and none of these white women want him anywhere near their campaign. So how do we explain this? The explanation is the guy is toxic and will cause others who might want to vote for these white women to stay home. So they don’t want him anywhere near their campaign. And he said, “I don’t care, I don’t blame ’em. They just gotta do what they gotta do to get elected.” In the meantime, the irony is the first black president is an albatross around the necks of five white women who need the black vote because he will hurt.