Stacy Ellingen is a former Fond du Lac resident now living independently in Oshkosh. (Photo: Submitted photo)

I'm 29 years old and live in Oshkosh.

I have a bachelor of arts degree in journalism with an emphasis in advertising from University of Wisconsin-Whitewater. I live by myself in an apartment and am able to handle my own finances.

I started my own business doing freelance graphic design and social media. I'm also independently contracted with In Control Wisconsin and work as their online community network manager.

This probably doesn't seem like anything out of the ordinary until I share that I have a severe physical disability. Due to complications at birth, I have Athetoid Cerebral Palsy. I rely on an electric wheelchair to get around and use a communication device to communicate. I need assistance with all of my basic needs such as bathing, toileting, dressing and feeding.

I've been in the IRIS — Include, Respect, I Self-Direct — program for just over four years. I self-direct everything from my personal cares to my finances. Having control over everything and being able to self-direct my care has made me as independent as I can be.

Having independence is so important for people with similar situations like mine. Being able to have choices about which service providers we want to use and to decide where and how our funding is used is critical to our independence.

IRIS is a long-term care program financed with state and federal funds. Participants self-direct their supports. This means they have choice and control over which service providers they use and how funds are spent. It provides opportunities to create efficient use of tax dollars through small local personal control.

In Gov. Scott Walker's proposed budget, it suggests that the IRIS program be eliminated. Individuals using the IRIS will reportedly be moved to a proposed less flexible, larger government-driven model. IRIS is a smaller-government, locally controlled model that respects Wisconsin citizens' ability to make responsible decisions.

Eliminating the IRIS program would drastically impact my life in a negative way. It would take away independence that I continue to strive for. After years of self-directing everything myself, having other people dictate how my money is spent and what providers I use would be a huge slap in the face. People who want to self-direct their funding and supports should be able to continue to do so.

Furthermore, the proposed budget suggests major cuts in funding for personal care. Many people with disabilities — myself included — could not survive without personal care assistance. I'm not able to even take a sip of water without help.

Cutting personal care funds would significantly affect the lives of people with disabilities. We, as human beings, should have the right to the care we need so we can lead as successful lives as possible.

So, I kindly ask that legislators keep how it would affect the lives of people with disabilities in mind while considering the budget proposal. We're not asking you to move mountains. We just want to have the appropriate supports so we can live our lives to the fullest.

Stacy Ellingen is a former Fond du Lac resident now living independently in Oshkosh.

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1Dsflxk