Kennedy, Photo: The Advertiser

The looming physician shortage in Louisiana reminds me of the premise behind the 1990s television show “Northern Exposure.”

“Northern Exposure” featured a young doctor duped into setting up practice in the wilds of Alaska. In a nutshell, the doctor failed to read the fine print for the scholarship that put him through medical school and found himself assigned to a rural Alaskan town desperately in need of a physician.

Now I’m not suggesting that we dupe medical students into treating the flu and giving booster shots in Louisiana’s villages.

What I am suggesting is that we need to jumpstart the conversation on opening a medical school in Lafayette. I wrote a column about this issue last year. We need to pick up those threads of conversation, and we need to do it without delay.

Want job security? Go to medical school and become a primary care physician. Want to experience frustration? Try getting an appointment with a primary care physician in the near future.

As a nation, we’re simply not graduating enough doctors. The shortage is only going to get worse with the Affordable Care Act expanding access to health care.

By 2025, the physician shortfall in the U.S. will range from 46,100 to 90,400. I didn’t come up with those numbers. The Association of American Medical Colleges did in a report earlier this year.

Do you know what that shortfall means to you? If you’re approaching 50, it means a lot. You need regular checkups to ensure you’re around to enjoy your grandchildren and your golden years. At the same time, too many doctors in Louisiana are preparing for their own retirements. They won’t be around to make sure that cold doesn’t turn into pneumonia or to check your blood pressure.

We have three fine medical schools in Louisiana. Two are in New Orleans. The third is in Shreveport. At the two public medical schools within the LSU system, 4,000 students apply each year for admission. The schools can accommodate a little more than 300 of those applicants as first-year medical students.

If you’ve been keeping up with news about the physician shortage in Louisiana, you know there was considerable chatter last year about opening a medical school in Lafayette. Then it got quiet.

It’s no secret that we have budget problems. We didn’t set aside enough dollars for TOPS or for the Medicaid program. We put the state’s operating budget together with scotch tape, but we rubbed that tape against the carpet first so it’s not doing a very good job of holding things together.

I wish we could solve our budget problems and then tackle building a new medical school. We simply don’t have the time to wait. Becoming a doctor takes years of study. The huge doctor shortage is only a few years away. The clock is ticking, and it’s ticking unmercifully.

Louisiana needs a fourth medical school. Lafayette is the best location for it.

— John N. Kennedy is the treasurer of Louisiana.