iStock

WAYNE RIVERS: The resource small-business owners should stop using is themselves! After observing family-owned business leaders for over a quarter century, we are still amazed–and we know we’re stepping on toes here–at how poorly they manage themselves and their time. Their time management problems can be squeezed into four broad categories:

Doing things they shouldn’t be doing at all Doing the right things, but doing them inefficiently or ineffectively Time spent which is purely waste Possessing no system or technique for mastering the 24-hour day and the executive requirements that must fit into it

Ninety-five percent of family business leaders would be well served to enroll in a Time Management 101 class.

Some small-business leaders see themselves as the employee of last resort for various routine jobs.

They’re the ones who change the light bulbs, run errands, make deliveries, handle the mail, etc.

Surely they know intellectually that another employee could do these mundane tasks at a much lower cost to the organization. Worse, they don’t see the opportunity costs of using their executive time unwisely.

If they devoted a few more hours per week to business development, long-term business planning, communicating their vision and values among their teams, rigorously evaluating their talent and getting super-competent new hires on board, and improving corporate quality, they’d see dividends and impact immediately.

Small-business and family-business leaders love business, but often they seem to love busyness more. Their words and actions give testament to their belief in hard work as the primary contributor to success.

But hard work is no substitute for smart work; if small-business owners used their time more intelligently, they’d produce not only better companies but better and more well-balanced lives.

Wayne Rivers is the co-founder and president of the Family Business Institute and author of books about family and closely held business, including “The Top Nine Reasons Family Businesses Fail and The Eight Building Blocks for Creating a Sustainable Closely Held Company.”

Read the latest Small Business Report.