International Go Skateboarding Day Parade in Aiken

In honor of Global Go Skateboarding Day tomorrow, locals headed out on their wheels today. Skateboarders from all over the CSRA rolled around downtown Aiken this afternoon in a parade.



Bo Mitchell started an annual Skateboarding parade last year. He said it's to celebrate global go skateboarding day, and bring awareness about the sport to the community.



“Skateboarders are normal kids just like anyone else. Just because we skate doesn't mean that we're bad people trying to tear something up. So that's the main reason, bring everyone together, and show that we're here for a good cause,” said Mitchell.



Daniel Acheson said having fun is the best skill you can have in this sport.



“There's no other sport that you can do this with. Like, everybody is cool with everybody. As long as you're out there skating and trying. It doesn't matter how good you are, It doesn't matter how long you've been skating, as long as you're out there trying, everybody's gunna be cool with you. And, that's one of my favorite parts about skating,” said Acheson.



Many skaters at the event today said there's not many places to skate around town. They said it was nice to skate in an area they are usually not allowed to. The parade today also allowed them to skate with a police escort for safety.



David Lyell and his son came out to be a part of the large group today. He said he grew up skating and now shares his love for the sport with his son.



“It's just a great community of people. Anywhere you go in the world, you're gunna have something in common with another skateboarder there,” said Lyell.



About 50 skaters showed up to be in the parade today with their friends and families.



After the parade skaters made their way back Mitchell's HIC Warehouse Indoor Skate Park for a free day of skating, food and fun.



Next year, Mitchell said he hopes to have an even bigger parade with floats and even more skaters.



Copyright 2015 WFXG. All rights reserved.