Given the desperate need for primary care docs as health care access expands under the Affordable Care Act and the horde of aging baby boomers requires more hands-on care, a lesser-known form of medical education is taking root in Northeast Ohio.







The region has long produced MDs — short for the Latin phrase “medicinae doctor” — at its venerable medical schools, Case Western Reserve University and Northeast Ohio Medical University. But soon, the region will be churning out more DOs, or doctors of osteopathic medicine.







It's not a new form of medical education, given that its roots go back more than a hundred years, but it is different.







Simply put, DOs tend to focus on treating the whole patient, not just their symptoms. They also tend to focus less on research and gravitate toward careers in primary care.







“We take care of people, not problems,” said Dr. Robert Juhasz, president of Cleveland Clinic's South Pointe Hospital in Warrensville Heights and head of the American Osteopathic Association.







“We believe in taking care of the whole person — body, mind and spirit. We believe in enhancing the body's innate ability to heal itself.”







Leading the teaching charge regionally is Ohio University, whose Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine has been on a tear over the last few years expanding beyond its Athens headquarters.







Last year, for one, it opened a $24.7 million campus in Dublin, Ohio, and this summer plans to open a new outpost in 60,000 square feet of renovated space at South Pointe.









Surge in the ranks

This summer, the Clinic collaboration — one valued at about $49.1 million — will welcome its first class of 50 students, 18 more than originally expected.Moreover, Erie, Pa.-based Lake Erie College of Medicine, or LECOM for short, has been deepening its relationship with University Hospitals. UH's Richmond and Bedford hospitals have hosted LECOM's graduates as residents for several years, and this summer UH Parma Medical Center will welcome its first class of residents. LECOM is also developing a residency program at UH Elyria Medical Center, which along with Parma's hospital joined the UH system a little more than a year ago.“There's been a lot of expansion and growth in this field,” said Dr. Christopher Loyke, Parma's chief medical officer and director of medical education. “Osteopathic physicians are pushing hard to fill the need for primary care.”

Over the last decade or so, interest in osteopathic medical education has exploded.







In the 2003-2004 academic year, for one, osteopathic medical schools enrolled 11,857 students at 20 sites across the country, according to data from the American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine.







By 2013-2014, that number surged by 95% to 23,071 at 37 sites. Today, osteopathic medical students make up roughly 20% of all U.S. medical students.







Enrollment at traditional MD schools hasn't grown at quite the same clip, and observers say the growth in DOs could help alleviate the looming physician shortage. The Association of American Medical Colleges, an association representing the country's accredited MD schools, estimates a national shortfall of 12,500 to 31,000 primary care physicians.







“Our mission here is to graduate students who are going to stay in Northeast Ohio,” said Dr. Isaac Kirstein, a DO and dean of the new OU campus at South Pointe.







That shortage is being fueled by growing demand as more Americans gain health insurance under the federal health care overhaul.





Blurred lines

Also, the health reform law puts a premium on and has begun to tie reimbursements to preventive care, or physicians' ability to keep a set population healthy rather than only treating patients when sick.DOs contend they have a leg up in practicing that sort of care given that it's always been in their profession's DNA. They receive extra training in the musculoskeletal system, which provides them with the knowledge of how an illness or injury in one part of the body can affect another.

While UH and the Clinic both are renowned academic centers that put a premium on research, they haven't shied away from hiring DOs.







The Clinic employs 199 DOs, compared with the 2,504 MDs on its professional staff. UH, meanwhile, boasts 238 DOs and 2,343 credentialed MDs throughout its enterprise.







And if anything, the lines are being blurred between the two types of docs. Starting this year with the goal of being fully in place by 2020, both MD and DO graduate medical programs will be accredited under a uniform system.







Still, it's not as if the region's traditional MD programs are at a standstill waiting for DOs to rescue the country from its primary care shortage.







Case Western Reserve University and the Clinic are plotting a joint, 485,000-square-foot medical education hub on East 93rd Street between Euclid and Chester avenues. The premise of that effort is to train caregivers — nurses, docs, physician assistants, etc. — to work together to keep patients' healthy.







Also, NEOMED, which itself is polishing off a $160 million campus makeover in Rootstown, has teamed with Cleveland State to train physicians who will practice in Cleveland's urban communities.







“We're not in direct competition based on mission,” Ohio University's Kirstein said.