Luke DeGroote is sitting in front of what looks like a jewelry tree, playing with metal bands draped over the top. The trinkets are technically bracelets — They’re just not for humans.

Mr. DeGroote runs the bird-banding program at Powdermill Nature Reserve, near Ligonier in Westmoreland County. And what he’s pointing to are the individual bands distributed by the U.S. Geological Survey, each with a nine-digit code, “like their own Social Security number.”

Powdermill Nature Reserve Where: 1847 Route 381, Rector, PA 15677; 724-593-6105. Information: www.carnegiemnh.org/powdermill. Hours: April 1–Nov. 15: Sunday: noon-4:30 p.m. Monday: closed. Tuesday-Saturday: 9 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Nov. 16 - March 31: Sunday: noon-4:30 p.m. Monday and Tuesday: closed. Wednesday-Saturday: 9 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Trails: Sugar Camp Trail: 1 mile, slightly more strenuous. Wildflower walk: 330 feet of gravel in all weather, plus an additional 200 feet of mulch when it’s not raining. Suitable for people with disabilities. Black Birch Trail: ¾ mile, easy walk. Porcupine Ridge trail (will open late 2016): 3½-mile round trip when added to Sugar Camp Trail. Strenuous, for more experienced hikers. Tips: Wear tennis shoes or hiking shoes and clothing you can walk in. Put on sunscreen or wear a hat if you’re going during the summer, and bring a water bottle and a snack if you think you’ll get hungry — There is no food at the reserve. Print out directions because you may lose Wi-Fi service once you get close. There is no phone service at the reserve. Bathrooms are available, as well as a water fountain, and the museum is air-conditioned.

The program is part of a bevy of projects that the nature reserve — part of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History — runs, and perhaps its most famous. In addition to tracking bird flight, the center also is in the process of testing bird-proof windows and cataloging bird calls, which involves placing birds in what can only be described as a recording studio.

It is the reserve’s recently opened nature trail, however, that is expected to attract visitors this summer, especially those who were unable to enjoy the reserve before. The new trail is accessible to those with disabilities. At just 330 feet and a loop composed of gravel, the Wildflower trail is not what most people would call a trail. But it serves its main purpose.

“Instead of making them go out into the woods, why don’t we bring the woods to them?” said Powdermill director John Wenzel. Families with young children and grandparents used to come and find themselves unable to fully explore the trails, he said. Now they’ll be able to experience what other visitors have always enjoyed.

The nature reserve is more than just birds and trails. It’s also a museum and a research site. Although there are a slew of trails, only three are public. The rest are for research and are not particularly beautiful, so they’re left to the people who work there, Mr. Wenzel said.

“We want the public to go some place where, when they’re done, they’ll be happy they went,” he said.

Each of the three public trails offers something different. The Black Birch Trail is an easier ¾-mile walk, and the 1-mile, slightly more strenuous Sugar Camp Trail is nice for visitors who are more knowledgeable about the woodlands. The Wildflower Walk is great for those who wouldn’t otherwise be able to enjoy the reserve.

The reserve also will be debuting a new trail in late 2016. Porcupine Ridge, as it will be called, will add another 1¼ miles to the Sugar Camp Trail, making the round trip roughly 3½ miles and adding a relatively strenuous stretch to the trail.

People interested in research will find Porcupine Ridge a treat. Scattered throughout are little sites set up to measure the effects of winds on the forest canopy, the impact of cutting down underbrush and how different seeds make their way to the forest — bird droppings or wind?

Research on winds in the woods began in earnest roughly three years ago in the wake of a June 2012 tornado that swept through Ligonier and felled some of the reserve’s tallest trees. At first, Mr. Wenzel said, he thought the storm was a catastrophe for the trail. Who would want to see fallen trees in the middle of a beautiful nature trail?

PG graphic: Powdermill Nature Reserve

(Click image for larger version)

“But then I just realized — I’d make it a feature.”

And so it is a feature today.

In addition to seeing the fallen trees, visitors can spot little porcupines, the prickly rodent for which the trail is named. They can see and hear a creek that gurgles along to a mesmerizing rhythm. And at the very top, after emerging from the forest, they can look out over Laurel Ridge State Park.

The trail isn’t yet ready for visitors; walking up it still requires a fair share of swatting large branches aside and sometimes stepping over roots.

Powdermill is unlike some other nature reserves in its insistence on using only plants native to Western Pennsylvania.

“This is not a garden,” Mr. Wenzel was quick to point out. “This is the way they look in nature.”

That sometimes means the trails are more a landscape of green and brown shades than a rainbow of colors. But Powdermill is out to make the experience authentic, and it does that well.

The trip to Powdermill from Downtown Pittsburgh is roughly a 1½ hour drive. Beyond a visit to the reserve there are other offerings in the area to see. It’s near Ohiopyle and Linn Run state parks as well as Fort Ligonier, the reconstruction of the original fort from the French and Indian War. The reserve also is a roughly 40-minute drive from Fallingwater, the famous house designed by Frank Lloyd Wright.

“It’s significant that people come from so far away,” Mr. Wenzel said. “It’s a very full day, and the drive becomes a small investment.”

Hannah Schwarz: hschwarz@post-gazette.com, 412-263, 3772 or on Twitter @hannahrschwarz.