Richard Fletcher, the man the Inquisitr reported on two days ago who took a savage beating from more than 50 Baltimore teens, is out of the hospital.

Unfortunately, he doesn’t have much time to be relieved, because the medical expenses are rolling in — and they’re quite steep.

In fact, estimates are currently around $400,000, according to the Daily Mail.

His family has set up a GoFundMe page in Fletcher’s honor, but the tally at this time is just $89,722, with an original funding goal of $100,000. What isn’t clear at this time is whether the family of Richard Fletcher will need additional monies to pay his share of the expenses or if the $400k is his share of the expenses.

As is often the case with healthcare, you never know what you really owe, and then just when you think you’re paid off, you get a four- or five-figure bill in the mail.

Given that reality, the family is hoping it can push past the $100k goal even as authorities work to round up all of the Baltimore teens involved in the beating.

According to the Inquisitr, the 61-year-old disabled man was brutally beaten by the pack of 50 teens when he went outside of his home in an attempt to get two girls who were “fighting on top of his truck” to move their dispute somewhere else.

“This is not a simple fistfight. This is a brutal assault,” Baltimore County police Corporal John Wachter said shortly following the incident.

The teens then reportedly kicked and hit Richard Fletcher until he fell to the ground and then continued beating him.

Fletcher was reportedly left with a brain bleed, broken eye sockets, broken ribs, and a broken nose after being attacked by the pack of teens. He was also reportedly required to undergo a blood transfusion.

Baltimore Police have arrested two teens in connection to the beating. All involved were reportedly students from the Baltimore Community High School.

Antoine Lawson, 17, was charged with attempted murder as an adult and an unnamed 15-year-old girl was charged with assault. Five others have been identified as well (see video above).

When the Inquisitr reported on the incident, the GoFundMe page was just at $8,000, so the two-day jump to $89,000 is promising, but there is still some ground to cover. The link is included above if anyone would like to participate in helping Richard Fletcher to pay for his recovery.

Do you think the teens responsible should be locked up for the rest of their lives? Sound off in the comments section below.

[Image via GoFundMe, linked above]