— Lehigh Valley's medical device manufacturers B. Braun, Olympus and OraSure may be getting an early Christmas gift from Congress.

Device makers would see their federal tax bills temporarily decrease under a massive spending and tax package lawmakers are preparing to send to President Barack Obama's desk this week.

The legislation would place a two-year moratorium on a 2.3 percent tax on certain medical items, ranging from pacemakers to artificial joints to tongue depressors.

Repealing the medical device tax, created through the Affordable Care Act widely known as Obamacare, has been a priority for device makers and a mostly Republican contingent of lawmakers. They say it has slowed or halted hiring and research plans since it went into effect in 2013. Independent reports, however, have found little evidence of the tax harming the businesses' bottom lines.

There are more than a dozen smaller device manufacturers in the Lehigh Valley in addition to B. Braun Medical, Olympus and OraSure Technologies, three companies that alone employ more than 3,000 workers.

Local lawmakers and manufacturers large and small praised the policy move Wednesday, saying the savings would allow companies to spend more money on projects that had been sidelined.

"It definitely is going to enable us to invest more in product development, invest in some new employees, and hopefully a little bit extra for our current employees," said Jerome Smith, chief financial officer and chief operating officer for HoverTech International of Fountain Hill.

Those savings come with a catch: They're only guaranteed for two years if the legislation is approved. After that, the tax would resume unless legislators extend the tax break or repeal it.

Congressional supporters, including Sen. Pat Toomey, R-Pa., said approving the temporary halt would be the first step toward permanently ending the device tax.

"The two-year moratorium puts the medical device tax on death row," said Rep. Charlie Dent, a Republican who represents much of the Lehigh Valley. "We'll spend probably the next two years trying to drive a stake through its heart once and for all."

Sen. Bob Casey, D-Pa., also supports the device tax moratorium, describing it in a statement as "an important reform" to the Obamacare statute.

"Part of supporting the ACA is being willing to examine and offer changes to improve it," Casey said. "Delaying the medical device tax makes sense."

The provision is among a set of changes for taxes created in the Obamacare law. In addition to pausing the medical device tax, the legislation also would delay the statute's health insurance tax and a levy, known as the Cadillac tax, on expensive employer-sponsored health plans.

Efforts to eliminate the device tax stretch back to the federal health care law's beginnings. It was crafted to help pay for health insurance subsidies and other aspects of Obamacare, and was projected to raise nearly $30 billion over 10 years.

Several industry trade groups have fought vigorously against it, pointing to membership surveys indicating their companies have cut back on jobs, research and product development.

Anecdotes from local companies have been similar: A B. Braun executive testified during a Senate hearing in April that spending on research, travel expenses, clinical trials, and employee raises, pensions and other benefits have been slashed since the tax went into effect.

No B. Braun employees were laid off, but plans for a new headquarters in Upper Saucon Township were shelved, said Bruce Heugel, the company's senior vice president and chief financial officer.

HoverTech officials said last year that the money they were putting toward medical device tax payments, more than $1 million over two years, caused them to push off plans for a new building.

Asked about that delay Wednesday, Smith said they've been able to resume their plans for a new building. Still, he said, the payments have been large enough to severely restrict hiring at the 34-employee company, which sells inflatable devices used to help move immobile patients to hospitals.

"Now we can fill several positions," Smith said, adding that he'll be watching to make sure the pending bill doesn't hit any snags along the way.

Some reports looking into the broader effects of the tax have raised questions about how widespread any financial impacts have been. A report from the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service concluded that the tax was more likely to affect consumer prices than company profits.

Financial analysts say the overall impact of the tax is tricky to separate from other economic factors. Some job cuts have occurred since the levy went into effect, but they came as industry growth slowed and companies were trying to reduce costs, said Mike Matson, a senior research analyst for medical technologies at Needham & Company in New York.

The effect also has varied depending on a company's size, with larger companies more able to absorb the impact by cutting other costs, Bloomberg analyst Jason McGorman said.

They questioned how much companies will increase their investments if the tax is merely delayed, rather than repealed.

The uncertainty over what will happen when the moratorium ends drew concerns from those who have supported the Obamacare law and have opposed ending the device tax.

The Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal-leaning think tank, said in a statement that the impact of delaying the medical device tax and other health care taxes depends largely on whether those delays become permanent.

The medical device tax is the smallest of those revenue provisions, with its delay projected by the Joint Committee on Taxation to cost around $4 billion, or just a fraction of the three provisions' combined $35 billion price tag.

Collectively, those health care tax changes could "threaten to punch a large new hole in federal revenues" if they are repealed, said Robert Greenstein, the center's president.

lolson@mcall.com

Twitter @LauraOlson

202-824-2816

PROPOSED OBAMACARE TAX CHANGES

• Medical device tax: Two-year moratorium (through 2017) on a 2.3 percent tax charged manufacturers on medical items ranging from pacemakers to artificial joints to tongue depressors. The tax started in 2013.