The Republican National Committee’s 2016 convention scouts said they were wowed by both cities they visited this week, Denver and then Dallas. But the cities took drastically different approaches to try to win the Republican National Convention: Dallas went straight for hearts, and Denver tried to appeal to minds. Put another way: Dallas put on a showstopping performance, and Denver hosted a business meeting, albeit with a few flourishes (including an appearance by the Denver Broncos’ mascot horse Thunder).

I wouldn’t discount either approach: Denver is seen by many as a favorite alongside Dallas, and its bid leaders have a chance of winning the convention for Denver if they can shore up fundraising, the biggest weakness of the bid . Friday morning, before I left Dallas to return to Denver, I attended a closing news conference with that city’s bid leaders, including former Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison. Though the RNC will make the official host announcement during its August meetings in Chicago , they said the Site Selection Committee could vote on a single choice as soon as June 30, leading to negotiations with that city in July. Cleveland and Kansas City, Mo., also are in play.

If nothing else, Dallas is known for its confidence and for doing everything big. It didn’t disappoint during the RNC delegation’s 48-hour visit, from Wednesday afternoon to Friday morning. Below is a video showing portions of the show Dallas put on inside its arena, the American Airlines Center.

Here’s a concise rundown — in seven paragraphs — from the Dallas Morning News’ Tom Benning in Friday’s newspaper (the story is well worth a read in full):

There was breakfast at Savor at Klyde Warren Park and lunch at Cloud Nine, where desserts were shaped like Reunion Tower. Oil baron Ray Hunt hosted a reception at the Hunt Oil Building, and real estate magnate Harlan Crow hosted one at his home. Both are big Republican donors. Two live elephants — Suse and Esa, from Oklahoma — welcomed the GOP convention scouts to the AAC on Thursday morning. As did a crowd of cheering volunteers. As did cheerleaders for the Dallas Mavericks and Dallas Stars. As did the Kilgore College Rangerettes. As did Dallas’ Salvation Army band. Linda Gray, who plays Sue Ellen Ewing on Dallas old and new, surprised the entourage at a luncheon. And Jerry Jones arranged for the Cowboys’ team buses to take the group to AT&T Stadium, which is still being considered for opening or closing ceremonies. State signs with the party’s elephant mascot stood in the AAC’s lower bowl, matching the home states of the top officials in attendance. Videos played of Reagan’s acceptance speech from the Dallas convention. And live vocalists performed a rousing song about Dallas. Then came the balloons. Then came the confetti. Then came the fireworks.

I’m not sure if the RNC visitors ended the Dallas trip impressed beyond belief, or simply exhausted by Dallas’ efforts. Regardless, you can’t say Dallas, which joined the RNC’s bid competition late in the game, didn’t give its all. Benning reports that when site committee chairwoman Enid Mickelsen was asked later to name Dallas’ top attribute, she said: “Setting aside the enthusiasm? How do you not notice the enthusiasm?”