Former Polk standout has been out of work for a month due to knee surgery

Christmas came early for Otis Miller on Tuesday night.

Miller, a Polk County fan, was sitting in the visitor's section at East Henderson watching basketball on Tuesday night when the Eagle cheerleaders came by advertising the Bryan Easler Toyota Half Court Hot Shot. Miller bought 10 tickets for the chance to win $1,000.

All he had to do was hit a half court shot if his number was drawn out of a bucket.

Miller's number was drawn and the former Polk County basketball player swished the bucket and was bombarded by both Polk and East fans in the middle of the court.

“Man, that's awesome,” East Principal Scott Rhodes said after the shot. “It's great to see somebody at Christmastime win a thousand dollars.”

Miller isn't just any former Wolverine basketball player. He graduated from Polk in 1994 and is the all-time leading scorer for the Wolverine basketball team. He's generally an assistant with the program, but he tore his patellar tendon and had surgery a month ago.

Since that surgery, Miller hasn't worked at his job at Tryon International Equestrian Center or been able to help with the basketball team.

“It was a blessing,” Miller said. “I've been out of work for a month because of my knee. It couldn't have happened at a better time.”

After his name was called, Miller made the long walk across the East basketball floor. When he realized that he'd be taking the shot, he walked back towards his seat to get his knee brace. At that point, the Polk fans began chanting his name.

“The kids love him,” Polk coach Josh McEntire said. “He's a good guy.”

His impact on the players who come through that program is invaluable, the coach said. Miller has been an influence on many Wolverine basketball players since graduating.

As he strolled towards Rhodes at half court on Tuesday night, he reached out and took the ball and turned towards the basket. At that moment, the words that he's told many of those players through the years came back to mind.

“(I was thinking) don't get nervous,” Miller said. “I just dribbled and focused.”

He released the ball and it went through the goal, hitting nothing but net. Miller turned towards the Polk bleachers with both hands held high. Those hands were met with fans and cheerleaders rushing the floor.

“It was like being back in high school,” Miller said. “I think this is the highlight of my year.”