Topics: Bigotry, Charlie Hebdo, Editor's Picks, France, Judaism, Muslims, Life News, News

After “Do you miss home?” the question I am asked most frequently about my 10 years in France is, “Do you feel safe as a Jew?” Invariably, the query cloaks another, usually unspoken one: Am I afraid of all the Muslims? And so I wish to say what a decade here has shown me: The generalizations contained in those questions frighten me more than any experience in France ever has.

I don’t mean this in ideological or statistical terms, although those are important points to be made as well. Those terms are too general, and what I wish to share is the opposite; it is purely personal. But as the wave of terror that follows crimes committed in the name of any creed or god pushes us to embrace stereotypes and generalizations, I believe it bears repeating: In my 10 years on French soil I have learned that choosing how and when to discuss my Jewishness with a French person can be a fraught and sometimes painful affair – unless, that is, he or she happens to be Muslim. I have never been treated with anything approaching intolerance by a Muslim in France; more often than not, I am hailed and welcomed as a kind of distant cousin.

When I first arrived here, I was lunching alone in a restaurant in the small village where my family and I now live. I asked for my salad without lardons, the bits of cured ham the French would probably put in their toothpaste if they could find a way to do so, and when the owner served me, he smiled. “Cacher,” he whispered, raising an eyebrow at the Star of David around my neck. “Comme moi.” Kosher. Like me. I returned his smile gratefully but didn’t quite understand – not yet, at any rate. His name was Rachid.

During the years we lived in Paris my husband worked for a company that restored historical monuments. It was an all-male, testosterone-charged environment that fostered sexism, racism and homophobia, and my husband spent many a lunch break considering which comments he would or wouldn’t let slide. After years with a Jewish wife, it was often the non-Muslims’ attempts to get the Muslims to eat pork and drink wine that bothered him most. One day, a Muslim colleague asked him why. “My wife doesn’t eat pork either,” my husband explained.

“She’s Muslim?”

“No, Jewish.”

“And she follows the dietary laws?” the co-worker inquired.

My husband nodded.

“She doesn’t smoke?”

“Nope.”

“Or drink?”

“Sure she does,” my husband replied with a wink. “Wine every Friday night – it’s a commandment.”

The co-worker smiled. “That’s different.”

After this exchange, the man was always particularly friendly to my husband and always sent me his good wishes — and a Shabbat Shalom if they happened to cross paths on a Friday.

A favorite moment of my High Holidays in Paris was with our neighbor Kamel, the Tunisian Muslim who owned the corner grocery and set aside no-pork gummy candies for me, which he never would let me pay for. Every year, he would flag me down a few days before Rosh Hashanah to press bags of jujubes and fresh dates into my hands – the traditional New Year’s treat for Sephardic Jews in North Africa.

To return to that all-too-common question, and my answer to it: If past experience is any indicator, these stories will be met with accusations of idealization, illusion or anecdote. Every scary thing that can be attributed to someone claiming to be Muslim seems to fuel my interlocutors’ desires to argue I should be afraid. But I cannot be: My own family’s wounds are a constant reminder of how the temptation to demonize those of another, “other” faith scars Europe’s history.