American citizens: Government is NOT your friend!



By Madeline Crabb We the People, citizens of the United States of America, are relinquishing increasing amounts of control over our lives to the Federal Government, and doing so at an alarming pace. In most cases, this is happening by force. But as we have seen over the past few decades, citizens have willingly given up rights because of assurances from government that doing so was for our own good, the common good for all people, or for our own safety. In other words, government leaders have done or said whatever is necessary for citizens to submit to their schemes and plans. Like a bunch of sheep being led to the slaughter, we have acquiesced. But as growing numbers of Americans are finally realizing, the relinquishing of control over our lives to the Federal Government is not in our best interests. We are discovering the truth that Government is NOT our friend.A recent Fox News poll reported that 73 percent of Americans are dissatisfied with the direction our government is going. Reporting in mid- October, the Pew Research Center said that just 19 percent say they trust the government in Washington to do what is right just about always or most of the time, while a mere 12 percent say they are basically content with the federal government. Uh, that means 88 percent of American citizens are not content with our federal government. Are We the People finally waking up?Perhaps the recent government slowdown opened the public's eyes to some of the shenanigans of our government. It was absolutely absurd how our president behaved. And then we have the contempt with which high-ranking congressional members spoke of the American people, those whom they are supposed to serve, i.e. work for. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid called American citizens a variety of names before and during the slowdown, including: "rabid, anarchists, willful, extreme, guerilla," and as having a "Banana-Republic mindset." To the Republican leadership who were doing the job We the People asked them to do, Reid said they were "kidnappers and hostage-takers," among other things. During the same slowdown, it was the House that was passing laws to do the bidding of Americans, and to re-open the government. It was Obama and the Senate that blocked all bills, and thus led to the 16-day slowdown.What we have been seeing with increasing frequency, particularly over nearly the past five years is a huge Monopoly game being played by our government. Just as in the board game, the most skilled player, and who holds the most money, wins the game. In this case, it is the government with all the money they have confiscated from taxpayers. But to insure they "win the game" of control/monopolization over We the People, government borrows, (or prints from thin air) 46 cents for every spent dollar, according to the Washington Times reporting in December 2012. The other "players" in this gigantic board game don't have the capability of printing their own money or borrowing from foreign governments. Therefore, it's sort of a "rigged game" against We the People. And it is getting worse, not just on the monetary level.As of October 1, 2013, we began to relinquish ALL private information about our lives to a group of non-elected, non-accountable people in the Internal Revenue Service because of the Affordable Care Act – Obamacare. Because of this one unconstitutional law, the Executive Branch of our federal government will now have access to every kind of private information about our health – even concerning our sexual lives. Furthermore, despite making fun of Sarah Palin for talking about death panels, we have relinquished ultimate control over our very lives through the same abominable law. In the future, our government, not ourselves or our family members, will have the final say about whether or not we will receive necessary health care. Yes, there will be panels of strangers sitting in government offices – funded by American taxpayers – deciding if we are too old, too young, worthy or unworthy, of receiving various medicines or procedures. If we don't fit "their" criteria for whatever reason, we will receive a death penalty "sentence" from our government. Yes, it IS in the thousands of pages constituting this law. As Palin might say, "you betcha there's a death panel," a panel that awaits the day it can exercise its tremendous power over us. Of course, it will only do so in order to, and toUh huh...Nowhere in the U.S. Constitution is it written that the Federal Government can force Americans to buy any products they don't want or need. Of course, Supreme Court Chief Justice had three theories presented by the Obama Administration,from which to choose regarding the ACA. He chose to rule on the one ensuring government control over the people the Constitution is supposed to protect, thus making Obamacare a tax. Like the rest of our country's federal tax abomination, Obamacare is also a convoluted mess.Of course, not everybody will have to pay this "tax." Oh no...Everyone will be forced to purchase health insurance whether or not they want or need it. But these people will then receive government subsidies, or partial/full payment of their premiums from government. However, since the government has no money of its own, it will force taxpayers to pay not just for their own Obama-approved health insurance, they will have to pay the subsidies as well. What a deal! – for those receiving this subsidy. Of course, there are all those other subsidies American taxpayers have to pay for as well – food stamps, government housing, "free" Obamaphones – you get the picture.There is still the question about whether Congress and other government employees will be placed on Obamacare. Yes, we pay for a sizeable portion of healthcare benefits for Congress, the President and his family and Cabinet members, congressional members, and untold numbers of congressional and/or other government employees. Would Obamacare cost us less in paying for these people? Doubtful. Nothing the government is involved in ever costs less than similar services rendered from private industry.The point is that the number of people actually working and paying taxes is decreasing, which means the burden on that group of responsible citizens is becoming a crushing one. And for your information, the average American salary is $51,000. Congressmen earn $174,000, or 3.4 times the average American salary, reports the Daily Caller. But then, members of Congress get additional compensation adjusting their salaries to $285,000. Question: Why are American taxpayers expected to payof health care premiums for these people – Obamacare version or not? Oh, and you will love this one...Yesterday, Rep. Mike Doyle, D-PA, was eager to report before a congressional hearing on Obamacare with Czarina Sebellious that he thinks the ACA will save him money by subsidizing an insurance policy for his 33-year-old son. Yes, Obamacare already forces parents to pay for their "children" up to the age of 26. (Seriously.) But the Doyle family has apparently voluntarily supported this son past the mandatory age. Now, American taxpayers will have to partially support him, even though his daddy, a U.S. Congressman makes a minimum of $174,000 a year. Is anybody seeing red yet?While there are millions upon millions of Americans who unfortunately think government should "take care of them," or that America "owes them something," people who actually take personal responsibility for their own lives and work one or more jobs to accomplish this, are forced to relinquish increasing amounts of their paychecks to the government. Socialist Obama and all his cronies do everything in their power to create even more freebies to give-away in their quest to make life "fair" for all. But again, it isn'tmoney used in these benevolent plans. It is OURS! And I don't know about you, but I'm getting sick and tired of it.If we don't start taking back our government, insisting that our "public servants" start obeying the Constitution, and preparing/living on a budget, instead of spending and borrowing future generations of Americans into oblivion, well then, maybe we deserve what we get. And that "what" is full-blown Communism. We must open our eyes and understand that everything government does is to gain more power over us. Obama is deliberately bankrupting our country. He is a Communist who believes in total government control, government ownership. Citizens then work for, and are at the mercy of the government for all their needs. Of course, like in all previous Socialist/Communist regimes, there is a group that lives "high on the hog." Guess who comprises that group? That's right, government officials and their cronies. Are you getting the picture yet, fellow American?Obamacare is the final straw that will break the proverbial camel's back – America's back. Taxpayers can't afford it. I don't have to go through all the figures in this article. There are tons of facts on the Web regarding how much it will cost. There are tons of facts about what it's costing individual Americans and businesses. What has it already cost you?And for those who think the U.S. Constitution doesn't mean that much anymore, then ask yourself what would happen to We the People if there were absolutely no boundaries on what the Federal Government could do to us. Really. No rules...Frightening.The government is NOT our friend. It is taxing, spending, and regulating us both individually, and as a nation, into oblivion. In his first inaugural address, Thomas Jefferson said, "A wise and frugal government...shall restrain men from injuring one another, shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement, and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned.This is the sum of good government." Our government has not been a good government, but an oppressive one doing great harm to We the People. As Mark Levin says, "We need to breathe life back into our heritage – or we are doomed." What are we waiting for?© Madeline Crabb