ATLANTA, Sept. 10, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- MedAssets (NASDAQ:MDAS) today announced that Upland, Calif.-based San Antonio Regional Hospital, a premier regional medical facility serving California's Inland Empire, has renewed and expanded its longstanding relationship with the company for services to reduce the total cost of care. The agreement leverages a range of MedAssets solutions to drive sustainable cost reduction including group purchasing and pharmacy analytics services, clinical cost management, service line analytics, decision support consulting and spend analytics.

Under the multi-year extension, San Antonio Regional Hospital and MedAssets are building upon a successful partnership that, since 2010, has achieved average annual savings of approximately $1 million, or 3% of San Antonio's total supply spend from group purchasing and pharmacy analytics services.

"As a regionally focused provider, our hospital needs strong analytics to achieve a value-driven, strategically run supply chain that helps create a competitive edge in our market," said Wah-chung Hsu, chief financial officer, San Antonio Regional Hospital. "Using MedAssets data-driven solutions, we are optimizing our supply chain performance while improving quality and reducing our supply expense."

With the addition of MedAssets operational and cost analytics solutions, San Antonio Regional Hospital is leveraging business intelligence tools to gain insight through evidence-based pricing and supply chain cost strategies. Real-time monitoring of supply costs provides better transparency into current performance and contract compliance, and helps identify areas for additional cost reductions.

"We are pleased that San Antonio Regional Hospital is continuing its partnership with MedAssets to optimize their supply chain operations as part of an enterprise-wide cost-reduction strategy," said Mike Nolte, president and chief operating officer, MedAssets. "Financial pressures stemming from the Affordable Care Act and other regulatory issues have elevated the business need for greater pricing transparency and understanding of the total cost for providing patient care. MedAssets solutions help San Antonio Regional Hospital and other providers to analyze operational performance across service lines and cost-reduction opportunities within the supply chain."



About San Antonio Regional Hospital

San Antonio Regional Hospital in Upland, Calif., is a non-profit, acute care hospital that offers a comprehensive range of general medical and surgical services, along with the latest technological advances in cardiac care, cancer care, orthopedics, neurosciences, women's health, maternity and neonatal care, and emergency services. Since 1907, San Antonio Community Hospital has emerged as a premier regional medical facility with satellite locations across its Inland Empire campus.

About MedAssets

MedAssets (NASDAQ:MDAS) is a healthcare performance improvement company focused on helping providers realize financial and operational gains so that they can sustainably serve the needs of their community. Approximately 4,500 hospitals and 123,000 non-acute healthcare providers currently use the company's evidence-based solutions, best practice processes and analytics to help reduce the total cost of care, enhance operational efficiency, align clinical delivery, and improve revenue performance across the care continuum. For more information, please visit www.medassets.com.

MDAS/B

Media Contact: Lea Volpe 678.248.8203 lvolpe@medassets.com Investor Contact: Robert Borchert 678.248.8194 rborchert@medassets.com