As the years went by, the wonderful existence and celebration of the Broncos’ Ring of Fame was taking on a tinge of bafflement.

Why wasn’t Rick Upchurch in the Ring of Fame?

He was such an electrifying punt returner and later a home run-type receiver. For many NFL fans in the late 1970s, when they thought of Denver, they thought of him.

“I don’t know what the hang-up was,” said former Broncos quarterback Craig Morton. “He was really overdue. I played with a guy, Bobby Hayes. Rick was like a reincarnation of Hayes. Nobody could cover him. He was a guy where if you needed something, you had to figure out how to give him the ball as fast as you could and let him run.”

At long last, the Ring of Fame caught up to Upchurch. The NFL’s all-decade punt returner in the 1970s and second-team all- decade returner in the 1980s, Upchurch joined original Broncos halfback and kicker Gene Mingo and longtime coach Dan Reeves during an induction ceremony at the Ring of Fame Plaza at Sports Authority Field at Mile High on Friday night.

The humble Upchurch thanked his blockers and coaches for the honor and said he never gave the Ring of Fame much thought.

“I did hear some of that, but you have other players that should be in,” Upchurch said. “Simon Fletcher, Riley Odoms, Red Miller. And I think by the Broncos going back now, and bringing in myself and Dan Reeves and Gene Mingo, some positive things can happen and maybe some of those other guys will get in as well that are deserving.”

Morton and Reeves were rookies together with the Dallas Cowboys in 1965.

“I knew he was going to be a coach from the very beginning,” Morton said of Reeves. “He just knew the game better than anybody I had played with. “

Reeves had seven 10-win seasons and a franchise-best five division titles during his 12 years as Broncos coach. His best team?

“I’ve never been asked that question,” Reeves said after a pause. “You’re always going to hurt somebody’s feelings if you pick the wrong one. The exciting game no question was ‘The Drive.’ To go to the first Super Bowl is something you never forget.”

Mingo led the American Football League in scoring in both its inaugural season of 1960 and in 1962. He became emotional Friday when he recalled Chuck Gavin, a starting defensive end in 1962, being concerned about Mingo’s weight that year. Gavin would bring Mingo to a local park and have him do push-ups, sit-ups and jumping jacks.

“Chuck wanted me to get into the Ring of Fame,” Mingo said. “I miss him and I wish he was here.” Gavin died in 2012 at 78.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis