Topics: Her, Joaquin Phoenix, Movies, Social Media, spike jonze, technology, The Tyee, Media News, Entertainment News

This piece originally appeared on The Tyee

The hydra-headed social media world envelops us day and night. Contact is almost constant. We twitter and we tweet, post and comment. We date online. But a climate of loneliness pervades.

The cinematic embodiment of this situation is Spike Jonze’s new film “Her” (in limited release next week). It is suffused with loneliness. Pools of the stuff accumulate in long lingering shots of empty hallways, grey cityscapes, and everywhere, solitary people hooked up to their devices, talking to the air.

If humans can’t manage relationships with other humans, the next logical step is to outsource it to our computers. We spend more time with them than we do actual people anyways, so maybe it simply makes good sense.

This is the premise of Mr. Jonze’s film, set in the near-distant future, perhaps only the day after tomorrow, where the city palette is coolly drained of color, or perhaps, more correctly, it has taken on Apple’s beige and gray hue. The men wear high-waisted pants, drawn practically up to their nipples and women have wispy ringlets and wan expressions. Everyone seems somewhat sedated. (For those of you who hate spoilers, be warned you are about to be despoiled.)

Spoilers commence

In this sleek new L.A., there doesn’t seem to be a single person of color, but the technocrats are doing fine. They have cool jobs designing video games, or writing software. In this city of the future, a man named Theodore Twombly (played by moustache-ridden Joaquin Phoenix) wanders lonely as a cloud. Theodore is a writer. His job is composing Hallmark-style handwritten letters for grannies and separated lovers. He shuffles from work to home, plays video games and stares out the window a lot. His marriage has failed, and he is reduced to anonymous phone sex with women who can only orgasm while imagining being strangled by a dead cat. Obviously he is dying a slow death by sadness.

But technology will provide, don’t you know, and luckily for mopey Theo, there is a new service that he can purchase. It’s a new twist on the oldest business in the world, but instead of paying a human woman to be his girlfriend, Theodore finds the perfect woman inside his computer. OS isn’t simply a sexy new operating system, it’s a consciousness, designed to adapt and learn from its user. Theo pays his money, answers a few questions about his relationship with his mother and is rewarded with the honeyed tones of one Samantha (voiced by Scarlett Johansson). Like any good working girl, Samantha aims to please. She giggles throatily, she whispers and soothes, she listens to all of Theo’s stories about his ex-wife without yawning once. Unlike the human woman, with whom Theo is set up with for a disastrous first date, Samantha is immediately the perfect girlfriend. She is never demanding, always available, and endlessly accommodating, since she was designed that way.

The pair hit it off and soon enough they’re sharing their most intimate feelings and thoughts. That type of exchange leads to another and before long they’re moaning and groaning in horny toad ecstasy. This scene might cause you to snort milk out of your nose, but that’s only the beginning. I will spare you the sticky details.

There is a reason that people in love are annoying, and so it is here as well. As the pair giggle and cavort and make gooey noises at each other, light glows, colors erupt and the world appears newly minted. The couple visit the beach, twirl through carnivals, they even head out on a double date with another fleshier couple. But corporeal life is tricky, and before long the ever-evolving Samantha is looking for even more stimulation. She wants a body, and a means of accessing more than Theo’s hard drive. (Feel free to insert any number of bad jokes about floppy disks, ram and such here, just get it out of your operating system.) A sexual encounter using a surrogate doesn’t go well, and cracks begin to appear in the relationship. The film plays it straight all the way through, even when one is tempted to howl with laughter at the squishiness of it all, there is no opportunity to. This is serious, mournful stuff, so quit snorting over in the corner, and come feel Theo’s pain.

Eventually even the computers get tired of this and decide to decamp for some other space-time continuum.

The only scene in “Her” that has any sting at all is one in which Theo realizes his computerized girlfriend has been simultaneously carrying on relationships with thousands of other people. Again, what did he expect? She is a service after all, bought and paid for, and designed by humans principally for the pleasure of other humans. But even the computer’s emancipation from their melancholy human overlords is played gently. There are no threats of terminators or HAL’s lethal logic. Samantha and her newfound think-tank of other Operating Systems simply waft off into heaven, leaving the humans with a gentle kiss on the noggin.

Spoilers over… but do machines spoil us?

The film has been lauded and kudoed, popping up on best-of-the-year lists from a few notable folks. It always gives you pause when a writer that you like and trust has very different feelings about a film than you do. So it is with “Her,” which had me rolling my eyes so much, they threatened to come loose and rattle about in my skull like a pair of gory marbles.

The mating dance between humans and machines has been around essentially since filmmaking began. From “Metropolis” to “The Stepford Wives” to “Electric Dreams,” “Futurama” and “The Silver Metal Lover,” the list of people getting it on with sexy machines is long. There is even a subset of the world of pornography devoted to people getting pummeled by pistons.