In one room of the Purdue Technology Center of Northwest Indiana, phone IT professionals from as far away as France and Costa Rica are nearing the end of a two-week advanced class on the CISCO phone system.

In another, students learn how to become ultrasound technicians, using a machine to probe an actual heart. Elsewhere in the building, people are doing cancer research.

The modern 60,000-square-foot building, which is turning 10 in July, is almost 70 percent full with 40 tenants, about 95 percent of which are tech-related in one way or another, according to operations manager David LaMere.

LaMere said the center, part of the Purdue Research Park in Ameriplex at the Crossroads at 101st and Broadway, gets new tenants all the time, which in its case, is a positive.

An incubator designed to help start-up companies with the aid of conference rooms, videoconferencing capabilities and a receptionist and telephone answering service, the hope is that tenants grow and move on to their own, larger spaces.

"Tenants can stay here a year or forever," he said.

One success case has grown and decided to expand in the center.

IT hardware and software solutions firm CSO IT Procurement went from one small office to four, one of which houses its data center, vice president Ray Govert said.

"The Purdue Tech Center is a perfect fit for us. It's affiliated with Purdue and we're involved in education. It's looking for upstart companies and has conference rooms for up to 50 to 60 people. We're just getting rolling and need some conference space," Govert said.

A spin-off of Mokena, Ill.-based Competitive Support Options, CSO IT Procurement partners with computer manufacturers including Epson, Hewlett Packard and IBM to supply the healthcare, financial services, manufacturing and education sectors with technology solutions.

Govert said it specializes in serving K-12 schools and has worked with a number of school corporations in the area. The company now has four employees, but the Indiana Economic Development Corp. said it has plans to create up to 25 new jobs by 2019.

The company is investing $235,000 to lease and equip its expanded facility at the center. The IEDC offered it up to $226,000 in conditional tax credits and up to $24,000 in training grants based on the company's job creation plans. These incentives are performance-based, which means the company is not eligible to claim incentives until Hoosiers are hired.

Marianne Moore, program director of Cardinal Tech Institute of Allied Health, said the institute has been in the tech center since last June and recently started its second ultrasound technology class.

"It's a beautiful environment. We're thrilled to be here," she said of the center.

She said graduates of the one-year course will be able to earn between $65,000 and $75,000 a year, according to Bureau of Labor statistics.

"It's a growing field. There will be a large demand for it under (the Affordable Care Act,)" she said.

Juan Delgado of Costa Rica was among a group of IT professionals from across the U.S. and as far away as France who were taking an advanced class on the CISCO phone system offered by New Trek Technologies. If they passed the exam at the end, they would receive a certificate, which Delgado said is needed in his work.

Not all the companies in the tech center are as tech-oriented, LaMere said. The Regional Development Authority and Chicago Title have offices there. Another company, Property Insight, provides the means to do property ownership research dating back to the mid-1800s, long before computers were invented.

"Say you own a steel mill and you want to put a railroad through. You need to find out who owns the land. They can help you," LaMere said.

Property Insights has a library of books, some tattered and held together with duct taped to keep them from falling apart, which the public can go through to find out who owned a certain piece of property before they were recorded on computer.

"It would be too expensive to computerize this information," LaMere said.

Lynette Cieslak, customer service representative, has been with the Purdue Technology Center of Northwest Indiana since it opened.

She's with the clients from the start, beginning with an orientation and giving them their key and fob to the building. She hosts networking and social events and conducts safety drills.

She even saved the life of one of the people who work there last year.

One of the companies called her and said an employee had just collapsed and she needed to come right away with her automated external defibrillator (AED).

"I kept working on her until the ambulance arrived. I administered two shocks with the AED machine," Cieslak said.

"By the grace of God I was able to restart her heart," she said.

The employee has since returned to work.

Cieslak said since the incident, there are now 15 people in the building certified in CPR and AED.

Karen Caffarini is a freelance reporter.