Thompson Valley swimmers, from left, Liam Gately, Jack Thorne and Chris Eddy pose together on the medal podium before practice at Dick Hewson Aquatic Center. The trio provides the Eagles with a core of high state placers in the lane in a push for the 4A team title. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Agitated.

Chris Eddy didn't have to think about a response. The emotion was right there, just as it had been since the end of last season.

"A lot," Eddy said. "It's agitated us ever since. It definitely brought up some emotions."

Liam Gately agreed. So did Jack Thorne, adding "having some friends from Air Academy at our meet in Texas last week made me think about it even more."

Just 36 points separated Air Academy from Thompson Valley (280-244) in the team race for the 4A state title last year, and since that day in May, the Eagles and coach Dale Leonhart have tried to figure out what they can do to bridge that gap. The Eagles have finished in the top five the past three seasons, a bit better each time out.

Now, they'd like to figure out how to win it.

"What I have to impart upon the crew is it's got to be a total team commitment to the process," Leonhart said. "We can't ride the coattails of a half dozen fast kids and four potential divers. It's going to take more than that. Our guys need commit to the practice ethic, doing things right in practice and trying to get better at things in practice."

Going deeper, Leonhart said every team in the state will do the same yardage in practice. The Eagles just have to do it better. And for those on the team who may not get a state cut or place, their attitude in practice can go a long way toward keeping a positive vibe.

What the Eagles start with in the lanes is arguably the best stroke-swimmer in the classification in Thorne, and two of the top distance freestylers in Eddy and Liam Gately.

Thorne is the two-time defending champ in the 100-yard backstroke (beating the classification record each time), adding the 100 butterfly title last year. Naturally, he can't score any more points.

Gately (second in the 500 free, fourth in the 200 free) and Eddy (fourth in the 500 free, ninth in the 200 free) can, and that's where both are out to do their part.

"I think we got off to a good start last year, but we're always trying to expand on our races and our swims," Gately said. "I think we have a pretty good chance this year."

Eddy is taking expansion to another race, too, for the good of the team. He's working hard on improving his breaststroke, not only for the medley relay, but even to see if he can score better there than in one of the free events.

Leonhart said it's always a positive when a swimmer is willing to step out of their comfort zone for the common good. Eddy is willing, but he's also curious.

"I'm kind of nervous about that," he said. "I like breaststroke, but it's not my key race. We need it for the relay, and we just don't have any points in breaststroke."

Where the Eagles do gain a ton of points is in diving, with three returning state placers — Collin Williams, fourth; Kyle Pape, seventh; and Set Niko, 16th — and coach Amon McCrary is excited about his group of five, adding in Hunter Williams and Brandon Bicknell.

"Having those four divers, with their capabilities, that's like having a fourth relay," Leonhart said. "They can ring the bell for more points than a first-place relay can get. A first-place relay will get 40 points."

And relays will be important. Leonhart believes that returners Garrett Britt, Jack Kisch, Reed Charron, Jon Schlager, Justin Riley and Braden Eidem are all improved, many with the capabilities to add individual points, but necessary to help all three relays score high.

The same can be said with freshmen Lukas Gately, Michael Vierra and Jacob Satur, all who will be competitive off the blocks.

The question is, will it be enough at the end?

"We've got some new guys, and I think most of us perform pretty well under pressure," Thorne said. "I think it will be an exciting meet. It will come down to some of the last events."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/rhpreps