A group of 12 Panama City Naval Sea Cadets got a chance to take an inside look on what it's like to be part of the Florida National Guard.

The 144th Florida National Guard unit came to the Naval Surface Warfare Center Panama City for a joint drill. It's a program exposing youth to various military career paths.

The U.S. Naval Sea Cadets, a group of young individuals seeking the life of military.

"I'm hoping to join the military right out of high school and I feel this will give me an edge over anyone else who's just going to enlist, who hasn't been in a program like this," said Panama City Naval Sea Cadet Brandon Kight.

"We do Navy SEAL training where we expose them to what it, some of the exercises and things they have to do and if they don't like it they get an experience early on, so it can help direct them in the way of a career that they really like," said Panama City Naval Sea Cadet Instructor Jim Fath.

Every month these cadets are required to do various drills. Saturday they went on a joint drill with the 144th Florida National Guard.

"This definitely gives them an opportunity to see what another branch of the service does and what we do in the National Guard and with the army, so it gives them more options out there as they begin to enter adulthood and choose the different career fields," said Company Commander 144th Florida National Guard Captain Robert Davis.

Cadets got a hands on feel for what it's like to be a part of the Florida National Guard. From the vehicles they operate to the mission they serve.

"There's just a lot of great benefits that the Florida Guard offers, but they're also able to be a citizen within the state and be that citizen solider that dual role," said Captain Davis.

And a learning opportunity for not only the Cadets, but the Guard too.

"Also come and see what it is they do in the navy and broaden our horizons and understanding of what we do in the military together," said Captain Davis.

Sunday the Sea Cadets will be headed to Camp Bethlehem for expeditionary warfare training.