Healthcare, always a pressing issue on Americans’ minds, is in the news this week with a Republican threat to defund Obamacare and the Democratic candidates for president squaring off in the public sphere over their respective health care platforms. Bernie Sanders of Vermont is promoting a form of universal single payer — which he refers to as Medicare for All, turning an existing government service into a national health provider. Clinton, however, warns that his proposal would effectively take the Affordable Care Act apart and start from scratch, which would be a real challenge given how difficult it was to pass Obamacare in the first place. She’s expressed opposition to the plan, as has her daughter Chelsea Clinton, who has been joining her on the campaign trail.

One interesting problem: Hillary Rodham Clinton was for single-payer before she was against it, and in fact she was heavily criticized in the 1990s when she made it a major part of her work as First Lady when her husband Bill was in the White House. So what happened between then and now, what exactly is she proposing to address health care coverage gaps, and how comprehensive is the Sanders platform when you take a second look?

To find out, you need to delve deep into the growing tensions between the two campaigns, which have been largely cordial but are taking the gloves off as we approach the critical Iowa caucus and New Hampshire primary. Part of the reason is the shrinking poll gap between the two candidates, with Sanders leading in some key polls, though by a very narrow margin.

Almost immediately after taking office, President Bill Clinton began championing universal health care, in part at the urging of Hillary, who campaigned across the U.S. to attract supporters. The political climate in some ways would look very familiar to contemporary viewers, as Congress was deeply divided along partisan lines — only one Republican, appropriately enough from Vermont, was willing to support the president, and the party leadership kept other Senators and Representatives in line, discouraging compromise that might lead to successful passage of Mr. Clinton’s proposed legislation. Ultimately, it failed, and both Clintons were knocked around the political arena for it, with single-payer becoming an issue that would dog Ms. Clinton, and does to this day.

Hillary Clinton’s passionate championing of the cause in the 1990s shifted as President Obama pushed the Affordable Care Act, bringing about significant health care reform in the United States. At the same time that Congress was working on Obamacare, the health insurance industry — already a substantial lobbying force — was jostling for position, hoping to establish a foothold with political movers and shakers. Some have accused Clinton of capitulating on universal single-payer because of her connections with the insurance industry, but the truth is likely more complicated. Clinton sees a strongly polarized political climate and one in which there is a very real risk that a single-payer proposal not only might fall through, but could take ACA down with it, leaving Americans exactly where they were before the Obama Administration took office. Instead, she wants to build on existing reform, continuing to lower prices for key components of health care and get more Americans onto insurance policies.

The situation is complicated by the fact that, while the Sanders plan is ambitious and sounds good in abstract — he’s effectively proposing that the United States streamline healthcare and administer it from one central agency, Medicare, rather than through a hodgepodge of agencies as well as private and subsidized insurers — he hasn’t provided many specific public details on how to implement and administer it. He has specifically stressed that it would be a federal system delegating responsibility to the states, stepping in if they fail to adhere to guidelines, but it could be very expensive, even though people won’t need to pay private insurance premiums anymore, and he would need to raise taxes to pay for it, a move that’s always unpopular. Worse yet, Vermont, which tried to implement a single-payer system, failed. That’s cause for concern, as the nonspecific nature of his plan could mean that it would be difficult to enact, which is precisely what Clinton fears, and that’s assuming he could ram it through a Congress that could be extremely hostile, a problem Obama has faced throughout his presidency.

Political attack ads are common, especially in the primary season, when politicians often scrabble fiercely for every point in the polls. In this case, on the surface it looks like Clinton was for single-payer before she was against it, to paraphrase an infamous quote from John Kerry’s earlier presidential campaign. Both sides could be more upfront, though — fact checking suggests that attacks on Sanders’ plan from the Clinton camp haven’t been completely accurate, but at the same time, Sanders isn’t being entirely forthcoming with the details people need to take an informed position about health care, though his campaign says his proposal will likely resemble a 2013 bill he introduced in the Senate. Should Republicans succeed with a threatened veto override, this isn’t going to be a purely academic legal exercise anymore, because if Obamacare is repealed, the playing field for health care reform will be wide open again.

Photo credit: U.S. Embassy New Zealand