WASHINGTON — Civil liberty concerns over legislation sought by a Kansas state senator to speed police access to cell phone location data didn’t derail the measure from advancing Tuesday.

A Democratic amendment to revert the legislation to a compromise reached in previous years failed, rejected on an apparently party-line voice vote. The old pact addressed some of the concerns of civil liberties advocates, who fear an erosion of privacy under the bill.

The Kelsey Smith Act would require cell phone companies to provide police with phone location information during emergencies involving a high risk of death or serious injury.

Kansas has passed its own version of the measure, but passage of federal legislation, named after his murdered daughter, is an ongoing goal of state Sen. Greg Smith, an Overland Park Republican. U.S. Rep. Kevin Yoder, a Republican hailing from suburban Kansas City, has championed the bill. Sen. Pat Roberts has also introduced a similar measure in the Senate.

The amendment offered by Rep. Frank Pallone, D-New Jersey, during a House subcommittee meeting to move the legislation back to a version previously considered, would have required law enforcement to provide a sworn statement asserting they have probable cause — the same standard used for search warrants — when seeking location data. The current bill contains a lower, “reasonable belief” standard.

The Kelsey Smith Act passed the House Energy and Commerce Committee in 2014, but didn’t receive a vote on the House floor.

“We prefer the version without the sworn statements. Just because, again, it’s a time thing and the whole idea behind this is to cut as much time as possible to save a life,” Smith said.

Smith, who attended the Energy and Commerce subcommittee on communications and technology, sat in the front row and smiled as soon as the panel recommended the legislation receive a favorable recommendation. His daughter, Kelsey Smith, was kidnapped on June 2, 2007, raped and strangled to death. Her body was found after a four-day search and after Smith’s family was told by Verizon that the phone company couldn’t release location data.

In a statement, Yoder commended that the subcommittee act quickly. He said it was time to give law enforcement effective tools to try to prevent tragedies like what happened to Kelsey Smith.

The bill drew opposition from the American Civil Liberties Union. The group cautioned lawmakers about the potential for law enforcement abuse of the law. It argued the Fourth Amendment protects access to a person’s location.

Pallone, speaking Monday, indicated the earlier bill had stronger civil liberty protections than the current legislation.

“For some reason, however, the Republicans decided to walk away from their own deal. Instead, we have HR 4889, a version of the bill that drops all the consumer safeguards the Republicans agreed to in the last congress,” Pallone said.

The subcommittee’s chairman, Rep. Greg Walden, R-Oregon, defended the legislation. The bill seeks to balance the interests between privacy and providing access to data when needed.

Walden offered the only successful amendment to the bill. The change ensures liability protections for companies complying with law enforcement requests for data. Every second counts, he said.

“We also heard from an ACLU attorney who expressed concerns about privacy violations and potential abuse of the legislation by law enforcement,” Walden said. “While I know these concerns are shared by some members here, I believe the law is drafted — creates a sufficiently narrow set of circumstances in which law enforcement agencies can access this type of data as well as a very small subset of data that they’re able to access.”