“All I know is that we have an outstanding New York congressional delegation that, over the years, has defied partisanship and worked together,” Mr. Rangel said.

Photo

There are some obvious areas of common interest: In his campaign, Mr. Donovan highlighted the importance of infrastructure funding for New York, and criticized national Republicans for what he called an “anti-New York” attitude.

In his first act as a congressman, Mr. Donovan told his Democratic colleague, Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, that he wanted to co-sponsor legislation reauthorizing the James Zadroga 9/11 Health and Compensation Act, a law providing care to workers who became sick as a result of their exposure to polluted air after the trade center buildings fell.

Yet for others in the delegation, Mr. Donovan’s arrival has rippled in a more disconcerting way. Several lawmakers said they remained suspicious of Mr. Donovan’s role in the Garner case, and complained that a judge had sided with the prosecutor and had refused to release transcripts of the confidential grand jury proceedings.

The Justice Department has opened a civil rights investigation into the case, in which a police officer’s chokehold on Mr. Garner, who was unarmed, led to the man’s death.

In his congressional race, Mr. Donovan seldom spoke about the Garner case: He said he had delegated the investigation to a team of lawyers in his office and that, while he stood by the grand jury’s decision, he had never set foot in the courtroom himself.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Representative Gregory W. Meeks said he still wanted to know whether Mr. Donovan’s office “presented a strong case or not.” There is a tricky balancing act ahead, Mr. Meeks acknowledged, for members who criticized Mr. Donovan as a prosecutor but hope to work collaboratively in Washington.

“I, of course, am still working to correct what I believe was a miscarriage of justice with regards to the Garner case,” Mr. Meeks said, adding: “That said, I also have a responsibility to work with individuals that I agree with on issues.”

Representative Hakeem Jeffries said he was troubled by the appearance that Mr. Donovan “presided over a stunning miscarriage of justice and was rewarded with a job in Congress.” Mr. Donovan, he said, could allay some distrust by supporting criminal justice reform legislation in Congress.

“For many, his arrival in Congress is like salt being poured over an open wound,” Mr. Jeffries said. “Moving forward, it is going to take a lot of constructive dialogue to get past the events of the last year.”

Photo

In an interview shortly after taking the oath of office, Mr. Donovan said that no one in the New York delegation had raised the Garner case with him directly. “Some of them said harsh things about me, but I’m not going to let that get in the way of governing,” he said.

The former prosecutor described his reception on Capitol Hill as “wonderfully welcoming,” and ticked off a few areas where Democrats have already reached out to him: Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand called him about working together on the Zadroga bill; in a congratulatory phone call, Mr. Donovan said, Mayor Bill de Blasio said he hoped to have the Republican’s support on homeland security issues.

During a visit to Washington last week, Mr. de Blasio referred to the Republican congressman as “someone that I can work with.”

As for law enforcement policy, Mr. Donovan said he would review any legislation his colleagues put forward, but stopped short of signing himself up as a partner in criminal justice reform. “I certainly would want to look at what’s being proposed,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Despite his landslide election to the House, Mr. Donovan’s political image remains a work in progress: It was largely untested in his special-election campaign against an underfunded Democratic opponent, City Councilman Vincent J. Gentile. Mr. Donovan managed to evade questions on some key issues throughout the campaign, such as his precise position on the minimum wage and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the trade deal under consideration in Washington.

Mr. Donovan also reversed himself on the issue of health care, first saying it would be unnecessary to undo the Affordable Care Act, then calling for its wholesale repeal.

Now that he will take votes almost daily as a member of Congress, Mr. Donovan will have to give swift definition to some of his hazier stances, and in the process walk a line between pleasing his party’s leadership and protecting his popularity back home. Though his district has mainly elected Republicans, voters there supported President Obama in 2012. In addition, Staten Island’s nonwhite population has grown by about 8 percentage points since 2000, according to the census; Democrats tend to have a powerful advantage among minority voters.

Mr. Donovan’s Democratic colleagues took a skeptical view of what the Republican freshman might accomplish across the aisle. Representative Jerrold Nadler, the Manhattan Democrat, said that having a Staten Island Republican in the House could “theoretically” be helpful. He cautioned, though, that Mr. Donovan’s predecessors had limited success winning concessions for the city from Republican leaders.

Mr. Nadler, who in December called the lack of an indictment in the Garner investigation “shocking and almost unfathomable,” said he remained concerned about the resolution of the case. But Mr. Donovan, he said, would be scrutinized anew in Washington.

“What he did before — it was upsetting to me that the officer wasn’t indicted,” Mr. Nadler said. “But whether that was his fault or the grand jury’s — I don’t know. As a new member, he’s going to be judged on what he does in Congress, and he should be.”