A look at some recent surveys and reports dealing with risk and compliance issues. Send surveys and reports to wsjrisk@wsj.com.

More than 80% of respondents to the sixth annual ethics and compliance leadership survey from LRN said business performance and value creation as the greatest benefits of an ethical culture. The survey found 74% of executives who responded listed data privacy as the top ethics and compliance risk, followed by conflicts of interest at 70%, electronic data protection at 68% and bribery and corruption at 62%.

A TripWire/Ponemon Institute survey of IT professionals in the U.S. and U.K. found 51% use formal risk assessments to identify security risks, 86% believe minimizing noncompliance with laws and regulations helps meet certain business objectives and 52% listed “flow of upstream communications” as one of the top three features most critical to the success of a risk-based security management approach.

The financial sector remains the industry most under threat of email attacks and incidents of cyberfraud, data security company Agari said in its TrustIndex for the third quarter of 2013. The survey found email remains the top vector cybercriminals use to launch attacks to facilitate the stealing of personal and financial information from consumers and businesses.

Government surveillance is having a chilling effect on American writers, as a survey from the PEN American Center and FDR Group found 85% of the more than 500 writers who responded saying they are worried about government surveillance of Americans. The survey found one-third of respondents saying they have avoided certain topics in phone conversations and 27% admitting they have self-censored themselves either in print or in speech.

A white paper from Kroll talks about what companies must know about their supply chains to avoid becoming involved in the illegal human trafficking industry. The report said there are an estimated 21 million people who are victims of human trafficking, with many ending up working in the agriculture, seafood, garment, mining and construction industries–and 10% ending up as commercial sex workers.

A survey of more than 100 IT professionals involved with the North American Electric Reliability Corp.’s critical infrastructure protection compliance found 70% don’t think the compliance protocol is strong enough to ensure the security of the Bulk Electric System from cyberthreats. More than three-quarters of respondents say a compliance plan is necessary to protect the system from cyberattack, according to the TripWire survey.

PwC U.S. compares results from two surveys—one of corporate directors and one of institutional investors—to see where the two groups agree and disagree on current corporate governance issues. The survey found both groups think compensation consultants are “very influential” over board decisions on executive compensation, but disagree on how much negative shareholder voting is necessary to initiate a review on compensation.

The Institute of Internal Auditors latest Pulse of the Profession survey found 17% of respondents said they are considering reducing or dropping health care coverage in the next three years in order to mitigate the effects of the Affordable Care Act, with 64% of respondents saying the law will “impact” their organization.

Write to Ben DiPietro at ben.dipietro@dowjones.com, and follow him on Twitter @BenDiPietro1.