George Zimmerman, the man notorious for shooting Travyon Martin in a 2012 killing that was ruled to be in self-defense, took to Twitter over the past two days to blast a “racist” President Barack Obama following Wednesday’s murder of two reporters in Roanoke, Va.

Zimmerman first joined Twitter in December of 2013, and has generally been a quiet user, with about 1,350 total tweets. But following the killing of Alison Parker and Adam Ward in Virginia, which appears to have been partly racially motivated, Zimmerman unleashed a torrent of mockery and criticism against President Obama, referring to him as a racist and a “baboon:”

Pansy Fester lee Flanagan, too much of a daisy to deal w/racism. Murders 2 whites. Hate crime, 100%. Racist Obama says nothing condeming. — George Zimmerman (@TherealGeorgeZ) August 26, 2015

“the # of people who die from gun-related incidents around this country dwarfs any deaths that happen through terrorism,” – Ignorant Baboon — George Zimmerman (@TherealGeorgeZ) August 26, 2015

Zimmerman didn’t shy away at all from the topic of his own shooting of Trayvon Martin in 2012, instead gleefully responding to critics who attacked him over the matter:

We all know how it ended for the last moron that hit me. Give it a whirl cupcake. https://t.co/F0IlHiHLX6 — George Zimmerman (@TherealGeorgeZ) August 27, 2015

Zimmerman even mocked Obama’s comments following Martin’s death that “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon:”

If Obama had a son… pic.twitter.com/GRh4XIn7vr — George Zimmerman (@TherealGeorgeZ) August 27, 2015

If @BarackObama had 2 sons… http://t.co/PkgvfFCRZO pic.twitter.com/KICkl3z5zH — George Zimmerman (@TherealGeorgeZ) August 27, 2015

When one user suggested that Zimmerman was trolling the Black Lives Matter movement, and that it wouldn’t “end well,” Zimmerman had a ready-made response.

For them… https://t.co/4sYD9snUeD — George Zimmerman (@TherealGeorgeZ) August 27, 2015

Follow Blake on Twitter

Send tips to blake@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@ dailycallernewsfoundation.org.