Rising star: Wizards guard John Wall. Photo: AFP

On Christmas Day on national TV, the New York Knicks paid John Wall a big backhanded compliment, a testament to how wonderful he has become. They couldn't stop him, so they tried to goad and goon him. Quincy Acy, a bruiser off the bench, took a cheap flagrant foul, then stood over the Wizards guard to try to instigate or intimidate. Wall shoved back. Acy took a lame roundhouse swat and got heaved.

The Knicks admitted that, after watching Wall rain 24 points, 11 assists and six rebounds on them, their only hope for a late comeback was to agitate him out of his normal game or hope he would overreact and get ejected. That's how far Wall has come. He is second in the league in assists and steals, guards so well he's in the top 10 in some all-around defensive metrics, scores 18 points per game and leads Eastern Conference guards in all-star votes. Most important, he's a leader who owns the closing minutes of tight games for a 20-8 team with dreams of the NBA Finals.

It took five years.

Not so festive: Officials break up a scuffle between Quincy Acy #4 of the New York Knicks and John Wall #2 of the Washington Wizards in the second half of their game at Madison Square Garden on December 25, 2014 in New York City. Photo: AFP

That's not only a testament to Wall's tenacity but also a lesson to other Washington teams as they evaluate their extremely gifted but still early-career performers such as quarterback Robert Griffin III, outfielder Bryce Harper and pitcher Stephen Strasburg. All three, because of youth and injury, are still early in their learning curve. Harper and Griffin have played only slightly more than two full seasons of games, while Strasburg is a bit past three full seasons of experience, though he debuted in mid-2010.

Advertisement

At the same juncture, Wall's career was still a mystery. Just 17 months ago, after his third NBA year, the Wizards were worried, almost scared. Should they offer a maximum contract in the neighborhood of $80 million to lock up their No. 1 overall draft pick of 2010 and avoid losing him as a free agent? It was a city-wide debate.

Sound familiar? Dan Snyder and Bruce Allen must decide by May whether to extend Griffin's contract - a roughly $16 million obligation - or risk losing him after 2015.

The Wizards held their breath and did the deal in July 2013 even though Wall had missed 33 games with injuries the season before, nearly led the league in turnovers per minute and, though improving, was a far-below-average shooter. If he was a max-deal guy, why was the team 29-53?

Does that echo, at least to a degree, Griffin with his knee and ankle injuries, his problems becoming a pocket passer and his dismal won-lost record the last two years? Does it evoke the frets that Harper might batter his body before he masters his game? Are Strasburg's losses of poise when things go against him akin to Wall's nightmare nights when turnovers led to ugly shots and even to sulking on the bench?

Now, as we watch Wall's jet-pack levitation acrobatics, such as a 360-degree spinning layup over a 7-foot Knick, it's easy to forget his future was still so unclear at the three-year mark.

How do we know who will continue to improve? That's often a function of personal maturity and critical self-knowledge. Who will stay half-finished until they end up "too-soon-old, too-late-smart?"

Who knew Wall would end up being an excellent model not only for extremely high draft picks like Griffin, Strasburg and Harper, as well as Wizards teammate Bradley Beal and the Nats' Anthony Rendon? Mid-first-round draft picks like Capitals wingers Andre Burakovsky, 19, and Tom Wilson, 20, and center Evgeny Kuznetsov, 22, need look no further than the Wizards' locker room at Verizon Center for career lessons.

Maybe nothing matters more, especially if you have obvious elite talent, than focusing on craft in your early pro years, even as you are already adored for being famous. For example, Wall has gotten better at strengths and improved most weaknesses each year. His true shooting percentage, which factors two-point, three-point and free-throw shooting accuracy, keeps rising: .494, .502, .521, .524 and now .533 - more than good enough. His assists per 36 minutes improve: 7.9, 8.0, 8.4, 8.7 to 10.4. Turnovers are still the same problem, but his defense, graded a negative as a rookie, now ranks him No. 7 in the NBA in defensive win shares (don't ask).

Sometimes it seems that being almost famous - but not quite - is an advantage when you get to the top level of your sport, like Beal, the third overall draft pick in 2012, and Rendon, the sixth pick the year before. Beal, 21, may be an all-star soon. Rendon, fifth in MVP voting last season, may already be at Wall's level as a star. In his second year, he ranked in the top 10 in the National League in 19 offensive and defensive categories and was the second-best everyday player in the league in wins above replacement.

Nothing counts like inexorable improvement. If you want to worry, then look for players who seem to level off or even decline in their first few years. The Capitals' Nicklas Backstrom rocketed up his first three years with 69, 88 and 101 points. Now, in his eighth season, Nick is scoring the most points per game of his career.

Confession time: Last month, I thought a benched Griffin might never get much better. The last two weeks, he has looked somewhat more confident and comfortable - a first step. At times, I've wondered whether Strasburg would ever be durable, whether Harper's hitting approach might have stalled and whether Rendon would get strong enough to handle fastballs on both sides of the plate. Strasburg just pitched 215 innings. Harper had three homers and a double in four clutch playoff games. Rendon barrels up everything.

Most of all, two years ago, I was skeptical of Wall. Valuable and exciting, yes. But bad NBA shooters seldom become good. Reckless point guards have infuriating limits. A consistently committed defender, a grown-up leader on a possible 60-win veteran team - are we talking about John Wall?

Sure looks like we are. It took four years to hit his major inflection point and five seasons for the total breakout year - to what heights we don't exactly know yet. At playoff games last year, I listened to Wall and thought, "Wouldn't it be impressive if other big young talents in Washington mature like this."

Some will; some won't. But our impatient schedule doesn't matter. The gift they need is time.

Washington Post