'Code Black' review: Health care system on life support

Photo: Long Shot Factory Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 A medical team attends to a patient at the Los Angeles County Medical Center emergency room, which the documentary "Code Black" portrays as a microcosm for an overwhelmed American health system. A medical team attends to a patient at the Los Angeles County Medical Center emergency room, which the documentary "Code Black" portrays as a microcosm for an overwhelmed American health system. Photo: Long Shot Factory 'Code Black' review: Health care system on life support 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Code Black

Documentary. Directed by Dr. Ryan McGarry. (Not rated. 82 minutes.)

You've probably heard or read about most of the problems presented in "Code Black," a compelling documentary about the struggles of an overburdened emergency room. But reading about such problems is one thing - seeing them up close is quite another.

Physician-director Ryan McGarry works at Los Angeles County Medical Center (it never hurts to have connections) and wheels us into the emergency room's trauma bay, where he and fellow doctors must deal with life-or-death cases at a dizzying rate.

Yet "Code Black," which refers to the breaking point in which the emergency room cannot treat new patients, doesn't concern itself with just the trauma victims. The L.A. hospital serves as a microcosm for an overwhelmed American health system, in which breathtaking numbers of the uninsured must turn to the emergency room because there is simply nowhere else to go for even relatively routine medical treatment.

When we see the reception room stuffed with ailing people, some of them waiting 18 hours or more to be checked by a physician, the feelings of helplessness and frustration are palpable, both from the viewpoint of the patients and the doctors. When we see the doctors wading through paperwork instead of treating patients, we all conclude that the system, whatever it is, needs to be fixed.

McGarry wisely steers away from the Obamacare fray, and though a few moments in the emergency room are hard to watch, he and his (very good) editor, Joshua Altman, go to great lengths to make these scenes as sensitive as possible.

Away from the mayhem of the emergency room, some of the doctor-to-doctor interactions come off as contrived, and though it's perhaps unfair, we cannot help but roll our eyes at how photogenic these physicians are - they seem to have answered a casting call for "E.R." or "Grey's Anatomy."

"Code Black," however, succeeds in its most important mission: taking us to ground zero of the health care mess. As they say, seeing is believing.