Obamacare and the federal tax code: Neither is celebrated for its simplicity. So the marriage of the two this tax season has created new complexity, and new headaches, for the millions of Americans who got coverage on the individual health-insurance market.

This year, for the first time, tax filers must tell the Internal Revenue Service whether they have health insurance. Those who went without coverage last year will owe a penalty, unless they met specific criteria for an exemption. For the majority of people, who get insurance either through their job or through a government program, this just means checking a box on the Form 1040 attesting to having had coverage in 2014.

But for the millions of Americans enrolled in Obamacare for 2014 (around 7 million were counted last fall), and especially for the majority of that group who received premium subsidies, this tax season involves new forms and calculations. “There’s a whole new language with Obamacare,” said Kristin Esposito, senior technical manager for the AICPA, a professional organization of accountants

Certain taxpayers need to pay particularly careful attention to their paperwork. Members of the sandwich generation, who may have grown children on their plan, need to watch how household income is defined to ensure they received the proper subsidy—those who received too much may need to repay at least some of it. And anyone who earned more than they expected last year may face an unwelcome tax liability, although a quirk in the law could let some reduce that liability by contributing to their retirement fund.

Below, we’ve rounded up some of the major considerations for people with Obamacare.

Deadlines

Open enrollment for 2015 coverage under Obamacare ended on Feb. 15. But earlier this month, the government created a special enrollment period that extended the deadline for people who meet specific criteria: They must live in one of the 37 states whose insurance marketplace is facilitated by the federal government (that means they’ll enroll through HealthCare.gov, not the website of a state-run exchange); they must attest that they paid a fee when they filed their taxes for not having had health coverage in 2014; and they must attest that they first became aware of the penalty for not having coverage in connection with preparing their 2014 returns after the Feb. 15 deadline had passed. People who meet these criteria can enroll in health coverage from March 15 through April 30 to avoid paying a penalty next year for being uninsured for this year.

Reconciling premium subsidies

Under Obamacare, moderate-income families are eligible for government help in paying their monthly insurance premium. Most often, this help takes the form of what’s called an “advanced premium tax credit”—that is, an amount paid by the government directly to the insurance company on behalf of eligible enrollees.

This payment lowers the monthly premium cost for enrollees, but because they don’t actually see it, many taxpayers who received this subsidy did not understand that they were receiving government assistance, according to a white paper published this month by the Tax Institute at H&R Block.

Those who had Obamacare coverage last year will already have received Form 1095-A from their health insurance marketplace. This form, new this year, includes information about any advanced premium tax credits paid directly to their insurer.

Last week, government officials announced that about 20% of tax filers who bought insurance from the federal marketplace received 1095-A forms that included incorrect information about the benchmark silver plan on which their premium subsidy is based. Those who already filed taxes using these incorrect form 1095-As do not need to file amended returns and will not be held liable for any additional amount owed based on the correct information, a Treasury spokesperson said this week.

Now comes the fun part: making sure that you’ve received the correct amount in advanced premium credits. This is done on Form 8962. When people enrolled in Obamacare for 2014 coverage—a process that began in the fall of 2013—they were asked to estimate their income for 2014. This estimate determined the amount of premium assistance they qualified for (a family of four earning up to 400% of the federal poverty level, or $95,400 in 2014, a family of two earning up to $62,920, and single people earning up to $46,680 were eligible for some level of help).

Understandably, it’s hard for many people predict with precision how much they’ll earn. A self-employed consultant may lose and gain clients throughout the year, and her income will fluctuate accordingly. Turns out, many folks underestimated their 2014 income, according to H&R Block. That means they received more in premium subsidies than they ultimately qualified for, and they may have to repay at least a portion of the difference. The amount that people owe back is capped based on their income up to 400% of the federal poverty level—those making above that amount must repay their unearned subsidy in full.

Paying subsidies back

So far in the 2015 tax season, H&R Block has seen a majority (52%) of Obamacare enrollees paying back a portion of their advanced premium tax credit, with an average repayment of $530. (Most people won’t actually have to write the government a check—their repayment is deducted from their tax refund.)

This could come as an unwelcome surprise for people who had already mentally spent their refund. To avoid the same thing happening next year, enrollees should consider overestimating their future income, said Lisa Greene-Lewis, a certified public accountant and TurboTax expert. It’s also important to notify your state marketplace of income changes throughout the year, so the premium credit can be adjusted accordingly. If you end up qualifying for more premium assistance than you actually received, the difference will be added to your refund or subtracted from your balance due.

Here’s a nifty tip and potential silver lining: Those who found they made more than expected in 2014 can lower their modified adjusted gross income for the year by making a contribution to their traditional IRA by April 15, said Laurel Lucia, policy analyst with the University of California, Berkeley Center for Labor Research and Education. Total contributions to all IRAs must not exceed $5,500 for those under 50 and $6,500 for those 50 and older, but for someone whose income is borderline, a timely contribution could make the difference between having to pay back some of your subsidies or not.

Who’s in your ‘household’?

Under Obamacare, eligibility for premium subsidies is based on a household’s modified adjusted gross income. A household is defined as every individual for whom the taxpayer will claim an exemption, including themselves, a spouse and dependents (a person may be a dependent even if he files a tax return, as long as he doesn’t claim his own exemption), according to an illustration by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.

Members of the sandwich generation, take note: Dependents cannot provide more than half of their own support and must be under age 19 at the end of the year, under 24 if a full-time student for at least five months of the tax year, or any age if disabled. Dependent children must also live with the tax filer for more than half of the year (living away from home while attending school is still considered time in the home).

So whose income counts toward the household income calculation? The household modified adjusted gross income calculation includes that of the tax filer and all dependents who are required to file a tax return. The filing requirement for single dependents under age 65 is unearned income of greater than $1,000 or earned income of greater than $6,200, or taxable gross income of more than the larger of $1,000 or earned income (up to $5,850) plus $350. So if your dependent child earns, say, $7,000 from a part-time job, that’s counted in the family’s income calculation for premium subsidy purposes, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities illustration.

“This is a complicated calculation,” said Jeff Smedsrud, CEO of HealthCare.com, an online health-insurance search and comparison engine (not to be confused with the official government site, HealthCare.gov). Smedsrud has three young adult children on his family’s health plan, but because his household income is too high to qualify for subsidies, he does not have to do any detailed calculations.

Obamacare allows adult children up until age 26 to remain on their parents’ health plan even if they have the option of employer-sponsored coverage, and even if they’re not a tax dependent. If your young adult child is on your health plan but is not a dependent, then the family’s premium subsidy is calculated differently—that is, you’re considered to have two households, even when there’s just one health plan.

Things are different enough this year that some experts are urging people with premium subsidies to seek out professional assistance filing their returns, even if they’ve done their own taxes in the past. Said Smedsrud, “You’re going to have to sit down with competent tax counsel.”

More from MarketWatch