Editor s Note: The Republican Report is a weekly Thursday column on the news of the week in the Republican Party including the 2014

Editor’s Note: The Republican Report is a weekly Thursday column on the news of the week in the Republican Party including the 2014 midterm elections, political/electoral strategy, new initiatives, and party fundraising. Email ayobami@inthecapital.com with Republican Party news and scoops.

Capitol Hill

John Boehner Makes 'The Tonight Show with Jay Leno' Debut: House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio will be making his first late-night appearance on NBC's “The Tonight Show with Jay Leno” Thursday, January 23 at 11:35 ET.

Senator Tim Scott Hosting Panel Discussion with Black Senators: Republican Senator Tim Scott of South Carolina announced Wednesday that he is hosting a panel discussion with African-American senators in honor of Black History Month in February. Scott will be joined by former Democratic Senators Carol Moseley Braun and Roland Burris of Illinois, and William “Mo” Cowan of Massachusetts. The event titled “Honoring our Past and Celebrating our Future: Discussing Personal Journeys and a Nation’s Progress with America’s Black Senators” will be held at the Library of Congress on February 25. President Barack Obama, Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey and former Senator Edward Brooke of Massachusetts were also invited to the event.

The announcement comes after North Carolina NAACP Leader William Barber called Scott a “ventriloquist dummy” for the tea party in South Carolina. “A ventriloquist can always find a good dummy,” Barber said at Zion Baptist Church in South Carolina. “The extreme right wing down here finds a black guy to be senator and claims he’s the first black senator since Reconstruction and then he goes to Washington, D.C., and articulates the agenda of the Tea Party.”

Eric Cantor to Travel to Auschwitz: House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, the first Jewish Majority Leader, will visit Auschwitz concentration camp this week to mark International Holocaust Remembrance Day on January 27. “I look forward to joining members of the Israeli Knesset as well as Russian and Polish officials at Auschwitz-Birkenau to mark International Holocaust Remembrance Day,” Cantor said in a statement to the Richmond Times-Dispatch. “Visiting Auschwitz will be a powerful and sober reminder of the horrors of the Holocaust and how we all have a responsibility to ensure no similar atrocity ever happens again.”

Cantor is leading a Congressional delegation to the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland before heading to Auschwitz. Republican Representative Darrell Issa of California, and Democratic Representative Carolyn Maloney of New York will join Cantor in Poland, the Times-Dispatch report.

Mike Lee Will Give Tea Party SOTU Response: Republican Senator Mike Lee of Utah has been chosen to deliver the Tea Party response to President Obama's State of the Union Address on Tuesday, January 28. Lee along with Republican Senator Ted Cruz of Texas led a major push to defund the Affordable Care Act last year. “For the Tea Party movement, 2014 is not just about taking back the Senate, but it is also about putting forward conservative ideas that will allow for America to prosper,” said Amy Kremer, chairwoman of the Tea Party Express. “Senator Mike Lee has been both a Tea Party hero for supporters across the nation, and a conservative leader in the upper chamber.”

2014 Midterm Elections

James Lankford Announces Senate Run: Republican Representative James Lankford of Oklahoma announced Monday that he will seek to fill the Senate seat held by Republican Sen. Tom Coburn, who is retiring at the end of his term. “After a great deal of thought, prayer and discussion with my family, I feel led to continue my Oklahoma common sense and principled approach to attack the deep problems in the United States Senate,” Lankford said in a statement. Lankford, 45, is currently the chairman of the House Republican Policy Committee.

The Senate Conservatives Fund, a conservative group, said Monday that it will not support Lankford. “We won't support Congressman Lankford's bid for the Senate because of his past votes to increase the debt limit, raise taxes, and fund Obamacare,” said SCF Executive Director Matt Hoskins. “We have reviewed his record and it's clear that conservatives cannot count on him to fight for their principles.”

NRCC Launches Major Ad Buy in Florida: According to a report in Saint Petersblog, the National Republican Congressional Committee is launching a $725, 000 ad buy to support Republican nominee David Jolly in the special House election in Florida's 13th Congressional District to replace the late Republican Representative Bill Young. The broadcast and cable ads will run from Wednesday until February 10.

David Vitter Announces Bid for Louisiana Governor: Senator David Vitter announced Tuesday in a Youtube video that he is running for governor of Louisiana in 2015. “I believe that as our next governor, I can have a bigger impact addressing the unique challenges and opportunities we face in Louisiana, helping us truly reach our full potential,” he said .

GOP Staff Moves and Promotions

RNC And New York GOP Hire Asian State Director: The Republican National Committee in partnership with the Republican Party of New York, announced Friday the hiring of Oliver Tan as the New York State Director of Asian Pacific American Strategic Initiatives. “The RNC continues to build an on-the-ground presence to help our candidates up and down the ballot reach diverse communities in New York,” said RNC Chairman Reince Priebus. “We are building our ground game to fight for every vote not only in the Empire State, but across the country.”

Oliver previously worked for former Governor George Pataki of New York and also served in the office of the U.S. Secretary of Treasury in the Bush Administration.

Tessica Glancey Moves on to NRCC: Tessica Glancey is now the Communications and Digital Coordinator for the National Republican Congressional Committee. She previously served as Deputy Press Secretary to Republican Senator Richard Shelby of Alabama.

Joseph Russo Moves on to Judiciary Committee: Joseph Russo is now Coalitions Director for House Judiciary Committee. He previously served as Legislative Correspondent to Republican Representative Bob Goodlatte of Virgnia.

Justin Ouimette Gets Promoted: Justin Ouimette is now the Legislative Director for Republican Representative Mark Sanford of South Carolina. He previously served as his Legislative Assistant.