Twitter read like a plot playbook:

Stevia. #ricin. Marie. Walt. Lydia. Skylar (sic.) Jesse. Badger and Skinny Pete. "Hello Gretchen."

All trends pertaining to the #BreakingBadFinale Sunday.

There was, of course, #GoodbyeBreakingBad, the on-screen hashtag provided by AMC for the series finale. But there were other tributes, such as the periodic table-minded "BrBa."

Not only did the episode garner a series best of 10.3 million viewers — it started the second half of its last season with 5.9 million — Nielsen's SocialGuide reported 1,472,793 tweets surrounding the finale. (Compare to the Patriots-Falcons football game on NBC with 471,926 tweets.)

Jesse, I love you and you will always be a part of me. Thanks for the memories. Your friend, Aaron — Aaron Paul (@aaronpaul_8) September 30, 2013

The show was trending as late as Thursday, with events from the conclusion of the Walter White saga (another trend was "Damn Walt," an exclamation previously used during this season) still being weighed and dissected.

At the same time, anything to do with the drama's cast — including new roles for its actors — propelled the hype.

"Breaking Bad" was a Sunday Google Trend, with more than 2 million searches.

Aaron Paul, meanwhile, was the No. 10 most-searched item for the night. As the episode unfolded, "Need for Speed," Paul's upcoming action movie based on the video game franchise, trended on the strength of a trailer during the commercial break.

It is not a dream. It is thoughts of a diseased and dying mind. — Norm Macdonald (@normmacdonald) October 4, 2013

In connection with his appearance on "Talking Bad," the live post-show chat, tweets also lionized "Breaking Bad" creator Vince Gilligan.

Later, famous superfan Norm Macdonald, the comedian, got a fair amount of chatter for a theory explaining the last episode — Walt, he claimed in a series of tweets, was actually only thinking (or "sick dreaming") the final sequences.



Washington

Accompanying "Breaking Bad" in recurring Twitter trends was #governmentshutdown, Sunday's No. 1 Google search. Government was in high focus as #Obamacare came to the fore when open enrollment under the Affordable Care Act began on Tuesday, spurring #Healthcare and #GetCovered hashtags.

But on Thursday, when reports of a shooting near the U.S. Capitol hit Twitter, #governmentshutdown returned to prominence, along with #shutdown.

Even though a Capitol on "lockdown" was seemingly the news of the day — details emerged about a Connecticut woman named Miriam Carey who was shot dead by police after ramming a car into the White House barricade — tweets riffed on whether or not various federal personnel would be paid during the time. Carey entered the Google Trends Thursday, with more than 500,000 searches for her name.

Then, yesterday, National Mall trended as reports filtered in of a man setting himself on fire there.





In the headlines

There was no lack of book titles to cite Wednesday as tweets spread the news — Tom Clancy had died.

"RIP Tom Clancy," tweets read, and the author trended globally as novels "The Hunt for Red October," "Rainbow Six" and Clancy protagonist Jack Ryan circulated worldwide. More than 1 million Google searches went to the writer that day.

But another name, one not usually seen in trends lists, became the subject of 200,000 searches Wednesday.

Ronan Farrow, son of Mia, was being scrutinized for how much he does (or doesn't) look like Frank Sinatra. In an interview for Vanity Fair, Mia Farrow said it was possible that her ex-husband Sinatra, not Woody Allen — her partner at the time — was Ronan's father. For his part, Ronan, 25, responded in the best possible way — with a good-humored tweet.

"Listen, we're all *possibly* Frank Sinatra's son," he posted. (See another gem of his below).

On Thursday, Sinead O'Connor topped Twitter for her letter to Miley Cyrus.

You say skanky, I say YOLOsexual. — Ronan Farrow (@RonanFarrow) September 21, 2013

Cyrus had posed topless for Rolling Stone and in an interview with the magazine likened her own music video to O'Connor's "Nothing Compares 2 U." O'Connor took Cyrus to task, warning her of the dangers of "pimping" herself as a sexual object in the music industry.

And with 50,000 searches by Thursday, Tropical Storm Karen reminded anyone who forgot that it is, indeed, hurricane season.



Trending is a weekly column monitoring Twitter, Google and the web. Follow Amy Kuperinsky @AmyKup.