SALEM — Oregon’s two parties are about to show just how much they disagree on the causes of the affordable housing crunch that’s gripping much of the state.

The differences between lawmakers from rural and urban Oregon on fixing the problem came to the forefront this week, as a group of metro lawmakers proposed raising fees, offering new tax breaks and passing renter protection laws while rural Oregon lawmakers said Democrats were putting Band-Aids on the real issue.

The debate has been ongoing for years but has roared back to life as rental vacancy rates continue to plummet toward zero and housing costs climb. Republicans appear ready to support some Democratic proposals only if the majority party concedes on land use.

Rep. Knute Buehler, a Bend Republican, said again this week the root cause of affordable housing issues is a lack of land supply because of landmark laws that promote density and limit sprawl.

“It’s overwhelming,” Buehler said. “The root cause of the problem is the lack of buildable affordable land.”

Rep. Alissa Keny-Guyer, a Portland Democrat who chairs the House committee dealing with housing, said “there are multiple causes” of what’s become a statewide problem. Keny-Guyer is a strong proponent of allowing cities to require that developers keep up to 30 percent of new housing units at below-market rates for low-income residents.

The two are set to continue their debate next week when they visit Bend for an affordable housing tour that will lead into the Feb. 1 start of the short session of the Legislature.

But their disagreements, which represent a longtime and ongoing split between Oregon Republicans and the Democrats who control both chambers of the Legislature, received a public airing in a preview to a lightning-fast session that received its unofficial start in hearings this week in Salem.

“One of the things that Rep. Buehler and I are trying to do is trying to understand each other’s different contexts,” Keny-Guyer said of the upcoming visit.

Meanwhile, she has proposed increasing a fee assessed by county clerks when processing certain housing documents, from $20 to $30. The hike would bring in an additional $5 million annually for affordable housing projects. The same bill would exempt from taxes the below-market-rate sales of housing units to housing authorities.

Another proposal seeks to prevent landlords from retaliating against tenants who make a housing complaint. Landlords would be prevented from increasing rents or evicting tenants within six months of the complaint.

The concept would also require that landlords who want to evict tenants must give them 90 days’ notice if they have lived in a property for a year and are renting month-to-month. Landlords who violate the proposal would have to give the evicted tenants a month’s rent to cover relocation costs.

Buehler, along with Bend Republican Sen. Tim Knopp and many Oregon Republicans, believe the state needs to ease land use restrictions east of the Cascade Mountains as a way to address rising housing costs there.

Buehler pointed to work by Jason Furman, a Democrat and top economic adviser to President Barack Obama, that has sounded an alarm about a growing national affordable housing problem.

A speech Furman delivered in November seemed to address what Republicans in Oregon say is the underlying cause of the housing crisis that state housing experts say exists statewide.

“I want to be clear from the outset, some land use regulations can be beneficial to communities and the overall economy,” Furman said, citing potential health and safety benefits. “But in other cases, zoning regulations and other local barriers to housing development allow a small number of individuals to capture the economic benefits of living in a community, thus limiting diversity and mobility.”

“As such, land use regulations are an example of a broader range of situations that may give rise to (costs),” Furman said, adding that zoning can place “upward pressure” on housing prices due to lack of supply.

There is work to get to a deal between powerful lobbyists for homebuilders on a Democratic priority for the coming legislative session: eliminating a 1999 law that prevents cities from requiring a percentage of new housing units to be priced at below-market rates.

Sen. Chris Edwards, D-Eugene, is leading work on a proposal to ease some land use laws. He met on Friday with Keny-Guyer, though he wasn’t able to talk for this story, citing a death in the family.

Sen. Michael Dembrow, D-Portland, has submitted a proposal that would let cities pass ordinances that require developers to set aside up to 30 percent of new housing units for low-income buyers or renters, a practice known as inclusionary zoning.

In exchange for the lost revenue for building below-market housing, cities would give developers a break on density requirements, fees, expedited processing of permit and approval, or property tax breaks.

Knopp said he would support the measure only if “it included incentives that matched dollar-for-dollar” the revenue given up to develop the low-rate units. He said that’s difficult to do unless developers are given land for free or possibly through tax abatements.

An inclusionary zoning proposal last session passed the House but stumbled in the Senate. Dembrow attributed that failure to senators’ unfamiliarity with the subject. The 2016 bill more clearly targets rental properties as well, which may help it, Dembrow said. Oregon and Texas are the only states with bans on inclusionary zoning.

“I think more senators have an understanding of what (inclusionary zoning) is, although I wouldn’t say that there’s not still a lot of work to be done,” Dembrow said.

It’s not a given that Senate Democrats will support the proposal this time around.

“I start from the basis of I don’t like inclusionary zoning because I think it has the opposite effect on housing prices (of what) people think it does,” Sen. Lee Beyer, D-Eugene, said Friday.

Dembrow was skeptical that loosening state or local land use restrictions would help with an affordable housing crunch that’s become more acute for low- and middle-income workers.

“If what’s being talked about is expanding the UGB (urban growth boundary) so that you can have affordable housing out in the periphery, that’s not going to help low-income people very well because a lot of them have transportation issues, etc.,” he said. “We need to make sure that all of our neighborhoods have a mix of residents.”

Knopp, who sits on the Senate committee that will address housing, also repeated what has become a theme among Central Oregon Republicans.

“They talk about other areas doing this, but other areas don’t have Oregon’s land use system that drives up the cost, because that’s what happens: You constrict supply, demand continues, you have an artificial market, prices go up,” Knopp said. “That’s not rocket science, that’s just reality.”

— Reporter: 406-589-4347,

tanderson@bendbulletin.com