By Marcus Hawkins

Updated February 13, 2015 .

t

Should conservatives support President Obama's tax incentives to provide more subsidies for child care? This is a first step towards "universal daycare" much in the way Obamacare is the stepping stone for universal healthcare. This is also likely going to be a major 2016 theme for Presidential candidates like Hillary Clinton and Democrats running for the US Senate and House.

First, some background from President Obama's 2015 State of the Union Address:

In today’s economy, when having both parents in the workforce is an economic necessity for many families, we need affordable, high-quality child care more than ever. It’s not a nice-to-have: it’s a must-have. So it’s time we stop treating childcare as a side issue, or a women’s issue, and treat it like the national economic priority that it is for all of us. And that’s why my plan will make quality childcare more available, and more affordable, for every middle-class and low-income family with young children in America, by creating more slots and a new tax cut of up to $3,000 per child, per year.

Of course, the program would also be quite expensive. Rather than try to pay for it by cutting costs elsewhere, the Obama administration quickly proposed "raising taxes" once again:

White House officials said while the average subsidy for low- and moderate-income families under the federal Child Care and Development Fund was $5,500 in 2013, Obama’s expansion of the program would aim to cover the entire cost of high-quality care, an average of $10,000. And the number of children covered would nearly double, to 2.6 million in 2025. The increased subsidies and tax credits would be financed by Obama’s plan to increase taxes on investments and inherited wealth, as well as a fee on large financial institutions. The preschool initiative would be paid for by increasing tobacco taxes

2 Reasons to Reject This Proposal

Treat All Families Equally

You won't find too many Republicans arguing against tax cuts and breaks for working (or all) families. But once again, Democrats are out to pick winners and losers, with families choosing a more traditional lifestyle plucked as the losers. Most parents have to make sacrifices. Take two different, 2-parent families as an example: "Middle-class family A" has two parents working and "Middle-class family B" has one stay-at-home parent and one spouse working. The Obama argument proposes that the federal government should pay for all or most child-care expenses for the two-parent family where both work, enabling them to keep almost all income from both jobs. The family that will make decidedly less - with no extra support - gets brushed aside.

Why? This family would be decidedly financially better off (assuming similar income levels per individual) than the family who chooses to raise their own children in the early years. The reasoning for subsidizing dual-earners is that if spouse #2 is working and earning, say, $15,000/year, nearly all of that income would be going to pay for childcare. So the parent is "forced" to choose between working and paying for daycare or not working at all. And that's not fair! Having someone else watch your children is, I reckon, yet another life necessity that other people should pay for. (Planning ahead is taboo.)

Why doesn't the government just offer to pay the same amount for spouse #2 not to work? This is not something I am proposing. Paying people with tax dollars to stay home and raise their own children is an absurd proposition. As absurd, in fact, as paying people with tax dollars to not stay home and have someone else watch their children so that person can make the same amount of money as is being paid out to pay for their childcare. In reality, what is the difference? The only difference is who gets paid for watching the children: a parent or a "day care provider." (And if that is the argument, there is a pretty good case to argue in favor of the former.)

Everything Cannot Be Free

The cradle-to-grave government programs just keep adding up. Public education is already paid for from Kindergarten until 12th grade, so "free care" for those aged 5-18 is already taken care of. Under the Democrats recent wishlist, everything before then should be taken care of (free day care!) and another 2-4 years after high school as well (free community college for full and part-time students!). Tack on the right to healthcare ("free" as far as subsidies go in many cases, but quite expensive in the deductible department) and, really, the list never ends. Both were also proposals in Obama's 2015 State of the Union. There are only so many taxes that can be raised and trillions borrowed from China to keep paying for all of this "free" stuff.