Just three weeks after landing the Department of Defense's massive, multi-billion-dollar EHR modernization project with its partner Cerner, Leidos has notched another military health win.

The contractor has been tapped by the U.S. Army to provide medical product and research development to the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, which develops and maintains capabilities to enable medical readiness worlwide, officials say.

[Also: Big data: Bold promise or hardest part of population health, precision medicine, patient experience?]

Under the new contract, officials say, Leidos Life Sciences will provide medical product research and development services to support the missions of the U.S. Army Medical Materiel Development Activity, U.S. Army Medical Materiel Agency, other subordinate commands of the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Joint Project Manager Medical Countermeasure Systems, and other DoD entities responsible for medical product research and development.

The aim is for Leidos to support the entire scope of developing new drugs, vaccines, blood products, medical devices and medical support equipment that enhances readiness, ensures the provision of the highest quality medical and preventive care to the DoD, and maximizes survival of medical casualties on the battlefield.

Leidos' Frederick, Maryland-based Life Sciences team has "proudly supported the U.S. Army Medical Research and Material Command for more than 33 years," said Jerry Hogge, deputy group president of Leidos Federal Health, in a press statement. "Our distinguished scientists and researchers look forward to providing research and development for medical products to deliver solutions that can help save and improve the lives of our military service members."

The multiple-award indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity contract has a five-year base period of performance, five-one year options, and a total contract value of $900 million for all awardees, if all options are exercised.

Twitter: @MikeMiliardHITN

Email the writer: mike.miliard@himssmedia.com

Like Healthcare IT News on Facebook and LinkedIn