This article was originally published on July 16, 2015, and was updated April 27, 2016, to reflect current information.

Choices are usually good, but they can be tough, especially when it comes to something as complex as your health insurance.

For instance, figuring out if you're better off picking a health maintenance organization, or HMO, rather than a preferred provider organization, or PPO, insurance plan can be downright confusing if you don't know the key differences between the two options.

Explaining HMOs

HMOs give you access to doctors and hospitals that are within a network established by the insurance company.

Those HMO networks are made up of healthcare providers who meet certain qualifications and who have agreed to provide their services at prices negotiated with the insurance company.

Typically, this means that healthcare providers participating in an HMO are paid less than they might otherwise be paid by the insurer -- a concession that doctors and hospitals are willing to make in exchange for access to a greater number of potential patients.

Since HMOs only contract with a certain number of doctors and hospitals in any one particular area and insurers won't pay for healthcare received at out-of-network providers, the biggest disadvantages of an HMO are fewer choices and higher potential costs. Other drawbacks to HMOs include the need to obtain a primary care referral before seeing a specialist and limits on the number of office visits, tests, and certain treatments annually.

In exchange for accepting those limitations, patients usually pay lower monthly insurance payment premiums, and in some cases they may not have to pay certain deductibles.

Explaining PPOs

PPOs offer patients more flexibility than HMOs, but it comes at a price.

Like HMOs, PPOs establish networks of healthcare providers, but PPOs have fewer restrictions on receiving care from people or facilities that don't participate in their network.

For example, PPO insurance plans will pay for out of network visits, and a referral isn't necessary before visiting a specialist, which can mean fewer visits to your primary care physician.

However, the amount your insurance plan will pay for out of network care is likely to be less than it would pay for in-network care, and that can lead to surprising out of pocket expenses.

Additionally, a patient's share of costs for out of network visits often doesn't count toward a patient's annual out of pocket maximum for PPOs. That means there's no limit to how much you could end up spending on out of network care each year.

Are PPOs really more expensive?

Before choosing an insurance plan, people need to consider co-pays, co-insurance, drug coverage, and other plan costs -- but a look at the average monthly premium payments for Medicare Advantage HMOs and PPOs shows that Medicare recipients will pay a lot more for a PPO's flexibility.

According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, the average Medicare Advantage regional PPO plan, unweighted by enrollment, will cost $78 per month in 2016, or nearly double the $39 per month that it will cost to purchase a Medicare Advantage HMO plan in 2016.

Although PPO monthly premiums are higher for Medicare Advantage recipients, they may not be higher for people who get their insurance through the Affordable Care Act exchanges or their employers. Premiums can vary from region to region and state by state, so consumers will want to shop around.

Similarly, rates can vary widely if you're getting insurance through an employer. However, Kaiser Family Foundation reports that the average employer sponsored PPO plan cost $6,575 per year for a single person and that a HMO plan cost $6,212 per year.

Tying it together

How out-of-network care is handled is the biggest difference between an HMO and PPO, but over time, that difference is blurring as more HMOs allow for some out-of-network benefits and more PPOs decrease how much they'll pay for out-of-network visits. Because the gap between HMOs and PPOs is closing, it's becoming even more critical to consider total out of pocket expenses beyond the monthly premium -- and unfortunately, that makes choosing a plan even more confusing for consumers.