Mesa Mayor Scott Smith at his office on Monday, Mar. 17, 2014, at City Hall in Mesa, AZ. (Photo: Rob Schumacher/The Republic)

It's only April but already fists are flying – anonymously, of course -- in the cagefight that will be the Republican gubernatorial primary.

A dark money group called the Legacy Foundation Action Fund is spending $275,000 on ads linking Mesa Mayor Scott Smith to President Barack Obama. Smith is president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, which supports the Affordable Care Act and background checks on gun sales.

"Obama's favorite mayor Scott Smith is president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors. What does his organization support?" the ad says, while showing pictures of Smith, Obama and Vice President Joe Biden.

The ad urges viewers to call Smith's office.

"These policies are wrong for Mesa. Tell Scott Smith to make his organization more like Mesa, not the other way around," the ad says.

Who knew the Iowa-based Legacy Foundation Action Fund was so concerned with what goes on in Mesa?

Or could it be that Smith's a Republican running for governor, one seen as stiff competition for state Treasurer Doug Ducey?

Don't look to find the ties that bind Legacy Foundation Action Fund to a gubernatorial candidate. This group is calling its ad "issues advocacy" rather than an election piece, a sweet move that allows it to duck what few requirements there are in Arizona for disclosure of who is actually behind the ad.

Smith -- who says, by the way, that he opposes Obamacare -- is claiming that Ducey is behind the anonymous attack.

"The issue-advocacy television ad linking Smith to Obama by virtue of his leadership role in the US Conference of Mayors was designed by Ducey's media consultant, Larry McCarthy," Max Fose, Smith's campaign adviser, said in an email.

Team Ducey says not so and asks where's the proof.

Of course, there isn't any, which is the whole point of dark money.

It's worth noting that McCarthy produced a recent ad for the Legacy Foundation in another state.

But that is, apparently, just one giant coincidence.

"Our firm did one ad for the Legacy Foundation, one time, in Nebraska and that's it," McCarfthy told the Arizona Capitol Times. "We had nothing to do with the ad currently running in Arizona. We didn't know it was coming or who produced it.".

So is Team Ducey involved in this anonymous smear? Beats me. That's the problem with dark money. There are no fingerprints to be publicly found on the hands hurling the mud.

Our leaders must like it that way because the Arizona Legislature, once again this year, has declined to do anything to compel disclosure.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/PV2GOQ