“Thanks, Obama!” It’s a catchphrase so popular that even President Barack Obama has poked fun at it in a video:

While Obama uses it in jest, plenty of conservatives try to use it earnest. That doesn’t make their attempts any less laughable, though. You won’t believe some of the absurd things that they’ve accused him of being responsible for, starting with the most recent example:

1. The Popularity of Donald Trump

The GOP has gotten used to blaming Obama for just about everything, so at a time when a party outsider (and narcissistic lunatic) has become the frontrunner for the Republican presidential nominee, establishment Republicans have started questioning whether Obama is responsible for the “rise” of Trump, too.

Give credit to Obama for not breaking out into laughter when a member of the press asked a similar question. “I have been blamed by Republicans for a lot of things, but being blamed for their primaries and who they’re selecting for their party is novel,” Obama said.

Instead, Obama pointed to the “circus”-like atmosphere the Republicans and the media have encouraged this election cycle. Add to that the anti-government, obstructionist rhetoric the Republicans have been peddling throughout Obama’s administration, and the popularity of Trump makes a lot of sense. The Republicans may have created this monster by directing so much hate toward Obama, but that doesn’t make it Obama’s fault.

2. Hurricane Katrina

In a 2013 survey of Louisiana Republicans, pollsters asked participants who they blamed for the nation’s poor response following Hurricane Katrina. 28% blamed George W. Bush, who was serving as president at the time. That response that isn’t too surprising given how much criticism Bush subsequently faced for his apparent apathy toward the region.

What is surprising is the one person on the poll who beat Bush: Obama. 29% of Louisiana Republicans saw fit to criticize President Obama for the disaster. That’s a particularly bold person to blame considering that Obama did not take the nation’s top office for nearly three and a half years following the hurricane.

It’d be one thing if these were the thoughts of Republicans in other states who are used to blaming Obama for just about anything. However, these are residents of Louisiana, people who know darned well what went down following Katrina. Somehow, they still can’t help but incriminate Obama despite lacking any solid reason.

3. The 2008 Economic Crash

In a speech last year, Republican Senator Ted Cruz made a bold proclamation: Obama is to blame for the 2008 economic depression. Never mind that Obama didn’t get inaugurated as president until 2009, there’s no place for simple facts on the campaign trail!

This trick was no mistake, either. In the same sentence, Cruz blames Jimmy Carter for the state of the economy in the years following his presidency, while simultaneously blaming Obama for the years leading into his own presidency. The way he woxrded his gripe couldn’t be more obvious that he was fudging the numbers. That’s why MSNBC reported, “Cruz is playing a dishonest little game, assuming that his audience isn’t smart enough to notice the con.”

Subsequently, Cruz went on to blame the president and Obamacare for his family not having health care anymore. In reality, Cruz simply forgot (or neglected) to sign up for his government-covered health care guaranteed to all members of Congress. It was later revealed that his health coverage had never lapsed since he had been automatically re-enrolled for health care. It sure did make an interesting talking point for Cruz, though!

4. Sarah Palin’s Son Assaulting His Girlfriend

Former vice presidential candidate Palin is no stranger to spinning lies, but her latest attack on Obama was a stretch even for her. In January, Palin’s son Track was arrested by the police after physically assaulting his girlfriend and brandishing a weapon while drunk.

It’s an embarrassing incident, for sure, but one that mama Palin tried to excuse by pointing the finger at Obama instead. In a speech, she referenced Track’s service in the military and alluded to some PTSD that followed. She then blamed that PTSD on Track and fellow soldiers not feeling “respected” by the president after putting his life on the line.

If it’s hard to follow the logic of how Obama made Track beat his girlfriend, that’s because there is no logic to it. Track served in Iraq during the Bush administration in a war that Bush started under false pretenses. While I wouldn’t be surprised if PTSD did play a role in Track’s violent outbursts and potential issues with alcohol, that has nothing to do with Obama not loving the troops enough. Besides, it’s the Republicans who keep trying to cut funding for veteran health services that could help people like Track.

Photo Credit: Justin Sloan / Flickr