SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

You won’t find an abundance of media outlets questioning Hillary Clinton about her husband Bill’s links to Jeffrey Epstein — on the rare occasion when she allows the press to ask her a question. The New York Post touched on the Clinton/Epstein connection in February.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Just a few weeks ago, reports broke that Bill Clinton had flown at least 11 times on “The Lolita Express” — a private plane owned by the mysterious financier and convicted pedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

Also, forget that Michelle Obama made over $100k as a part-time hospital employee while Obama was in the Senate — not to mention any monies that came in through her serving on boards and such. Those kinds of inquiries are often dismissed as out of bounds, because they’re characterized as attacks on a candidate’s family.

Obama’s reported income was $103,633 in 2007, the year she reduced her work schedule to part time.

But those sorts of concerns didn’t stop Bloomberg’s Mark Halperin and David Knowles from piling on the family of conservative Republican Ted Cruz as he announced his candidacy for the GOP nomination.

One day after announcing himself as presidential candidate, Texas Senator Ted Cruz fired a few shots across the bow of Wall Street, and the firm that employs his wife as managing director. In an interview with Bloomberg’s With All Due Respect, Cruz was asked by host Mark Halperin whether, on balance, Goldman Sachs was a positive or a negative force on society.

Bloomberg pushed and pushed, forcing Cruz to defend his wife.

During Tuesday’s interview, Halperin pointed out that during Cruz’s campaign rollout at Liberty University on Monday, he failed to mention the fact that his wife, Heidi, worked for Goldman Sachs. “I am unabashedly proud about everything about Heidi,” Cruz responded. “And I did mention the fact that she had an incredibly successful business career.” A managing director at Goldman, Heidi Cruz will be taking unpaid leave as she campaigns for her husband. As a result, the Cruz family will be switching over from Goldman’s generous medical plan to, you guessed it, Obamacare.

But then, what was left to attack? BuzzFeed already went after his father. Conservatives and Republicans would do well to remember that the next time they hear this, or that liberal politician’s family is off limits because… well, because the media mostly agrees with them, I suppose. Here’s Buzzfeed’s headline: