Topics: Affordable Care Act, Chris Chocola, Club For Growth, healthcare exchanges, Mike McCaul, Mike Pompeo, Obamacare, Ted Cruz, Video, Politics News

The drop-dead date for members of Congress and their aides to enroll in Obamacare is fast approaching, which is great news because the deadline is propelling a severe, airborne whining contagion through the U.S. Capitol.

If you’re a regular reader of this space, you’re already well acquainted with House Speaker John Boehner’s bellyaching. At his regular Capitol briefing Thursday, he complained about his enrollment experience publicly for the first time, telling reporters he actually considered skipping the exchanges, paying a penalty and holding out for Medicare when he turns 65 next year. The buggy D.C. exchange website and premium increase were so frustrating that he almost decided to go without insurance. It turns out one of the few things Republicans like less than Obamacare is being uninsured themselves.

Anyhow, last week the whining reached pandemic proportions. The symptoms of this bug include tweeting about website glitches, complaining about prices without actually disclosing prior premiums, and — oh, right — being a Republican.

“I want to talk about my personal experience with the D.C. exchange,” groused Rep. Michael McCaul, R-Texas, on the House floor Friday. “The president said you can keep your health care plan. That your premiums will go down. Mr. Speaker, I lost my health care plan. I have five kids. My premiums have gone up significantly. And I don’t know if I can keep all the same doctors that I have to treat my kids.”

Let’s start with McCaul’s initial complaint: that he can’t keep his existing coverage. Like millions of other Americans, his plan is being canceled because of Obamacare. But unlike every other person in the country who’s received a cancelation letter, McCaul and other members and aides are receiving them because of a GOP-authored amendment to the health care law prohibiting them from remaining in the Federal Employees Health Benefit Program. He should take this up with Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa.

I don’t know how much McCaul paid for his old FEHB plan. But I do know that the D.C. market generally offers pretty decent deals, even for 51-year-olds like McCaul. As a general rule, young aides will have a better experience than old members because on the D.C. exchange they will be subject to a 3:1 age band — insurers can charge older beneficiaries up to three times as much as younger beneficiaries for the same plan. FEHBP isn’t age rated at all. Everyone pays the same premiums for the same plan no matter how old or young. So Obamacare’s a better deal for McCaul’s staff, who will no longer be over-subsidizing their boss, than it is for McCaul himself.

The fact that McCaul is the second richest member of Congress, worth over $100 million, should help him finance the difference.

Most Hill operatives probably aren’t as rich as McCaul, but they’re coming down with the bug too.

Amanda Carpenter — Ted Cruz’ speechwriter and senior communications adviser — has been tweeting about her woes, including website problems and supposedly higher premiums, for days.

My premiums are more than a hundred dollars more a month and the coverage is much crappier. — Amanda Carpenter (@amandacarpenter) December 3, 2013

At the start of her adventure she claimed she was enduring Obamacare “as required by law.”