URBANA — Two East Central Illinois hospitals are among the 27 in Illinois being penalized by Medicare for having too many avoidable complications and infections.

Carle Foundation Hospital in Urbana and Sarah Bush Lincoln Health Center in Coles County are among the 721 U.S. hospitals seeing their Medicare payments slashed by 1 percent for the 12 months from Oct. 1, 2014, to Sept. 30, 2015.

Both those hospitals, along with Iroquois Memorial Hospital in Watseka, were in line for potential penalties in spring when Medicare did a preliminary analysis of the numbers of certain hospital-acquired conditions — things patients don't bring with them when they're admitted but acquire during their hospital stays.

The Watseka hospital wasn't on the final list, which was based on an analysis done later in the year using a longer period of data prior to 2014.

About a quarter of the hospitals evaluated for hospital-acquired conditions in Illinois are being fined, with smaller, critical-access hospitals being exempt.

The 1 percent fine is being imposed under Medicare's Hospital Acquired Condition Reduction program, as dictated by the Affordable Care Act.

Under that program, Medicare payments are reduced for the 25 percent of all hospitals performing the worst in their numbers of central-line bloodstream infections, catheter-associated urinary-tract infections and a composite of eight patient safety measures, among them pressure ulcers, post-operative hip fractures, and accidental cuts and punctures.

Central-line bloodstream infections, which cause thousands of deaths a year, occur when germs enter the blood through tubes used to deliver blood, fluids or nutrients.

The hospital-acquired-condition program is Medicare's third pay-for-performance program, with the first penalizing hospitals for high rates of preventable readmissions and the second based on quality measurements though a program called hospital value-based purchasing.

The Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program, which began in 2012, affects a larger group of hospitals — among them Carle, Sarah Bush Lincoln, and Presence Covenant Medical Center in Urbana and Presence United Samaritans Medical Center in Danville — which will continue to lose percentages of their Medicare payments for inpatient stays during the same 12-month period from Oct. 1, 2014, to Sept. 30, 2015. Those penalties are being assessed on hospitals considered to have too many patients requiring readmission for care within a month after their discharge.

For 2016, Medicare will also begin scoring hospitals for their numbers of surgical-site infections.