SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Nationally syndicated conservative radio host Laura Ingraham says that “the bearded wonder,” House Speaker Paul Ryan, is a failure who enabled President Barack Obama’s gun control by executive action.

“I would love to see the bearded wonder Paul Ryan—he’s got to lose that beard, it makes him look ridiculous that beard, he should shave it, that is just horrible—that bearded wonder Paul Ryan giving Obama funding for his lawless behavior for the next 12 months,” Ingraham said.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Removes congressional oversight, meaningful oversight through the power of the purse. Congress could have shut this thing before it even started, but no the bearded wonder came out and said ‘going forward we’re going to do things differently but we need to start the new year without the threat of a shutdown hanging.’ The bearded wonder has now given Obama the running room he needed to go for the guns. The bearded wonder. I liked him before the beard—I think he’s been worse since the beard.

Ingraham then played audio of Ryan saying “I love you too” then she noted that “no, he doesn’t love me.”

“I do like him as a person, I shouldn’t say that—but this is mind-numbingly stupid: Why did you give Obama all this running room with the money?” Ingraham asked. “$1.1 trillion budget.”

Ingraham is absolutely correct that Ryan could have stopped this whole executive gun control before it ever even started had he been willing to use the power of the purse, which Congress has essentially surrendered since Obama was elected president. Ryan’s predecessor, now former Speaker John Boehner, wouldn’t use the power of the purse to stop Obama—and now Ryan has not only followed in Boehner’s footsteps of funding Obama’s efforts to fundamentally transform America, Ryan has accelerated those efforts.

The American people, as they’ve seen Ryan operate as House Speaker for his first couple months since his election to the post in late October, has seen an extraordinary drop off in his approval ratings not just among all Americans but particularly among Republicans. According to the latest Economist/YouGov ratings out on Monday, Ryan has dropped 24 points in just two months—and he’s now down at 29 percent approval among all Americans and under 50 percent at just 45 percent among Republicans.

New York Magazine recently culled through millions of Breitbart News comments to find a handful that alleged that Ryan’s newly grown beard means he’s a secret Muslim. Others throughout the mainstream media have pushed the narrative that somehow conservatives believe Ryan is a secret Muslim because of his new beard. Obviously, Ryan is not a Muslim and most people don’t believe he is–but that didn’t stop Ryan from complaining to Obama that conservatives think he’s a secret Muslim because of the beard.

“Mr. Ryan’s relations with Mr. Obama have sometimes been testy,” Al Hunt wrote in a column for the New York Times before Christmas. “But last week, as they were discussing the final deal on the phone, Mr. Ryan, who has grown a beard, told the president that some on the angry right have even accused him of being a Muslim. The president, who has long faced the same absurd allegation, chuckled.”

That New York Magazine columnist, Jesse Singal–shortly after he made the great revelation about a handful of commenters on Breitbart News–went on to have an out-of-control Twitter rant where he called the millions of readers of this news network “hateful idiots.” The unhinged Singal Tweeted over and over again for a full evening.