“I can go to dark levels when we lose…Every coach does. We’re all manic in some way. We’re all borderline depressed most of the time.”

– Erik Spoelstra

Thankfully because the Miami Heat have an 18-11 record there isn’t much to get depressed about in the city. The Heat might have of the worst offenses in the entire NBA (ranked 25th in the league) yet this team has overcome many obstacles throughout the season and their hard work still has them ranked within the best three teams within the Eastern Conference. Being ranked 3rd in the East isn’t bad because the balance of power has shifted once again, the east is better.

In spite of the Heat’s offensive woes, it’s been pretty discouraging to hear people complaining about how the Heat have been playing. On this roster where there aren’t many naturally gifted scorers, a lot of veterans, and an infusion of younger talent, it’s a shame that we’re not prouder of this team. Last year the Heat didn’t make the playoffs and this year it would be a surprise if they didn’t, at least, make it to the second round.

In case you didn’t get the memo, it doesn’t look like the Cleveland Cavaliers are the clear cut favorite in the Eastern Conference. This year it looks like the entire playoffs are wide open for anyone to reach the NBA Finals. Unless you’re in the Western Conference that is….then you’ll have to get ready for Golden State because their not losing.

But in the case of the east, in particular, the Heat, it’s time to relax with the fire coach Spoelstra talk. People when they say that sentence they need to remember how many active coaches in the league have his type of pedigree. Coach Spoelstra already ranks with the all-time greats in the league.

When it comes to the postseason, he’s already as successful as any coach in the league as he’s tied for sixth all-time with his two championship rings. Additionally, he’s also 15th all-time in playoff wins with capturing 63 to his name. Furthermore, his record in the playoffs is near spotless as he ranks fifth all-time where he wins 63% of the time. Additionally, his winning percentage in the regular season is just as impressive as he’s a shade under his mentor and boss, Heat President Pat Riley, winning 62% of his games in the regular season.

People can say that coach Spoelstra isn’t like Gregg Popovich at all and that’s fine because on his own he’s managed to accomplish a career most coaches couldn’t dream of. It’s only a matter of time before he’s starts to earn even more trust with the fan base and it’s a shame. When Don Shula, won Super Bowls we treated him like the greatest of all-time which he is. But Spoelstra is doing the same right there on Biscayne Blvd, and we should cut him a lot more slack.

Being the third best team in the Eastern Conference after not making the playoffs isn’t a fireable offense, it’s something that should get Spoelstra in contention for the Coach of the Year award and we should be the people to start the campaign. Unless the NBA wants’ to be hilarious and give it to Luke Walton.



D’Joumbarey A. Moreau covers sports in Miami-Dade & Broward County. You can follow him on Twitter@DJoumbarey.