"You will continue to see more work to be done to bring the cost of an education down." — Karl McDonnell

It’s a rough time to be the head of a for-profit college.

For-profit schools — which include the University of Phoenix, DeVry University and Strayer University — began booming in the 1990s after changes in state and federal regulations made it possible for them to open campuses across the country and online.

The colleges were praised for offering more convenient classes and faster degrees without all of the pomp and circumstance of traditional nonprofit colleges.

But in recent years, lawmakers and accreditation agencies have been taking a closer look at whether for-profit colleges are more interested in making money than graduating students. The schools have come under fire for low graduation rates, high student loan default rates and aggressive recruiting. Many of the publicly traded, for-profit colleges are also facing tough questions from stockholders unhappy with dropping enrollment and declining revenue.

Karl McDonnell jumped into the fray last spring when he took over as chief executive officer of Strayer Education, which owns Strayer University, one of the nation’s largest for-profit colleges. Strayer enrolls more than 50,000 students in online and classroom programs on more than 100 campuses across the country, including sites in Piscataway, Lawrenceville, Willingboro and Cherry Hill.

McDonnell spoke with Kelly Heyboer, The Star-Ledger’s higher education reporter, about the state of the industry.

Q. For-profit colleges, including Strayer, have been under intense scrutiny in recent years by Congress, accrediting agencies and state regulators. Has this increased attention been fair?

A. We welcome scrutiny. We are in regular contact with the Middle States Commission on Higher Education, our accreditor. We have good relationships with the various state regulators that we operate under in our states. And our view on it is the best way to plan for the university’s overall health is to always be focused on the highest level of academic quality that you can deliver and to make sure that you are doing what’s in the best interest of the students. We tend to take a very long view.

We don’t shy away from scrutiny. We think it’s an important part of higher education. We accept the fact that we are in a heavily regulated industry and we want to be known as the best-in-class institution in terms of doing what’s in the best interest of students.

Q. Strayer University has responded to some of the criticism of for-profit colleges by starting the Graduation Fund, a program to cut tuition and keep students from dropping out. How does it work?

A. We were thinking about the dual challenges of affordability and degree completion. There are a lot of benefits to being a college graduate, but they only accrue if you actually finish and get your degree. We were thinking about how could we start a program that will address both of those challenges.

We came up with the Graduation Fund for all of our new undergraduate students. For every three courses they complete in their degree program, they will earn a tuition voucher that will be placed into their Graduation Fund. They can redeem that voucher to take one of their last 10 courses without any tuition. In essence, it’s a way for a student to earn his or her senior year free.

Q. Did Strayer come up with the idea or was it modeled after another program?

A. Our team came up with this. I’m not aware of any other program in higher education today that works the way our Graduation Fund does.

Q. How many Strayer students actually graduate?

A. It really depends on the type of student you are. At the graduate-student level, we have very high graduation rates probably consistent with most traditional institutions — in the high-60 percent to low-70 percent range.

At the undergraduate level, it probably depends on whether or not you’ve ever been to college before. Many of our students come to us with transfer credits from other schools. Those students tend to do very well, also graduating 50 or 60 percent. Then, there is a group of students who come to us who’ve never been to college before. They have, frankly, very low graduation rates, probably 15 to 20 percent. It’s a riskier population.

Q. Enrollment numbers are down at many for-profit colleges. Strayer reported its summer enrollment dropped 13 percent compared to this time last year. Why are the numbers going down?

A. It’s just a very challenging environment. For the first time in a generation you’ve seen a decrease in overall post-secondary education attendance in the United States. And you have some very challenging economic headwinds. You’ve got very high levels of real unemployment. There’s just a very high level of uncertainty, which is certainly impacting the number of students — especially working adult students — willing to go back and get a college degree right now.

Q. How have your stockholders reacted to Strayer’s declining enrollment and has their reaction affected the university’s plans?

A. We are a publicly traded company. We don’t think about how the university is going to operate quarter to quarter based on whatever we think the public reaction to our performance is going to be. That would be a recipe for disaster.

Academic outcomes have to be measured over long cycles. We take a very long-term view of what we think is in the best interest of the university and our students. Whatever noise there is out there in the public markets about where our shares are trading, that really doesn’t enter into our calculus of what we’re focused on.

Q. Why should a New Jersey student choose Strayer when, in many cases, they can get the same associate, bachelor’s or master’s degree at a public college at a lower tuition?



A. We’re certainly not the right institution for all new students. The type of student that we historically serve is a working adult student with a job during the day and a family. That’s all we do — educate students like that. We have a 120-year history of doing it. We think we’re very effective at it. We cater to the working adult student. We know the type of student support services they need.

Q. Your predecessor, former Strayer CEO Robert Silberman, was criticized for having a salary 50 times higher than the president of Harvard University. Why do for-profit college executives need such high salaries?

A. I can’t comment on what other colleges pay their executives. And just as a matter of principle, my compensation is determined by our company’s board of directors and it’s not something I comment on.

Q. For-profit colleges are obviously in a time of transition. What do you see as the future of Strayer and the for-profit industry?

A. There will be a lot of innovation that happens. You have seen the rise of some potentially exciting forms of instruction, like direct-assessment and competency-based learning models. You will see a greater emphasis on making sure that academic programs are aligned to career growth and job growth. You will continue to see more work to be done to bring the cost of an education down.

Those are all things that I think Strayer will be a leader on. There are 80 million to 100 million people in the United States who have left high school, are in the workforce and don’t have a college degree. It’s very important in our mind that we be a place where those students know they can come and get a high-quality degree.