Prescription Hope is extending an invitation to those affected by a health insurance co-operative bankruptcy to receive their prescription medications through America’s fastest-growing pharmacy program. Through Prescription Hope’s proprietary process, individuals can receive over 1,500 FDA-approved prescription medications from over 180 American pharmaceutical companies for $35 per month, per medication, without the traditional barriers of insurance.

“The bankruptcy of health insurance co-ops is the most recent example of difficulties Americans face when trying to access their prescription medications,” said Douglas K. Pierce, President and Chief Executive Officer of Prescription Hope. “We work to bridge the gap that insurance can often leave behind, connecting Americans with the medications they need at a price they can afford.”

In 2016, over 800,000 individuals lost access to affordable health insurance when over half of America’s insurance co-ops went bankrupt. The largest bankruptcy was Health Republic Insurance of New York, forcing over 150,000 individuals to seek new health insurance. Other major co-operatives to go bankrupt include CoOpportunity Health serving Iowa and Nebraska, Louisiana Health Cooperative, and Nevada Health CO-OP. As a result, many were forced into other insurance programs or discount cards, which may increase out-of-pocket costs for routine prescription medications.

Research from the Centers for Disease Control shows once Americans lose access to their prescription medications, they begin taking risks with their health, ultimately driving up the cost of their care. Although one in five people rely on three or more monthly prescription medications, those who cannot afford all of their medicines may be skipping dosages, splitting medicines, or sharing them with others.

“Nobody should be forced into deciding between paying their bills and affording their prescription medications,” said Pierce. “Through our program, individuals do not: our program allows individuals to control their costs by fixing prescription medication costs at $35 per month, per medication.”

As opposed to discount drug cards or mail-order pharmacy programs, each medication received through Prescription Hope costs only $35 per month. More importantly, Prescription Hope works alongside any coverage an individual may have. There is no limit to the number of prescribed medications an individual can receive through Prescription Hope.

When an individual joins Prescription Hope, the highly-skilled team begins working on their behalf to obtain each of their prescription medications for the set monthly cost of $35 per month, per medication. Prescription Hope works hand-in-hand with America’s major pharmaceutical manufacturers and their pharmacy to secure prescriptions, track medication shipments, manage refills on time, maintain up-to-date records, and renew prescription medications every year. Individuals and families earning less than $100,000 per year often qualify for Prescription Hope.

“With over a decade of experience, our dedicated team has served thousands of people across the country, saving them millions off the retail costs of their medications,” Pierce said. “I personally welcome those 800,000 individuals who lost their health insurance access to experience a new level of hope for their personal care through Prescription Hope.”

For more information about Prescription Hope, or to apply to receive prescription medications for $35 per month, per medication, visit http://www.prescriptionhope.com or call 1-877-296-HOPE (4673).

---

About Prescription Hope: Prescription Hope, Inc. is the nation’s fastest growing pharmacy program, serving thousands of Americans with access to over 1,500 FDA-approved prescription medications for $35 per month, per medication. Prescription Hope is not a mail order pharmacy or discount drug card. Instead, Prescription Hope obtains prescription medications for those who cannot afford them. There are no other costs, fees, or charges associated with the medication or our services. For more information, please visit http://www.prescriptionhope.com.