Reprinted from INSIDE HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGES , a hard-hitting newsletter with news and strategic insights on the development and operation of public and private exchanges. Sign up for a $62 two-month trial subscription today .

Not-for-profit Blues plans “represent the backbone of the exchanges,” but the majority of them are sustaining large losses in the public exchanges with margins that are worse than the levels reported by other insurance carriers, Credit Suisse analyst Scott Fidel wrote in a recent research note. The public exchange market will survive the loss of a dozen Consumer Operated and Oriented Plans (CO-OPs), but the exit of Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans “would seriously threaten the continued existence of the public exchanges,” he wrote.

Increased use of narrow networks combined with premiums that more accurately reflect the health risk of exchange enrollees could help Blues plans battle back from a difficult start on the exchanges.

Full-year 2015 earnings among Blues plans are expected to show a deep decline after 23 of 35 Blues plan collectively reported an earnings drop of $1.9 billion for the first nine months of the year, largely due to their experiences on public exchanges. For 2016, however, earnings among Blues plans should rebound due to higher 2016 premiums, says Mark Rouck, a senior director at Fitch (see table, p. 8).

HCSC’s Losses Recede

Health Care Service Corp. (HCSC), which operates Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans in five states, lost $1.5 billion on its individual Affordable Care Act (ACA)-compliant plans in 2015 — according to recent financial filings. After factoring in a $650 million premium deficiency reserve, the insurer lost $866 million last year on its ACA plans.

As of the end of 2015, HCSC’s retail market membership, which includes on- and off-exchange individual policies, student health plans and temporary plans, was 1.7 million. The company is in the process of finalizing retail open enrollment figures for 2016, says spokesperson Mark Spencer. Based on the company’s assumptions around changes in the marketplace, HCSC didn’t record a premium deficiency reserve in 2015 for its 2016 retail business.

While HCSC recorded a net loss of $66 million for 2015, that’s substantially less than the $282 million loss reported for 2014. Overall, HCSC’s total revenue increased more than 15% in 2015 to $35 billion thanks to administrative contracts with self-insured employers and using common accounting principles, says Spencer.

HCSC sells QHPs through HealthCare.gov in Illinois, Montana, Oklahoma and Texas. The company pulled out of New Mexico’s state-run exchange last summer after local regulators declined to approve an average 51.6% rate increase for the company’s 2016 individual products. The Blues plan operator had about 35,000 exchange members in that state, (HEX 8/15, p. 1). HCSC also discontinued non-group PPOs in some states for 2016.

Among single-state Blues plans, some fared much better than others on the public exchanges. Harrisburg, Pa.-based Capital BlueCross, for example, saw overall net income plummet 904% during the first nine months of 2015. Florida Blue’s net income, by contrast, soared more than 8,000% to $174 million, up from just $2 million in the first nine months of 2014, according to a Feb. 24 analysis from ratings firm Fitch Ratings.

Going into 2015, the Blues had more exposure in the exchanges than their publicly traded competitors. “The results weren’t completely surprising,” Rouck tells HEX. Blues plans typically operate statewide, while publicly traded companies can be more selective about the markets where they sell coverage. Moreover, Blues plans tend to operate in just one state, and generally have large market share. And single-state Blues plans tend to be not-for-profit, so their mission isn’t necessarily to achieve a certain return or to satisfy shareholders, he adds.

Along with substantially higher rates for exchange-based plans sold by some Blues plans, some 2017 products might be built around tighter provider networks. The most successful publicly traded carriers were the ones that implemented narrow network products, Rouck says. But the idea of narrow networks runs counter to the wide networks and rich benefits typically associated with Blues plans, he notes.

© 2016 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a special discount on the latest edition of the best-selling annual resource The AIS Guide to Blue Cross and Blue Shield Plans (Not affiliated with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association or its member companies).