Brinkley, a retriever/Labrador/bulldog mix, eats his lunch at the Longmont Humane Society on Friday. Brinkley is one of the dogs available for adoption from the shelter at 9595 Nelson Road in Longmont. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Related Dogs on the Front Range

Front Range dog stats: Labs responsible for most bites

The animal shelter serving El Paso County and its cities euthanized more than one pit bull a day last year, making it the most euthanized breed along the Front Range, according to an investigation by Rocky Mountain PBS I-News and 9News.

The two news organizations analyzed dog euthanasia cases from 2013 at the major shelters along the Front Range. Combined, they accounted for about 4,800 of the 7,000 dogs euthanized statewide.

However, the number of dogs euthanized in the state was small when compared to the number of dogs shelters adopt out or return to their owners. In 2013, shelters found homes for almost 53,000 dogs and returned close to another 24,000 to their owners.

The Longmont Humane Society euthanized 69 dogs in 2013, including 50 for behavioral reasons and 19 for medical reasons, according to figures provided last Friday by executive director Elizabeth Smokowski. The agency has euthanized 56 thus far this year, including 46 for behavioral reasons and 10 for medical reasons.

However, the Longmont Humane Society currently has what Smokowski called a 97.5 percent "live release rate" of the dogs sheltered there, she said.

That included 1,229 dogs adopted and 599 dogs returned to their guardians in 2013, and 1,151 dogs adopted and 668 dogs returned to their guardians thus far in 2014, Smokowski said.

The Humane Society of Boulder Valley euthanized 297 dogs in 2013 — 225 for behavioral reasons and 72 for medical reasons. It has euthanized 185 dogs thus far this year, 144 for behavioral reasons and 41 for medical reasons, according to figures provided Friday by operations vice president Don Shires.

The Humane Society of Boulder Valley's live release rate of dogs at its shelter varies between 92 and 94 percent annually, Shires said.

He reported that 3,888 dogs were adopted from Boulder Valley's shelter and 820 returned to their guardians in 2013, and that 2,795 have been adopted and 779 returned to their guardians thus far this year.

Shires said the last national average he's seen reported for live release rate percentages, which he said "measures the number of successful outcomes" of returning dogs to their guardians or finding new guardians for dogs, "was in the high 40s."

Maggie Schaefer, Boulder Valley's behavioral health manager, said that on a statewide basis, Colorado shelters have been successful at returning dogs to their guardians or finding adoptive homes for the animals.

'Reflection of ... the community'

Longmont Humane Society animal care team member Josh Christ pets Ernie, one of the dogs available for adoption from the Longmont Humane Society, during a break while walking Ernie outside the agency's shelter at 9595 Nelson Road, Longmont, on Friday. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Pit bulls stood out as a breed for euthanasia, accounting for 766 of the Front Range cases. More than half of those, 445, took place at the Humane Society of Pikes Peak, the shelter for El Paso County and its cities. They totaled about 40 percent of all of the about 1,100 dogs put down at the shelter last year.

Jan Smith, director of the shelter, said a combination of factors account for the high numbers.

"They're a very popular breed here in El Paso County, so we see a large influx of those animals coming in," Smith said. In addition, the county's population tends to be transient leading to a large number of stray animals, she said.

"What's interesting is that about 72 percent of those dogs (pit bulls coming to the shelters) are strays," Smith said.

She said the pit bulls are harder to place with families than other breeds taken in by the shelter.

"We are outraged about the number of animals we have to euthanize every year," Smith said. "We're working proactively to try to get these dogs into homes."

Roger Haston, executive director of the Animal Assistance Foundation, said another problem is that spay and neutering by pit bull owners is lacking.

"The shelters are simply a reflection of what is going on in the community," Haston said.

The analysis showed that almost 90 percent of the pit bulls euthanized at the shelter were because of aggression or high arousal tendencies. That compares to 50 percent of all euthanasia cases for all breeds along the Front Range.

But animal rights activist Davyd Smith of No Kill Colorado said shelters are too quick to label pit bulls as aggressive.

"We're killing dogs that have a square head, short hair and straight tail," Smith said. "It has nothing to do with their behavior. The shelter serving all of Jefferson County and its cities euthanized 125 pit bulls in 2013, the second highest number along the Front Range.

Denver and Aurora, which both ban pit bulls, euthanized 89 combined.

The Humane Society of Boulder Valley reported it had euthanized 61 American pit bull terriers and six other dogs classified just as pit bull terriers in 2013, and 41 American pit bull terriers and seven other pit bull terriers thus far this year.

The Longmont Humane Society reported euthanizing 20 American pit bull terriers in 2013. It has euthanized another 15 American pit bull terriers and one dog listed just as a pit bull terrier thus far this year.

Labradors were the second most euthanized breed along the Front Range last year, 435 cases, followed by Chihuahuas, 337, and German Shepherds, 230.

The Longmont Humane Society euthanized nine Labrador retrievers last year and seven thus far this year. The Humane Society of Boulder Valley euthanized 32 Labrador retrievers last year and 18 thus far this year.

Times-Call staff writer John Fryar contributed to this report