Six-term Georgia Congressman Tom Price, R-Roswell, is an orthopedic surgeon who never dreamed of entering into politics. Until.

“I got into my practice and realized there were a whole lot of folks in Atlanta and Washington who had never taken care of a patient that wanted to tell me how to practice,” he said.

Price met with the Rome News-Tribune editorial staff Monday in advance of a speech on healthcare economics and policy issues to Berry College students.

One of the highest-ranking physicians in Washington, Price has long been an opponent of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare.

In May of 2015, Price introduced a revised version of his Empowering Patients First Act.

It would repeal the ACA and replace its subsidies and mandated purchase of insurance policies with a plan that focuses on regulatory reform and tax credits to make coverage affordable.

Unlike the income-based Obamacare subsidies, Price’s plan would provide tax credits based on age. The higher the age, and likely dependency on the health care system, the higher the tax credit.

“We don’t tell anybody what to buy; we simply make it so that’s financially feasible for everybody to get coverage,” Price said. “The way that we do that is to provide tax credits to folks regardless of their income status.”

Price said that under Obamacare many Americans may have medical coverage but they’re not getting actual care.

“You get somebody early in the year who hasn’t met their deductible and you tell them they need a procedure that’s going to cost $6,000, they’re going to say ‘I’m sorry, I can’t do it,’” Price said. “That’s just wrong. Real people are getting hurt right now.”

“You’ve got to trust people and you’ve got to trust markets to believe that my plan works,” he continued. “I know what doesn’t work and it’s government-run healthcare.”

Price does not face opposition in the GOP primary next month but will face off with Democrat Rodney Stooksbury in the Nov. 8 general election.