Former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin reads from "Green Eggs and Ham" at CPAC on March 8. | M.Scott Mahaskey/POLITICO Palin mocks Obama's 'Yes you can'

NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. — Sarah Palin offered a tour of the past year of anti-establishment Republican politics in a speech that stirred activists here on the final day of the Conservative Political Action Conference.

The 2008 GOP vice presidential nominee contrasted her current optimism with the feeling last year at the annual gathering last year, when “there was some reeling going on” because of the 2012 election results.

Story Continued Below

“We’re stronger now, we’re wiser now and God knows we are hungry,” Palin told activists in the conference’s closing speech, which hit crowd-pleasing notes on everything from Benghazi to birth control and also took square aim at Republican leaders in Congress.

The former Alaska governor spoke to a near-capacity crowd after an introduction from NRA Institute for Legislative Action executive director Chris Cox and a glossy video featuring clips of Palin, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, Fox News host Megyn Kelly and the signature roaring bear associated with Palin’s political action committee.

“That hope and change, it went from a catchy [Obama] campaign slogan to a reality, and along the way, hope and change, ‘yes we can,’ it became ‘no you can’t,’” Palin said, winding up an Affordable Care Act-NSA-Michelle Obama attack in a speech full of riffs she clearly appeared to be enjoying.

“No you can’t log onto the website,” she said. “No you can’t keep your health care. No you can’t make a phone call without Michelle Obama knowing this is the third time this week you’ve dialed Pizza Hut delivery.”

Palin singled out Cruz for his marathon speech on the Senate floor last year during his push to defund Obamacare, when the freshman senator read Dr. Seuss’s “Green Eggs and Ham” to his young daughters watching at home.

Palin brought her own version of the rhyme, crediting a couple lines of it to the Internet.

“I do not like this Uncle Sam,” it began. “I do not like this health care scam. I do not like these dirty crooks or how they lie and cook the books.”

The crowd devoured it.

In addition to Cruz, Palin name-checked other congressional Republicans as “good guys” who need “reinforcements” in the 2014 midterms, including Sen. Mike Lee of Utah, Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky and House Republicans Trey Gowdy (S.C.), Paul Gosar (Ariz.) and Louie Gohmert (Texas).

She said the midterms offered an opportunity make Sen. Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) either minority leader or “a blackjack dealer in Vegas.”

But, she warned existing Republican leadership: “You know that 2010 election victory that swept you into power? You didn’t build that. The tea party did.”

She offered repeated nods to the young people in the audience. Organizers said almost half of the attendees who voted in the conference straw poll were between the ages of 18 and 25.

“I love coming back here because there are always so many young people, or as you’re known by the folks across the river, Obamacare suckers,” she said.

Slightly less well-received was a joke about the “choom gang” — a dig at President Barack Obama over marijuana — shortly after conference organizers said their straw poll found three-fifths of attendees favor legalization of marijuana for either recreational or medical use.

Palin also devoted a section of her speech to women in the audience, urging them to resist Democratic entreaties after a year filled with partisan fights over Obamacare’s women’s health care provisions and calls by some in the GOP to retool the party’s message to women.

“Women, don’t let them use you unless you choose to be their political pawn or just their piece of accessory on their arm,” Palin said. “Honey, that’s not liberation. That’s subjugation, and this sisterhood fights against that.”

She spoke shortly after the announcement that Paul had won CPAC’s presidential straw poll. Palin took 2 percent of the votes, tied with figures such as Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, after she flirted with a run in 2011.

During her speech, she responded to a few chants of “run, Sarah, run” from the audience.

“I should,” she quipped. “I didn’t get to run this morning. I was so busy.”

Authors: