Stage

Jack Finsterer as widowed tree surgeon Jack in Shellshock. Photo: Picasa

Reviewer rating:

Rating: 3 out of 5 stars

SHELLSHOCK

Riverside Theatres, Parramatta, August 1. Until August 8

In the centenary year of the Gallipoli landings, playwright Justin Fleming examines the legacies of war – the personal, the political – and the national myth-making arising from it. Nothing unusual in that, you might think. Except that Fleming does it with a tortoise.

The kernel of the idea behind Shellshock goes back to 2012 when reports surfaced in the UK media about a tortoise that had been brought home from the Gallipoli campaign in a soldier's kitbag and was still alive. Having survived his original owner by 30 years, the tortoise was looking for a new home.

Advertisement

Fleming grafts that story on to a fictional one, that of a modern day Australian family descended from an Anzac veteran, Matthew Lindsay. Matthew, whom we meet in an introductory scene set in a Cairo hospital, is long gone now, but his descendants still call his beloved soldier settlement allotment of 100 acres home. So does Hermann, the native tortoise Matthew picked up on the battlefield.

As interest in the Gallipoli centenary begins to peak, Hermann becomes a news item. Word of his existence eventually reaches the ears of the Turkish government. An emissary, Adile (Francesca Savige), is dispatched from Ankara to regional Australia to pay her respects. Her unstated mission is a more complex and sensitive one, however. To the Turks, the tortoise is a symbol of peace and they would like him back. Poor old Hermann's status is suddenly elevated from that of family pet to diplomatic incident.

Framed by a friendly Turkish narrator, a travelling shadow-puppeteer (played by Yalin Ozucelik), Shellshock is a well-made but charmingly offbeat exercise in storytelling calculated to appeal to a family audience.

Wayne Harrison's production is busily attractive and nicely weighted performances draw us into the story: Jack Finsterer as widowed tree surgeon Jack (Matthew's grandson); Sandy Gore as Jack's testy mother June, an anti-Vietnam War firebrand in her time, and Benson Jack Anthony as Tom, Matthew's 14-year-old great-grandson. Ozucelik mischievously pops up as a consular driver and a zoo security guard. Savige takes elegant care of the story's romantic undercurrents.

Lights (Matthew Marshall, with projections by Martin Kinnane), sound (Nate Edmondson) and a swirling score composed by Joseph Tawadros combine to excellent effect and cast a warm glow over this novel take on the Gallipoli legacy.