Hillary’s past suggests she’s fought against youth jobs as she now professes to fight for them

Hillary Clinton wants youth to know that she supports them and their professional endeavors, and that’s why she launched the “Job One” project at the Clinton Global Initiative America meeting in Denver, Colo., Tuesday to encourage companies to hire young adults.

It’s too bad that she has already done young Americans a huge economic disservice by pushing for Obamacare and her own mandate-included alternative.

Clinton has both supported and defended the president’s health care law from its earliest days, even despite the rocky rollout and website issues. More importantly, though, Hillary developed her own universal health care plan in 2008 that bore likeness to Obama’s ultimate policy. Both included an employer mandate that required institutions to supply their workers with health insurance or pay a fine.

Unfortunately, such a mandate is greatly harming the American youth population trying to get work in today’s economy.

For instance, an official at the University of Colorado recently explained that students working on campus in excess of 30 hours per week may need to find employment off-campus so that the school does not have to deal with the employer mandate, which takes effect when workers’ hours pass this threshold.

“The limitation is very unfair, especially for students who are financially independent like myself,” junior math major Kristen Robards said of the threat Obamacare poses to her employment. “For them to limit that I don’t think is morally right.”

Last year, the University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa announced its limitation of work hours for graduate students to 20 hours or less each week due to Obamacare for the same reason that the Colorado school is considering such actions now.

Not only are students feeling the negative effects of the Affordable Care Act, but the universities that educate them are saddled with harsh extra costs because of the law. For example, the University of North Carolina could face up to $46 million in costs in order to pay for health insurance for its employees.

How will colleges compensate for these escalating bills? Hiking tuition for students is an easy option, of course. The University of South Carolina announced just last week that it is raising tuition 3.2 percent in part to help pay its $4.5 million Obamacare tab.

Clinton’s initiative has recruited 10 companies to pledge to hire, train or mentor young Americans. “Job One” is anticipated to reach 150,000 young individuals, which isn’t much considering the student population of the University of South Carolina alone accounts for one-fifth of that number. If you factor in the nearly 3,000 four-year colleges in the United States, the amount of students affected in some way by the Affordable Care Act far exceeds Clinton’s “reach.”