Topics: Ben Carson, Bobby Jindal, Carly Fiorina, Chris Christie, CPAC, CPAC 2014, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Jim DeMint, John Cornyn, Marco Rubio, Mike Huckabee, Mike Lee, Pat Toomey, Paul Ryan, Rand Paul, Rick Perry, Rick Santorum, Sarah Palin, Ted Cruz, Wayne LaPierre, Elections News, Media News, Business News, News, Politics News

Starting today, conservative activists converge in Maryland – along with a healthy complement of journalists (this one included) – to hear from top Republicans and leading voices of the modern right. Controversy is basically inevitable.

But CPAC’s top stars will have a high bar to clear if they want to outdo themselves in the provocation department. Here are some head-turning past comments from headliners highlighted on CPAC’s site — on black people, gay people, “takers” and much more:

“Even if an alcoholic is powerless over alcohol once it enters his body, he still makes a choice to drink. And, even if someone is attracted to a person of the same sex, he or she still makes a choice to engage in sexual activity with someone of the same gender.” – Rick Perry, 2008

“After Hurricane Sandy, we saw the hellish world that the gun prohibitionists see as their utopia.” – Wayne LaPierre, 2013

“One of the things I will talk about, that no president has talked about before, is I think the dangers of contraception in this country … It’s a license to do things in a sexual realm that is counter to how things are supposed to be.” – Rick Santorum, 2011

“More background checks? Dandy idea, Mr. President. Shoulda started with yours.” – Sarah Palin, 2013

“I’m not a scientist, man. I can tell you what the recorded history says, I can tell you what the Bible says, but I think that’s [the age of the Earth] a dispute amongst theologians, and I think it has nothing to do with the gross domestic product or economic growth of the United States.” – Marco Rubio, 2012

“Probably the most heartwarming experiences I’ve had over the last several days is when naturalized American citizens, who have immigrated here from Germany, Iran, and other countries, they come up to me and they say: Why are we doing what so many have fled from? … [T]hese people who’ve lived under socialist type economies, and totalitarianism, they know where we’re headed if we don’t turn things around.” – Jim DeMint, 2009

“You know, something may go down tonight, but ain’t gonna be jobs, sweetheart.” – Chris Christie, 2012

“[I]f we can redefine marriage … based on social pressures as opposed to between a man and a woman, we will continue to redefine it in any way that we wish, which is a slippery slope with a disastrous ending, as witnessed in the dramatic fall of the Roman Empire.” – Ben Carson, 2012