The health advocacy group that started with fewer than a handful of volunteers and a $5,000 budget, now employs more than 185, has an annual budget of more than $50 million, and each year serves more than 90,000 patients with chronic or debilitating illnesses who are seeking access to care or reimbursement for their treatments.

The Hampton-based Patient Advocate Foundation grew into a multimillion-dollar nonprofit under the leadership of founder Nancy Davenport-Ennis. A former English teacher, she launched the foundation with her husband, John "Jack" Ennis, in 1996 after seeing the barriers her friend Cheryl Grimmel faced in getting the cancer treatment she needed. Since then, it has helped almost 700,000 people nationwide with access to care.

Earlier this year, Davenport-Ennis officially handed over the helm to Alan Balch after an 18-month transition period.

Balch, who holds degrees in biology and environmental studies, spent the previous decade as a nonprofit executive, most recently as vice president of the Preventive Health Partnership, a program of the American Cancer Society, American Diabetes Association, and the American Heart Association.

The new executive is committed to continuing existing programs — and three members of Davenport-Ennis' family continue to work at the foundation — her husband as chief development officer, and two daughters, Fran Castellow, president of operations, and Beth Moore, president of mission delivery. But Balch also has his own ideas going forward.

These include "doing more work in our own back yard," including establishing a college scholarship for a Hampton Roads student and starting a local advisory board of business and philanthropic leaders. Balch also plans to expand a health equities initiative through outreach to African-American and Latino communities across the country.

PAF's services divide between case management and direct financial support through co-pay programs. The latter, Balch explained were authorized by the 2003 Medicare Modernization Act and funnel money from pharmaceutical companies primarily to Medicare patients; in this way, PAF supplied $32 million in co-payment support for patients to pay for their medications in the 2013/2014 fiscal year.

Patient Advocate Foundation Sangjib Min, Daily Press Patient Advocate Foundation co-founder Nancy Davenport-Ennis, center foreground, her husband, co-founder John Ennis, center right, and case managers are shown at the foundation in 2012. Davenport-Ennis officially handed over the helm to Alan Balch in 2015 after an 18-month transition. The foundation, a nonprofit that mediates with insurance companies over health issues, helps people with medical debt and access to health care. Patient Advocate Foundation co-founder Nancy Davenport-Ennis, center foreground, her husband, co-founder John Ennis, center right, and case managers are shown at the foundation in 2012. Davenport-Ennis officially handed over the helm to Alan Balch in 2015 after an 18-month transition. The foundation, a nonprofit that mediates with insurance companies over health issues, helps people with medical debt and access to health care. (Sangjib Min, Daily Press)

Twenty percent of the foundation's clients are uninsured, and while pharmaceutical subsidies remain robust, staff has observed a drop in hospital programs to help that group, Balch said. Fifty percent have an annual income below $23,000.

Many of the foundation's clients have gotten access to health care through the Affordable Care Act marketplace.

Spokeswoman Kelly Alvord offered examples of people the foundation has helped: one had a new cancer diagnosis and had lost employer-sponsored insurance; another was prescribed medications that cost more than her income; another was unemployed and uninsured with a chronic disease and needed help applying for both disability and insurance.

Much of the case managers' work involves paperwork and negotiations to keep medical payments manageable. "There are a lot of out-of-pocket costs associated with utilizing care," Balch noted. Staff helps arrange payment plans, sorts out coding and billing issues, finds transportation — 25 percent of patients live more than 50 miles from the site of care — and more. "We take a one patient at a time approach and average 19 contacts per case," he said. "We look for things that are very practical, like working on pre-authorization times."

True to the foundation's beginnings, and reflective of the disease's impact, 70 percent of the case management is cancer-related. "It's an expensive, complicated disease," Balch said.

By contrast, little attention is given to diabetes and heart-related conditions. "It's understood how you should manage it, there are fairly cheap drugs available that are covered. It's a compliance issue, the challenges are different," he said. "We're picking populations that will have constant challenges. We're acutely focused on patients with chronic diseases who need immediate practical help."

Under Balch, PAF is expanding its aid into virology, and what he calls "big buckets of disease areas, not as well structured as cancer," including rheumatoid arthritis, Hepatitis C, muscular sclerosis, Crohn's, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's.

The patient data PAF gathers provides leverage for its policy arm, the National Patient Advocate Foundation based in Washington, D.C. It has lobbied successfully for the elimination of pre-existing conditions as a consideration in insurance plans, for caps on out-of-pocket costs, and for parity in different drug regimens (such as oral and infusion).

It's also working on the financial side to change laws regarding medical debt, the primary cause of personal bankruptcy. Currently such debt shows up on credit reports for seven years, which makes it difficult for people to rebuild their lives, Balch said. The NPAF wants legislation that would erase the record 90 days after the debt is repaid.

The foundation supports the expansion of Medicaid in Virginia as a way to provide insurance more broadly. "The whole idea is to get everyone in the system, to spread the cost," he said, while pointing to the current "fee-for-service" model as the problem in rising health costs.

A PAF board member since 2006, Balch enjoys the organization's patient-centered, hands-on approach. "From my history and background in nonprofits, that it can demonstrate so tangibly what it does. It's very gratifying from a mission perspective."

Salasky can be reached by phone at 757-247-4784.

Patient Advocate Foundation

Patient Advocate Foundation, a nonprofit with a four-star rating from Charity Navigator, provides patients with arbitration, mediation and negotiation to settle issues with access to care, medical debt, and job retention related to their illness

PAF, 421 Butler Farm Rd., Hampton; 800-532-5274, 757-873-6668, http://www.patientadvocate.org. For co-pay relief, 757-952-0118, http://www.copays.org; MedCare Line, access to emerging medical therapies, 877-614-9240.