Topics: Bradley Cooper, Burnt, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Movies

If “Burnt” were being honest, it would have been called “Everybody Wants to Fuck Bradley Cooper.” The John Wells-directed film, in which Cooper plays a bad boy chef, labors under the misapprehension that no matter how horrible, narcissistic or borderline violent a guy cinema’s second favorite Brad plays, everyone is dying to bone him: the talented sous chef (Sienna Miller) who can’t stand the sight of him; the gay, Elmer Fudd-inflected maître d’ (Daniel Bruhl) willing to sacrifice his entire career for just one kiss and even the restaurant critic who is exclusively into women but willing to make an exception for white dudes whose names rhyme with “Madly Boop-her.”

This is despite the fact that (to reiterate) Cooper is playing the worst person in the world. While displaying almost no redeeming qualities — outside of those piercing baby blues — Cooper’s Adam Jones manipulates Miller’s character (whose character may as well be named “Girl Chef”) into working with him and then repeatedly bribes her not to quit because of his abusive behavior; in one scene, he violently grabs her by the shirt for daring to question his authority. Jones forces the Elmer Fudd-ish maître d’ to give him the head chef job at his dying father’s restaurant — because Jones knows Fuddy is in love with him (hey, who isn’t?). And in a telling moment, he facetiously suggests that a shy cook should work for him for free — all to prove a point: You have to be a jerk to get what you want.

It might seem like “Burnt” is “Wall Street” with a frying pan, but the film’s “narcissism is good” ethos is less a philosophy than a love letter to insufferable white golden boys and the people who find them dangerously irresistible. “Burnt” validates and redeems Jones’ numerous misdeeds not by having him ever apologize for his behavior or make amends but by repeatedly reminding us a) that he’s so brilliant b) that he’s so damaged (bad childhood: check!) and c) that he’s not overtly horrible to children. In Adam’s redemptive “he’s not so bad after all!“ scene, he deigns to bake Girl Chef’s daughter a cake — and even eats it with her. This is, of course, after he wouldn’t let Girl Chef have the actual day off to throw her daughter a party.

If little separates Adam Jones from Patrick Bateman aside from a knife and an adult poncho, Adam Jones actually exemplifies a time-honored type in American cinema: In real life, you would file a restraining order against him, but unfortunately, he’s attractive, Caucasian and the protagonist of the film. The Hot White Douche is as old as the history of the cinema itself: In the film “His Girl Friday,” you’d throw a pie in Cary Grant’s face if he weren’t, well, Cary Grant. In a memorable scene from “The Philadelphia Story,” Grant actually facepalms Katherine Hepburn, pushing her to the ground — and then they end up together. And James Bond has made a 50-year career off being a debonair dickbag; a recent review of “Spectre” called 007 a “violent misogynist,” and even Daniel Craig agreed. Sexism just looks better in Tom Ford.

The current cinema has given us famous examples of the Hot White Douche like Edward Cullen and Christian Grey, both of whom teach horny teenage Mormons and middle-aged hausfraus that there’s nothing sexier than abusive relationships. But even less controversial characters have distinct HWD tendencies: In “Reality Bites,” Winona Ryder ends up with Ethan Hawke — a pretentious, greasy-haired jerk who spends the whole movie being mean to her — for no other reason than the script says so (they “belong together” or something). “Bridget Jones’ Diary” and “The Ugly Truth” respectively give us Daniel Cleaver (Hugh Grant) and Mike (Gerard Butler), whose workplace behavior should be used as a cautionary tale at sexual harassment seminars.

The problem with a movie like “The Ugly Truth” isn’t just that the screenplay (which was somehow written by three women) lets the misogynist get the girl but that it, like “Burnt,” proves his worldview correct. “The Ugly Truth” offers a Cyrano de Bergerac scenario in which Mike helps Abby (Katherine Heigl) get laid by teaching her what men like — which is Cool Girls who wear tight dresses and find all their jokes hilarious. Of course, Abby finds that his methods work — until she and Mike inevitably fall in love. “Jurassic World” offers the same thesis: For women, there’s nothing sexier than a scruffy asshole (this time Chris Pratt) with a six-pack ordering you around.