STAR File photo Jennifer Owen-Ward’s Westlake Village home photographed by the Star in 2012 for the 23rd Annual Holiday Homes Tour that benefitted the Cancer Support Community.

By Megan Diskin of the Ventura County Star

Taking care of a Christmas tree is like taking care of a new puppy, according to a captain with the Ventura County Fire Department.

They both require a lot of attention if the house is expected to stay in one piece.

When Christmas trees burn "it's like lighting gasoline on fire," said Capt. Mike Lindbery, a county fire spokesman. He said structure fires started from the holiday tree are often fatal.

"You really can't pick a more flammable tree to put inside your house," said Doug Miser, a battalion chief with the city of Ventura Fire Department.

According to the National Fire Protection Agency, fire departments respond to an average of 230 home fires each year caused by the trees and offered some tips to prevent them.

County firefighters head to Christmas tree lots to spread safety awareness

Lindbery said the most important tip is to cut about 1 to 2 inches off the bottom of the tree before its placed in the stand so it can absorb water. Then check the water levels each day.

"Keep it constantly in a pool of water so it stays as hydrated as possible," Miser added.

Lindbery said to also be aware of how hot the house gets because it may be a factor in how much water is evaporating. If well-cared for the tree can last three to four weeks, he said.

The agency also said to make sure the tree is at least 3 feet away from any heat source, and that it's not blocking an exit. And be sure to turn off all of the tree's lights before leaving the house or going to bed, the agency said.

Miser said to avoid a fire caused by a short circuit, the lights on the tree should not be plugged in to an overloaded outlet. If possible, give the tree lights their own outlet, he said.

Lindbery said to avoid using the big bulb lights on the tree and instead use LED lights. Make sure the wiring is not cracked or has been crushed because that may also cause a short circuit. Any foil-like decorations on the tree should also be avoided, Lindbery said.

When the branches get brittle the tree is dying, Lindbery said. As soon as it's dead, remove the dry tree from the home to remove the fire hazard, he said.

When decorating the home or tree, Lindbery suggested using no more than three strands of lights per outlet. Stockings should also be hung on the far sides above a fireplace, especially when it is in use, he said.

Lindbery said decorations tend to get cluttered and with candle use more prevalent this time of year it's important to not leave candles unattended.

Ventura city firefighters responded to a fire started by an unattended candle at a Montgomery Avenue home Nov. 27 when some nearby garland caught fire about 5:30 a.m. and spread to the entertainment center. The homeowner was only alerted to the blaze when his smoke alarm went off, and he avoided a major disaster by putting it out with a fire extinguisher since a Christmas tree was nearby, Miser said.

"Garland and candles, they go hand in hand," Miser said. "Do it with fire-resistant material."