MOST of the questions now roiling American politics can be distilled into this: where is the Republican Party heading? The races for governor in Virginia, where voters picked Terry McAuliffe, a Democrat, and New Jersey, where they chose Chris Christie, a Republican, send a pretty clear signal about what the Grand Old Party ought to do if it wants to get its hands on more than one of the federal government’s three branches: hug the centre. Becoming a revolutionary movement of ever greater ideological purity is a way to lose and lose again.

Precedent suggested that a Republican ought to have won in Virginia. Two weak candidates came up against each other, their deficiencies almost cancelling each other out. Mr McAuliffe is the archetypal backroom politician, a Clinton fund-raiser better known for the size of his address book than for the power of his oratory, a representative of the money-for-access aspect of politics that voters dislike and candidates leave to someone else.

Yet he was able to buck the Virginia curse, according to which the party that holds the presidency cannot win the state’s governorship, which had held for almost 40 years. Mr McAuliffe won (albeit narrowly) while Barack Obama’s approval rating is around 40% and his most important policy, the Affordable Care Act, is even more unpopular. And he did it in a state that has become a bellwether for the nation: in the 2012 presidential election Virginia gave Barack Obama and Mitt Romney precisely the same share of the vote as they received nationwide.

This achievement says little about Mr McAuliffe but a lot about his opponent, Ken Cuccinelli. Mr Cuccinelli is something of an idol among cultural conservatives. He was the first state attorney-general to sue the federal government over the new health-care law, which he argued was unconstitutional. He also tried to sue the Environmental Protection Agency, describing the science establishing a link between carbon-dioxide emissions and climate change as “doctored”. He had a fixation with piling regulations on abortion clinics, in the hope of forcing them to close. Republicans might not have selected such a candidate, had the nominating process not changed from an open primary, in which lots of people vote, to a party convention, where the impassioned few who showed up were able to get their man.

Despite the instructive nature of this defeat, the lesson has yet to be learned. Mr Cuccinelli’s campaign strategist, Chris LaCivita, pointed out that his man was outspent by $15m dollars, and that Mr Cuccinelli could have won the extra couple of percentage points required for victory had the party’s national organisation offered more support. In this account, Mr Cuccinelli’s defeat was a victory.

This is nonsense. Turnout in the race was low, at under 40%, even though the election was competitive. Voters didn’t like either candidate much. But Mr McAuliffe was able to raise more money because his opponent spooked people. Pre-election polling suggested that ideological purity carried a penalty: a Washington Post poll found that 52% thought Mr McAuliffe could work with lawmakers from both parties, whereas only 30% thought Mr Cuccinelli capable of cutting deals with his political opponents.

For evidence that this quality is an electoral asset, see New Jersey’s gubernatorial race. Chris Christie was expected to win big. But the margin of his victory—he won 60% of the vote—is remarkable. The last Republican to win more than 50% in a statewide race in New Jersey was George Bush senior in 1988. The last Republican to do so in a governor’s race was Thomas Kean in 1985. Mr Christie put those results in the shade in a state that has become so reliably Democratic that Barack Obama increased his share of the vote there in 2012. Though New Jersey leant Republican in presidential races from the 1940s to the 1980s, its demography is now thought to give Democrats a huge advantage: one-third of its schoolchildren have immigrant parents.

Mr Christie won them over in part by appearing to put party politics aside. He praised Barack Obama’s response to Hurricane Sandy, on the eve of a presidential election, and has managed to work with a state legislature controlled by Democrats. His state is in a terrible financial pickle—it is required by law to balance its budget yet its revenues and long-term liabilities are badly out of line. But Mr Christie has been unusually frank in acknowledging the problem and has made modest improvements by reducing expenditure and increasing revenue. That sort of balanced approach is anathema to many Republicans in Congress, and Mr Christie would doubtless have trouble defending it before voters in the Republican presidential primaries, as he surely will in 2016.

Republicans have now lost winnable statewide seats in Virginia, Missouri and Indiana in the past year, by running candidates who please the party’s base but strike other voters as a bit weird. The party has collapsed in big cities: none of the 12 largest has a Republican mayor. The elections on November 5th once again suggest that Americans quite like Republican moderates but can’t abide the zealots.