Democrats used an unconstitutional amendment process to get President Barack Obama's signature health care overhaul through Congress, opponents of the law told the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans on Tuesday. In one of the latest legal challenges to the act, the law's opponents said the bill, which includes tax penalties for individuals who fail to purchase insurance and employers who fail to provide it, violates the Constitution's requirement that tax measures must start in the House.

The lawsuit contends that the law, in effect, originated in the Senate: Senators took an unrelated tax bill passed by the House, gutted it and substituted the health care language before sending it back to the House for final passage. That argument was rejected earlier this year by U.S. District Judge Nancy Atlas of Houston, who ruled that the bill met constitutional requirements because raising revenue was not its overarching purpose and the law was therefore not subject to the origination clause. She also said the original House bill was indeed a revenue measure and said the Senate had broad authority to amend the bill once it left the House.

Gregory Katsas, arguing for congressional opponents of the Affordable Care Act, said Atlas was interpreting that amendment authority too broadly. Her ruling, he told the appeals judges, "would make vast swaths of taxes totally exempt from the origination clause." Judge E. Grady Jolly of Jackson, Miss., one of the three judges hearing the appeal, questioned whether the origination clause has any real meaning if the Senate is allowed to gut the House measure and substitute a new bill.

But attorneys supporting the law cited Supreme Court and 5th Circuit precedents that they said support Atlas' ruling. Attorney Alisa Klein, arguing for the Justice Department, said no House members argued that the origination clause was being violated when the law was making its way through Congress in 2009 and 2010. And attorney Elizabeth Wydra, arguing for congressional supporters of the measure, said House members still zealously guard their prerogative to start tax legislation. "The origination clause continues to be something that is alive and well in the House," Wydra said.

The 5th Circuit panel gave no indication when it would rule. Sitting with Jolly, who was nominated to the court by President Ronald Reagan, were Judges Carolyn Dineen King of Houston, nominated by President Jimmy Carter, and Gregg Costa of Houston, an Obama nominee approved by the Senate earlier this year.

Although the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act in 2012, legal challenges continue. The high court last month agreed to review a federal appeals court ruling that upheld Internal Revenue Service regulations allowing health-insurance tax credits under the Affordable Care Act for consumers in all 50 states. Opponents argue that most of the subsidies are illegal.

The origination clause argument has already been rejected by the District of Columbia appeals court in a 3-0 ruling in July. A different ruling by the 5th Circuit could keep the issue alive and make it ripe for Supreme Court arguments.

. . . . . . .

Story by Kevin McGill, The Associated Press.