According to the recent reports revealed, there is an indication that the Milky Way galaxy is stripping off hydrogen gas from close by spheroidal dwarf galaxies which is compulsory for the creation of stars. Thus, the Milky Way’s closest galactic neighbors will not be able to make stars. On the other hand, this doesn’t happen with the dwarf galaxies beyond our neighborhood. They can produce plenty of Hydrogen, that’s why they have the ability to form plenty of stars.

The Milky Way galaxy is believed to be one of the biggest group of galaxies that are held together by gravity. The Milky Way is the bigger galaxy and others are dwarf galaxies. After the formation of galaxies, the remnants’ group together and form the spheroidal dwarf galaxies. Ahead of the monarchies of the dwarf galaxies are misshaped dwarf asymmetrical galaxies that are not the part of the group.

“Astronomers speculated if, after billions of years of interaction, the close by dwarf spheroidal galaxies have all the same star-forming ‘stuff’ that we find in more distant dwarf galaxies,” Kristine Spekkens, lead author of the new study stated.

It’s quite obvious that the far away asymmetrical dwarf galaxies have lots of neutral hydrogen gas, though there is no clear indication about the nearby dwarf galaxies yet. The astronomers explored that spheroidal dwarf galaxies were devoid of any signs of hydrogen gas with the help of large telescopes around the globe including the National Science Foundation’s Green Bank Telescope.

At first, it was believed that the close by black hole was actually sucking the hydrogen gas from the spheroidal galaxies. Though, afterwards it was observed that the Milky Way galaxy is bash reverse as compared to the dwarf galaxies. The Milky Way galaxy is situated in the center of a dense halo of Hydrogen Plasma that expands for thousand of light years. So, eventually the huge halo in addition to the high-speed of the spheroidal dwarf galaxies orbiting around the Milky Way was stripping away their hydrogen.