Windsor's Buddy Buder has been volunteering at the Travelers Championship since 1972. (WFSB)

Volunteers, many who arrive daily at 5 a.m., but few as seasoned and loyal as Windsor's Buddy Buder, who has been both a Travelers' employee and volunteer since 1972.

"I love to volunteer, whether it be giving blood or helping the Hole in the Wall Gang or working any golf tournament," Buder said.

Earlier in the week, Buder served as walking scorer.

"What a walking scorer does is take scores for the professional," Buder said. "I have three professionals in my group. I will be charting every shot they take in the round."

Buder said the walking scorers use a Palm Pilot to chart the shots. The information gathered by the walking scorers will be used online and on television, so fans and media can watch what's going on with a given player. The scorer will note where the yardage and where they are on the green.

Buder said technology has changed the work flow for the walking scorers.

"We used to use what they called tear sheets," Buder said. "We used to have a piece of paper that we would rip off after every hole and we would give it to a marshal, so they could call it in."

After tear sheets, the PGA went to paper and then developed some technology to help the waling scorers.

Buder said he has a "good supportive wife" that allows him to spend his time volunteering.

"The reason why I do a lot of volunteer work is so I don't have to do any work at home," Buder joked. "So you can't beat that,"

Buder said over the years he has worked with hundreds of golfers. Some of his favorites include Bubba Watson, Stewart Cink and Aaron Baddeley.

"I like them all," he said. "The reason will volunteer is so we can see them all."

Besides seeing golfers, Buder said he really enjoys meeting up each year with all the other volunteers. He compared returning to volunteer at the tournament as like a "home coming."

"We have a great bunch that we work with," Buder said. "The volunteers that we have a tournament, we're all friends."

Every year when it's time for the Travelers Championship, Buder said it becomes his "number one priority."

"If a relative is getting married or I got a broken leg, I am going to be here," Buder said.

Buder has met some of the biggest names in golf over the years. But, he told Eyewitness News on Thursday no meeting he's had has been more moving than one earlier this week with a group of wounded warriors, who has been invited here for the tournament. Buder said that those wounded warriors are what this great event is all about

Copyright 2015 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.