Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care to open Pearland clinic next year Pearland is third site for network of pediatric care

Photo: Courtesy Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Founders of Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care are Connie Cazares, left, Zawadi Bryant and Anastasia Gentles.Founders of Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care are Connie Cazares, left, Zawadi Bryant and Anastasia Gentles. less Founders of Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care are Connie Cazares, left, Zawadi Bryant and Anastasia Gentles.Founders of Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care are Connie Cazares, left, Zawadi Bryant and Anastasia ... more Photo: Courtesy Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care to open Pearland clinic next year 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

The Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care will be keeping the lights on late at its new location in Pearland, set to open early next year.

The 4,000-square-foot clinic under construction at 2803 Business Center Drive in the Shadow Creek Ranch Town Center will be the third the owners have opened in the greater Houston area since 2007.

Anastasia Gentles, M.D., had the idea to create an urgent care clinic that catered to children while working at the emergency room in Texas Children's Hospital.

"Most of the patients wouldn't have been there, if the doctor's office would have been open at the time," she recalled. "A lot of doctors close at 5 p.m., during weekends and holidays. I started thinking this could be done a little better."

At the time, Gentles was attending church services at Reflections of Christ Kingdom in Alvin, where she met two women - Zawadi Bryant and Connie Cazares - who would later become her business partners.

Cazares was a top-ranked medical assistant in a few Texas Children's Pediatric Associates offices in the greater Houston area. Bryant was working in business - at Hewlett-Packard as a supply chain manager.

More Information Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care New location: Shadow Creek Ranch Town Center, 2803 Business Center Drive in Pearland Size: 4,000-square-foot clinic Opening: Set for 2014 Other locations: 15551 Southwest Freeway in Sugar Land and 19708 Northwest Freeway in Houston For more information: visit Nightlightpediatrics.com

"I started working for an independent consulting company, which had me traveling a lot," Bryant recalled. "I got tired of traveling. It was really perfect timing."

Gentles presented her plan to her two friends from church.

"It looked like a fantastic business opportunity," Bryant said. "It's a great idea, a great relief to parents."

The first location the women opened was in Sugar Land. It offered late hours and service on holidays and weekends. The clinic is open from 5 to 11 p.m. on weekdays, from 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. on weekends and holidays during the year, and from noon to 7 p.m. on weekends and holidays during the summer.

She explained that Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care treats minor emergencies that typically do not require emergency room care - like asthma attacks that need treatment and laceration repairs. The clinic will splint broken bones, treat a fever or aid in an earache.

Trauma care also includes stitches, sprains, burns, eye injuries and animal bites.

"A lot of things do happen at night and weekends," Gentles said.

At first, she focused on spreading the news about the clinic.

"When we started, there was nothing like this," Gentles said. "As the word got out, we just got busier and busier. We've been going for seven years and not slowing down."

In fact, three years after opening their first clinic, the women opened a second location in Cy-Fair. They noticed several clients were traveling from the northwest and wanted to address the need in that area, Bryant explained.

"The main reason we were interested in expanding is because when we just had Sugar Land, we were seeing all of the greater Houston area, even Galveston and Conroe," she said.

Gentles agreed. "We've been so successful, and people are so grateful," she said. "It was just a testament to the fact that there is so much need for this."

After obtaining permits for their third location, they said they expect construction to be completed early next year.

"We see a significant number (of patients) coming from the 288 corridor," Bryant said. "When we see a need, we want to address it."

The new Nightlight Pediatric Urgent Care clinic will follow the model of its predecessors - with several exam rooms and a kid-friendly design. Children's movies play in the waiting room.

Colorful murals are in the plans and the ceilings will be painted like a starry night.

All three facilities will soon be equipped with X-ray machines. "We want to bring everything under one roof," Gentles said.

Gentles said that emergency rooms are still bursting at the seams.

She believes that with the Affordable Care Act, demand for lower-cost pediatric urgent care will increase.

"The net result is there will be more covered lives," Gentles said. "We're here to relieve the pressure in the ER."

Still, she said that Nightlight is not meant to replace use of primary care physicians. Instead, the clinic is meant to serve as an extension of the family pediatrician seeing their patients when the office is closed.

"You need a regular doctor," Gentles said. "Come to us if your doctor is closed."

Bryant said that urgent care is a more affordable alternative than going to the emergency room - which can cost two or three times as much.

'It's an efficient way to address people's health-care needs," she said. "It fills a gap. Our co-pays are a fraction of what yours would be in the ER."

Bryant said the co-owners will consider opening more clinics when the demand presents itself.

"There's a continuous need out there," she said. "There's a lot of opportunity. Right now, we're trying to assess that and see how we will grow."