Lookout, MO

For the first time in the near 100 years of Dakota Wesleyan University men’s basketball, the Tigers are headed to the national semifinals.

The No. 5 Tigers (31-4) used guts and heart to pull out an 88-80 win over No. 4 College of Idaho in the quarterfinals of the 2015 NAIA Division II Men’s National Championship Saturday at Keeter Gymnasium in Point Lookout, Mo.

“It’s a pretty surreal feeling right now,” DWU Head Coach Matt Wilber said. “We have a pretty mature group and it’s been fun to be a part of it. This group is doing it the right way and they deserve everything they have gotten.”

Down by as many as 12 early, the Tigers fought back, led by several key performances, including a Herculean effort from senior forward Luke Bamberg (Corsica, S.D.). Bamberg more than doubled his average offensive output with a season-high 17 points, including a clutch 3-pointer in the first half. The Great Plains Athletic Conference Player-of-the-Year paced the Tiger defense as well, pulling down 12 rebounds to go along with two steals, one block and several key deflections that stymied the Coyotes.

“The gaudy numbers are not always going to be there for Luke, but he is one of the best players ever to play at DWU,” Wilber said. “There is no way we have this kind of year without Luke Bamberg.”

The first half opened with COI racing out to a 19-7 lead as the Tigers uncharacteristically turned the ball over several times in the opening minutes when faced with the Coyote full-court press. Sophomore Tate Martin (Mitchell, S.D.) came off the bench to control the COI pressure and run the DWU offense. Wilber praised Martin for his toughness and poise under pressure in the win.

“Against their pressure, Tate flat out controlled it,” Wilber said. “He took care of the ball. College of Idaho is big-time good, but our guys took care of the basketball and Tate was the big catalyst. When we were down in the first half, Tate came in and really got us going.”

The Tigers fought out of the early deficit and took a five-point lead on Bamberg’s 3-pointer with 11 seconds to play in the first half. COI hit a pair of free throws and DWU took a three-point lead into the break.

Junior guard Trae Bergh (Crooks, S.D.) got the Tigers rolling in the second with a pair of early layups to push the DWU lead to seven. The advantage swelled to 13 points with 13 minutes to play, but COI did not go away. The Coyotes fought back and trimmed the DWU lead to three with 53 seconds to play.

The Tigers did their job at the free-throw line and walked off the court with the hundreds of DWU faithful in attendance chanting “Final Four.”

Bergh led the Tiger offense with 19 points on 6-of-13 shooting. One night after reaching the 2,000-point mark, senior forward Jalen Voss (Worthington, Minn.) finished with 17 points and five rebounds, while senior guard Kris Menning (Corsica, S.D.) added 14 points and seven rebounds. Miller finished with 13 points and was a perfect 8-for-8 at the free-throw line.

The Tigers, who started the tournament by hitting 16 threes in their opening-round win, struggled from deep against COI. DWU was 4-of-23 from long range, but hit 21-of-27 shots from everywhere else. The Tigers finished an even 50 percent from the field and outrebounded the Coyotes 39-32. COI came into the game as the fourth best rebounding team in the NAIA Division II.

The Coyotes took 22 more shots than DWU, but the Tigers went to the free-throw line 27 more times. DWU was 34-of-44 from the free-throw line. The 34 makes is the eighth most in an NAIA Division II Tournament game.

The Coyotes finished with five players in double figures, led by Marko Kovacevic with 15 points. One night after scoring 32 points, Demetrius Perkins was held to 13 by DWU’s defense. COI shot 30-of-72 from the field and 7-of-24 from 3-point range.

The Tigers will play No. 8 Davenport University (Mich.) in the semifinals of the NAIA Division II Men’s Basketball Tournament at 6 p.m. Monday. Davenport knocked off No. 1 seeded and defending national champion Indiana Wesleyan University in a thrilling game to close out the quarterfinal round. The other side of the bracket has No. 2 Embry-Riddle (Fla.) facing off with No. 3 Cornerstone (Mich.).



Nick McCutcheon

Dakota Wesleyan University

Sports Information Director



News

Non-Homepage {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.