Demonstrators hold up their cellphones in a display of solidarity during anti-Beijing protests outside the headquarters of the Legislative Council in Hong Kong on Monday. Xaume Olleros/AFP/Getty Images

Protests that began Friday in Hong Kong intensified over the weekend, with police using tear gas to disperse crowds that had grown into the tens of thousands. Protesters had initially gathered in front of Hong Kong government headquarters to demonstrate against what they see as Beijing’s meddling in the island’s democracy.

[READ: China Faces Tricky Balance in Hong Kong's Protests]

Mainland China has indicated it wants to vet candidates for chief executive of the Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong, the island’s head of government. Pro-democracy advocates say Beijing shouldn’t have a say in the nominations for that 2017 election because it promised Hong Kong residents universal suffrage when Great Britain returned the island nation to the Chinese.



“The democratic activists feel this is too much of a rigged job which is guaranteeing Beijing can veto potential hostile or less-than-friendly-enough candidates from taking part in the election,” says Douglas Paal, vice president for studies at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. “China has made it very clear from a variety of statements from officials who deal with Hong Kong that they want patriotic [pro-China] outcomes in the selection process.”

When the British ruled Hong Kong, they selected governors for the island. The Chinese regained control in 1997 with a negotiated agreement of how the island was to be governed; that deal stipulated a 1,200-member body would nominate candidates to lead the autonomous region off the southern coast of China. That body, made up of private citizens and special-interest groups, will nominate two to three candidates, then present them to the public for a vote.

Protesters remained in the streets on Monday, blocking streets in the important financial center. Students boycotted classes and demonstrators decried the police use of tear gas, batons and pepper spray against unarmed protesters, in unrest Hong Kong hasn’t seen since the 1960s. The government ordered them to clear the streets, but demonstrators have so far refused to abandon their blockades in several financial and shopping districts. Police violence, in turn, seemed to bring greater numbers of pro-democracy advocates to the streets.

Riot police withdrew on Monday, according to a statement by an unidentified government spokesman, who also “urged the assembled residents to maintain calm and to peacefully disperse.” But police officers with riot shields were still seen near protesters in one business district.



Police and protesters collide during a student protest Saturday as more than 100 demonstrators broke through the gates of a government facility in Hong Kong.

Xaume Olleros/AFP/Getty Images

Paal says that it’s doubtful the unrest will move Beijing to reverse what authorities have already decided regarding the nomination process for the 2017 elections. He says the mainland will likely attempt to tap into Hong Kong's influential business community in to convince them that the protests are damaging the island's economic climate, which has long been a global business hub.

“China will want to let the threat to stability and prosperity become more real to the people of Hong Kong so that they might reevaluate the choice between what China would consider extreme freedom on elections and stability and prosperity which Hong Kong has enjoyed in very high quality,” Paal says.