A squall chased boats from McIntosh Lake on Sunday afternoon, but residents still fished from the shore. ( Johnnie St. Vrain / Longmont Times-Call )

Dear Johnnie: It's always been my understanding that powered craft aren't allowed on McIntosh Lake . Yet while riding bikes with my family (June 24) along the lake shore, I noticed an aluminum-hulled fishing boat with an outboard motor, perhaps 100 yards out from Flanders Park. What's more, it appeared that the crew were setting some sort of traps in the shallow water. Any idea what was going on there? — Dan

Dear Dan: Those people were trying to catch fish. They work for Colorado Parks and Wildlife.

I contacted Ben Swigle, aquatic biologist for CP&W. He didn't just know what was going on at McIntosh Lake, he's been a part of it. The activity you saw was on of the regular fish surveys that are done at the lake.

"I am tracking trends and condition factors," Swigle told me in an email. That is, trends in fish population and the condition of the fish — or how "plump"they are, he said.

In McIntosh that's done using "experimental gill nets," he said. Each has six panels of mesh from 1/2-inch up to 4-inch mesh size. "Thus we can gauge all sizes of a given population."

A survey completed in 2012 noted a decline from an all-time high in walleye numbers, Swigle said, so "I was checking on the needs to modify stocking and fishing regulations with the most recent survey."

Why the decline?

"Based on input for the wildlife officers we had significant harvest in 2012 following the story about the gentleman who falsely reported catching the state record striped bass out of Mac," Swigle wrote.

Remember the false report from May of that year?

"Additionally, Mac was drained nearly to deadpool which likely flushed walleye out and probably killed off some individuals because of the low water and high temperature."

So, this spring, Swigle almost tripled the usual number of walley fry stocked in the lake, from 500,000 fish to 1.4 million.

"Those fish probably measure 2 to 3 inches and I won't be able to gauge the success of that stocking until 2015, but we hope we can reverse the trend," he wrote.

But, Swigle noted, the population of catfish remains strong.

The most recent survey that's posted on the CP&W website shows that caught in the nets were:

89 walley (down from 150 in 2011); 52 gizzard shad; 50 common carp; 48 channel catfish; 13 each black crappie and smallmouth bass; and lesser numbers of black bullhead, bluegill, green sunfish, largemouth bass, white bass, white sucker and yellow perch.

These numbers don't give any idea of how many fish of each species are in the lake, but Swigle said that the percentages are "spot on."

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com.