Going into the final three-game homestand, the Avalanche players were adamant about having some things — and someone — left to play for.

Pride. Professionalism. The organization. And their fans.

Jarome Iginla had two power-play goals, the second breaking a tie with 32.9 seconds remaining, as Colorado closed out its season with a 3-2 victory over Chicagoon Saturday, giving the Avs a sweep of those final three.

Cody McLeod — the senior Avalanche player in terms of continuous tenure with the franchise — had the other goal, and Semyon Varlamov made 28 saves and collected his 28th victory of the season. It came in front of a sellout, standing-room-only crowd of 18,049 at the Pepsi Center — albeit one that again included many fans in Blackhawks regalia.

ANALYSIS: Avs had multiple reasons for season gone bad

“Our captain (Gabe Landeskog) made some comments in the paper about those three games, and then we won the three of them,” Avalanche coach Patrick Roy said. “That makes me proud of them and showed we have character, showed we have pride, and certainly as a coach, I’m very happy with those three games, no doubt about it.”

The Avalanche finished 39-31-12, and the 90 points were the fourth-lowest total for the franchise in the 18 full seasons Colorado has played since arriving in Denver in 1995. The positive note was that the Avalanche’s 48 points in the second half represented an upswing, and the 17-9-1 record in the final 27 games was a pace that would have gotten Colorado in the playoffs if maintained over the full season.

“There is a lot of regret,” Roy said of the season coming to an end minus a playoff appearance. “I have said many times, I am here to win the Stanley Cup, I am here to win and make the playoffs in order to win a Stanley Cup. Obviously, it is a disappointment. We’re all disappointed our situation, but at the same time, I’d like to think we’ll benefit from it. I’d like to think that will make us a better team along the way.”

The Blackhawks were locked into the No. 3 playoff slot in the Central Division earlier in the day when the Minnesota Wild lost to St. Louis, meaning the Wild couldn’t catch Chicago and drop the Hawks into a wild-card spot. With the Nashville-Chicago first-round matchup set, and with the Predators guaranteed of opening at home, the Blackhawks gave two of their stars — center Jonathan Toews and defenseman Duncan Keith — the night off in Denver. And Corey Crawford’s backup, Scott Darling, got the start in the Chicago net.

Colorado’s much-maligned power play was 2-for-2 for the night, and Iginla had both goals to get his team-leading total to 29. His first goal, at 14:21 of the second period, gave the Avalanche a 2-1 lead, but the Blackhawks tied it up again when Brandon Saad scored at 15:20 of the third. Then Iginla scored again to give the Avs the win.

Iginla, 37, came up just short of having his 13th 30-goal season, but he ended up only one short of that benchmark — and only one short of the total he posted last season for Boston, in advance of signing a three-year deal with Colorado as an unrestricted free agent.

“I’ve been fortunate to play with great players and chemistry has grown,” Iginla said. “I feel good and this year was a tough start for all of us, the first 20 games. But as a group I felt we got better and personally, I was able to get back in sync.”

“He didn’t have the start he wanted,” Roy said of Iginla, who had two goals in the first 20 games. “But I have to admit, 29 goals … I would have loved to see him get the 30th, but he was close. It was a great year for him. When we lost Paul (Stastny) , we thought (Iginla) was going to do a good job for us, and he did exactly that.”

READ: Evaluating the Avs players for the 2014-15 season

Matt Duchene had an assist on Iginla’s first goal, and he finished with 21 goals and 55 points, down from his totals of 23 and 70 in 71 games a year ago.

“I was looking back at the schedule today … and we kind of put ourselves in such a hole in October and November,” he said. “We played pretty good hockey from December on, but we just couldn’t get out of it. We finished with 90 points and it’s still not good enough, so it’s pretty crazy nowadays, especially in this division. We know how important a start is and how important those divisional games are.”

And his own season?

“It was frustrating at times,” said Duchene. “There were a lot of times during the year where I liked my game and I thought I was generating a lot of chances and they just didn’t go in as much this year. Having said that, there’s still lots of stuff I’m learning and I definitely got better from this season, for sure.”

With defenseman Brad Stuart unavailable because of a cut leg, Duncan Siemens, recalled from Lake Erie on Friday, made his NHL debut for the Avs. He had 14:00 of ice time and most often was paired with Tyson Barrie.

While Siemens played his first game, veteran forward Daniel Briere might have played his last. “It’s very possible,” Briere said after getting 8:44 of ice time against the Blackhawks.

Briere’s contract is up and the Avalanche likely won’t attempt to re-sign him. He has 307 goals and it’s possible he’s reached the end of his career. His fiancee, Capt. Misha Harrell, is a flight surgeon in the U.S. Air Force, now stationed in North Carolina after overseas postings, including to the Middle East.

“There are other things I have to think about,” Briere said. “I’ve been away from my (three) kids the past two years. It’s been fun playing in Montreal and in Denver. It’s been a blast with two wonderful organizations, but there are other things I have to take into account here for the future. We’ll see. I need a few weeks, too, to think about it.”

Also, Avalanche assistant Tim Army coached his 1,000th game in the NHL.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei