The Office of Personnel Management issued a proposed rule this summer that would expand federal-worker health benefits to temporary and seasonal government employees, who do not currently qualify for the program.

The move came in response to the Affordable Care Act, which penalizes employers if they do not offer health insurance to all their workers.

The government wants to avoid those penalties, but Sen. Tom Coburn (R-Okla.) has questioned whether expanding the benefits is legal, saying in a recent letter to OPM Director Katherine Archuleta that the rule change would violate a statute pertaining to temporary and seasonal federal workers.



(HECU Health)

Current law states that non-permanent federal employees become eligible for the health plan after “1 year of current continuous employment, excluding any break in service of 5 days or less,” Coburn noted.

The senator also pointed out that OPM official Angela Bailey testified before Congress in 2010 that the law is “written in such a way that it excludes temporary employees from receiving health benefits.”

Coburn’s letter asked OPM to explain the agency’s recent change in position and provide legal justification for how the proposed rule could possibly comply with the law.

OPM did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the matter Friday afternoon.

Federal-worker unions support the extension benefits to temporary and seasonal workers. The National Treasury Employees Union released a statement last month applauding the proposed OPM rule, calling it a “welcome step for important groups of federal employees that have been excluded from the [federal-employee health plan].”

The federal government employed about 120,000 temporary, seasonal and intermittent workers. OPM has estimated that the expansion of benefits to those personnel will cost between $21 million and $42 million annually.

Coburn is focusing on the legality of the OPM rule, which is a reasonable concern. But this issue could ultimately boil down to how much the government wants to pay.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the government has to fork over extra cash, either in the form of penalties or expanded coverage for the workers who are not permanent federal employees. It is unclear at this point which would cost more.