ONWARD & UPWARD

Boone County National Bank has announced the promotion of Julie Arnett to vice president of professional development, Patrick Madigan to vice president of investor services and C.O. Scheffer to vice president of mortgage lending. These promotions were voted on and approved by the bank’s board of directors during its annual meeting in February. Arnett is the training and information security officer for the bank, ensuring all employees are up to date on bank rules and regulations as well as taking necessary precautions to keep all banking-related information secure. She has worked with the bank for more than 16 years. Madigan is the vice president of investor services. He has more than 13 years of experience working in financial services, previously serving as assistant vice president of investor services. As a financial adviser, Madigan helps customers prepare for their long-term financial goals, developing the best methods to meet those goals. Scheffer is a team member of the mortgage lending department, starting in 2003 with the bnak and becoming a mortgage loan officer in 2007, most recently holding the title of assistant vice president. Scheffer graduated from the University of Missouri with a degree in personal financial planning.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Michael Moehn has been promoted to chairman, president and chief executive officer of Ameren Missouri, an electric and gas delivery utility subsidiary of Ameren Corp., effective April 1. He succeeds Warner Baxter, the president of Ameren Corp., who will become the utility’s chief executive officer on April 24. Moehn, a native of Alton, Ill., has held many leadership positions since joining Ameren in 2000 after a successful career in public accounting at PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. He most recently served as senior vice president of customer operations for Ameren Missouri and before that led field operations for Ameren Illinois. Before these operational roles, Moehn was senior vice president of corporate planning, where he led Ameren’s strategic planning and risk management efforts. He also has held several financial roles at Ameren Corp. and in the company’s operating segments. Moehn holds a bachelor of arts degree in accounting from Saint Louis University and a master’s in business administration degree from Washington University in St. Louis. He is an Eisenhower Fellow and also completed the Reactor Technology Course for Utility Executives, an intensive three-week program on nuclear technology offered through the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass.

The Broadway Columbia — A DoubleTree by Hilton has announced the following new hires: Ben Randolph has been named chef de cuisine; Shelby Vermilye has been selected to be the front office manager; and Aric Jarvis has been appointed assistant general manager. In his new position, Randolph has played a key role in the creation and design of The Broadway’s menus and in selecting a talented kitchen staff to execute it. A native of Columbia, Randolph previously worked as the executive chef at the popular Columbia restaurant Trattoria Strada Nova and most recently was executive chef at the Columbia Country Club. An apprenticeship at Mélisse, a Michelin Guide award-winning restaurant in Santa Monica, Calif., helped Randolph refine his culinary expressions. A certified chef de cuisine with the American Culinary Federation, Randolph has received numerous awards, including first place for the Covey Run Semillon Ice Wine Endless Possibilities Contest. He also was part of the 2003 Mid-West Iron Chef winning team. Vermilye will oversee the front desk agents, bellmen, concierge and valet service, ensuring that every guest is comfortable and all expectations are exceeded with each visit. Vermilye recently graduated from the University of Missouri with a degree in hospitality management and a minor in business. Previously, she worked at her mother’s nursing company, Angels On Duty, as a human resources assistant. Jarvis will be responsible for helping to oversee all hotel operations. He also will be charged with supervising all training and human resources responsibilities. An attendee of State Fair Community College, Jarvis brings more than eight years hotel experience to his new position. For more than five of those years he served as front office manager at Courtyard by Marriott. He is a Certified Tourism Ambassador for the city of Columbia and serves as a member of the Cosmopolitan International Luncheon Club. The Broadway Columbia is scheduled to open this month in downtown Columbia.

Tim Gerding has joined Evans & Dixon LLC as of counsel in the newly established Columbia office. Gerding will practice civil litigation and business law. He joins the firm from Rotts, Gibbs & Gerding LLC in Columbia. Gerding joins environmental attorney, Aimee Davenport, in the Columbia office established in October of 2013 at 501 W. Cherry St., Suite 200.

Susie Ouderkirk of Las Cruces, N. M., has joined the equestrian studies faculty at William Woods University as a clinical instructor, hunter/jumper. Ouderkirk will instruct the hunter/jumper applied riding classes, as well as applied theory classes. She also will supervise the care and management of all the hunter/jumper horses and coach WWU student riders at local, regional and national competitions. A graduate of New Mexico State University in Las Cruces, N.M., Ouderkirk received her bachelor’s degree in English in 1988 and her New Mexico state teaching license for master-level coursework in 1992.

Rick Means, president and chief executive officer of Shelter Insurance Cos., has been elected to the Boone County National Bank board of directors at its annual meeting. Means worked his way up through the Shelter organization over more than 36 years, starting as a claims adjuster. A native of Fulton, he graduated from the University of Missouri in 1977.

Great Circle has announced the following changes in both regional advisory council and staff leadership on the Columbia Campus of Great Circle. Randy Boehm, former Columbia police chief and currently at MU Health Care, has been elected chairman of the Columbia regional advisory council. He replaces longtime advisory council Chairwoman Mariel Liggett, who will now act as immediate past chairwoman. Ryan Bross of Boone County National Bank has been voted to serve as vice chairman. The group also welcomes Susan Daly, vice president of compliance and trust at The Bank of Missouri and Mark Schlemper, systems developer at Carfax, as members of the council. The regional advisory council is a group of volunteers that supports local fundraising efforts or youth activities and builds bridges to the communities that Great Circle serves. Rebecca Nowlin has been promoted to chief program officer of residential programs for Great Circle. In her new role as chief program officer, Nowlin will oversee the implementation of all residential programs and contracts. Nowlin came to Great Circle in 2005, as director of residential treatment services. Marissa Peterson has been promoted as the director of residential treatment services to fill the vacancy created by Nowlin’s promotion. Peterson has been the clinical services manager at the Great Circle Columbia campus for the last four years.

KUDOS

David Setzer, a professor of biological sciences in the College of Arts & Science at the University of Missouri, was named the Advisors Forum Advising Shout Out Award winner for February. The Shout Out Award, which was first presented in December 2010, is awarded twice a semester and recognizes undergraduate advisers for the impact they make on students’ lives.

MidwayUSA will return as the official sponsor of the 2014 NRA annual meetings and exhibits for a fifth-consecutive year. The 143rd edition of the NRA’s premiere event will be held April 25-27 at the Indiana Convention Center in Indianapolis. The 2014 NRA annual meeting will occupy more than 440,000 square feet of exhibit space and feature more than 600 product displays. Attendees also can attend the Stand & Fight events featuring nationally known speakers and entertainers. In 2013, more than 86,000 people attended the NRA annual meetings in Houston, Texas.

Jason Warzinik, Boone County GIS manager, was appointed to the National Geospatial Advisory Committee. The advisory committee provides recommendations, reviews and comments on geospatial policy and management issues to the Federal Geographic Data Committee, the interagency executive group responsible for providing leadership and direction to federal geospatial programs. It also provides a forum for conveying the views of non-federal representatives in the geospatial community. The NGAC includes as many as 30 members, chosen to be a balanced representation of the varied interests associated with geospatial programs and technology. NGAC members serve a three-year term, meeting three to four times per year. Warzinik began his position as Boone County GIS manager in 2003, working both as a senior staff member of the county information technology department and a valuable resource to County Assessor Tom Schauwecker in the development of high-quality GIS data, applications and maps.

Ellis Fischel Cancer Center has been reaccredited by the American College of Surgeons’ Commission on Cancer for excellence in the delivery of comprehensive patient-centered care. The three-year accreditation is given to multidisciplinary programs that meet the commission’s stringent quality standards in areas of cancer prevention, early diagnosis, treatment, rehabilitation, follow-up for recurrent disease and end-of-life care. Ellis Fischel Cancer Center has been accredited by the Commission on Cancer since 1966. Established in 1922 by the American College of Surgeons, the Commission on Cancer is a consortium of professional organizations dedicated to improving patient outcomes and quality of life for cancer patients.

BUSINESS CALENDAR

The Columbia Chamber of Commerce is hosting events on the following days:

MONDAY

Welcome reception for Chancellor R. Bowen Loftin, 4 p.m., Courtyard by Marriott, 3301 Lemone Industrial Blvd.

TUESDAY

Membership Committee, 8:15 a.m., Columbia Chamber of Commerce, 300 S. Providence Road