Kevin O’Connor / Staff Photo

Vermonter Garret Keizer signs copies of his new book, “Getting Schooled: The Reeducation of an American Teacher.” His year of teaching in Vermont was a revelatory experience.

Garret Keizer, a contributing editor at Harper’s magazine, had good reason for toiling a year as a fill-in high school English teacher in Vermont’s Northeast Kingdom.



To support education? Or shape future generations?



“I signed on mainly,” he says, “because my wife and I needed the health insurance.”



Little did he know what else he would reap.



Keizer has written nonfiction ever since he left his native New Jersey 35 years ago and, taking a job at Lake Region Union High School in Orleans, chronicled his work in the 1988 memoir “No Place But Here: A Teacher’s Vocation in a Rural Community.”



Retiring from the profession in 1996, he has published seven more books. In the summer of 2010, he promoted one on “The Colbert Report.” Then that fall, lacking medical coverage before the rollout of Obamacare, he relinquished his writing career and returned to the classroom.



End of story? Keizer thought so, figuring 80 students handing in one assignment a day would, if he spent just 10 minutes correcting each, swallow nearly 14 hours of whatever time he had left away from his chalkboard. Yet somehow he stole a few occasional minutes to scribble in his journal, which led to a 2011 Harper’s essay and, this fall, a new book, “Getting Schooled: The Reeducation of an American Teacher.”



Seeking solutions to problems plaguing today’s youth?



“Anybody who looks to this book for a 10-point plan will be disappointed,” Keizer says.



Instead, the author poses more questions than answers as he prods readers to inquire if the root cause of what’s ailing public education is society itself.



“If I’m in a supermarket and somebody says, ‘Kids today ’, I’m hell on wheels. One of my hopes is that people will read the book and think maybe it would behoove them to take some time before holding forth on schools to walk into one.”



Keizer was surprised to see what has changed since he left teaching nearly two decades ago to settle in the tucked-away town of Sutton, population 1,000, and write about life lessons and current-day conundrums.



Becoming an Episcopal clergyman, the husband and father penned 1991’s “A Dresser of Sycamore Trees: The Finding of a Ministry,” then left that service to explore personal questions in “The Enigma of Anger: Essays on a Sometimes Deadly Sin” (2002), “Help: The Original Human Dilemma” (2004), “The Unwanted Sound of Everything We Want: A Book About Noise” (2010) and “Privacy” (2012).



In between the latter two books, Keizer unwittingly came up with his latest by taking the one-year substitute job at his old 355-student, grade 9-12 school.



“How did it feel to sit at a table,” he writes of his application interview, “across from a principal, a director of guidance services, and two out of four school board members who are all not only younger than I but also former students of mine?”



No less surprising than entering his classroom and finding a television, a desktop computer (“that I’m instructed never to turn off”) and students asking to use the restroom to answer a different call.



“Texting in the boys’ room,” he writes, “is the new version of smoking in the boys’ room.”



Keizer chronicles his resulting thoughts and feelings in a 320-page hardcover published by Henry Holt and Co. Technology ensnares him everywhere, from electronic attendance at the beginning of the school day to computerized grading at the end of the semester.



“I am increasingly devoting more time to the generation and recording of data and less time to the educational substance of what the data is supposed to measure,” he writes. “Think of it as a man who develops ever more elaborate schemes for counting his money, even as he forfeits more and more of his time for earning the money he counts.”



Students, for their part, talked, texted and tweeted on cellphones when not searching the Internet for synopses of his book assignments.



Keizer attempted to circumvent the circuitry.



“Printed below is the text of a summary of chapters 6 and 7 for ‘The Secret Life of Bees’ as found on a sleazy Internet rip-off site,” he began one quiz. “Read over the summary and then, based on your own reading of the chapters, list seven details, events, exchanges, or other information that the summary misses or waters down.”



But also resigned himself to a hardwired reality.



“We inculcate in our children the sensibilities of raccoons, a fascination with shiny objects and an appetite for garbage, and then carp about ‘the texting generation’ as if 13- and 14-year-olds who couldn’t boil an egg are capable of creating a culture,” he writes. “They grow on what we feed them.”



Keizer believes what many blame as the fault of schools is more a failing of society.



“We make kids illiterate by shrinking and/or wiring their libraries, then we build wired support centers to teach the illiterates how to read,” he says in another example. “If you want kids who can read and write, you need a culture that prizes books.”



Keizer’s latest spills with similar insights. He notes of students: “Often the most neglected kids in a school system are not the so-called troubled children; they’re the struggling but mostly cooperative children whom no one troubles to give a second thought.” And of standardized tests: “Yet another example of taking time away from teaching in order to test what you lack the time to teach.”



The author isn’t immune from scrutiny. He recounts incident after incident where he wondered if his dealings with one student in need of direction were too soft while the next too hard.



“It comes back to me now in a sickening wave — what I hated most about teaching, not the loss of free time and the weariness of the work, the absurd pettiness of a thousand minutiae, the hurry-up-and-wait inertia of the school routine, the interruptions tugging and blaring at you every other minute but the constant second-guessing of oneself. Anything you do is bound to be, on some level and for some kid, wrong.”



Not that Keizer is a pushover. When Vermont Public Radio host Jane Lindholm introduced him recently as a man known for “wrangling” students, he lassoed the microphone and launched into a correction.



“I object to the word ‘wrangle’ as misrepresenting my teaching, but, more important, as giving an incorrect characterization to the students that I taught,” he said in a live interview. “I’m no cowpoke and the kids in the Northeast Kingdom are no doggies.”



Keizer also isn’t afraid to question the New York Times. Sure it praised “his beautiful book” and “astounding” work ethic, opining “it wouldn’t hurt if we had another million Garret Keizers.” Then again, he wonders, why did that observation come at the end of a review devoted mainly to someone else’s new release?



The newspaper got one thing right: Keizer is “an irascible idealist.” In a recent Los Angeles Times opinion piece tied to his book, he expressed worry that Lake Region Union High School, ranked as the state’s poorest based on students eligible for free or reduced-price lunches, was outperforming many others on standardized tests.



“As long as the test scores are at par, you see, we need not be overly concerned if the pantries are bare, the parents jobless or jailed, and the gap between rich and poor more appalling than it’s been since 1928,” he wrote. “If food-insecure 16-year-olds can master a prescribed curriculum, then what is the excuse of the richest nation in the world for failing to master the common core of a livable wage, a color-blind legal system and a society in which the word ‘class’ refers to a course you take and not to chances you never had?”



For in the end, Keizer wasn’t working for the health insurance. He just wants a better world.



kevin.oconnor



@rutlandherald.com







Garret Keizer will read from his new book, “Getting Schooled: The Reeducation of an American Teacher,” on Oct. 28 at 7 p.m. at Bear Pond Books in Montpelier. More information is available at (802)-229-0774 or www.bearpondbooks.com.