The news coming out of Greece these days can be troubling, so I’m happy to tell you about a positive development on the small, traditional, airport-free Greek island of Patmos, where I sit and contemplate the simplest blessings in life.

A round, crumbling, stone windmill from 1588 has been restored, and bread is being made the old fashioned way: The wind blows, the sails go round, the heavy mill stone inside rotates, and the heirloom seeds that come to Patmos from the north of Greece are crushed into pure wheat flour.

Thafmassia. Wonderful. This proto-industrial grinding process — opening and closing the sails on the windmill to control speed and consistency — results in super fine flour. The chaff is shaken out by hand (to be fed to Yannis’s chickens, free-ranging nearby) and the flour is immediately taken to a small bakery a few minutes away, where Theologia, who shut the family bakery for two years after her husband died, is now producing the healthiest bread in the world.

The healthiest bread. From heirloom wheat. Right here on Patmos, where goats still have the right of way. One euro, ten cents. About $1.20. Delicious!

And here’s why I’m telling you all this: In the U.S., we’re about as far from eating the healthiest bread in the world as you can get. In fact, the modern dwarf wheat flour that is in our daily bread, and hidden in everything from soups to lipstick to vodka is making millions of Americans sick. Very, very sick, according to family physician Mark Hyman, who is relentless on this subject.

“This new modern wheat may look like wheat,” he reports, but in fact, it’s “the product of genetic manipulation and hybridization that created short, stubby, hardy, high-yielding wheat plants with much higher amounts of starch and gluten and many more chromosomes coding for all sorts of new odd proteins.”

So what? Bread is still the staff of life, right? Wrong. It’s the stuff of early death, he says, and each American consumes about 55 pounds of this tainted wheat flour every year.

“The first major difference of this dwarf wheat is that it contains very high levels of a super starch called amylopectin A,” Dr. Mark explains. Amylopectin A is very good for making Wonder Bread fluffy and Cinnabons sticky, but it is super fattening for humans.

Both white and whole-grain bread are high on the glycemic index: “We know that foods with a high glycemic index make people store belly fat, trigger hidden fires of inflammation in the body and give you a fatty liver leading the whole cascade of obesity, pre-diabetes and diabetes.”

Our modern commercial wheat is also engineered to be super-addictive, Hyman explains, making us crave and eat more than we otherwise would.

“Not only does this ‘FrankenWheat’ contain super starch, it also contains super gluten, which is more likely to create inflammation in the body,” also leading to obesity, diabetes and lots of other chronic diseases.”These non-communicable chronic diseases will cost our global economy $47 trillion over the next 20 years.”

That’s a lot of dough. “The biggest scam perpetuated on the unsuspecting public is the inclusion of ‘whole grains’ in many processed foods full of sugar and wheat giving the food a virtuous glow,” he says.

The bread in Patmos with the windmill stamp on the crust has earned its virtuous glow.

It’s the heirloom, Biblical wheat of our ancestors, something, sadly, most Americans never get to eat. I plan to tear off a chunk right now, pour some of Bo’s luscious local olive oil on top, and chew over how it is that Big Food’s appetite for re-engineering wheat turned our U.S. bread supply to toast.

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.