It's no coincidence that the Colorado National Forest Wilderness Act passed three days before Christmas 35 years ago. On Dec. 22, 1980, Colorado and the citizens of our great country gained 1.4 million acres of wilderness, including the 122,396-acre Holy Cross Wilderness. Located in between the recreation hubs of Aspen, Vail, and Breckenridge, our Holy Cross Wilderness is truly a gift from that generation to ours and all to come.

With lakes, rivers, creeks, and healthy habitat for hundreds of species, the Holy Cross Wilderness is a photographer and angler's paradise. The area is home to incredible scenic views and blue-ribbon trout fishing opportunities. Colorado's Continental Divide is one of my favorite places to photograph, and photography ultimately led to me to start my small fishing products business, Fishpond. But these mountains are more than an inspiration. I depend on protected lands and waters to keep my business booming.

Outdoor recreation is the third-largest economic sector in the United States with roughly $646 billion in annual contributions and over 6 million American jobs. In Colorado, where quality talent and great companies are locating because of the recreational opportunities provided by our public lands, we are able to generate $34.5 billion annually from outdoor recreation and create 313,000 jobs, according to Colorado Parks and Wildlife. Wilderness areas and other public lands draw inspiration, creativity, and a shared passion for coexistence with the species and habitat that is the vital link for our economic and personal health.

Advertisement

While the Holy Cross Wilderness is celebrating 35 years of protection, we need to look to other opportunities to keep our water clean and healthy. That is why I support the Continental Divide Wilderness and Recreation Act introduced by Congressman Jared Polis earlier this year. In addition to adding acreage to my beloved Holy Cross Wilderness, it would also expand the Eagles Nest and Ptarmigan Peak wilderness areas. And it would create the Williams Fork, Hoosier Ridge, and Tenmile Range wilderness areas — all excellent places to explore Colorado's diverse backyard. The bill would also protect important mountain biking trails through special management areas.

Yet as we celebrate the gift that is the Holy Cross Wilderness, we are seeing precious land disappear. According to the U.S. Forest Service, the United States is losing roughly 6,000 acres of open space each day. That means that the lands that protect our watersheds, provide a home for wildlife, and offer us outstanding outdoor recreation opportunities are at risk. Ensuring that we have wild places to hike, camp, raft, paddle, fish, hunt, ski, bike, and so much more is important if we want to leave a natural legacy for future generations to enjoy.

As the CEO and founder of a fly-fishing products company, I know that safeguarding Colorado's Continental Divide makes economic sense. Colorado's economy is built on our great outdoors. Whether it is the recreation tours that take people on adventures, grocery stores and small shops that serve residents, or manufacturer and outdoor product businesses like mine, we all depend on protected lands and waters.

It is time to invest in Colorado's future and pass the Continental Divide Wilderness and Recreation Act. Earlier this summer, Sen. Michael Bennet made a commitment to introduce a Senate companion to the legislation, and I hope that happens soon. People have been working to preserve this special part of Colorado for over five years. From sportsmen to veterans and small business owners to mountain bikers, our community has been talking about the best way to protect our environment and our way of life — and we found a solution in Congressman Polis' bill.

We have a responsibility to protect what's in our own backyard and to work with others to do the same thing. None of us can do everything, but each of us can do something. Time is running out to protect Colorado's Continental Divide. Let's work together as a country, and as a state that recognizes the value of our public land, to make sure that the economic blood, the true heartbeat of what defines our identity and economic future, remains a priority — not only for people, but the species that depend on our voice.

John Land Le Coq is the CEO/Founder of Fishpond, Inc. in Silverthorne.