Texas Sen. Ted Cruz speaks with Dolph Bell of The Greenville News and J.R. Berry of WLTX-TV in Columbia after speaking at the Freedom Summit. (Photo: RICHARD SHIRO)

With many of the Republican presidential contenders in town Saturday, The Greenville News saw an opportunity to inform its readers.

We conducted exclusive interviews with eight candidates or potential candidates as they gathered at the Peace Center for a full day of stump speeches.

Our goal was to help South Carolina voters better understand their choices in the state's first-in-the-South presidential preference primary, tentatively set for Feb. 20.

We were assisted by WLTX, a Columbia television station owned by our parent company, Gannett Co. Inc.

The declared presidential candidates who came by our table in the Peace Center lobby were retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio.

RELATED: Conservatives at Freedom Summit decide who to back

RELATED: Highlights from the SC Freedom Summit

The four possible presidential candidates we interviewed were Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker.

We talked to another declared presidential candidate, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, on Friday while he was campaigning at the Embassy Suites hotel.

Below are their answers to our toughest questions.

Ben Carson

Q: You rose from poverty to become a world-renowned neurosurgeon but you became a political figure not by serving in office but through a speech at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast that intrigued some conservatives.

Is it prudent to elect a man to run the country who has never served one day in public office?

A: "I think it can be very prudent because a lot of people have bought into the concept that in order to be a good leader you have to be soaked in politics. And I believe that in order to be a good leader you have to be wise. You have to know how to get things accomplished. And I'm not sure that there's too many people running who've done a lot of complex things that no one else has done before. I'm not sure there's too many people running who've had as much corporate experience as I've had, serving on Kellogg's board for 18 years, Costco for 16 years. I'm not sure there's too many people who've started a national nonprofit that is active in all 50 states and has won multiple national awards for how effective it is.

"And I could go on talking about the surgical career and some of the things that have been done, but my point being that you can gain experience from a variety of different ways. It doesn't all have to be in the political sphere. And in fact, I'm sure I can name many people who've spent their whole lives in politics who you probably wouldn't want solving your problems."

Ted Cruz

Q: You were the principal instigator of the idea that congressional Republicans ought to demand the defunding of the Affordable Care Act as the price of continuing to fund the federal government.

The fruit of that strategy was a 16-day partial federal government shutdown that disrupted lives across the country and sent the Republican brand plunging in the polls.

What did you accomplish by doing that?

A: "Well, I think No. 1, the shutdown occurred because President Obama and Harry Reid decided they wanted to shut the government down. Both House Republicans and I repeatedly voted to fund the federal government, and it was President Obama and the Democrats who decided if Obamacare wasn't funded, they'd shut everything down.

"But No. 2, at the time a lot of commentators said the fact that we stood and fought on Obamacare was going to cause enormous damage to Republicans. You had all these gray beards going on television saying that as a result of this Democrats were going to win in 2014. Harry Reid was going to stay majority leader. Well, I think history played out a little bit differently. I think that fight elevated the debate over the harms of Obamacare, the millions of people who have lost their jobs, who have been forced into part-time work, who have lost their healthcare, who have lost their doctors, who are paying a higher premium because of Obamacare.

"And as a result of that fight, we saw an historic Republican victory in November 2014, the largest majority in the House since the 1920s, picked up nine seats in the Senate, retired Harry Reid as majority leader, and the No. 1 issue in that election was Obamacare, the very thing we were fighting, the very thing that saw millions of Americans, saw conservatives all across South Carolina, standing up to stop."

Carly Fiorina

Q: More than any other Republican presidential candidate or potential candidate, you have been critical of Hillary Clinton, the Democratic frontrunner.

This highlights your unique capability, as the only female Republican in the race, to neutralize any advantage that Clinton may enjoy because of her gender.

But is gender a valid reason for picking the nominee, or even a VP? Isn't that the kind of identity politics that Republicans criticize Democrats for?

A: "Gender is not a valid reason for picking a nominee or VP, not at all. It's entirely legitimate to question whoever the Democratic nominee would be about their track record of accomplishment. Why do people assume I do it because I'm a woman? I do it because I come from a world where people are held accountable. And she has never been accountable for her words or for her actions. So since she will be the nominee of their party, and since she is the person we have to beat as a Republican Party, I'm going to hold her accountable."

Mike Huckabee

Q: You have strong support from social conservatives … but as we speak the (fiscal conservatives at the Club for Growth) are running television ads in Greenville attacking you for tax hikes while you were governor of Arkansas….How can you unite the country and win a general election if you can't even unite the various factions of conservatives?

A: "I'm not sure there's any Republican that makes everybody happy. I assure you this, though. Whoever gets the Republican nomination will get the support of all the factions. We always have. We had a bitter, bitter primary in 2012. There was some of the nastiest things said among those candidates that I've ever heard said in the Republican family. Yet when it was over, people united behind Mitt Romney, and I have every reason to believe that'll happen again."

Bobby Jindal

Q: Mitch Landrieu, the Democratic mayor of New Orleans, recently criticized you for making a new religious liberty law your top priority, even though Louisiana faces a projected budget deficit of $1.6 billion. Are you putting your presidential ambitions ahead of your gubernatorial responsibilities?

A: "No. I think we can have religious liberty and economic growth in the state of Louisiana, so let's look at both of those. We already have a Religious Freedom Restoration Act in the state of Louisiana. It was passed in 2010 with strong bipartisan support. This is a different bill. This year the bill is different from what was proposed in Indiana and Arkansas.

"We already have that religious freedom bill. Mike Johnson, new representative, has offered a bill that simply says this: Says the state of Louisiana cannot discriminate against those families, individuals or businesses that have a traditional view of marriage. To me, this is common sense. A business owner shouldn't have to choose between their sincerely held religious beliefs and be able to operate their businesses. They shouldn't have to lose their licenses, pay thousands of dollars in fines. The religious freedom act had a strong, bipartisan majority. I'm hopeful this bill will as well. We can have religious liberty and tolerance.

"In Louisiana, we don't believe in discrimination against anybody. In terms of economics, look, our economy has grown twice as fast as the national economy. Our job creation three times as fast as the national economy. We actually right now have more people working than ever before, our highest ever per capita income ranking.

"Now for seven years in a row we've balanced our budget without raising taxes. I'm not going to raise taxes again. We've made that clear. We are not raising taxes in the state of Louisiana. We have cut the size of our budget over 26 percent. Over 30,000 fewer state government employees. Some people think we've cut government too much. My point is, I measure prosperity by how the people are doing, not how government is doing. So I think that we can have religious liberty and economic growth. I don't think they're mutually exclusive."

Rick Perry

Q: Republicans are divided over whether to continue the Export-Import Bank, a federal agency that finances the sale of U.S.-made goods to overseas customers.

You wrote to Congress in favor of the bank in June, but on Tuesday you said in the Wall Street Journal that you now think the bank should be shut down.

Among the companies you said should no longer use the bank are two that make high-dollar products for export right here in South Carolina, General Electric and Boeing.

Did you flip-flop on this issue to improve your standing with Republicans who think the bank is corporate welfare?

A: "Well, here's what became evident to me over the course of six months, is that there's rampant fraud and corruption at the import-export bank. That was exposed. I did not know about that beforehand. And I'm a huge believer in economic development. There is nobody in the country that's been a more active economic development governor than I've been, and we've been very successful with it.

"We recruited Caterpillar to our state to build engines and excavators. This is a great company, and I want them to be competitive in the world. I want them to be able to sell those products that are made in my home state and made in South Carolina for that matter, what Boeing makes, and what GE makes. But we have to take a hard look at the import-export bank. And if what we have to do is shut it down, and then have a conversation about how do we make American products be more competitive, then that's what we need to do.

"But to stand aside and to say that we're going to allow for this corruption and this fraud -- that was rampant it appears -- in the import-export bank was unacceptable. The American people were not going to accept that. I couldn't stand up with a good conscience and say, you know, I'm still for the import-export bank and to have to see this type of corruption and this fraud. So I made a decision that I was going to step in and clearly state my opposition to the import-export bank, the way that it is operating today.

"And we can, I think, very quickly deal with this and put regulations into place that does put American products at a competitive advantage around the world. One of the ways we do that, actually two of the ways we do that, is by lowering the corporate income tax rate. We also have some regulatory reform in this place where it doesn't cost Boeing, and GE, and Caterpillar and these big corporate entities, huge amounts of money to address EPA regulations for instance. So let's get the fair and the free trade out there for our companies in America, sell these products, but I just can't stand up and support an entity that has that type of corruption, that type of fraud."

Marco Rubio

Q: A federal appeals court on Thursday ruled that it was unlawful for the National Security Agency to collect Americans' telephone records in bulk as part of a program to prevent future terrorist attacks.

Two of your rivals for the nomination – Sens. Rand Paul and Ted Cruz – have attacked the program as an unconstitutional infringement on citizens' rights.

But you defend it. Why?

A: "First of all, that's one appeals court. There's numbers of other cases out there. They're all going to wind up in the Supreme Court. And their argument is that the Patriot Act did not authorize it. Bottom line is the world has never been more dangerous than it is today. Even as I'm sitting here with you now, there are terrorists actively plotting to attack the United States, both here, and Europe, and the Middle East, everywhere in the world. We need to have every tool at our disposal to be able to track that.

"There is not a single, one single instance in which this program has been improperly used or violated. Not even the opponents of the program say that there is. If someone gets caught misusing this program, they should be fired, prosecuted and jailed. But we need all of these tools because if, God forbid, there's an attack in the homeland that kills Americans, the first question everyone's going to have is, 'Why didn't we know about it, and why didn't we stop it?' And the answer can't be because we dismantled our intelligence-gathering capabilities."

Rick Santorum

Q: You sought the Republican nomination in 2012 and won 11 states but ultimately lost to Mitt Romney. What reason is there to think you're going to fare better this time?

A: "Well, if we decide to do so, I think experience helps a lot in just about anything in life and having gone through a presidential campaign, gone through that experience is a great teacher. As I mentioned out front, if you look at who the Republican Party has nominated over the past 50 years since the convention era ended. In other words, back in the 50s and prior to that, nominees were always selected by conventions and by party bosses. But since the primary and caucus system went in place, every Republican nominee has met one of three criteria. No. 1, they were vice president. No. 2, they were the son of a president. Or No. 3, they came in second place in the previous election. And so if you look at it that way -- 100 percent certainty one of those three gets nominated -- there's only two of us in this race that meet any of those criteria."

Scott Walker

Q: According to a report by Bloomberg, wealthy businesswoman Dianne Hendricks of Beloit, Wisconsin, was the largest contributor to your gubernatorial campaigns. The same article quoted her as saying she doesn't believe social issues should be part of the political debate.

You've also gotten support from the billionaire Koch brothers, and David Koch was reported to have told donors that you should be the nominee. At the same time, David Koch openly supports gay marriage, while most GOP primary voters in South Carolina oppose it.

Do you share their views on social issues?

A: "No. I mean I'm a social conservative, and economic conservative, fiscal conservative, and I think that's why you've seen me win three times in the last four years in a state that hasn't gone Republican since '84. We brought the full spectrum, from social conservatives, to libertarians, from chamber of commerce types, to tea party and everybody in between. We had about 96 percent of the Republican electorate vote for us, but we also carried independents by about 11 points, almost a 12 point margin this last time, similar to the previous two elections, and for me the focal point I ran on, is what I continue to talk about and that is the economic and fiscal crisis that our citizens face. There's a similar challenge across this country. You heard me talk here today. It was about growth, reform and safety, meaning national security. Those are the highlight issues. But it certainly doesn't mean you should never talk about. They're just not the foremost of the three pillars. But I'm prolife. I believe marriage is between one man and one woman. I believe that religious freedoms are inherent to the founding of this country. I believe in all those things. It's just, when it gets right back down, those are important, but so are economic and fiscal issues."

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/1bHMTgw