On Thursday, Dec. 3 the Republican party proposed a bill that would defund Planned Parenthood and repeal the Affordable Care Act. Although they expect this bill to be vetoed by the president, they decided it was a good idea to propose it as a symbolic gesture.

“The value is to let him know, the president, and others that there is a big division in this country, and a lot of us don’t like it, and the American people don’t like it,” Republican Sen. Richard Shelby of Alabama said, as reported by National Public Radio. This is a huge generalization and a bill should not be proposed just simply to make a statement.

Planned Parenthood is an organization that aims to provide healthcare to those in need. They teach people how to safely have sex by providing education, contraceptives and testing for sexually transmitted infections. The fact they also provide abortions raises a big concern for those who consider themselves pro-life.

Roe v. Wade was one of the first court cases regarding abortion that raised a big awareness among the country. Jane Roe was a single mother who wanted to safely end her pregnancy, but due to the abortion laws in Texas she was only able to do so if her life was at stake. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of Roe and declared the law unconstitutional. Due to Roe’s case, abortion deserves the highest level of constitutional protection according to Planned Parenthood.

Abortion is a political issue that has been debated for a long time. Republicans are generally pro-life and Democrats are generally pro-choice. While everyone is entitled to their own beliefs, this whole controversy becomes even more of an issue when funding is involved.

Since funding is going to Planned Parenthood, a place where in-clinic abortions are available, the Republicans have decided it would be a good idea to defund this institution altogether, which is completely ignorant.

Abortions are not funded by the federal government, so there is no point in defunding Planned Parenthood based on that argument. Abortion is not the only service this institution provides. Their goal is not to kill babies, but to take care of those who seek help. If that entails giving an abortion at the request of a patient, then so be it. That is their job.

Recently, Robert Dear was charged with shooting up a Planned Parenthood in Denver, Colorado. While police have refused to discuss his motives for the shooting, there’s a great deal of evidence such as telling authorities “no more baby parts” during his arrest, as reported by NBC News. This suggests Dear was very concerned about abortion. Dear also made outbursts admitting he was guilty and a “warrior for the babies” as reported by The Washington Post. Based on this information, it is pretty ironic Dear would try to prevent abortion by killing innocent people who are just trying to make a living. While Dear is completely entitled to his beliefs and opinions, that in no way justifies the act of murder.

In today’s society, we have an issue with making hasty generalizations. We find something we disagree with, or a negative action in a particular institution, or a group of people, and we assume everyone and everything identified with that is out to get us. We can see this issue is prominent with treatment of Muslims, the police brutality against African-Americans, and Planned Parenthood. By making these ignorant accusations, we are preventing things from getting better.

Just because ISIS is a terrorist group run by Islamic extremists does not mean every Muslim even remotely agrees with the actions of ISIS. The same goes for Planned Parenthood. Just because they facilitate abortions, based on the requests of the patients they are required to take care of, does not mean they should stop receiving the funding to provide good healthcare to those in need.