Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

NEW YORK (AP) — Even though the server got his order wrong, Rodney Crowell waits patiently for his egg-white omelet. He chats with Emmylou Harris as she picks at her grapefruit, revealing his easygoing nature and their comfort with each other.

But more than having similar personalities, it’s evident they share the same sense of values.

Friends for almost four decades, it wasn’t until a few years ago that they recorded an album together. That one turned out pretty well — “Old Yellow Moon” won the Grammy for best Americana album. It included some covers and a few songs penned by Crowell.

That experience was so positive they decided to step it up on the recently released “The Traveling Kind” by co-writing seven of the album’s 11 songs. Now they’re off touring the United States and Europe to promote it.

“I would certainly say the writing process was fun. On ‘Old Yellow Moon,’ we didn’t do any writing together,” Crowell said.

Harris agreed, adding that from her perspective, their fruitful collaboration derives from what she describes as Crowell’s “Rodney-ness.”

“We have no tension,” she said. “We’ve never even had an argument.”

Crowell added: “I guess you might say there’s no ego because our relationship is based on friendship.”

While Crowell penned a few of the songs on their first album and he and Harris co-wrote a majority on the new one, he doesn’t feel like you have to write a song to give a piece of yourself to the music. It’s something he feels Harris does very well.

He cites an artist that both have a connection with to prove his point.

“Johnny Cash and Emmy are similar in a way. People ask me and I say Emmy has a poet’s soul, so when she records outside material, as John did, there’s a poetic sensibility,” Crowell said.

Harris was influenced by Cash at an early age and was one of the artists who appeared on the recent cover album, “Look Again to the Wind: Johnny Cash’s Bitter Tears Revisited.” Originally released in 1964, that album provided strong commentary about the U.S. government’s mistreatment of Native Americans. She remembers buying “Bitter Tears” when it came out.