During Grayson's three years leading the agency, Goodby Silverstein helped to launch the Nest brand, win San Francisco's bid for Super Bowl 50, turn Frito-Lay into Marketer of the Year, and was nominated for an Emmy Award for advertising.

Prior to re-joining Goodby Silverstein in 2013, Grayson was at Wieden + Kennedy in Portland, OR, where he directed strategy for Nike's global business and helped to revamp the Nike Golf and Running brands.

"A lot of people were trying to woo Andy away from advertising," said Nuno Valentine, Chief Executive Officer and co-founder of Iggbo. "So it's a coup for us. He is passionate about creativity and insight in all aspects of communications, but what excited us most was his reputation for both leadership and innovative thinking. We are thrilled that Andy will be joining our team and our mission to disrupt the healthcare industry."

Grayson said, "It has been a privilege to contribute to the special culture of Goodby Silverstein and it was heart-breaking to leave the breakthrough work we were generating, but Iggbo is on an amazing mission to bring personalized medicine to everyone. The challenge to shape their communications efforts in pursuit of that goal was something I couldn't resist."

About Iggbo

Iggbo brings personalized medicine to everyone. Operating in over 120 US cities, with a workforce of over 6,000 blood draw professionals, Iggbo's on-demand platform benefits every vertical of healthcare—from health systems to specialty labs to tele-medicine to mobile diagnostics. With smartphone technology, Iggbo closes the last mile to the patient and reinvents healthcare's service delivery model. Iggbo's phlebotomists perform fixed and on-demand draws anywhere, anytime. Physicians and nurses can order lab tests with the push of a button, patient compliance improves to 97%, and every sample is monitored, tracked, and connected digitally. For more, visit www.iggbo.com.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160328/348389

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/iggbo-hires-goodby-silversteins-head-of-strategy-as-chief-communications-officer-300242022.html

SOURCE Iggbo

Related Links

http://www.iggbo.com