4595621

Republican presidential aspirant Jeb Bush announced the launch of a new award Monday sponsored by his mother’s foundation, which is funded by the liberal corporation Comcast and Accenture, the current proprietor of the Obamacare website.

The foundation also counts a Comcast Cable government affairs executive as a board member, despite Comcast’s ownership of the left-wing cable network MSNBC. The foundation has also recently taken donations from big banks including Goldman Sachs and big oil companies including Halliburton and BP.

The $7 million Adult Literacy XPrize, introduced on video by Jeb Bush, is sponsored by the Barbara Bush Foundation For Family Literacy and the Dollar General Literacy Foundation to promote adult literacy.

The Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy’s annual financial report provides a window into the company that the Bush family is keeping these days.

Comcast, parent company of MSNBC, is a “Platinum” level donor to the foundation. But as the report notes, Comcast’s donation worth more than $50,000 was an “in-kind donation of goods and services.” The Comcast Foundation also donated to the Barbara Bush Foundation.

Timothy Gage, senior vice president for government and regulatory affairs at Comcast Cable, is a board member of the Bush foundation.

Comcast CEO Brian Roberts, a golfing partner of President Obama, is a major Obama and Democratic Party donor. Obama even identified Comcast executive vice president David Cohen, a multi-million dollar Obama fundraiser and frequent White House guest, as a personal “friend.” Comcast was a major corporate supporter of Obamacare. (RELATED: Byron Allen Reveals The Comcast-Obama Conspiracy).

Accenture, which holds the more than $500 million Obamacare contract to fix Healthcare.gov, is a silver level Barbara Bush donor, having given between $10,000 and $24,999.

Big banks are well represented on the donor list, with Bank of America, Merrill Lynch and Goldman Sachs giving money to the foundation.

Big oil also cuts a figure among the Bush donors, with Halliburton and BP giving donations.

Follow Howley on Twitter