Nearby homeowner voiced concerns pilot was eyeing her hemp field

A small ultralight aircraft had to make an emergency landing at the City on the Hill Church at 75th Street and Arapahoe Road in unincorporated Boulder County on Saturday afternoon. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

A small ultralight aircraft made an emergency landing at City on the Hill church in unincorporated Boulder County shortly before 3 p.m. Saturday.

The pilot, who declined to give his name to the Camera, told Boulder County Sheriff's deputies responding to the scene that his home-built power glider had run out of gas.

The pilot was identified by the sheriff's office as Justin Riley, 27. He landed the aircraft in the church's small parking lot.

No structures were damaged, and nobody was injured in the landing. The plane also touched down without hitting any of the several power lines in the immediate area.

The aircraft, which only has two seats and no cockpit, was quickly taken on the bed of a pickup truck to a local farm, where it will be stored until its owner figures out what to do with it.

There was no apparent damage to the aircraft and nearby roads were never closed down, due to the incident.

Veronica Carpio, the owner of a nearby hemp field and former owner of a Lafayette dispensary, said the pilot demonstrated erratic dipping and circling before the aircraft landed in the church's lot.

"I thought he was a spy," said Carpio, who was concerned he had been surveilling her hemp field.

Asked if he had been buzzing the hemp field, Riley, denied it. Additionally, Boulder Sheriff's Sgt. Bill Crist said there was no evidence to support Carpio's claim, and that Riley had merely been circling in order to lose altitude quickly so he could land.

The Boulder County Sheriff's office has closed its investigation of the landing, and the National Transportation Safety Board has classified the landing as an "occurrence," Crist said, No charges will be filed.

"He wasn't doing anything reckless or dangerous," said Crist.

"It's really embarrassing," said Riley. "I made it. It's all good."