White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest on Monday. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster, AP)

WASHINGTON — The White House hailed the 2016 budget compromise that emerged from Capitol Hill Wednesday, saying President Obama had successfully held back the Republican policy proposals he had threatened to veto.

Through a formal statement from the Office of Management and Budget, the White House urged Congress to pass the bill, suggesting the president would sign it.

“We feel good about the outcome,” White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said Wednesday.

The $1.1 trillion spending package did not include many of the policy "riders" the White House had objected to, including eliminating federal payments to Planned Parenthood, rolling back consumer protection regulations, repealing taxes that fund federal health insurance subsidies, and cutting funding for climate change initiatives.

“We walked into these negotiations focused on making sure that Republicans would not succeed in advancing their ideological agenda through the budget process,” Earnest said. “We did succeed in fighting off those efforts.”

Earnest said the deal also lifts the across-the-board budget cuts known as the "sequester" that were implemented in 2011, and makes permanent some lower- and middle-class tax cuts first passed in the 2009 Recovery Act known as the "stimulus."

On other areas, the White House was forced to accept compromise. But Earnest downplayed those areas Wednesday.

While the administration still opposes lifting the ban on exporting crude oil, Earnest said those objections were on procedural, not ideological, grounds. The law currently allows the Secretary of Commerce to make the determination on oil exports, and the United States already exports more than 4 million barrels a day of refined oil products. Earnest said the White House was "not overly concerned" about a provision lifting the ban.

And provisions aimed at the tax provisions of Obamacare would have a "minimal" effect on funding the president's signature health insurance law, Earnest said. The bill would delay implementation on the so-called "Cadillac tax" on high-cost health plans, and place a two-year moratorium on the medical device tax.

Earnest noted that Congress has taken more than 50 votes to repeal Obamacare completely since 2010. "So when you consider their ambitions, the steps that are included in this proposal are quite, quite meager," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Yl3qbV