New Jersey’s uninsured population has been cut in half as the Affordable Care Act enters its second year, with the federal government announcing Wednesday that more than 250,000 people in the state had signed up for coverage in Obamacare health plans by midnight Sunday.

Combined with nearly 400,000 people added to the state’s Medicaid program in the past 13 months, the state is now “somewhere north of 650,000 New Jerseyans who now have coverage thanks to the Affordable Care Act,” said Jackie Cornell-Bechelli, director of the federal Department of Health and Human Services for the region including New Jersey.

An estimated 900,000 New Jersey residents were uninsured and eligible for coverage before the first open enrollment under the law known as Obamacare began in October 2013.

What remains to be seen is whether the newly insured will pay their premiums — there was an attrition rate of 13 percent last year — and whether they will be able to make use of their coverage and get doctor’s appointments. Medicaid patients, in particular, face a shortage of primary-care doctors and specialists willing to accept the program’s reimbursement.

The days before Sunday’s deadline were busy. “It was a blowout weekend for us,” Kevin Counihan, CEO of the federal marketplace, HealthCare.gov, said in a conference call Wednesday. More people logged in, called, created accounts and selected plans on Saturday and Sunday than on any previous day this year or last.

The rate of sign-ups from New Jersey — 30,000 in the 11 days leading into Feb. 15 — was more than three times the rate of the previous weeks. “It’s testament to the desire and need for this here in New Jersey,” Cornell-Bechelli said.

That number may increase, as extensions were granted to those who were unable to complete their enrollment because of a technical glitch or long wait at the federal call center.

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell also is considering whether to give another chance at enrollment to people who discover they face penalties at tax time. Rep. Frank Pallone, D-Monmouth, who joined Cornell-Bechelli on the conference call, said he would work with his Democratic colleagues in Congress to push to give people that opportunity to sign up for coverage.

In all, a total of 11.4 million people signed up nationwide, President Obama announced via Facebook on Tuesday. That exceeded the government’s prediction of 9 million. “It represents a 10 percent increase over where we were expecting to be,” said Counihan.

The federal figures released Wednesday do not show how many of the 252,792 New Jersey consumers who chose marketplace plans were previously uninsured. Some were among the approximately 100,000 people last year who had to find new coverage after their previous plans were discontinued because they did not comply with the new law.

More than four out of five enrollees in the federal marketplace in New Jersey qualified for tax credits that averaged $309 monthly, the federal government said. With those credits, three out of five were able to purchase coverage for less than $100 a month.

The subsidies, combined with tax penalties for going without insurance, drove New Jersey’s high enrollment, said Linda Schwimmer, vice president of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, a non-partisan policy group. “The reason people were uninsured is that they couldn’t afford it,” she said.

But looming over the year’s success is a challenge to the subsidies pending before the U.S. Supreme Court.

Opponents of the law argue it only gives states that run their own insurance marketplaces, such as California and New York, the right to provide tax credits to their customers. The court may rule that HealthCare.gov customers in New Jersey and the 36 other states that rely on the federal marketplace are not eligible for subsidies — a decision that would wreak havoc on the insurance market.

“What happens if the Supreme Court says we don’t get the subsidies because we’re not a state-run marketplace?” asked Schwimmer. “That would be a disaster.”

New Jersey’s decision not to establish a state-run marketplace also resulted in less federal funding for marketing and outreach to the uninsured. But a well-coordinated volunteer effort, augmented by the work of Enroll America, a non-profit working in New Jersey and 10 other states, appeared to overcome that disadvantage.

Sign-ups for coverage in 2015 jumped by 56 percent in the state compared with last year. “We did not in New Jersey let any obstacle stand in our way,” state Sen. Nia Gill, D-Essex, said in a press call with Cornell-Bechelli.

Ray Castro, an analyst with New Jersey Policy Perspective, termed this year’s result “pretty amazing. … That’s a very short period of time to make that big of a change” in the number of uninsured. In future years, it will be a “bigger challenge with fewer resources,” he added, as funding for outreach is reduced. But rising tax penalties — from $95 or 1 percent of taxable income to $325 or 2 percent of taxable income next year — could motivate some of those who have resisted enrolling so far, he said.

The date has not been set for the start of open enrollment for 2016 coverage.

Email: washburn@northjersey.com