PUBLIC HEALTH BLOCK PARTY The city hopes to address “health inequities and improve outcomes” at its public health block party on Saturday, 10am-2pm near the entrance to the Frances Albrier Community Center, 2800 Park St. in South Berkeley. Come receive information and resources, such as screenings for blood pressure, glucose, bone density, and Hepatitis C. People can also get assistance with applications for Covered California, the state health insurance exchange created by the Affordable Care Act that provides federally subsidized rates. Not only that, there is free food, courtesy of Acme Bread and Phat Beets Produce, and delicious smoothies created by a “Smoothie Bike,” as well as a Kid Zone and free haircuts courtesy of stylists from South Berkeley barber shop DnD Cuts.

KALA ART INSTITUTE GALA Kala Art Institute’s 2015 annual gala benefit auction, “Fresh and Local,” will be held on Saturday, 6:30-10:30 p.m. at the Kala Gallery, 2990 San Pablo Ave. The auction — featuring over 100 works by Bay Area artists, along with art-related services and treasures offered by local donors — provides vital support for Kala’s extensive array of artistic, cultural, and educational programs serving the East Bay community and beyond. Participating artists include Val Britton, Sofia Cordova, Naomie Kremer, Hung Liu, Kara Maria, Jim Melchert, Richard Misrach, Susan O’Malley, Francesca Pastine, James Sterling Pitt, Ann Weber, and more. Malcolm Margolin, community visionary and founder of Berkeley-based Heyday Books, will host the auction as Honorary Chair. Celebrity chef Narsai David will return as Master of Ceremonies and Wes Sparling of Bonham’s as our auctioneer. Artists Kim Anno and Don and Era Farnsworth will be honored as the 2015 recipients of Kala Master Artist Award. Details and tickets on the Kala website.

RUN AND WALK FOR BAHIA On Saturday the Bay Area Hispano Institute for Advancement (BAHIA) celebrates 40 years of providing bilingual care and education to children for over four decades in Berkeley with its its third annual 5K Camina y Corrre Por BAHIA — Run and/or Walk fundraiser. It takes place at Berkeley’s Cesar Chavez Park, 11 Spinnaker Way in Berkeley and kicks off the event at 8:30 a.m. with Cuauhtli Mitotani Danza Azteca who will perform a sunrise ceremony at the park. Runners will begin their 5k at 9 a.m. followed by walkers/strollers at 10 a.m. For details visit BAHIA’s website.

BERKELEY PLAYHOUSE PRESENTS ‘HAIRSPRAY’ It’s plus-sized teen Tracy Turnblad time to shine when she suddenly becomes a dance superstar on the popular Corny Collins Show. Not dissuaded by fame, and with morals as high as her bouffant, Tracy uses her new star power to fix the personal and social plights affecting 1962 Baltimore. Berkeley Playhouse’s family-friendly production of Hairspray, which opens on Saturday and runs through May 17, includes songs such as “Good Morning Baltimore,” and “You Can’t Stop The Beat!”. For show times and tickets visit the Berkeley Playhouse website.

BEER INFUSED CUPCAKES FOR AUTISM April is Autism Awareness Month, and what better way to raise money for a great cause than beer and cupcakes? Pyramid Alehouse in West Berkeley is hosting this event on Sunday, between 1-4 p.m., which will offer you the chance to sample the top three cupcake recipes from those submitted, along with the three beers they feature, for $15, and vote for your favorite. A percentage of proceeds will be donated to Ales for Autism. The LIVE 105 Action Team will also be on site with games, prizes and music. Pyramid Alehouse is at 901 Gilman St. Visit the Facebook event page for details.

Don’t miss these other events featured on Berkeleyside:

Berkeley RADICAL focus of Cal Performances’ new season

An evening with Judy Blume, literary freedom pioneer

Poetry and jazz: surging together in Berkeley

Movie reviews: Dior and I, Kung Fu Killer

‘Talley’s Folly’ is terrific at Aurora Theatre’s Harry Upstage



For more events in and around Berkeley, check out Berkeleyside’s Events Calendar. And submit your own events there — the calendar is free and self-serve.