Transcript for Intuitive Eating: the Anti-Diet

woman who tried almost every diet out there. And then, she finally tried a radical, new approach. The anti-diet. Could it be the answer to being happy and healthy? Sara haines is here with that story. Good morning, sara. Reporter: Good morning. Diets -- literally, even the mere mention of the world makes me hungry. What if there was a way to get the same results without the diet? Now, there is. And it's appropriately called the anti-diet. Call it the anti-diet. 29-year-old kelsey miller writes for refinery 29. And she says, she's tired of being fat. I was really sick of my weight fluctuating all the time. And I was sick of being overweight. And I was just done with dieting. I've been doing it literally my entire life. Reporter: She wrote an article, chronicling her aha moment. I was doing a workout a couple months ago. And I wanted to die from it. I was feeling out of shape. And I realized in that moment, that what I had been doing my whole life wasn't working. Reporter: Miller, embracing what she called a license to eat philosophy. What is intuitive eating? It's about diet deprogramming and learn to trust yourself around food. Your body's smart. And you're not an idiot. Reporter: We hit the kitchen to see what's cooking in kelsey's more mindful eating p iing rotation. I would have a lunch that was very plain and healthy. And eating because in my mind, these are good, safe foods. And stuff over here, this is bad, evil, makes you a bad person kind of food. That makes you a bad person. God forbid the pizza. Reporter: Don't get me started. If I start my day with what i want, which is eggs and toast, it's a bigger, more complete meal. I don't find myself snacking. I don't find myself going for the candy bowl. Reporter: While kelsey re-evaluated her eating habits, she also tackled her workout routine. It's about moderate exercise to stay healthy. How many days do you work out? I work out with my trainer twice a week. And I work out three days a week on my own. Reporter: At the end of the day, kelsey is back to basics. Eating to live. And not living to eat. One of the big things she said, if it didn't hurt and it wasn't miserable, then it wasn't doing anything. You know. It can be fun. Eating can be fun. It's back to basics. That no pain, no gain, is out the door. Maybe not for you. Keep doing it if it's that painful. You want to make it a nice experience. How many times have you had to go without? And you had to workout. It was crazy. Ricky martin coming up.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.