Chief Justice John Roberts ASSOCIATED PRESS

As we wait for the Supreme Court to render its decision in the latest challenge to the Affordable Care Act, we asked a panel of experts for their predictions.

Our brave participants include Jonathan Adler, a professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Law; Erwin Chemerinsky, dean of University of California, Irvine School of Law; and Richard Pierce, a professor at The George Washington University Law School.

The Supreme Court’s decision will determine whether low-income Americans are entitled to subsidized health insurance in more than two thirds of the states.

The law provides for federal subsidies for plans purchased on marketplaces established by the states, but it makes no explicit mention of them for insurance bought on a federally created exchange. The rub is that most states declined to set up their own marketplaces, in a show of opposition to the Affordable Care Act. So, their residents use the federal marketplace, HealthCare.gov.

The Internal Revenue Service, in crafting regulations concerning the subsidies, interpreted the law to permit subsidies for plans purchased on the federal site, as well. The Supreme Court must decide whether the IRS regulation is in step with the text of the law.

“I think it’s a coin toss,” said Mr. Adler, who was among the first to highlight the discrepancy, in a 2011 paper. But he expects that Chief Justice John Roberts will write the majority opinion, as he did in the Supreme Court’s first ruling on the Affordable Care Act, in 2012. In a surprise ruling, Chief Justice Roberts joined the court’s four liberals to uphold the linchpin of the law — its requirement that Americans carry health insurance or pay a penalty.

Mr. Chemerinsky, an expert in constitutional law, predicted a similar outcome this time around. He expects a 6-3 vote, with Chief Justice Roberts writing the majority opinion holding that tax credits are available to those who purchase insurance from a federally created exchange.

Mr. Pierce, an expert in administrative law and regulation, also expects a 6-3 decision, with Justice Samuel Alito, Justice Antonin Scalia and Justice Clarence Thomas in the minority. He said Justice Anthony Kennedy and Chief Justice Roberts will probably write a separate opinion “that relies heavily” on the argument made by Abbe Gluck, a professor at Yale Law School. Ms. Gluck, who declined to make her own prediction, has argued that the subsidies must be available to people who use the federal exchange, because Congress never provided the states with clear notice of the consequences of declining to establish marketplaces.

Correction: An earlier version of this post said Professor Jonathan Adler was among the first to write about legal issues relating to the subsidies in a paper published in 2013. He first wrote about the topic in 2011.