Loveland Police Officer Chuck Hofkamp places a police badge sticker on Lastin Cunningham, 9, right, and his brother O'sias Cunningham, 7, on Friday during an award ceremony at which the two were honored for saving their little brother's life after he fell into the Big Thompson River last December. Lastin pulled his brother out of the river and went for help as O'sias wrapped him in his coat to keep him warm. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Two Truscott Elementary students were honored Friday afternoon for their lifesaving actions after their younger brother fell into the Big Thompson River.

On Dec. 20, Lastin Cunningham, 9, O'sias Cunningham, 7, and Jr. Pacheco, 3, were playing behind their home at Waterford Apartments when they decided to cross the river on a fallen tree trunk.

Jr. slipped and fell into the cold water.

"My brother got him out, and I kept him warm," said O'sias, whose seventh birthday was that same day. "I was super-hot because of my coat, so I took it off to give him some of my body heat."

Lastin ran back home and told their mother, Brandi Cunningham-Pacheco, what had happened.

Jr. Pacheco, 3, shakes the hand of Thompson Valley EMS paramedic Jaron Francois on Friday during an award ceremony at Truscott Elementary School at which his big brothers Lastin Cunningham, 9, right, and O'sias Cunningham, 7, far right, were honored for saving his life after he fell into the Big Thompson River last December. Their mom, Brandi Cunningham-Pacheco, center, also shakes the hands of policemen, firefighters and paramedics. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"I went to him, and I just kept thinking, 'We've got to get him out of here, we've got to get him out of here,'" Cunningham-Pacheco said. "So, it was cold and took me a while to get him back — it was a trip."

She called 911 once Jr. was home and she noticed he wasn't acting quite right.

While he did suffer from minor hypothermia and water inhalation, Jr. has fully recovered.

The award ceremony held Friday was the school's trimester assembly at which students are recognized for their accomplishments, Truscott principal Karen Hanford said.

Members of the Loveland Fire Rescue Authority, Thompson Valley Emergency Medical Services and Loveland Police Department who responded to the incident attended Friday's event to present the boys with their awards and commemorative coins.

Advertisement

"One of the officers had contacted us and just said, 'We'd really like to come and recognize these kids,'" Hanford said. "Any opportunity you can celebrate what students do is worth it."

Fire Chief Mark Miller introduced police school resource officer Ben Avitia to the crowd of about 300 students, staffers and family members.

"It is with no doubt that they saved the life of their little brother that day," Avitia said. "The courage it took for Lastin to jump in the water ... and O'sias staying with (Jr.) until their mom arrived. Thank you very much, guys."

The boys received two awards — one from Loveland police and one from Loveland fire. Miller also presented them with two commemorative coins that read "Commitment, Compassion and Courage."

"These could be worth thousands of dollars one day," Miller joked.

Both boys took him very seriously and said their favorite part about the award was the coin worth thousands of dollars.

Law enforcement officials lined up at the end so that all three boys and their mother could shake each man's hand.

"They knew that we knew what had happened, but they didn't know this was happening today," Hanford said. "It's been neat to watch them want to step up and try to be role models."

Dana Rieck: 970-635-3630, rieckd@reporter-herald.com or www.twitter.com/DanaRieckRH