Energy, humor, interest in learning and joy all point to a vital life

Eighty-three-year-old Jim Younkin, in front, and Warren Dawson, 77, enjoy a game of pool at the Chilson Senior Center. The men said "good times and good friends" are part of having vitality. ( Jeannie Lancaster / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

What is vitality? This is, after all, the Vitality section of the paper. Is vitality the same thing for all people? Does your age determine your view of vitality?

Several people at the Chilson Recreation Center, Loveland Public Library and Chilson Senior Center were asked what vitality meant to them. Their ages ranged from their 20s to their 90s. All live in the Loveland area.

Those who chose to participate provided a broad range of views on the subject, with a common thread weaving through the individual responses.

Visiting with Elson Wride, 94, before a meeting of the Golden K Kiwanis Club at the Senior Center, it was obvious he had it. Wride, an original charter member of the organization, said vitality was, "Having the energy to do what you need to do."

But then he smiled and added, "You've got to be happy. I'm always telling jokes." He proceeded to tell a funny one.

That same word "energy" came up over and over again from other respondents.

"It's feeling energized and alive — not tired," said Elizabeth Mathey, who was coming out of the Recreation Center, with her young son.

George and Elaine Stafford agreed. "Energy" was the first word they mentioned.

"Vitality is your life — good energy," said Cathy Spanbauer, at the Recreation Center.

Heading to the Recreation Center to water walk, Roberta Christopher expressed the need to "be energetic; to be able to get up and move around."

Advertisement

Sheila Miller agrees with Wride and his second point. "You have to have humor, or you'll never make it," she said. Miller was with a group of friends as they were sitting down to visit in the lobby of the Senior Center. They had all just come from a step aerobics class at the Recreation Center. The group's ages range from 67 to 85 years of age, and a sense of humor was everywhere.

"We exercise together. We hike together and go on trips with the Senior Center together. "We're good friends," said Miller.

Carol Ward shared that she believes, "Exercise promotes good health. We're totally blessed with good health," she added. None in the group have had any serious health issues.

"Be as fit as you can at any age," added Sandy Lafferty.

Group member, Jeannette Saul, believes she got her own sense of vitality from her mother, Mildred. Her mother rode her bike all over town into her 90s and enjoyed hiking. Saul hopes to continue to follow her example.

Another group member, Marilyn Davis, said it was her neighbor who first got her interested in walking 40 years ago. "When I'm feeling down, I get out and walk — pound the payment. Walking is the greatest exercise there is."

Virginia Brant, who joins the other women for the exercise class, said, "Vitality is a balance of physical, emotional and mental exercise."

At the Loveland Public Library, director Marcia Lewis added a powerful perspective on vitality. "It is being full of life and having a love of life," she said.

Young mother, Nicole Bursch, used the word "vibrant," when speaking of vitality.

Back at the Senior Center, Jim Younkin and Warren Dawson were enjoying a game of pool, when they responded to the question. "It's good times and good friends," said Younkin. "We come down here to have a lot of fun."

Outside the Recreation Center, a group of preschoolers gathered around a fire engine. They were listening intently as the firemen explained about the truck and the tools that it carried. Full of excitement and interest in learning, they bubbled over with vitality.

An obvious part of vitality is good health, eating wisely and getting enough exercise. But what of those who are facing serious illness or are homebound? Can they still have vitality?

It only takes a little reflection to answer a resounding, "yes." Perhaps someone you know is homebound yet writes cards to friends to brighten their day. It could be a person with a terminal illness, who chooses to find joy in little things. Most of us know someone, who is spite of illness or other challenges, is still full of vitality.

Initially, when queried about what vitality meant to them, several people had to pause to reflect. Perhaps that is because vitality encompasses so many different things.

Dictionaries define vitality as, "the capacity to live, grow, or develop; physical or intellectual vigor; energy; the power to survive; a life force."

We all view vitality from different perspectives. But when a person has it, we know it.