Huskies senior takes 2nd; sophomore James finishes just out of top 6

Jacob Yslas wrestles Valley's Ruben Lucero during the Class 3A state championship match at the Pepsi Center in Denver on Saturday. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Bob Masse and Dustin James console Jacob Yslas after he lost to Valley's Ruben Lucero during the Class 3A state championship match at the Pepsi Center in Denver on Saturday. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Denver — Jacob Yslas didn't wrestle up to his own expectations on Saturday. Perhaps that's what made the loss in the championship match so tough to deal with.

Valley's Ruben Lucero controlled the match in a 6-3 win against Florence's Yslas. Yslas finished in second place in the 126-pound weight class of the Class 3A state tournament at the Pepsi Center on Saturday.

"My head just wasn't all the way in it I guess," Yslas said. "Don't get me wrong, he's good. He's really good, but I think it should've been closer.

"Maybe I let the pressure get to me. I don't know."

Huskies coach Bob Masse said he was pleased with his senior's output, even though he didn't come out victorious.

"He wrestled the best he could," Masse said. "He wrestled a little timid. He didn't execute like I thought he could."

Lucero had a clear gameplan going in, and he executed it how he needed to. He said after the match that he knew how strong Yslas was on the ground, so his plan was to take him down, collect his two points, then give him back one by releasing him. This way he wouldn't give up two points on a reversal and risk giving up more.

All three of Yslas' points were earned on a escapes that were given to him by Lucero.

Lucero was the top seed in the tournament and ranked on top of Tim Yount's On The Mat Rankings for the latter part of the season. Yslas hovered around the No. 5 mark.

Advertisement

Lucero only loss in Colorado this season was to Olathe's Trenton Piatt, and it happened at the Florence tournament. Piatt moved down to 120s and won a state championship on Saturday.

Dustin James' tournament was ended in the second round of the consolation bracket. He lost 3-2 to Ellicott's Fabian Hermosillo. A win would've guaranteed that James would've placed in the top six.

Huskies speak highly of Yslas The Florence Huskies respect their senior leader. It's evident by the way they talk about Jacob Yslas, the way they root for him, and the way they consoled him after his championship loss on Saturday at the Pepsi Center in Denver. "Jake's the biggest inspiration this team had this year," junior Chance Green said. "... Jake just makes you want to wrestle." "His greatness in him makes you want to be great." — Brandon Hopper

"I felt like I wrestled pretty good. I had a few times when I could've capitalized a little better," James said. "Overall it was a good tournament for me."

James finished the tournament 2-2 and is now 34-18 on the season.

"It's great. There's no substitute for the experience up here. It's phenomenal."

Other Huskies to compete in the three-day tournament were: Chance Green (1-2), Lane Masar (1-2), Preston Sandoval (0-2), Alberto Rodriguez (1-2) and Sam Morgan (0-2).