Dr. Milton R. Wolf, M.D., a diagnostic radiologist, medical director, and also a cousin of President Barack Obama, has spoken out recently about his concerns with the Affordable Care Act. Dr. Wolf has made several appearances on Fox News, and wrote an op-ed titled "My Cousin Barack Obama and Our ObamaCare Family Feud" on Nov. 7 that lays out the serious problems with ObamaCare that he and many other medical professionals believe will have a negative impact on the future of healthcare in America.

Dr. Wolf and President Obama's mothers were cousins, but the two did not meet until Obama had already been elected president. Their mothers grew up together, but as he puts it, "Fate would never reunite our mothers who grew up together as young girls, cousins and friends, after they were separated decades ago, but now their sons bridged a divide in our family that was created by decisions not our own. It’s not often that a president’s most vocal critic comes from his own family, but I believe the inviolable oath I took to my patients demands that I oppose ObamaCare."

Since the disastrous rollout of the ACA on October 1, it has become clear that many of the concerns expressed by Dr. Wolf and others before the law was passed are coming to fruition. Problems with the website captured the headlines for the first few weeks, but lately the focus has turned to the detrimental effect the law will have on patients, doctors, and the insurance industry.

"The fundamental flaw at the core of ObamaCare is the mistaken belief that the government can spend your dollars more effectively than you can," writes Dr. Wolf, "This tragically pessimistic belief views all Americans with suspicion as either incompetent or unrighteous but either way in need of big-government control."

Dr. Wolf also points out the fact that before the law was passed there was no open debate, at least not an honest one. Lies were told when Obama and the Democrats were trying to sell us this snake oil. That has become glaringly obvious over the last few weeks as millions of Americans have seen their current healthcare plans cancelled, after President Obama assured us all that would not happen. "If you like you healthcare plan, you can keep it. Period," he vowed. Millions more will lose their health insurance in the coming weeks and months.

But that was not the only lie. President Obama also promised that the average family would see the cost of their insurance premiums drop by $2,500 per year. Instead, we are seeing a dramatic rise in the cost of health insurance, in fact the cost of health insurance has gone in exactly the opposite direction. The average family's heath insurance premiums have risen by more than $2,500, largely due to harsh new restrictions placed on insurers by the ACA.

Perhaps these lies, as well as many others we were told, were the reason the bill was shoved down American's throats, passed on a party-line vote without even being read by most members of Congress. Perhaps the likelihood that Americans would never accept Obamacare if they knew the truth about what it contained is why Nancy Pelosi told us, "We have to pass the bill, so we can find out what's in it."

Polls at the time showed the majority of the American people were strongly opposed to the law, and that number has risen as we have learned the gory details of the ACA, and what it means to real families.

Dr. Wolf doesn't blame all of the problems with the healthcare system in America on President Obama. He goes all the way back to 1929, when first health care waiver was granted to Blue Cross, after the American Medical Association lobbied to have Blue Cross exempted from certain regulations and taxes.

"In the following decades," writes Dr. Wolf, "Republicans’ and Democrats’ health care intrusions fueled increasing costs which priced more and more Americans out of the market. Many of the problems we face today are a direct result of those bad laws. The 1942 wage controls (and later tax laws), for example, forced the devastating marriage of health insurance to employment."

"To call ObamaCare a doubling down on these government failures," he continues, "is probably a betrayal of basic math skills -- it’s more like a quadrupling down."

The idea that government knows best is not a new one, but it is certainly a bad one.

Dr. Wolf also exposes another lie we were told by President Obama, that if there was a way to solve our health care problems with the free market he’d be happy to do so. One simple free market solution that would help drive down costs would be to allow insurance companies to compete across state lines. Dr. Wolf argues that the Commerce Clause could be used to institute that solution.

Dr. Wolf proposes other ideas in the piece as well, ideas members of Congress might be wise to consider if they are serious about improving America's healthcare system. The entire op-ed can be found by clicking the link in the first paragraph of this article.