Community HealthCare Association of the Dakotas (CHAD) is pleased to announce that its Board of Directors has selected Shelly Ten Napel to serve as Chief Executive Officer, effective March 7, 2016. CHAD, a non-profit Primary Care Association, serves member Community Health Centers (CHCs) and associate member partners in their mission to enhance access to affordable, quality primary health care in North and South Dakota. Ten Napel comes to CHAD with nearly 20 years of experience working in health care policy on the state and national level.

Jill Franken, CHAD Board President and Executive Director of Falls Community Health in Sioux Falls, SD, welcomes Ms. Ten Napel and states, “The CHAD Board of Directors is very pleased that someone with Shelly’s experience will be leading our organization. The work of current CEO Linda Ross transformed this organization over the past three years, and Shelly Ten Napel will now lead us further to achieve health center excellence and meet the health care access and quality needs of the residents of the Dakotas.”

A native of South Dakota, Ten Napel began her career as a legislative assistant to U.S. Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle, managing health care related issues and appropriations requests, including funding for CHCs. “My whole family is thrilled to be ‘back home’ in South Dakota. I am excited to join CHAD staff and members in support of their vital mission in our community,” says Ms. Ten Napel.

Prior to joining CHAD, Ten Napel served as the Director of the Health Care Reform and Innovation Administration for the District of Columbia Department of Health Care Finance in Washington, DC where she promoted payment and delivery system reform in the DC Medicaid program. Before that she served as a Director in the State Coverage Initiatives program at AcademyHealth where she provided technical assistance to states around the country as they implemented the wide-ranging reforms outlined in the Affordable Care Act.

“It has been a real privilege to work with leaders in state-based health reform from across the country, and I look forward to bringing that experience to my work with CHAD. States have an incredible ability to impact the affordability and quality of health care for residents. Governor Daugaard’s plan towards expanding Medicaid in South Dakota provides a clear example of how the decisions we make at the state level can transform lives,” says Ten Napel.

Ten Napel also has experience in rural health policy, gained in part in her role as Policy, Program and Outreach Manager for the National Rural Health Association (NHRA) where she developed policy on priority issues such as rural health insurance, health care quality, rural Emergency Medical Services, and rural public health coordination.

Community Health Centers throughout the nation have provided affordable primary and preventive health care services to patients for over 50 years. By offering discounted rates for those who qualify for sliding fee scales, as well as serving all patients regardless of insurance status, CHCs significantly reduce the financial impact on the health care system by reducing the number of costly visits to emergency departments and specialty services. Additionally, patient health outcomes are significantly improved when preventive care and primary care services lower the risks and complications of complex chronic diseases.