Photo

WASHINGTON — Robert A. McDonald, the secretary of Veterans Affairs, spoke with reporters on Thursday about changing the culture of an agency that is still trying to recover from the scandal over delays in care at V.A. hospitals that was uncovered in May. Since then, he said, wait times for doctor visits at the hospitals across the country have gone down.

Mr. McDonald said that at the department’s medical center in Phoenix — where delays in care contributed to the deaths of several patients — wait times have gone down by as much as 37 percent. Using that and other figures, he hopes to show that change is coming.

“Changing culture is one of the most important things a leader can do, particularly coming out of a crisis situation,” he said. “We know that the trust has been compromised. And we know that we’re going to have to earn that back — one veteran at a time.”

That was Mr. McDonald’s goal when he developed the “Road to Veterans Day” action plan that would address deep institutional deficiencies. The agency has extended clinic hours at facilities across the nation, sent out mobile units to constituents in places like Phoenix, and hired more doctors and nurses, all in an effort to accelerate patient access to care.

More than 1.2 million additional appointments have been scheduled in the past four months compared with the same period last year.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But some of the most significant changes are not about policy, they are about people.

In July, during a congressional hearing, Mr. McDonald gave out his cellphone number, which netted him about 250 calls a day from veterans and others. Those calls are now down to “maybe five to 10 a day,” he said, but that is the sense of accountability that he says he wants to build.

Since being sworn in, Mr. McDonald has visited 41 V.A. facilities, and he says that they are creating an environment that encourages whistle-blowing. The three employees in Phoenix who reported the problems this year have “good, new jobs,” he said, refuting accusations of retaliation. Those who speak up will be protected and the wrongdoers aptly punished, he said.

“You don’t run one of the most admired companies in the world by being lax on disciplinary action,” he said.

But there have not been the mass firings or institutional floggings that some had expected.

“Can a secretary come in and change the culture of the 300,000-person Department of Veterans Affairs, where often times worker protection is emphasized more than outcomes for vets?” asked Pete Hegseth, the chief executive of Concerned Veterans for America.

There are 100 cases under investigation by federal agencies.