For Justus, basketball has always been part of his life

EAST FLAT ROCK — East Henderson basketball coach Bruce Gilliam can remember a time when Lane Justus ran out onto the court at halftime of games shooting and dribbling around the court.

"I can remember him going out onto the floor as a little kid and we'd have to run him off," Gilliam said.

In fact, there aren't many times Gilliam can remember not seeing Justus. The coach taught the East senior at Upward Elementary School, Flat Rock Middle School and now at East Henderson High School.

Through all those years, there was a common theme for Justus.

"My whole life, I've just always had a basketball in my hand," Justus said.

Justus and his coach have led parallel lives where certain points have intersected. The last intersection is an Eagles basketball team in which Gilliam is leading from the bench and Justus is leading from the floor.

The senior is averaging 16.6 points per game, three steals per game and nearly three assists per game.

He's the Eagles' floor general.

Justus spent his junior year in frustration. The Eagles won just two games last season. There were injuries and youth that plagued East most of the season.

This year, the story is being rewritten.

"We're just a lot more mature," Justus said.

His coach concurred. This year Justus isn't alone on the floor. He's getting plenty of help from players like Malik Alston, Josh Glynn, Nykeem Brooks and Gunnar Harris.

"I think last year, he felt like he had to do way too much," Gilliam said. "He's gotten some help this year and I think that's helped more than people realize."

And the Eagles are better. They're a season removed from winning just two ballgames. So far this season, East has won nine and looks to be playoff bound. For that to happen, Justus and the Eagles will need to continue the upward trend that has occurred this season.

Justus has the pedigree to lead the way for the Eagles. His dad, Jeff, and brother, Lex, were both East basketball players. The youngest Justus has spent his life around the Eagle basketball team and the culmination could be the Eagles' first winning season in at least a decade. His drive could push the Eagles into the playoffs.

"The kid wants to win," Gilliam said. "He puts a lot of pressure on himself. He wants it."