Cassidy Griffin, PhD'20, is in Northeastern's population health doctoral program and is working part-time at MEDITECH, a Massachusetts-based health information company. Photo by Adam Glanzman/Northeastern University

Through Northeastern’s doc­toral pro­gram in pop­u­la­tion health, Cas­sidy Griffin, PhD’20, is gaining research expe­ri­ence in an emerging field of health as well as an industry view of how pop­u­la­tion health and data ana­lytics are being used to help orga­ni­za­tions improve effi­ciency and effec­tive­ness of health­care delivery.

Pop­u­la­tion health has been defined as “the health out­come of a group of indi­vid­uals, including the dis­tri­b­u­tion of such out­comes within the group.” The con­cept rep­re­sents a shift within the health fields away from reac­tionary and very expen­sive med­ical care to dis­ease pre­ven­tion, well­ness, and effec­tive man­age­ment of chronic illness.

Here’s where Griffin comes in. As part of a new Northeastern-​​MEDITECH part­ner­ship, Griffin attends doctoral-​​level classes and also spends three days a week at MEDITECH, a Massachusetts-​​based health infor­ma­tion com­pany. At MEDITECH, Griffin applies her discovery-​​based skills and knowl­edge obtained through the pop­u­la­tion health pro­gram to help MEDITECH better assess the care man­age­ment strate­gies and needs of health­care orga­ni­za­tions. These assess­ments are crit­ical to MEDITECH’s ability to develop inno­v­a­tive elec­tronic med­ical records soft­ware to help health­care providers—including hos­pi­tals, physi­cian orga­ni­za­tions, and urgent care centers—report health met­rics, iden­tify patients who are at high risk for chronic con­di­tions or hos­pital re-​​admission, and track groups of patients in need of health­care or guidance.

My under­standing of the field has grown expo­nen­tially. I learn some­thing every time I’m there.

— Cas­sidy Griffin, on her work at MEDITECH

Helen Suh, who directs Northeastern’s doc­toral pro­gram in pop­u­la­tion health and is a pro­fessor at Bouvé Col­lege of Health Sci­ences in the Depart­ment of Health Sci­ences, said Griffin emerged as the ideal can­di­date for this ini­tia­tive. She and pro­fessor Gary Young, Griffin’s aca­d­emic advisor, under­scored her strong quan­ti­ta­tive and ana­lyt­ical skills along with her aca­d­emic enthu­siasm and curiosity.

“Cas­sidy is get­ting a unique oppor­tu­nity to expe­ri­ence how cutting-​​edge research in pop­u­la­tion health and health­care delivery sci­ence can be used to improve quality of care and ser­vice effi­ciency in hos­pi­tals and other health­care delivery set­tings,” Young said, who in addi­tion to holding fac­ulty appoint­ments in the D’Amore-McKim School of Busi­ness and Bouvé, directs the university’s Center for Health Policy and Health­care Research.

Griffin raved about her expe­ri­ence thus far at MEDITECH. “My under­standing of the field has grown expo­nen­tially,” she said. “I learn some­thing every time I’m there.” What’s more, she’s seen her work trans­late directly to the class­room and vice versa, pointing to the lessons on care man­age­ment strate­gies dis­cussed in her Eval­u­ating Health­care Quality course, which Young teaches.

The doc­toral pro­gram in pop­u­la­tion health, which is based in Bouvé, is an inter­dis­ci­pli­nary pro­gram designed to train stu­dents to become out­standing researchers and public health leaders who under­stand the com­plex fac­tors that affect the health and well-​​being of var­ious pop­u­la­tions. Suh noted that the pop­u­la­tion health doc­toral pro­gram involves fac­ulty from across Bouvé as well as from D’Amore-McKim, the Col­lege of Social Sci­ences and Human­i­ties, the Col­lege of Engi­neering, and the Col­lege of Com­puter and Infor­ma­tion Sci­ences.

Through its inter­dis­ci­pli­nary lens, the pro­gram trains the next gen­er­a­tion of leaders in pop­u­la­tion health, a field that has con­nec­tions to almost every dis­ci­pline including man­age­ment, eco­nomics, soci­ology, epi­demi­ology, envi­ron­mental engi­neering, and statistics.

Chris­tine Silva, director for product man­agers in MEDITECH’s strategy divi­sion, over­sees the company’s pop­u­la­tion health ini­tia­tive and super­vises Griffin. She noted that pop­u­la­tion health man­age­ment is becoming increas­ingly impor­tant due to fac­tors such as the increase in the nation’s aging pop­u­la­tion, rising health­care costs, and evolving pay­ment and care delivery models that involve Big Data and ana­lytics, telemed­i­cine, and Account­able Care Organizations.

Silva said the data Griffin is com­piling and ana­lyzing is crit­ical to guiding the devel­op­ment of MEDITECH’s pop­u­la­tion health ser­vices. “Without her, we wouldn’t have that data,” Silva said. “For us, it’s a way to reach our cus­tomer base and get them tools they need to be successful.”