The man who designed the infamous “Hope” poster the campaign of President Barack Obama employed during the 2008 and 2012 elections to propel the abortion activist to the White House has some not-so-flattering comments about whether Obama’s presidency has been a success.

Has Obama’s two terms as president lived up to his expectations? Here’s what he said:

“Not even close,” Shepard Fairey said when asked in an Esquire interview published Thursday if Obama had lived up to the promise of his famous portrait. “Obama has had a really tough time, but there have been a lot of things that he’s compromised on that I never would have expected,” Fairey said. The graphic designer suggested Obama should be “more courageous” but acknowledged some of the president’s actions were out of his control.

The Obama presidency has been one of the most pro-abortion presidencies since Roe v. Wade with Obama repeatedly threatening to veto pro-life legislation and celebrating abortion. When it comes to Roe v. Wade, Obama has repeatedly voiced his support for the infamous abortion decision.

The Obamacare health care law President Obama signed contains absolutely no limits on abortion funding. Every pro-life group has confirmed that Obamacare will fund abortions and fund the Planned Parenthood abortion business. The pro-abortion mandate in Obamacare has led to more than 100 lawsuits from Catholic and evangelical groups, colleges, and businesses that would be subjected to millions in fines if they did not pay for abortion-causing drugs and birth control for their employees.

Obama has bent over backward to force taxpayers to fund the Planned Parenthood abortion business. He repeatedly refused to sign a bill in Congress to revoke its hundreds of millions in taxpayer funds and, on several occasions, he forced states to fund the abortion giant even after they approved legislation to de-fund it. Planned Parenthood’s funding jumped from 33% to nearly 50% – over $487 million in taxpayer funding now goes to the abortion giant (under Obama and his administration). This is almost half a billion dollars that American families are forced to pay in tax dollars to the nation’s largest abortion provider, Planned Parenthood.

On his third day in office, President Obama repealed the pro-life “Mexico City Policy.” By doing this, President Obama made groups that perform and promote abortion eligible for U.S. foreign aid funds.

In May 2012, the House of Representatives voted on legislation that would ban sex-selection abortions, which occur when the gender of the child is not preferred by the parents. A study by the Lozier Institute shows that sex-selection abortion is happening here in the United States, with unborn baby girls falling victim. The majority of U.S. representatives – 246-168 – voted in favor of this ban. President Obama opposed the ban on sex-selection abortions, saying, “The government should not intrude in medical decisions … in this way.”

After taking office, Obama immediately restored funding to the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), which helps implement China’s brutal One-Child Policy. From 2009 to 2011, $145 million has been appropriated for UNFPA, and $47 million was requested in the President’s 2012 budget.