(WSLS 10) – VDOT holds a public hearing tonight about proposed improvements to Route 696 at the intersection with Route 1101 and I-64. The purpose of the project is to alleviate congestion at exit 21 by installing traffic signals and adding turn lanes. The meeting begins at 4 p.m. at the Alleghany County Government Complex.

If you plan to sign up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act Exchange, the deadline is quickly approaching. To help you make the right choices, certified application counselors and insurance company representatives will be available starting at 1:30 at the Moore Education Building in Danville. They will answer any questions you have and help you enroll.

The Virginia Chamber Foundation and the Roanoke Regional Chamber present the State of the Commonwealth Report today. Produced by Old Dominion University, the independent report supports the chamber’s mission to strengthen Virginia’s long term competitiveness.

Twin County Regional Hospital in Galax holds a blood drive today ten until 2:30 at Twin County Regional Hospital. You must be at least 17 years old and weigh at least 110 pounds. Free Star Wars themed t-shirts will be give out. All donors during the month of December will be entered into a drawing for a $100 gift card and movie tickets.

Students at Holy Cross Regional Catholic School in Lynchburg will help those less fortunate today. They will make peanut butter and jelly sandwiches for soup kitchen The Daily Bread. You can help the students by donating loaves of 100% wheat bread, cereal and peanut butter and jelly.

Roanoke Public Libraries offers its next Indie Lens Pop-up film tonight by offering an advanced screening of the film “Autism in Love.” The film tells the story of four adults at different places on the autism spectrum as they explore dating and romantic relationships. The movie begins at 7:15 p.m. at the Grandin Theatre.

The Virginia Business Coalition on Health partners will partner with the Martinsville Henry County Chamber today to discuss trends in health care and insurance. The forum will give in business community information about changing market conditions and challenges affecting the health care industry and how those could affect local businesses. Speakers include representatives from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and hospital executives.