Will T. Scott

If Kentucky's elections were decided by entertainment value, former state Supreme Court Justice Will T. Scott would have already won this year's governor's race in a landslide.

Think the late Gatewood Galbraith with a thicker accent and sans a joint stuck in his hat band.

Whether it's jumping out of an airplane to bring attention to his plan for military veterans or telling stories about how his great granddaddy and his brother got shot by the Hatfields while on a scouting mission for the McCoys during the famous Eastern Kentucky feud, he's the most fun of all the candidates to hear speak.

"I just want to say real quick, if you elect me and you don't elect Will T. Scott, I'm going to find room for this guy cause he's got all the best lines," Matt Bevin, one of Scott's opponents in the GOP primary, said during a recent debate.

Just who is Scott? Let's let the Pikeville lawyer tell you:

"Good evening everybody, I'm Will T. Scott," he told a group on Thursday. "I'm from deep Eastern Kentucky, so far deep in Eastern Kentucky, if the surveyors who surveyed the state border had a been drunk, I would be in West Virginia. That's the truth."

He calls on his Republican foes to campaign on issues that they'll be able to accomplish with a Democratic House — and then to help elect a Republican House so they can do the things they really want to do.

"Why are we running on issues that you can't accomplish this year? He asked recently. "The House ran ... on the statewide right to work issue last year and got killed on it. We don't need to do anything 'til we take the House."

On education, he calls for more local and statewide control and an effort to give kids someone to look up to.

"All we have to do is get the United States out of this so we can get heroes like Daniel Boone, who didn't take drugs when he went west, or like Davy Crockett, you know. It tell you, they teach the wrong heroes."

And on the state's finances:

"I can guarantee you, when I get in there on the first day and I open the money cabinet there and look for money for next year, the only thing that's going to come out is a cockroach on crutches with tears in his eyes," he told a crowd at a tea party forum.

When the crowd broke the rules and began to clap and hoot when it liked one of his lines, The Justice, as he calls himself, encouraged civil disobedience. "Go ahead," he said. "I appreciate the applause."

And what to do with the folks in Frankfort, he says, "We just have to take a big broom and sweep them bats out of Frankfort, I'm telling you. There's some (bats) on the first floor, there's a couple on the second and several on the third floor."

And on the legislators in particular, he quotes a great philosopher — his father.

"My dad used to say that you could take all the legislators in Kentucky and line them up head to toe and they'd point in all different directions," he said.

The trouble for Scott is that we rarely elect candidates based on whether there are entertaining. Kentucky's political graveyard is full of candidates who were fun to watch but had little chance of winning.

This isn't 1933. Races now are won by professional political organizations and not catchy one-liners delivered from the stump. And they're won with money. Lots of it.

We're a month out from the primary and candidates and outside groups have already spent about $4.3 million buying television and radio air time. Expect that figure to double.

Scott hasn't spent a penny on television or radio.

Like most candidates, some of his ideas likely have merit. And like most candidates, others don't.

But you're not likely hear much of those ideas because of a political system (that we in the media are a part of) which rewards those with money and ignores those without it.

That's regrettable, but candidates must show some sort of ability to get their message out to the masses. "Free media" — news stories on television and radio and in newspapers — aren't enough to carry a candidate in today's world.

And that's why the most entertaining candidate in this year's election is showing up in polls heading for a 4th place finish.

So, on that note, we'll close with the words of Ol' Will T. himself: "I love every one of you and thanks for being so nice."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1yF29WK