An agreement between Tyler Junior College and Baylor University will aim to make it easier for students to transfer between the two schools.

TJC President Dr. Mike Metke and Baylor President and Chancellor Ken Starr signed the agreement Wednesday during a ceremony in TJC’s White Administrative Services Center Board Room.

“Through this partnership, (students) can achieve their … dreams without getting buried in debt,” Metke said before a packed room filled with TJC and Baylor personnel and alumni.

The agreement, which will be effective in fall 2015, is the second Baylor Bound program the university has launched. Baylor signed its first agreement last fall with McLennan Community College in Waco.

“We are thankful, proud, and we feel very blessed to be part of this partnership,” Starr said during the TJC signing ceremony.

The program works as follows. Students enroll full-time at TJC in the Baylor Bound program and become Baylor transfer students when they complete certain criteria.

Students can declare their intent to transfer to Baylor by submitting a Baylor Bound application before enrolling at TJC or while enrolled as a full-time student, according to a news release about the program.

Baylor’s Office of Admission Services will determine who is admitted to the program, according to the news release.

TJC Baylor Bound students can choose from 65 majors. Online resources provide information about the majors and course transfer equivalency between the two schools.

Most Baylor Bound students will take classes for one year at TJC followed by three years at Baylor. But, two years at each institution is a possibility in some programs and situations, according to the news release.

Students must enroll in an approved associate’s degree program, which will lead to an approved bachelor’s degree program.

Starr said the agreement makes sense educationally and in terms of efficiencies and controlling costs.

TJC Baylor Bound students will be part of a cohort of students with special Baylor-related benefits.

Advisers from both schools will help the students select courses that satisfy the program requirements to enable a successful transition from TJC to Baylor, according to the news release.

TJC Baylor Bound students also will receive information about scholarships and other resources available to transfer students.

With the strong Baylor alumni presence in East Texas, TJC officials are hoping to see scholarships develop specifically for Baylor Bound students.

“A quality education shouldn’t be out of reach for a family simply because they don’t have the resources,” Metke said. “Baylor Bound makes a first class education possible for these students.”