Sujuan Boutte, director of the state Office of Student Financial Assistance, answers lawmakers' questions about TOPS Sunday in the Capitol. (Photo: GREG HILBURN/GANNETT LOUISIANA) Story Highlights The proposed budget cuts funding from $250 million to $60 million

Only students with a minimum 28 ACT score would qualify

The average score is Louisiana is 19.2

Of those who do score a 28 or higher, the students who have the greatest financial need would be awarded first

BATON ROUGE — More than 37,000 Louisiana students would lose their TOPS college scholarships next year under the worst-case budget scenario presented by Gov. John Bel Edwards, the director of the Office of Student Financial Assistance told an alarmed Legislative Joint Budget Committee Sunday.

Edwards is clearly leveraging the popularity of TOPS, which has quickly become the third rail of Louisiana politics, to pressure lawmakers into raising taxes to fully fund the program, as well as other higher education and health care priorities.

RELATED: Answering questions about TOPS

Though students' who have TOPS are secure through the spring, next year would be a different story, said Sujuan Boutte of the Office of Student Financial Assistance.

"High school seniors are asking us if they're OK (for TOPS next year)," Boutte told the committee. "We really can't say whether they are or not. Until we know more we can't send the eligibility letters (to high school seniors)."

The proposed cut from more than $250 million to $60 million would eliminate about 80 percent of students currently eligible for TOPS. The number of scholarships would be reduced from about 46,000 to about 9,000.

It would also transform TOPS from a completely merit-based program to one that would be both merit- and needs-based. By law, if TOPS isn't fully funded, family income becomes a factor with the neediest students taken first.

"So TOPS becomes needs-based?" asked Joint Budget Chairman Eric LaFleur, D-Ville Platte.

"Yes," Boutte responded.

But that's not completely accurate. Those eligible would also have to score higher — much higher — on the ACT.

Currently, eligibility begins with an ACT score of 17 for TOPS Tech, a two-year award. Under the worst-case scenario it would take a 28 ACT score to qualify for any TOPS scholarship.

"Surely you're not correct," said freshman state Rep. Larry Bagley, R-Stonewall, a former teacher who said perhaps only one graduating senior from his previous school would score a 28 or higher.

"It's correct," Boutte said.

The average ACT score for Louisiana students is 19.2.

Of those who do score a 28 or higher, the students who have the greatest financial need would be awarded first, followed by those whose families are more affluent.

If more money is appropriated the ACT score requirement would be lowered to 27, 26, etc.

Gov. John Bel Edwards also mentioned TOPS in his address to the Legislature later Sunday to begin the special session.

"While students won’t be billed for the shortage of TOPS funds this semester, the future of TOPS, a program that I will fight tooth and nail to protect, is at risk, and therefore, so is the future for our children," Edwards said.

Follow Greg Hilburn on Twitter @GregHilburn1

Read or Share this story: http://tnsne.ws/1Xs3S9o