Campolieto

& Ruggiero

Frank J. Ruggiero earned a selection to the 2015 list as a member of the Nation’s Top One Percent from the National Association of Distinguished Counsel, an organization dedicated to promoting the highest standards of legal excellence. The organization aims to recognize the attorneys who elevate the standards of the bar and provide a benchmark for other lawyers to emulate. His practice concentrates on litigation pertaining to family law, criminal law, insurance law and municipal law. Attorney Ruggiero has also been selected as a Pennsylvania Super Lawyer for 2015.

Endless Mountains Heritage Region

Annette Schultz will serve as the new executive director of the agency. Ms. Schultz has more than 25 years of planning experience and will begin work on June 1. As executive director, Ms. Schultz will work to improve the overall function of the agency’s office in Towanda, revise the management action plan, review previous rounds of grant funding, increase contact with agency members, procure new income sources, review bylaws and personnel policies and continue ongoing work with partner agencies and project partners. The agency primarily serves Bradford, Sullivan, Susquehanna and Wyoming counties.

Eyewitness News

Mike Skurko, a meteorologist, joined the Eyewitness Weather team. A Pennsylvania native and a 2008 Penn State graduate with a Bachelor of Science in meteorology, Mr. Skurko comes to Eyewitness News from WSHM-TV, the CBS affiliate station in Springfield, Massachusetts, where he worked as a meteorologist and a reporter. He also earned the 2013 Edward R. Murrow Award for Best News Documentary, “One Year Later: Remembering the Western Mass Tornado.” Mr. Skurko also serves as a member of the American Meteorological Society. He will deliver the forecast weekdays from 5 to 7 a.m. on WBRE and WYOU, at 11 a.m. on WBRE and at noon on WYOU.

First National Community Bank

The bank recognized 17 employees with 10 or more years of service during a luncheon at Glenmaura Country Club, Moosic. Employees honored included Joseph Castrogiovanni, commercial lending, and Christine Dench, retail banking, for 25 years of service; John Brudnicki, facilities, Lisa Kinney, retail lending, and Christopher Kunz, technology services, for 20 years of service; Katie Burrell, credit, Jennifer Grullon, retail administration, Leigh Ann Nelson, retail banking, Maribeth Nihen, indirect lending, Rosemarie Stanziale, retail banking, and Theresa Verdon, finance, for 15 years of service; and Jeff Cosmark, mortgage processing, Marybeth Demko, commercial lending, Deborah Diehl, mortgage processing, Shayna Shramko, retail banking, Dorothy Smith, finance, and Colleen Sweeney, retail banking, for 10 years of service.

JCPenney

Staff members from the local store recently volunteered their time with United Neighborhood Centers of Northeastern Pennsylvania, cleaning up Camp St. Andrew in Tunkhannock, ahead of the opening of Project Hope Summer Camp.

Keystone Financial Management

Jason Monteagudo, an investment adviser representative with the agency, earned the Chartered Financial Consultant professional designation from the American College, Bryn Mawr. Candidates for the designation must complete a minimum of nine courses and 18 hours of supervised examinations. They must also fulfill stringent experience and ethics requirements. Individuals who earn the designation can provide advice on a broad range of financial topics, including wealth accumulation and estate planning, income taxation, life and health insurance, business taxation and planning, investments and retirement planning.

Klehr Harrison Harvey

Branzburg LLP

Lisa Lori, a partner in the litigation department at the firm in Philadelphia, conducted a presentation to the Philadelphia Bar Association May 13, entitled “Cybersecurity: Risks and Responses.” Ms. Lori serves as a trial lawyer and business adviser who focuses her practice on complex commercial litigation, including intellectual property, employment and fraud matters and investigations. Born and raised in Luzerne County, Ms. Lori obtained her law degree from Temple University, Beasley School of Law, and her undergraduate degree from Marywood University. The daughter of Arthur and Rosemary Lori of Pittston, she also serves as a member of the board of trustees of Marywood University.

Landmark

Community Bank

Krishnakant Patel, M.D., joined the bank’s advisory board. Dr. Patel serves as a board-certified family practitioner affiliated with five local hospitals, including Geisinger Wyoming Valley Medical Center and Wilkes-Barre General Hospital. His practice has been located at InterMountain Medical Group in Shavertown since 2004. Dr. Patel graduated from Pramuhkswami Medical College, Karamsad, Gujarat. He resides with his family in Shavertown.

Marywood

University

David Jumper, assistant professor of jazz studies and technology, advanced to the quarterfinals for the Grammy Foundation’s Music Educator Award, established to recognize current educators who make a significant and lasting contribution to the field of music education and demonstrate a commitment to the broader cause of maintaining music education in schools. A joint partnership and presentation of the Recording Academy and the Grammy Foundation, the award will be presented at the Special Merit Awards Ceremony and Nominees Reception, that honors recipients of the Lifetime Achievement Award, Trustees Award and Technical Grammy Award, during Grammy Week 2016.

Misericordia

University

John R. Ash, Ph.D., R.E.M.T-P., M.H.A., F.A.C.H.E., an adjunct faculty member of the business and health care administration programs at the university, made the presentation, “The Affordable Care Act: Its Impact on Your Ambulance Subscription Program,” at the Ambulance Association of Pennsylvania’s 2015 Reimbursement Conference in Hershey. Dr. Ash addressed how the Affordable Care Act requires all suppliers of health care services to change the way they do business, including the emergency medical services industry. Dr. Ash, president and CEO of EMS Management Systems Inc. and Modern Health Strategies Inc., is board certified in health care administration and a fellow of the American College of Healthcare Executives.

O’Donnell Law Offices

Michael O’Donnell of the Kingston law offices earned certification as a specialist in the practice of workers’ compensation law from the Pennsylvania Bar Association Workers’ Compensation Law Section. Mr. O’Donnell also passed the certification examination that focuses on workers’ compensation law and rules and leading case law. The certification will permit Mr. O’Donnell to use the language, “Certified as a specialist in the practice of workers’ compensation law by the Pennsylvania Bar Association’s Section on Workers’ Compensation Law as authorized by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court,” when communicating with clients and to the public.

Attorney Neil T. O’Donnell, owner and founder at the law offices, earned a spot on the Pennsylvania Super Lawyer list for 2015 and recognition as a Pennsylvania Top 100 Super Lawyer.

Attorney Catherine R. O’Donnell earned a selection as a Pennsylvania Super Lawyer for 2015, which marks the fifth time she received the honor.

Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals of Luzerne County

Todd Hevner joined the society as its new executive director. Mr. Hevner has experience in animal welfare, having worked previously as the operations manager for the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals of York County. Mr. Hevner and his wife, Sara, relocated to Luzerne County and have four pit bulls, Chopper, Lola, Pumpkin and Scuba Steve.

SUBMIT BUSINESS BUZZ items to business

@timesshamrock.com or The Times-Tribune, 149 Penn Ave., Scranton, PA 18503.