Video

Infectious Disease News has compiled a list of the most viewed news articles and videos from ICAAC 2014. This list represents the wide range of scientific topics discussed at this year’s conference.

1. Peramivir safe, effective in treating influenza symptoms

WASHINGTON, D.C. — A single dose of the antiviral peramivir was safe and effective in treating influenza in adult patients when administered within 48 hours of the onset of symptoms, according to new data presented here at ICAAC 2014.

Richard Whitley

“Based on clinical data, peramivir is the first neuramindase inhibitor that has shown to be safe and effective as a single-dose therapy for patients with acute, uncomplicated influenza,” study researcher Richard Whitley, MD, distinguished professor of pediatrics and director of the division of pediatric infectious diseases at the University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, said in a press release. “According to a retrospective combined analysis of two clinical studies, a single dose of peramivir, administered intramuscularly, alleviated flu symptoms, including fever, significantly faster than the studies’ placebo arms.” Read more.

2. P. aeruginosa septicemia incidence on the rise among hospitalized adults

WASHINGTON, D.C. — The incidence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa septicemia has increased among hospitalized adults within recent years and there has been no evident improvement in mortality or length of hospital stay.

Brian Werth

“Data from a recent study demonstrated that the incidence of septicemia overall increased 32.4% from 2005-2010, but in the same time period, we found that P. aeruginosa septicemia increased by 51.2%,” Brian Werth, PharmD, assistant professor in the University of Washington School of Pharmacy, told Infectious Disease News. “It’s outpacing the general trend of septicemia as a whole, which may be an indicator that the increase in septicemia might be related to multidrug-resistant pathogens.” Read more.

3. Researchers propose new strategies to combat antimicrobial resistance

WASHINGTON, D.C. — Leonard Sacks, MD, acting deputy director of the office of medical policy at the FDA, discusses innovative approaches to combating antimicrobial resistance and the challenges of implementing those strategies.

In particular, Sacks discusses potential new bacterial targets that are not subject to mutation, the use of different drug combinations, and new tactics, such as the use of siderophores, to penetrate bacteria and deliver antibiotics.

4. Antibiotic stewardship program reduced costs, infection rates

WASHINGTON, D.C. — Antibiotic stewardship program interventions at the New York Hospital Queens correlated with a decrease in multidrug-resistant organisms and Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea infection rates, as well as a decrease in antibiotic expenditure, according to new data.

Nishant Prasad

“This work emphasizes the rational approach to treating patients: choosing antibiotics at correct doses only when really needed, limiting side effects, limiting the selection of super bugs and limiting the risk of infection to new patients admitted to hospitals,” Nishant Prasad, MD, of the division of infectious diseases at the New York Hospital Queens, said in a press release. Read more.

5. Carbapenem-resistant bacteria found in 2016 Olympic rowing location in Brazil

WASHINGTON, D.C. — Data presented here indicate the presence of carbapenem-resistant bacteria in the Rodrigo de Freitas Lagoon in Rio de Janeiro, which is the designated venue for rowing events during the 2016 Olympics.

The researchers also found bacteria producing the Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenamase in the Carioca River, which flows through several neighborhoods in Rio de Janeiro, and into Flamengo Beach, according to the researchers from the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation. Read more.