WASHINGTON -- When Congress returns next Tuesday from its summer recess, whatever happens in terms of healthcare will be largely dependent on how larger budget issues are resolved, according to several experts.

"The big thing, obviously, is that there will be a discussion about how to fund the government for the next fiscal year," said Elizabeth Carpenter, vice-president at Avalere, a healthcare consulting firm here. "We're a few weeks from the end of the fiscal year, so a Continuing Resolution or appropriations discussion will likely be tops on the list." Those results will affect healthcare funding, including funding for the National Institutes of Health, she said in a phone interview.

After that, "the next big thing is the debt ceiling, which I have not seen the latest estimate [for], but I think at this point that [discussion] has moved into next year," she continued. "That will be kind of the next potential showdown in Congress."

Another possible healthcare-related agenda item for Congress is budget reconciliation, noted Edwin Park, JD, vice-president for health policy at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a left-leaning think tank here. "When Congress enacts a budget plan ... it includes budget reconciliation instructions," Park explained in a phone interview.

The advantage of budget reconciliation bills is that they only need 51% of votes to pass -- rather than the 2/3 majority required for other types of legislation -- and they are not subject to filibusters, so they are good places to insert controversial pieces of legislation that might not otherwise have a chance, as along as they are related to spending or revenues, and they don't add to the deficit, as required by Congressional rules.

However, "the congressional Republican leadership seems uncertain about what would go in the reconciliation bill healthcare-wise, and the timing," said Park. "It doesn't seem like it would be in September, but maybe later in the fall."

As to what might be included, "there is some discussion about having some Affordable Care Act (ACA) provisions repealed, like some mandates, maybe for employers [and individuals], and the medical device tax," he continued. However, President Obama is certain to veto any bill containing such provisions, and since a 2/3 majority is needed to override a veto, the president's veto would very likely be upheld.

"Reconciliation is really a political exercise on the part of Congressional leaders, but it will suck up a fair amount of time and oxygen this fall," Park added.

Even legislation that most members of Congress appear to agree on, such as the 21st Century Cures bill, will likely take a back seat to the larger budgetary issues, according to Park. In the case of 21st Century Cures, which passed the House on July 10th, "the Senate is developing its own bill, but from all of the reports I've heard, the Senate won't work on its own version until next year," he said.

There are a few healthcare issues, however, that may bubble up to the surface. "There are signs that certain 'tweaks' to the ACA, including repeal of the so-called Cadillac Tax [on expensive health insurance plans], could gain a certain amount of momentum, though wholesale repeal drives will also likely continue," Daniel Ehlke, PhD, assistant professor of health policy and management at the State University of New York-Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn, said in an email to MedPage Today. "Though there is scant possibility of any serious gun control legislation, recent events have led some to suggest that support for reform of various mental health provisions could gather steam."

Although not much healthcare legislation is expected from Congress in the coming weeks and months, "the passage of the 'Doc Fix' -fix earlier this year, however, shows that the legislature can occasionally surprise in this regard," he added.

Kip Piper, a healthcare consultant here, suggested one other possibility. "Congress will face a new problem when [the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services] announces the Medicare Part B premiums for 2016," he wrote in an email. "Because of the intricacies of the statutory formula and the fact that about 70% of beneficiaries are protected to some degree from big increases in premiums, about 30% of beneficiaries are ultimately responsible for 100% of the annual increases. This means many seniors will likely face a Part B premium increase of 40% or more."