During this panel discussion on Fox News Channel's "The Five," former Bush speechwriter Dana Perino blows up trying to respond to fellow panelist Jesse Water's discussion of Trump's immigration reform plan, which included: "Maybe the illegal alien families build the wall. Then when the wall’s finished, then they get amnesty. That’s called earned amnesty... It’s going to be a trail of tears. But... I don’t buy the whole crocodile tears from these liberals, oh, you know, ‘What’s going to happen?’ We know what they think is going to happen. We saw what Kelly Osbourne said. … They think of these people as servants. And you what? If these Mexican women were coming to this country legally, and having babies, and these babies were growing up to vote Republican, the Democrats would be building a bigger wall than Trump."





DANA PERINO: You think they're just going to line up and get on the bus?



KIMBERLY GUILFOYLE: I'm pinching myself... Is [this conversation] really happening? Is this real?



TOM SHILUE: I think most people think that wouldn't happen. There wouldn't be mass deportations, so they like the sound of Trump's plan.



DANA PERINO: This has been my problem from the beginning. It sounds good, and it’s totally unworkable, and impractical, and it will never happen. And you’re selling people a bill of goods to make them feel better. You’re not going to bring back all the jobs from China. The Mexicans are not going to build the wall…they’re not going to do it.



And the other thing is, the DREAM Act, when President Obama signed that, I think the approval rating for that was something near 70%.



And I thought at the time, ‘Who in the future, would ever try to take this back?’ And I thought, ‘No Republican candidate is ever going to do that.’ It can only be — it could only stay.



Now you have President Trump — maybe that’s a Freudian slip, saying that he would — just trust him, it’s going to happen.



I would love to see you and you [pointing at Watters and Tom Shillue] have to go find some families, round them up, and say, ‘Sorry, I know you’ve been here for several years. I know your children were born here in the Bronx. But you, you’re from Costa Rica. You’re all out of here.’



And the — and I would love to see you two have to go and do that, because I don’t want any federal government employee to have to do, what is so asinine that you guys are coming up with...



JESSE WATERS: I think the federal courts are going to throw out Obama's executive amnesty before we get to a "President Trump..."



PERINO: No!



Let’s talk about the judicial system for a second. He’s suggesting basically doing away with birthright citizenship.



Okay, so you’re telling people in America we’re going to end that. That actually — it’s not easy, one of the things that drives people crazy about President Obama is the imperial presidency.







JESSE WATERS: Are you surprised that a politician is saying he’s going to do things in a primary, and maybe not — doesn’t when he’s president?



PERINO: I'm surprised that you'd fall for it. Do you think that this Supreme Court is going to overturn a century of established immigraion law?



WATERS: This happens all the time.



PERINO: Right. But you’re in journalism. Don’t you want to hold people accountable?



...



I actually think there’s something that Donald Trump could do that would even be more effective, which is to talk about — if he wants to talk about African-American youth unemployment, there’s actually two liberal policies that have really lead and exacerbated it. And the first one is, minimum wage laws, that have ratcheted up so much, that, if you’re in a state, and you have a choice between buying a robot, or hiring two teens, you choose the robot, because it’s just economics. The second thing is, the negative consequences of Obamacare, and the part-time worker issue has really exacerbated the African-American unemployment issue. So, I think there are things that he could actually talk about.