CHUCK BALDWIN WRONG ABOUT RYAN ZINKE





By Dr. Ed Berry, Ph.D

October 18, 2014

NewsWithViews.com

Pastor Chuck Baldwin’s “Ryan Zinke: The Greater Evil” rejects accepted Christian theology, supports Alinsky-trained Obama’s plan for America, and tells you to vote for an unqualified Democrat rather than for highly-qualified Navy Seal Commander Ryan Zinke for Montana’s sole seat in the US Congress.

Baldwin refers to me as “a local online Republican hack”. I am editor and publisher of PolyMontana.com and I will reveal the truth about Chuck Baldwin and correct his lies about Ryan Zinke.

Baldwin writes Republican Ryan Zinke is “a big-government, pro-war, pro-Police State Neocon” but provides no evidence to support his claims.

I know Ryan Zinke very well. Zinke is for small government, anti-war except when necessary to defend America, anti-police state, and not a neocon.

If Baldwin were concerned about truth, he would have attended the noon meeting of the Kalispell Pachyderm Club on October 3, 2014, and asked Zinke questions. But Baldwin is not concerned about truth.

The Southern Poverty Law Center claims Baldwin is “a leader in the anti-government Patriot movement” but Baldwin’s actions favoring Democrats suggest he is a leader in the “pro-government anti-Patriot” movement.

Since moving to Montana in 2010, Baldwin has regularly attacked Republican candidates and promoted the Voting Mantra that helps elect Democrats.

Baldwin’s diatribe against Ryan Zinke boils down to three claims that I define for reference:

1. The Voting Mantra: “A vote for the lesser of two evils is still a vote for evil.”

2. The Moron Mantra: “Republicans are as bad as Democrats.”

3. The Voting Decision: Democrat John Lewis is the better candidate for US Congress than Republican Ryan Zinke.

The False Voting Mantra

Baldwin confuses the Voting Mantra with Republican Party politics. They are separate.

Philosopher Kempis rejected the Voting Mantra and recommended its opposite in the 15th century in his The Imitation of Christ, where he wrote “Of two evils we should always choose the less.”

Philosopher St. Thomas Aquinas confirmed Kempis’s conclusion in his Summa Theologica, where he tells us our moral duty is to vote to achieve the most possible good and cautions we cannot achieve good by voting for a candidate who cannot win.

Philosopher Pope John Paul II agreed with Kempis and Aquinas in his Evangelium Vitae (The Encyclicals of John Paul II and The Genius of John Paul II). He wrote circumstances can create compelling reasons to vote for the so-called “lesser of two evils” if we can help prevent worse evils from occurring. In the example of abortion, he wrote we should vote for a more restrictive abortion law, or the “lesser of two evils”, over a less restrictive abortion law:

“This does not in fact represent an illicit cooperation with an unjust law, but rather a legitimate and proper attempt to limit its evil aspects, in order to prevent worse legislation from being adopted.”

The clear statements of Kempis, Aquinas, Pope John Paul II, and others, let us formulate the True Voting Principle:

True Voting Principle: “Our moral duty is to vote to achieve the mostpossible good, which eliminates voting for candidates who cannot win.”

The Protestant Revolution did not reject the historical Catholic position on voting. All major Christian religions accept the True Voting Principle.

The True Voting Principle requires us not set mandatory conditions for a candidate to get our vote because that would conflict with our compromise necessary to achieve the most possible good.

The True Voting Principle leaves to each person the decision of how to vote to achieve the most possible good.

Some evangelicals believe they cannot vote for a candidate who is not 100 percent anti-abortion. Their belief is immoral because not voting cannot achieve the greater good.

America’s Founding Fathers used the True Voting Principle to create our Constitution. Had they set mandatory conditions we would not have our Constitution.

Baldwin’s Moral Errors

Baldwin’s first moral error is adopting the Voting Mantra cult which conflicts with all major religions. The 1960’s progressives started it.Third-parties adopted it. But it never worked and progressives abandoned it after their loss to Bush in 2000.

Baldwin’s second moral error is setting mandatory conditions for his vote, which makes impossible the political compromise necessary to achieve the most possible good.

Oath Keepers National Chaplain Baldwin, Oath Keepers founder Stewart Rhodes, and the John Birch Society moved to Montana in 2010 and infiltrated Montana’s tea parties. They preach the Voting Mantra, deceive tea party voters to vote Libertarian, and thereby helped elect Democrats Tester as US Senator and Steve Bullock as Governor. George Soros could not have been happier.

Baldwin claims “Republicans are as bad as Democrats”. In 2012, Baldwin attacked Mitt Romney and helped Barack Obama:

“… Romney-Ryan administration will do nothing to change the downward spiral of the nation. They will continue the fanatical interventionist, preemptive war policies of Obama and Bush. They will also continue to build and construct the Orwellian domestic Police State …”

Baldwin ignores that Obama is the first Alinsky-trained, progressive US President who hates America and whose goal is to make America a second-rate country. Hillary, the other Alinsky-trained progressive, is in line to put the last nail in America’s coffin.

Top US Generals say Obama killing America say Obama and his staff are dumbest national security leaders America has ever had, they have put America in grave danger, Obama changed the US position from fighting terrorism to aiding and comforting terrorism, Obama may cause a Constitutional Crisis if he continues to refuse to protect the American people from the threat of ISIS and radical Islam, and, if this occurs, it may be necessary for the US Military to remove Obama from office.

Obama appointed 2 Supreme Court judges. One more and Obama will swing the present conservative-liberal balance from 5-4 to 4-5.

Obama plans to change our electoral system to reflect popular vote by executive order, which will make America a one-party system.

The Republican Platform is much more conservative than the Democrat Platform.

GOP resolutions oppose Democrats in securing our borders, immigration, religious freedom in the military, common core education, marriage and children, accountability of DHS, support for a strong space program, exposing UN Agenda 21, opposing UN global taxes, Federal Reserve transparency, protecting our Second Amendment from UN interference, stopping Obama’s plan to bypass the Electoral College, and rejection of cap-and-trade.

Democrat votes with zero Republicans passed Obamacare and its tax increases. 46 Democrats vote against Second Amendment. 47 Democrats vote against First Amendment.

Republicans support,and Democrats do not support,CFACT’s “Climate Truth File” and “Energy & Environment Truth File”.

If you are conservative, you will favor Republicans.

The Voting Decision

Republican Ryan Zinke has an MBA in Finance, an MS in Global Leadership, and a BS in Geology. He was a Commander of Special Forces in Kosovo and Iraq, and the Dean of Special Forces Training and Education. He saw combat in Bosnia/Kosovo and Iraq, and earned two Bronze Stars in Iraq.

Oath Keepers National Chaplain Chuck Baldwin tells us to vote for the Democrat John Lewis over Republican Navy Commander Ryan Zinke, using arguments that could not pass muster in the third grade.

Baldwin regurgitates Miller’s claims against Zinke but Baldwin did not disclose Miller was helping Rosendale’s primary campaign against Zinke, and Miller had ethics claims against him in his 2012 run for governor. Baldwin regurgitates Larry Bailey’s claims against Zinke but Baldwin did not disclose Ryan Zinke’s reply that shows Bailey’s claims are invalid.

Baldwin claims military officer experience is of no value in Congress but he has no military experience so how would he know? The fact is basic college ROTC training, like I had at Caltech, is invaluable to understanding our military’s role in defending America. Everyone in Congress should have this basic education. So should preachers.

Here’s a factual comparison of Ryan Zinke to John Walsh.

Here are debate videos showing Zinke demolishing Lewis.

Voter’s Edge writes:

• John Lewis has no political experience or political accomplishments.

• John Lewis has never had a real job. His only employment was as an assistant to Montana Democratic Senator Max Baucus from 2003 to 2013.

• John Lewis’ education is limited to a BA degree in political science, Western Washington University

JohnLewis4Congress.com writes “John Lewis is bad for Montana”:

• After more than a decade working under Baucus, John Lewis has pocketed over $568,000 of taxpayers’ money.

• Lewis has been laying the groundwork for his campaign by visiting every county in Montana on the taxpayers’ dime.

• Lewis has spent nearly 12 years working under Baucus and was a top aide to the “chief architect” of Obamacare.

John Lewis is a global-warming eco-freak who will help Obama shut down American energy production because he believes our carbon dioxide emissions are destroying the planet.

I have spent many hours talking to Ryan Zinke. He is the most honest, intellectual political candidate I have ever known. He is sincere and truthful. He has children who are in the military. He has seen war and he does not support war except when necessary to defend America.

Personally, I cannot imagine having a better representative in Congress than Navy Commander, Seal Team Leader, Ryan Zinke. He is humble and sincere. He cares about people. He listens to you. He never boasts.

Here are some facts about Ryan Zinke where the percent scores come from VoteSmart:

Zinke is prolife. NARAL scored Zinke 0% because he was the only candidate to carry the “Assault on Unborn Victims” bill in the Montana Senate. Montana Family Foundation scored Zinke 90%, the Montana Women’s lobby 20%, and the Human Rights Network 25%, which are excellent pro-life scores. Zinke is endorsed by the National Right to Life Committee.

Zinke supports local control of education. MEA-MFT, which is about union control rather, scored Zinke 25% for not voting in its favor. Zinke wrote,“I firmly believe we must ensure more local control of our schools and give parents a stronger voice.” Download Zinke’s “Excelling in Education”.

Zinke strongly supports our Second Amendment. Montana Shooting Sports Association (MSSA) scored Zinke 69% and Lewis 0%. Zinke scored 100%on his 2014 reply to MSSA but returned it too late to be logged.

Zinke protects private property. United Property Owners of Montana scored Zinke 90%.

Zinke strongly supports a peacetime balanced budget amendment and a dramatic reduction in the size and scope of government. He wants government to get out of the way of business and cut burdensome regulation. Montana Chamber of Commerce rated Zinke 92%. Download Zinke’s “Bringing high-tech jobs to Montana”.

Zinke believes coal, oil, and gas energy development is critical to growing America’s economy and energy independence. He supports renewable energy provided it competes on the open market without subsidies. Download Zinke’s “Energy Plan – Powering our Economy”.

Zinke believes Obamacare is reckless and will lead to higher costs with less medical care. He supports the alternative Republican US Congress healthcare plan.

Zinke supports a strong national defense. He calls for action against ISIS and for action to save our US Marine held hostage in Mexico.

Democrats promote United Nations Agenda 21. Republicans oppose Agenda 21.

Democrats want the feds to own our land and water. Ryan Zinke will keep Montana’s land and water under Montana control.

For more information, read Ryan Zinke’s America and click here and here.

Libertarians should vote for Ryan Zinke because he scores 100% in The Daily Signal’s three areas where conservatives and libertarians share the same values: (1) Preference for small government, (2) Support for “religious liberty”, (3) Belief in a strong, stable family structure.

Conclusions

Baldwin’s Voting Mantra conflicts with all major religions.

By promoting Lewis over Zinke, Baldwin is not a “freedom fighter”.

Montanans are very concerned about the Federal government taking control of Montana’s water. Ryan Zinke is the only candidate who will ensure Montana’s water remains under the ownership and control of the State of Montana.

Ryan Zinke is clearly the best choice for all Montanans, conservatives, Libertarians, and tea party voters.

© 2014 Edwin X Berry, PhD – All Rights Reserved