Here in the nation’s capital, where every statement, action, and gesture is viewed through a partisan prism, Pope Francis’ three-day visit left Democrats gloating and Republicans reeling.

At the time of the largest Republican congressional majority in a century, they abruptly lost their House speaker. One day John Boehner was standing proudly by the pope; the next day he was a lame duck. It was an odd development, really, one that recalled Republican political operative Lee Atwater’s reminder that in American politics “perception is reality.”

Fissures within the GOP certainly existed prior to the pontiff’s uplifting journey to America, but it was astounding to see how the soothing words of a wildly popular pope exacerbated divisions between the Republican establishment and restive Tea Party conservatives. It should worry anyone who cares about the Party of Lincoln.

Abraham Lincoln, incidentally, was one of four Americans Francis mentioned by name. The others were Martin Luther King Jr., Catholic activist and union organizer Dorothy Day, and pacifist Thomas Merton, a Trappist monk. As columnist Melinda Henneberger noted, “that is one lefty list.”

Without even knowing that, a handful of congressional conservatives expressed prior misgivings about the pope’s speech on the grounds that he’s been talking a lot about global warming and the excesses of corporate capitalism. Rep. Paul Gosar, a Catholic Republican from Arizona , chose to boycott the pope’s speech because he “chooses to act and talk like a leftist politician.”

Gosar’s religious faith and roots in the church seem to run deep, so one shouldn’t be dismissive of such remarks , but refusing to attend the pope’s speech seemed petty. It also proved premature. Francis didn’t even utter the words “climate change.” Knowing his audience better than Congressman Gosar knew the head of his church, Francis instead inveighed against “environmental deterioration” caused by “human activity.” Who can disagree with that?

Speaking in the U.S Capitol, the pope also did not call for open borders, but instead drew attention the plight of those who “are led to travel north in search of a better life for themselves and their loved ones.”

“Is this not what we want for our own children?” he added in a statement that could easily have come from Jeb Bush. Afterward, Sen. Ted Cruz, another of the 2016 presidential hopefuls, grudgingly lauded the pope’s speech, which in itself is a minor miracle.

“It inspired me to be a better person in my personal life,” Cruz said, “but I didn't take a legislative mandate from it.”

Two asides about Cruz’s temperate response: First, inspiring his listeners is all the pope is trying to achieve. Second, Cruz’s equanimity didn’t last long. With the pope still on American soil—he was at Ground Zero in New York—Cruz greeted the news Boehner’s resignation thusly:

“If it is correct that the speaker, before he resigns, has cut a deal with Nancy Pelosi to fund the Obama administration for the rest of this year, to fund Obamacare, to fund executive amnesty, to fund Planned Parenthood, to fund implementation of this Iran deal, and then presumably to land a cushy K Street job after joining with the Democrats to implement all of President Obama’s priorities, that is not the behavior one would expect from a Republican speaker of the House.”

That’s a mouthful, but it’s a fairly concise recitation of the Tea Party-fueled view of the speaker.

A devout Catholic from a heartland congressional district in southern Ohio, Boehner is a longtime fiscal conservative and small government advocate who has worked for the pro-life cause all his political life. That’s not enough in today’s GOP. Boehner’s problem is that he has other loyalties, namely to his church and to the House of Representatives. In this instance, those two loyalties dovetailed nicely. After listening to Francis urge members of Congress to live by the Golden Rule, Boehner told reporters, he went home and told his wife he was quitting Congress.

He was doing so, he explained Friday, as an act of fealty to the legislative branch of government. Amplifying on this sentiment, Boehner said he believes a speaker’s first duty is to “protect the institution.” Some three dozen Republican members, most of them elected in the 2010 Tea Party tsunami, disagree. They see a nation facing $18 trillion in debt, underfunded entitlement programs extending unchecked into the future, and a U.S. foreign policy in disarray — and believe that the institutions and politicians responsible for this mess should be held to account. To them, another partial government shutdown is a price worth paying.

So Boehner’s loyalty to Congress wasn’t enough to save his job, and probably cost him his job. He didn’t look like a man who was leaving with any regrets. He looked like a guy who’d figured out a way to keep the government running at least until he steps down. He also looked like someone who’d fulfilled a quest. He spent 20 years trying to get a pope to speak to a joint session of Congress. Francis was the third one who’d been invited at Boehner’s instigation. He made the decision to quit, he suggested, after spending a brief moment alone with his holiness.

The Bishop of Rome, as Francis prefers to be called, took Boehner by the arm and thanked him for his work on behalf of underprivileged children.

“Pray for me,” Francis then asked.

“Who am I to pray for the pope?” Boehner recalled. “But I did.”