More than 20 million Americans suffer from depression, according to the NIH. (iStockPhoto)

Just over a third of people who have severe depression report having contact with a mental health professional during the past year, even though medication and therapy is known to be the most effective treatment against the condition, a new government report shows.

Released Wednesday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the report looked at depression rates from 2009 to 2012, finding that percentages of treatment remain low, and that the treatment received often is inadequate.

In collecting data, depressive symptoms were evaluated as lasting more than two weeks. According to the National Institutes of Health, more than 20 million people in the United States have depression. Its symptoms go beyond feeling sad for a few days, and interfere with people's daily lives, causing energy loss, feelings of worthlessness, problems with sleeping, or thoughts of death or suicide. It is considered a disorder of the brain that is due to a variety of causes, whether genetic, environmental, psychological or biochemical.



[READ: Obamacare Hasn't Propelled Mental Health Treatment]

The report showed that nearly 90 percent of people with severe depression report difficulty with work, home, or social activities because of their symptoms. Still, the majority do not seek mental health treatment. The report did not elaborate on potential causes for why people avoid treatment, and did not collect data on whether people seek care less often if they are below the poverty level.

The CDC findings reveal also that depression can vary by age, gender, race and poverty level. It also is associated with higher rates of other chronic disease, use of other health care services, and impaired functioning, according to the report.

Some other key findings:



Depression rates in the U.S. by age and by gender. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

7.6 percent of Americans aged 12 and over had moderate or severe depressive symptoms during the past 2 weeks in which they were interviewed.

In every age group, women had higher rates of depression than men, and rates of depression increased by age.

The highest rate of depression was among adults aged 40 to 59, but adults 60 and over had a lower rate of depression than their younger counterparts.

Men aged 12 to 17 had the lowest rates of depression.

[ALSO: Thanksgiving Reality for Some: Stress, Anxiety, Depression]

Race variations for depression. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

About 3 percent of Americans aged 12 and older had severe depressive symptoms, while almost 78 percent had no symptoms.

Non-Latino blacks had a higher rate of severe depressive symptoms than non-Latino whites.

Non-Latino blacks and Latinos had higher rates of mild and moderate depressive symptoms than non-Latino whites.

Non-Latino whites were more likely to have no depressive symptoms than either non-Latino blacks or Latinos.

[MORE: CDC Report Examines Obesity and Antidepressants]

Depression rates among poverty levels in the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention