By Kay Fate, Post-Bulletin, Rochester, Minn. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

March 05 --A Dover man once convicted of conspiring to have his brother killed is now a free man.

William James Shorter , now 42, was convicted in July 2009 by an Olmsted County jury of conspiracy to commit premeditated first-degree murder, then sentenced to 15 years in prison.

Shorter and his ex-wife were accused of devising a scheme to take out life insurance policies in the name of William's brother, John, and then kill him to collect the money to save the family farm. The couple was arrested shortly after Brenda Shorter assaulted her brother-in-law on April 24, 2008 .

William Shorter appealed the jury's decision, and in an opinion published Jan. 14, 2013 , the Minnesota Court of Appeals ruled he was entitled to a hearing for his claim of newly discovered evidence: namely, his ex-wife's testimony in her trial for the same incident.

William Shorter said that his ex-wife's testimony, which came six months after his trial, is new evidence, because Brenda Shorter's "motivation, mindset and version of events" was never disclosed to anyone, including his defense counsel, before her trial.

Brenda Shorter denied there was a conspiracy, saying that she assaulted John Shorter out of anger over his mistreatment of the farm animals.

In late August, Olmsted County District Court Judge Kevin Lund ruled that William Shorter was entitled to a new trial. The state had 60 days to appeal the ruling, which it did not.

Instead, the two sides reached a resolution, one which resulted in an amended charge of felony conspiracy to commit first-degree assault-great bodily harm.

On Wednesday, Shorter entered an Alford plea of guilty, in which the defendant maintains his innocence but acknowledges that the evidence would be sufficient to convict him.

The new charge carried a presumptive sentence of 49 months in prison. Because Shorter had already served 50 months in prison for the original conviction, the file is considered closed.

"It's resolved, closed and over," said Eric Newmark , Shorter's attorney. "He has no probation, parole or supervision; he's free and clear."

Assistant County Attorney Eric Woodford said in court he'd discussed the deal with John Shorter , who was in agreement with the resolution.

"I can safely say nobody in the family had the stomach for another trial," Newmark said. Shorter "did not acknowledge his guilt, because he's not guilty, but he does understand the reality, which is that he served 50 months and isn't going to get them back. He took the conviction in exchange for getting his life back, and it's in the state's best interest to get their conviction and conserve their resources.

"Nobody got everything they wanted," he said, "which is usually the hallmark of a good compromise."

Brenda Shorter was accused of assaulting her brother-in-law in their dairy barn with a hatchet and lariat. In March 2010 , a jury found her guilty of attempted second-degree murder with intent, and two felony counts of second-degree assault with dangerous weapons. She was sentenced to more than 11 years in prison, where she remains.

Newmark declined to say if William Shorter had returned to the area.

___

(c)2014 the Post-Bulletin

Visit the Post-Bulletin at www.postbulletin.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 527

[jetpack-related-posts]