Event co-organizers, John and Pam Marietta, in the forefront, dance to live music by the Lobo & Sheryl Show on Saturday during the Fremont Community Foundation's annual Cajun Crawl at the Quality Inn. Also pictured on the dance floor are Preston and Shirley Troutman. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

A horse salvaged from the burned carousel at the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park has been restored and will be available for live auction Feb. 28 during the Cajun Crawl. (Dan Brown / Courtesy Photo)

Temperatures were below freezing Saturday night, but nearly 200 people kept warm with cocktails, live music and jambalaya at the sixth annual Cajun Crawl hosted by the Fremont Community Foundation.

"It was a very profitable event," FCF board president Dan Brown said. "Well attended and enjoyed by all."

The silent auction did well, he said, and a few items in the live auction did very well. Included was a ride in a 1950s era French-style military jet.

It went for about $400, Brown said.

The most popular item of the night was a restored carousel horse from the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park.

Most of the carousel animals were destroyed in the June 2013 fire.

But a few will be on display in at the Gorge as part of a fire museum.

The rest made it into an ash pile, where Brown went digging and found two that he described as black, burnt and really fragile.

Brown said they were like marshmallows that were kept in the fire a little too long. The horses are modeled after carousel animals from 1948 but are only a couple of decades old. The Gorge carousel was constructed in 1992.

Florence artist Christine Hassler completely restored the two horses and kept one.

"They were hard to work with," Brown said. "We put expandable foam inside them. The legs were so fragile and wanted to break."

Cañon City artist Mary Shell gave the auctioned carousel horse its final paint job before being sold for $2,700 to the owners of the White Water Bar & Grill.

Advertisement

"That's where it will spend the rest of its life," Brown said.

The owners plan to hang it from the ceiling above the bar.

Money made at the event goes back into the community. Since its creation in 1999, the foundation has raised $200,000 that has been given back to Fremont County nonprofits.