Dawson School library media specialist Amy French-Troy is bringing the Civil Rights movement alive for her students. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

From an early age, Lafayette librarian Amy French-Troy has been fighting for equality, inspired by stories of her parents' upbringing in the segregated South.

In 1959, French-Troy's grandparents moved her father from Norfolk, Va., after the schools closed as a result of unrest brought on by integration.

"My dad said a lot of kids had to enroll in private schools or move to other towns to attend school," French-Troy, 38, said.

Her mother's stories about the poor treatment of a friend's Filipino dad still resonate with French-Troy, but her favorite story to share with students came from her grandmother.

Amy French-Troy Age: 38 Occupation: Lower school library media specialist and director of diversity and inclusion for Dawson School Years in St. Vrain Valley: 7

"She liked to tell a story about a noodle shop near their house. The Chinese man who owned the shop served Asians and African-Americans inside, but no whites," French-Troy said. "On the rare occasion that they were able to buy a bowl of noodles, she and her siblings would go to the back door of the restaurant to be served by the man. He was very kind to them, but never invited them to sit down and eat inside. It just wasn't done."

The story resonates with French-Troy's predominantly white students at Dawson School, illustrating the vast impact of Jim Crow laws, she said.

French-Troy is Dawson's first director of diversity and inclusion.

Diversity has always been a priority for the school, but it has yet to find a successful model, said Dawson's head of school George Moore.

In the past, staff members have shared the title's responsibilities, including finding ways to incorporate diversity into curricula and working directly with students through library and media programming, Moore said. While faculty and staff across the campus will continue to look for ways to increase diversity education, French-Troy will lead the charge.

"Amy has long had a passion for this work," Moore said. "So we decided she was the perfect person to lead this effort in the years ahead by having her bring those passions, skills and expertise to the curriculum."

Increasing diversity campus-wide is important to the school's four virtues of respect, compassion, courage and integrity, Moore said, and integral to the students' success.

"Diversity is about a new perspective and teaching them about a culture or person that they aren't familiar with," French-Troy said. "But it's also about finding the commonalities that they have with this new perspective, finding how they can relate to that."

This spring, Dawson students are peacefully protesting for universal health care, stricter gun laws and global Internet access, answering French-Troy's charge.

The library media specialist is teaching kindergarten through fifth-grade students about the Civil Rights movement.

And she is not just talking the talk.

French-Troy was one of 300 students and adults to walk the Selma to Montgomery National Historic Trail in Alabama in March commemorating the 50th anniversary of the historic voting-rights march.

Participants retraced the 54-mile trail that Civil Rights leaders took in 1965 led by Martin Luther King Jr.

French-Troy took a video of her students holding their protest signs with her to Alabama as a way to make history come alive for her students.

"By teaching them about peaceful protesting and marches, and then participating in this march, I want them to see that their opinions matter and that it is possible to make your voice heard in a peaceful manner," French-Troy said.

Growing up in Virginia, French-Troy could not stand aside while inequality ensued.

In elementary school she began working with children with disabilities, and in middle school she was giving speeches about ending apartheid in South Africa.

By college, French-Troy began working with Teaching Tolerance, a nonprofit that promotes diversity, equality and respect in schools. As a graduate student, French-Troy's research was in building diverse library collections and designing diverse curricula so when the school offered her a new title in March, she gladly accepted.

French-Troy embraces diversity in her home, as well as at the school.

After moving to Boulder County from Vermont — where she attended graduate school — about seven years ago, French-Troy and her husband, Michael Troy, searched for diverse neighborhoods.

"We knew we wanted to raise our kids in a neighborhood that was very diverse," French-Troy said. "There isn't a lot of diversity in Boulder County in general, but we did not want a neighborhood where everyone looks exactly like them."

The couple has lived in Longmont's Kensington neighborhood for more than six years, where French-Troy's children are often the minority among the neighborhood's many Hispanic children, she said.

"It's good for them to be in the minority sometimes also," French-Troy said.

The kids, Emmett Troy, 5, and Polly Troy, 1, attend Longmont's TLC Learning Center, a preschool that brings children with disabilities into classrooms with typical children.

While Emmett and Polly do not have disabilities, French-Troy said, her children have benefited from the integrated classrooms at TLC. Now, she is hoping to expand the benefits to her students by encouraging volunteering through a potential partnership between Dawson and TLC, she said.

"I'm hoping to kind of plant the seed," French-Troy said. "These kids have the potential to be the movers and shakers so let's hope they take those seeds and do the right thing."

"If I can teach these kids to look out for each other at a young age maybe they'll be nicer to each other," she said. "If there is one thing I could pass on to them it would be to treat everyone with kindness."

Whitney Bryen: 303-473-1113, wbryen@coloradohometownweekly.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter