This week, in a show of bipartisanship, Speaker John Boehner and President Barack Obama pushed forward a $1.1 trillion funding bill – known as the "cromnibus" – to keep the government open. In the bill, the Republicans proposed and Democrats accepted the repeal of regulations that keep banks from speculating in derivatives with taxpayer-guaranteed funds. With the repeal of this crucial safeguard, the chances of another financial crisis and taxpayer bailout went up significantly, and the American public got one more reason to distrust our government and both political parties.

Liberals and true conservatives immediately assailed the giveaway. True conservatives like Republican Sen. David Vitter of Louisiana opposed it because they’re against crony capitalism; they want corporations to win or lose in the market without tapping government guarantees. Liberals like House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and Massachusetts Democratic Sen. Elizabeth Warren opposed it because they know that when financial institutions speculate with public money, they get bailed out and then the public suffers; people lose their homes, jobs and more.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

But some conservatives celebrated the ease with which they gutted a key piece of regulation by tying it to an essential funding bill. “"If liberal Democrats vote for this package it shows that conservatives can use must pass legislation to repeal the regulatory state," said a senior GOP senate staffer in The Hill.

It’s no coincidence that the American public feels ever more disgusted with the Boehner-Obama economy. Both the mainstream Democrats and the less-extremist Republicans get campaign contributions from Wall Street, and that leads many of them to go easy on it.

The American public is not fooled by any of this. A recent New York Times poll shows that Americans increasingly feel the system is rigged against them, and their faith in the leading institutions of government and finance is wearing thin. According to the poll: Barely half the public (52 percent) feel that the American economic system is “fair,” with “all Americans hav[ing] an equal opportunity to succeed"; a majority (56 percent) feel they are not getting ahead economically, despite improvement in the economy as a whole; a majority (52 percent) feel the stock market is for all practical purposes rigged, and that it “unfairly benefits [the] rich"; a large majority (61 percent) have little or no confidence in Wall Street bankers and brokers; and a majority (58 percent) have little or no confidence in the federal government’s ability to regulate financial institutions. Thirty-seven percent of Americans feel that federal regulation of the finance industry did not go far enough, while only 28 percent feel it went too far.



[GALLERY: Political Cartoons on President Obama]

Interestingly, Americans seem to be pro-regulation on specific issues even while they question regulation in the abstract. In response to a poorly-worded question in the New York Times poll, a majority said that “over-regulation” is a greater threat than “too little regulation.” But at the same time, solid majorities favored tighter regulation of Wall Street, tighter limits on mergers and an increase in the federal minimum wage. It’s the same pattern we saw in the last national election, where several states passed higher minimum wage laws and other progressive measures while at the same time electing Republican legislators.

The overall pattern is quite clear, and quite disturbing. Americans feel the dream slipping away. They are losing faith in the proposition that hard work reliably brings reward. Thirty-three percent now say it is “not possible” to “start out poor in this country, work hard, and become rich.” While that’s not a majority, it’s the highest number seen on this measure since the early 1980’s. Americans’ trust in the major institutions of our economy is low and falling. They don’t trust our financial institutions, and at the same time, they don’t trust what government is doing to regulate these institutions.