Filmmaker raising money for vet's companion dog

If you go What: World premiere of "The Current," followed by a Q&A session When: 3 p.m. Sunday Where: Boulder High School auditorium, 1604 Arapahoe Ave., Boulder Cost: $10 More info: biff1.com To donate Checks should be made out to Make a Hero and mailed to: Make a Hero 4840 Pearl E. Circle, Suite 201 W Boulder, CO 80301 More info: 303-396-1332 or bit.ly/1eXEWlM

For the first time since returning from Afghanistan, former Army Cpl. Jesse Murphree has found a partner that is just as alert as he is — his service dog, Jasper.

Since coming home wounded from his deployment in 2007, Murphree said, he is constantly looking around, surveying his surroundings and, now, he has an extra pair of eyes.

"I have a partner," Murphree, 26, said of his 2-year-old German shepherd. "It's the same idea as having a battle buddy in the field watching your back."

The comfort and assistance that Jasper provides is priceless to Murphree, a former Niwot High School student who lost his legs in December 2007 when his unit was attacked. But that doesn't make the $6,000 bill any more affordable for the veteran.

A canine companion was out of reach for Murphree before Niwot resident Kurt Miller got involved.

Miller, who founded the nonprofit and film production company Make a Hero, launched a fundraiser in the fall to get Murphree a service dog. Miller is hoping the debut of a film featuring Murphree at the Boulder International Film Festival this weekend will spur interest in Murphree's story and boost donations, contributing to the remaining $2,500 needed to pay Jasper's bill.

Jasper's trainer agreed to give Murphree the dog on credit so the two could begin building a relationship.

Army veteran Jesse Murphree talks to his service dog, Jasper. Murphree will be featured in the adaptive sports film, "The Current," which will screen Sunday during the Boulder International Film Festival. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Miller's latest film, "The Current," will make its world premiere Sunday at Boulder High School. A question-and-answer session with the film's cast, including Murphree, will follow.

"The Current" is the second hour-long film produced by Make a Hero, a Boulder-based organization focused on inspiring, adaptive sports films.

The film features adaptive athletes finding freedom from their disabilities by learning to scuba dive, surf and kayak, Miller said.

Murphree has always been an active guy, and it was the physical challenge that initially attracted him to the Army.

"I was always hiking, running, working out, playing hockey or baseball or snowboarding," Murphree said. "If it was a sport, I did it."

After 58 surgeries and the loss of both legs, nothing was the same, including sports.

"Your life ends," Murphree said about his injuries. "The life you had ends. It's over, and you start a brand-new life."

Since his injuries, Murphree has relearned how to work out and ski with his disability. Now, he can add scuba diving to the list.

Murphree spent a week in Cozumel with "The Current" cast and crew filming and adapting to the water.

"I'm not really a water guy, but when they asked if I wanted a free trip to Mexico, I figured why not," Murphree said. "It ended up being really easy for me."

Being underwater felt natural for Murphree, who said he has not spent much time in the water before the film. Combining the physical challenge and mental focus that scuba diving required made Murphree feel calm, he said.

In addition to learning a new sport, Murphree experienced a bigger milestone in Mexico when he proposed to his girlfriend.

"I was so happy that week," Murphree said.

The couple live in Westminster with their son and Jasper, who Murphree says helps ease the tension that sometimes comes from his post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

"He's always there, against me and that's comforting when I feel anxious," Murphree said. "My wife is my best friend, but Jasper helps take some of the pressure off of her to constantly be watching out for me."

The family is preparing to move to Florida in a couple of weeks to be closer to veteran resources. Murphree said he is looking forward to using his scuba skills in his new home.

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com