Somerset School Board cuts 2015-16 preliminary budget, draws line at music program

The Somerset Board of Education approved a preliminary budget recommendation of $16,470,295 for the 2015-16 school year at their meeting Monday night. That represents a decrease of roughly 1.7 percent or $284,965 from the 2014-15 budget.

“There are definitely things (in this preliminary budget) that I hope will change and I suspect more of you feel that way too. This is to keep the ball rolling for Dave (Gerberding) because he has certain deadlines (he has to meet) and he needs some fixed figures because there are so many that change,” said Board Vice President Marie Colbeth.

“I would like to see the cost for professional development travel come forward to be considered as a cost savings, If we put a hold on going to conferences and staying overnight for a year what would be the potential savings,” asked board member Nancy Dressel.

In a memorandum to board members, District Director of Business Services & Operations Dave Gerberding noted three items that contributed significantly to reducing the district deficit thereby easing the budget reduction: the restoration of Per Pupil Aid by the legislature (restored revenue of $230,000); an annual premium decrease of approximately 17 percent (savings of $232,000) for the district health insurance plan; and estimated staff attrition and replacement costs (savings of $229,899).

“Because of the deficit and having to come up with a balanced budget, the 3 percent wage increase we had hoped for ($292,000) has been refigured down to 1.5 percent ($158,248) simply because we needed to use some of those funds to help balance the deficit,” explained District Administrator Randy Rosburg.

A measure of the difficulty board members have faced in trying to balance the budget came later in the evening when they voted unanimously to defeat a motion to post a .5 FTE Middle/High School Vocal Music Director position. Following an in-depth discussion of music department needs and alternatives, a group of administrators including all three school principals made the recommendation to post the .5 FTE position reducing it from a 1.0 position. That would have resulted in a savings of roughly $32,000.

“This is a motion I can’t support. It’s more than just a financial decision. You are taking what is currently a full-time position and asking whoever is hired, to shoulder the same amount of responsibility and to do it in half the time. I am very concerned for the step back this will be for the music department. I don’t think this would be doing justice to the work they have accomplished in the last five years plus. It doesn’t make sense to me for $32,000,” said Colbeth.

“Talking to both parents and students involved in the music program, it seems like cutting it to a half time position is just really insulting to those who have invested so much time into their craft. Everybody knows it helps with your grades with learning. We have a stellar group of students who participate in an award winning music program. We need to keep that momentum going and keep this a full-time position,” said board member Patty Schachtner.

The board approved posting a 1.0 full-time position.

The board approved a motion to renew its health insurance coverage with HealthPartners for three years beginning on September 1, 2015 through the 2017-2018 school year. The plan includes an annual premium decrease of approximately 17 percent and caps increases at 5 percent per year. Eligible employees who use the district provided health insurance plan should realize savings of $240 annually for a family plan and $108 annually for a single plan.

In order to comply with the Affordable Care Act, the board also approved a high-deductible, ($6250) 100 percent plan for 41 support staff employees who do not qualify for the district health insurance plan but work 30 hrs. per week. The district would pay 50 percent of the monthly premium leaving employees to pay $162.87 per month. The employee would be responsible for the full deductible.

Other business

-- The board approved a three year IT Capital Lease agreement directly with Hewlett-Packard Financial Services Company (HP) for $187,937.50. The contract will be paid out in three equal installments of $64,851.59 plus interest of 3.56 percent per year. By dealing directly with HP, the district should be able to realize savings of up to 40 percent on devices.

-- The board approved a new property insurance plan with the Chubb Insurance Group replacing the plan previously provided by the Local Governmental Property Insurance Fund (LGPIF) which is likely to be eliminated in the Governor’s budget.

-- Danielle Anderson a 2014 graduate of Somerset High School currently enrolled at Gustavus Adolphus College presented board members with copies of interviews she had conducted with current and recently graduated students in an effort to understand the negative reviews and sentiment directed toward the school.

“I found that a lot of them (students) seem not to trust the school administration which is quite concerning,” said Anderson.

Despite the revelations, Anderson believes the administration is doing a good job and that the problem lies in the student culture and student’s perceptions. To improve understanding between students and the administration she proposed a once-a-semester ice cream social during lunch hour to promote interaction and build a bond between both groups.

Results of Anderson’s informal survey can be found at Building Connections in Schools.

-- Freshman Devin LaQue was recognized by the board as the winner of this years American Mathematics Competition (AMC) Test. The senior level exam is open to all students grades 9-12. Twenty-nine students competed in this years exam. LeQue will be receive a $1,000 scholarship at the fall awards ceremony.