Iowa's primary elections are just over a month away.

And the battle continues to be the front-runner Democrat candidate for the First Congressional District.

On Saturday, Pat Murphy and Monica Vernon took part a debate at Monticello City Hall.

In each of their opening statements, both candidates made reference to past experiences and claim their backgrounds will help defeat current Republican Congressman Rod Blum.

Monica Vernon says her work on the City Council gives her experience leading during emergencies, citing her work during the historic 2008 flood.

"I spent quite a bit of the last eight years helping the city rebuild," Vernon said.

She also says a focus of her campaign is making an economy suitable for everyone, and will continue to push for more jobs.

Murphy mentioned his work in the state legislature during opening statements, saying he will continue to push for universal preschool and a higher minimum wage.

"She supports a minimum wage of $12 an hour, I support $15," Murphy said.

One heated question the candidates faced is what changes they would make to the Affordable Care Act.

Murphy says more doctors, who practice under the Act, need to be available for patients. He also says more people still need to have access to healthcare.

"that means we might have to move the Medicare age from 65 to 55 or expand Medicaid," Murphy said.

Vernon agreed improvements need to be made, but referenced different needs.

"To allow bargaining for lower drug prices, most of us still struggle with that," Vernon said.

One more area the candidates differ is how to handle the federal budget.

Vernon says her priority is stopping subsidies for big oil companies. She also says tax reform needs to take place.

"I don't think Wall Street executives should pay a lower tax rate than the assistant who works for them," Vernon said.

She also says more funding should be put into infrastructure needs throughout the country.

Murphy says he's against the Sequester budget cuts. Instead, he says more funding should be pumped into education, at all levels.

"We need to focus on things like the Pell Grant, making it easier for kids to have access to higher education and their not in depth forever," Murphy said.

Primary elections are June 7th.

The primary winner will go up against Republican Rod Blum who was first elected to office in 2014.