Presence Health wants to offload an aging Northwest Side hospital. Now comes the hard part: finding a buyer.

The health care industry is in the throes of a dramatic shift as the Affordable Care Act encourages outpatient care rather than more costly hospital stays. That's led to a decline in inpatient admissions, a hit to hospitals' bottom lines and less of a need for so many hospital beds.

While competitors in the fragmented Chicago-area market are trying to attract patients with new buildings featuring private rooms and other amenities, the 269-bed Our Lady of the Resurrection Medical Center has few private rooms. The nearly 60-year-old facility is part of a 12-hospital Catholic network based in Chicago.

“We are seeing hospitals in stressed markets that have older capital facilities having a more difficult time finding buyers,” said Jordan Shields, vice president at Chicago-based Juniper Advisory LLC, an investment bank that specializes in nonprofit hospital mergers and acquisitions.

But that doesn't mean there aren't possibilities, he said. Potential suitors include Livonia, Mich.-based CHE Trinity Health, a nonprofit and one of the largest Catholic health systems in the country with more than 80 hospitals, including two Chicago area hospitals acquired since 2011. Tenet Healthcare Corp., a Dallas-based for-profit hospital giant, is another possibility. It has four Chicago-area hospitals, including two that used to be part of a network that was a precursor to Presence Health, and has an eye toward growth.

Presence CEO Sandra Bruce announced plans to sell Our Lady of the Resurrection yesterday, about six months after disclosing that Presence was considering closing the hospital at 5645 W. Addison St. because of continued losses. In 2012, the hospital had a $12.5 million operating loss. That was followed in 2013 by a $9.8 million loss, which could double in 2014, she said in a statement.

In September, administrators painted a grim picture of Our Lady of the Resurrection in a memo to employees, blaming the losses on declining volumes, and an “unfavorable” payor and case mix for contributing to the financial woes.

In 2012, about 41 percent of revenue at Our Lady of the Resurrection for inpatients and outpatients came from Medicare, according to the Illinois Department of Public Health. About 15 percent came from Medicaid and about 30 percent from private insurers.

In October, in an apparent about-face, hospital officials said they planned to keep the hospital open and even pump about $30 million into both Our Lady of Resurrection and another Presence hospital a few miles away.

In an interview yesterday, Ms. Bruce said Presence considered many options over the past several months and decided to sell.

“It's very clear that the financial realities are just not supporting Presence Health's ability to continue to operate (Our Lady of the Resurrection) as an acute-care hospital,” Ms. Bruce said.

Selling the facility preserves jobs for the hospital's roughly 900 employees, many of whom led a campaign to prevent it from closing.

“The medical staff is very positive about a new prospective buyer coming in with a new thought and a new paradigm shift on how to run hospitals such as (Our Lady of the Resurrection),” said Dr. Vishnu Chundi, incoming president of the hospital's staff of about 350 doctors.

Ms. Bruce said Presence plans to issue a request for proposals next week to as many as 50 potential buyers and hopes to reach an agreement with one over the summer. Her preferences are for the suitor to be a Catholic health care provider as well as a nonprofit, but she said she wouldn't rule out a for-profit buyer.

She brushed aside concerns about whether it will be difficult to sell the hospital. Many entities in the area can enlarge their size and scope by buying Our Lady of the Resurrection, Ms. Bruce said.

Presence Health is not in talks with any buyers yet, she said, adding that the health system has no plans to sell or close any other hospitals.

Juniper Advisory's Mr. Shields said he expects Presence Health will conduct a broad search for a buyer. But given Our Lady of the Resurrection's financial condition, “I would expect for there to be interest, but I would expect the interest to be shallow.”

A NATURAL FIT

CHE Trinity is a natural fit, he said, given its footprint in the Chicago area with Loyola University Health System in west suburban Maywood and Mercy Hospital and Medical Center on the Near South Side.

A CHE Trinity spokeswoman said it is “routinely” in talks with health systems and others across the country about relationships and partnerships.

Allan Baumgarten, a Minneapolis-based health care analyst who follows the Illinois market, said Tenet might be a potential buyer given its ties to Presence. Tenet has three suburban hospitals and one on Chicago's North Side in a local industry dominated by nonprofit hospitals and health systems.

“They might think the geography plays in their favor and that they might be able to, with some investment, make a go of it,” Mr. Baumgarten said. “In the process they maybe get closer to challenge the bigger systems, or at least be competitive with the bigger systems.”

A spokeswoman for Tenet did not return messages requesting comment.

There is another potential future for Our Lady of the Resurrection. Prospective buyers not interested in keeping a hospital open likely will size up the cost of renovating and converting the facility into various kinds of outpatient centers, Mr. Baumgarten said.