Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

BOSTON (AP) — As a Los Angeles Dodgers broadcaster, Nomar Garciaparra watched Clayton Kershaw become the dominant pitcher in the National League, winning three of the last four NL Cy Young Awards — the last one unanimously.

But when fans ask if he’s ever witnessed anyone as good as the L.A. left-hander, Garciaparra stops them cold.

“Hang on,” he says, “I got to play with Pedro Martinez.”

The former Red Sox shortstop was already in Boston when the reigning NL Cy Young winner arrived from the Montreal Expos in 1997. And he saw the Dominican right-hander win the AL award twice with the Red Sox, in back-to-back seasons in 1999-2000 that established him as one of the most dominant pitchers in baseball history.

In that two-year period — in the middle of a golden age of hitting — Martinez went 41-10 with a 1.90 ERA and 597 strikeouts. After that, all he did was anchor the staff that helped the Red Sox earn their cathartic World Series victory in 2004, ending an eight-decade drought.

Martinez went on to pitch four seasons with the New York Mets, three of them injury-plagued, and returned to the World Series with the Philadelphia Phillies in 2009 before retiring. Five years later, he is eligible for the baseball Hall of Fame and likely to be among the inductees announced Tuesday.

Like Randy Johnson, who is also making his first appearance on the ballot, Martinez is a virtual certainty to be enshrined in July; each has a chance to break Tom Seaver’s record of 98.84 percent of the ballots cast.

Also like Johnson, Martinez was an imposing presence on the mound. But while the 6-foot-10 left-hander could intimidate with his size, Martinez accomplished as much with control that allowed him to use all parts of the plate — including the inside.

When he came out of the bullpen in relief for the finale of a 1999 AL Division Series game against Cleveland, the Indians batters were visibly deflated. Martinez, who had left Game 1 with a back strain, pitched six innings of no-hit relief to finish off the series.

“I wanted to make my presence be felt,” Martinez said this summer when he returned to Boston for induction into the franchise Hall of Fame. “Every time I went out there, I wanted to make sure that you knew, that you were aware, that I wasn’t kidding out there. That this was my job. That I’m here and I’m going to be responsible for it.”

In all, Martinez finished with a 219-100 record and a 2.93 ERA. He struck out 3,154 batters and walked 760 in 2,827 innings. He twice won 20 games, twice struck out more than 300 batters and twice posted an ERA below 2.00. He was an eight-time all-star, and five times he led the major leagues in ERA.