Buy Photo Pensacola native Ryan Wiggins has been traveling to Tallahassee where she works as chief strategist of Full Contact Strategies, LLC. (Photo: Ben Twingley/btwingley@pnj.com)Buy Photo

How far is Pensacola from Tallahassee? It's a measure of dissonance, not distance. Distance is measured in miles: roughly 200 of them along the boring yarn of Interstate 10. Dissonance, for some folks in Pensacola, would require accounting in light years.

Enter Ryan Wiggins, a Pensacola native who has built a career traversing the space-time continuum between her hometown and the gravitational center of Florida politics in Tallahassee.

Heck, doing the mind-numbing I-10 drive alone is a feat no less impressive than time travel, and it's part of Wiggins' weekly routine when committee weeks begin each February preceding the annual Legislative session. Last year, that amounted to roughly 30 roundtrips to Tallahassee in 52 weeks. This Pensacolian is an inhabitant of two worlds.

That's a big deal. Because in this city that marks the westernmost point of the Florida Panhandle as well as the Sunshine State's very first settlement (yes, older than St. Augustine), there's a healthy portion of the population that is more likely to pull for the Crimson Tide than for Garnet and Gold; hues of Orange and Blue often denote War Eagles over Fightin' Gators and license plates sport fleur de lis, not Bucs, Jaguars or Dolphins.

Not to say that a community's sense of self can be summed up by its pigskin preferences. But who are we kidding? This is the South — of course it can.

So for a town that's not even entirely convinced it's part of the great state of Florida when it comes to something important like football, engagement with the daily minutiae of state politics is ultimately a measure of dissonance, not distance; light years, not miles; and Ryan Wiggins may be our town's best connection to the Tallahassee solar system.

Buy Photo Pensacola native Ryan Wiggins has been traveling to Tallahassee where she works as chief strategist of Full Contact Strategies, LLC. (Photo: Ben Twingley/btwingley@pnj.com)

She's no lobbyist

Wiggins, 34, is wife, mother of two boys and owner/chief strategist of Full Contact Strategies, LLC. She is not a lobbyist. Lobbyists are the blunt instruments of capital persuasion — support or oppose, pro or con, yea or nea, bribe or blackmail. Wiggins' job is more nuanced, more agile. It's more about branding and intuition than simple either/or persuasion. The goal is to win public opinion, not politicians.

Sometimes she's an inside source for newspaper reporters. At others she's writing aggressive op-eds for the opinion pages of state newspapers. Almost always, she's a sarcastic wit and up-to-the-second presence on Twitter. Simply put, she's plugged in.

"My clients hire me to work with the media and target messages," she explains. "For example, I could take an issue and put a conservative spin on it so that it both makes sense to (Republican) lawmakers and provides those legislators with the political cover they need to be able to support or oppose a particular bill."

You saw some of her stereotype-defying messaging in last year's debate about Charlotte's Web, the non-euphoric strain of medical marijuana that virtually eliminates seizures in children suffering from severe epilepsy. Far from being an issue of liberal Democrats, it was Rep. Matt Gaetz — one of the most conservative legislators in Florida —who carried the legislation forward.

And it was Wiggins, in part, who successfully honed the message for conservatives — in the Capitol, on Twitter, in newspapers — so that Charlotte's Web became something that a Republican-dominated Legislature and a right-wing governor could safely vote for.

Presidential Pensacolian?

In the sleepless, social-media-obsessed realm of modern politics, message-honing like that is a major part of the game. And with a former Florida governor and a current Florida senator poised to make runs at the GOP presidential nomination in 2016, Wiggins may be soon be drafted into the biggest of the big leagues.

A recent piece on the influential political website "Saint Peter's Blog" named Wiggins as one of "five Florida political operatives the GOP presidential candidates should hire — now."

According to that scouting report, Wiggins brings "media savvy and political sixth sense... as well as a nose for the ball, as evidenced by her successful pro bono work with Caring 4 Florida, a nonprofit dedicated to passing Charlotte's Web legislation. She has a knack for ending up on the right side of a campaign and pushing her causes over the goal line, the supreme skill that candidates from out-of-state will seek."

Pensacola roots

Wiggins was born and raised in Pensacola. And if you're a native Pensacolian, your family probably knows folks in her family. Her father, Jack Nobles is the former city councilman. Her mother, Molly Nobles, is a lobbyist for Baptist Hospital. Former Pensacola Mayor Mike Wiggins is her father-in-law. Her work may be in Tallahassee. But by birth and matrimony, Wiggins has roots in Pensacola politics.

The Washington High grad majored in English and Communications at FSU. During her senior year, she interned for then-House Majority Leader, now-Pensacola Chamber executive director, Jerry Maygarden. She followed that up with a master's degree in strategic political communication back home at the University of West Florida.

Wiggins then took her resume on a road trip: Washington to work for Rep. Jeff Miller and back to Tallahassee in the press office of then-Gov. Charlie Crist, the DOT, the DCF, the Department of Health and eventually for then-Attorney General Bill McCollum handling the statewide and national media for the Obamacare lawsuit and Florida's legal response to the BP oil spill. Not to mention all that was going on during McCollum's run for governor, an experience of which Wiggins says "I was absolutely baptized by fire. I would not be where I am now without that time in that office. "

In the now

For a brief moment, she's home in Pensacola, with an eye on Twitter and an ear to the ground in Tallahassee. Current clients have her working on state water issues and implementation of Amendment 1. The 2016 presidential candidates haven't started fighting over her — yet.

"My focus right now is just on the legislative session," she says.

And like last year, she is passionately fighting for Ray Ann Moseley, the Gulf Breeze girl who became the face of the battle for Charlotte's Web in Florida. Due to wrangling over the Department of Health's rulemaking, as well as looming legislative action for legalizing medical marijuana, RayAnn still does not have the potentially life-saving medicine.

"We started this process when RayAnn was 10," Wiggins says sternly. "She just turned 12. She cannot wait another year."

The Legislature will kick off Tuesday and Wiggins assures that she'll traverse time, space and the trip to Tallahassee to see that the little girl from her hometown does not have to wait any longer for a cure.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1BrerB8