By

Waukesha is seeking approval to replace its contaminated and depleted water source with a reliable, environmentally sustainable and healthy Lake Michigan water supply.

Waukesha's proposal is to use Lake Michigan water and recycle no less than 100% of the volume back to the lake after treating it to standards that are stricter than those for most other dischargers to the lake or its tributaries. The amount of water Waukesha would withdraw is one-millionth of 1% of the volume of the Great Lakes. And we would put it back and have no impact on Great Lakes water levels.

That lack of impact to the Great Lakes is a stark contrast to the environmental impacts from using current or new groundwater supplies. Waukesha's primary water source, the deep aquifer, is down 400 to 600 feet, due in part to a natural formation (a layer of shale) that restricts recharge by rain and snow melt. As the aquifer declines, contaminants increase and the water becomes brackish, like salt water. Continuing to pump this resource until it is exhausted would be environmentally irresponsible.

The deep aquifer draw-down also has increased the levels of radium, a human carcinogen, to levels that violate drinking water standards. Waukesha is required by a court order to meet those standards by June 2018.

Waukesha's secondary water source is shallow groundwater wells, located outside of city limits. Adding additional shallow groundwater wells would have permanent adverse environmental impacts to thousands of acres of wetland habitat and areas with valued brooks and streams. Hundreds of private and municipal wells could be adversely affected.

Under the Great Lakes compact, Waukesha's proposal to use and return water to Lake Michigan requires the approval of all the Great Lakes governors. The compact agreement is a federal law that prohibits water from going beyond counties like Waukesha that straddle the Great Lakes basin divide. Under the compact, water can never be sent to Las Vegas, Atlanta or even Madison.

It is likely that only a handful of communities located in straddling counties will have a need for Great Lakes water and also be close enough to Great Lakes water to make it an economical option. Even for Waukesha, the estimated construction cost of the proposed project is more than $200 million.

Under Wisconsin law, Waukesha's water supply service area cannot be limited to the city limits. A water supply service area is determined by regional planners and the Department of Natural Resources, based on the regional water quality management plan, local needs and infrastructure. The water supply service area must also be consistent with the sewer service area. That means portions of a few adjoining municipalities, with their approval, are included in Waukesha's service area.

Waukesha's service area is not intended to fuel economic growth and sprawl, but to meet the needs of current residents. In fact, only 15% of the service area is undeveloped. Only 0.6% of the land in the service area outside of city limits is undeveloped industrial land; 0.2% is undeveloped commercial land. Population in the service area is expected to grow by about 0.5% per year; full development of the service area is projected to occur about 2050.

Today, about 14% of the residents in the service area are on private wells, but Waukesha is required to be able to serve them. Serving all the residents today would require an average of about 9 million gallons per day. The amount we are requesting for full development in the future is only 10.1 million gallons per day.

Waukesha will continue its leadership in water conservation, but conservation can't eliminate the need for a new water supply. Waukesha was the first city in Wisconsin to implement several effective conservation initiatives: a daytime ban on sprinkling, residential rates that increase with higher water use and a rebate program for installing toilets that use less water. Our decades-old middle school water conservation education program is supplemented by a variety of community outreach activities, including an online program that lets residents compare their water use to their neighborhood average and to earn rewards for using less water.

In summary, Waukesha needs a new water supply. Lake Michigan is our only reasonable alternative for protecting the environment and public health.

Dan Duchniak is general manager of the Waukesha water utility.