POLITICO Huddle

By Burgess Everett (@burgessev or beverett@politico.com)

PELOSI: NO GOP WAVE -- Defiant Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi sits down with Bres and Lauren to explain that it was maybe a Republican surge in the House -- or perhaps a crest? -- but certainly no wave. “There was no wave of approval for the Republicans. I wish them congratulations, they won the election, but there was no wave of approval for anybody. There was an ebbing, an ebb tide, for us.”

Story Continued Below

Press * to unmute: “On a conference call with members last Thursday, just two days after the election, Rep. Diana DeGette (D-Colo.) said Democrats need to ‘rethink’ their message after a number of young people voted for Sen.-elect Cory Gardner, a Republican, over Sen. Mark Udall, a Democrat. Pelosi cut her off, sources on the call said.” The California Democrat explained to my colleagues that the Democratic message is good but the party needs to do more to engage voters. And she brushed off suggestions that her caucus needs new leadership. http://goo.gl/OtuEGT | Full transcript of the interview: http://goo.gl/3tw6nr

More unrest: Emma Dumain of Roll Call has members like Democratic No. 3 Jim Clyburn and recently reelected Patrick Murphy asking questions. Clyburn: “A couple of weeks before the election, my travels around the country, in and out of these congressional districts, led me to the conclusion that our message, or a lack thereof, was causing a problem.” Murphy: “You got some younger, newer members who kind of want to be set free and don’t want to be tied down as much ...They want to talk about the things that got them elected in the first place.” http://goo.gl/3CxT0k

WHY GOP THINKS DEM LEADERS ARE STICKING AROUND -- Per John Feehery on WSJ: “1. President Obama gets the blame, not them … 2. They bring the money … 3. They are simpatico with the majority of their minority … 4. Nobody wants to challenge them.” http://goo.gl/sZ9xxG

LEADERSHIP RACES TO SHAPE UP: In the Senate, we are basically looking at races for the DSCC and NRSC chairmanship as the main event with no movement at the top (unless something crazy happens). But there’s a couple interesting leadership elections over on the House side, per The Hill’s Scott Wong. “It’s now a two-way race between Reps. Mick Mulvaney (S.C.) and Bill Flores (Texas) for the RSC gavel … In the contest for the No. 5 job in leadership, Rep. Luke Messer (Ind.) is the favorite after getting an early start this past summer. However, a GOP source familiar with the contest said Rep. Tom Reed (N.Y.) is ‘getting some traction.’ Rep. Rob Woodall (Ga.) is also running.” http://goo.gl/T5zHR9

AP CALLS IT FOR SULLIVAN -- Mark Begich won’t concede: Here we are coming back for the lame duck and races are still being called. As of the middle of the night, Dan Sullivan was up about 8,100 votes and the incumbent Democrat refused to admit defeat. Begich campaign manager “Susanne Fleek-Green, said in a statement that Begich believes every vote deserves to be counted and will follow the Division of Elections as it continues toward a final count.” AP: http://goo.gl/spvujN

U.S., CHINA INK EMISSIONS AGREEMENT: “U.S. officials said the commitments by the world's two biggest carbon polluters came after months of backroom negotiations and would set the tone for a global climate control pact, but experts said the limits did not break significant new ground … ‘If the United States is going to continue to lead the world in addressing global challenges, then we have to have the second largest economy and the most populous nation on Earth as our partner,’ Obama said.” Reuters: http://goo.gl/gvmAjW’

McConnell fired up: “‘Our economy can’t take the president’s ideological war on coal that will increase the squeeze on middle-class families and struggling miners,’ McConnell said in a statement minutes after the White House announced the bilateral deal.” The Hill: http://goo.gl/pHnCTF

Pressing issue: Gotta highlight the great work of Josh Gerstein in Beijing, who sinks his teeth into the odd dynamic at a joint presser with President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping. “When a New York Times reporter posed a series of questions to both Obama and Xi, the U.S. president responded to the queries directed to him, but the Chinese president initially failed to respond to the questions put to him about the U.S. pivot to Asia and about refusal of residence permits for U.S. journalists working in China … after several minutes of broad strokes on the U.S.-China relationship, Xi returned to the questions from Times reporter Mark Landler. ‘ Media outlets need to obey China’s laws and regulations,’ Xi said.” Makes covering Capitol Hill look pretty enticing, if I do say so. http://goo.gl/woIHVz

** A message from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and FairReform.com: America needs comprehensive tax reform – to protect American employers and American jobs. Learn more at FairReform.com . **

Here it is: The lame duck. Welcome to the Huddle, your play-by-play guide to everything Capitol Hill. I was pleasantly surprised to get some “Master of Puppets” out of Metallica last night at the Concert for Valor, so it’s hard to be mad on this Wednesday morning. Please send tips to beverett@politico.com and follow along on Twitter @burgessev.

TODAY IN CONGRESS –The first day back from a long recess and a triumphant election for Republicans.

In the House: New members will arrive on the Hill in the morning and begin to get acclimated to the madness of Capitol Hill that us old salts take for granted. At 5 p.m. there will a reception in Cannon for House members of both the 113th and 114th Congress. Oh yeah, and the House meets at 2 p.m. and suspension votes are scheduled for 6:30 p.m.

In the Senate: GOP Leader Mitch McConnell will welcome new GOP senators at 10 a.m. in his office, with a photo-op and maybe some shouted and ignored questions from reporters. The Senate convenes at 2 p.m. and will take a pair of procedural votes at 5:30 p.m. on two judges.

AROUND THE HILL – Reps. Jim McGovern, Pete King and Earl Blumenauer will hold a presser on transit tax benefits at 10 p.m. on the House Triangle. At 2 p.m., Congressional Hispanic Caucus members will talk about executive immigration action.

TUESDAY’S MOST-CLICKED: Y’all like your morning pictures, huh? Bloomberg’s “Rob Portman plays dress-up” drew the most Huddle eyeballs. Here’s a photo of Paul Ryan trying to steal Portman’s swagger in a North Face jacket: http://goo.gl/KJ0LWL

TRIAL BALLOON POPPED: Sen. Patrick Leahy WILL NOT challenge Sen. Barbara Mikulski for the top Democratic slot on the Senate Appropriations Committee, Manu reports. That makes the caucus far more stable heading into this week’s organizational meetings and avoids any intra party turf battles. http://goo.gl/8bKn2Q

Speaking of Approps: Today the committee will hold a hearing at 2 p.m. on Ebola. The Bold name witnesses: HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Thomas Frieden, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Anthony Fauci, DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson.

DEADLINE DRAMA -- GOP Congress warns on Iran: As Obama and Iranian leaders hurtle toward a Nov. 24 deadline for a broad nuclear agreement, there’s another key date waiting in the wings: January, of course, when the GOP takes over the Senate. “Senate Republicans don’t plan to wait until they take power in January to rattle the nuclear talks. On Thursday, a day after returning to Washington, they will seek a vote on legislation requiring that Congress approve any deal. Democrats, who still control the Senate, are likely to quash the move. But it’s an early illustration of Republican plans to confound the president’s nuclear diplomacy.” New super duper senior foreign correspondent Michael Crowley and yours truly: http://goo.gl/Nl5Vdj

KEYSTONE AND LANDRIEU? The Senate is never really in town until we start talking about procedural possibilities. Voila, they are back today and gums are flapping over whether approval of the Keystone XL Pipeline is possible before Sen. Mary Landrieu's Dec. 6 run-off. My story with Elana Schor: “Senate Democrats are signaling that there will be an open amendment process that could allow Keystone approval to be attached to either an Internet sales tax bill next week or the defense authorization bill after Thanksgiving … Keystone could even come up in a standalone bill if Landrieu or another senator receives unanimous consent to move forward. Although those requests typically get blocked, Democrats say the post-election Senate is a new world.” http://goo.gl/vI6cbv

Let’s face it, she could use it: Bloomberg’s Michael Bender and Annie Linskey survey the airwaves and it’s not pretty for the incumbent. “Democratic Senator Mary Landrieu's re-election race is truly running out of air: She's responsible for a mere 4 percent of all TV spots in the week-old Louisiana runoff. Republican challenger Bill Cassidy and his friends paid for 96 percent of the spots that have run so far.” http://goo.gl/0M9Hbl

DEVINE INTERVENTION FOR SANDERS: Vermont Independent Sen. Bernie Sanders continues to send signals that he’s serious about launching a run for president, bringing on former Gore/Kerry/Dukakis aide Tad Devine if decides to take the plunge. “If he runs, I’m going to help him,” Devine told Robert Costa. “He is not only a longtime client but a friend. I believe he could deliver an enormously powerful message that the country is waiting to hear right now and do it in a way that succeeds.” http://goo.gl/8OiNtq

CLINTON, INC.: Bill and Hillary Clinton went hard for the Democrats during the midterms, but that work didn’t come cheap, reports Buzzfeed’s Ruby Cramer. “When the Clintons travel, they fly private. This year, their airfare cost candidates at least $699,000, available state and federal campaign finance reports show … the $699,000 figure is the first comprehensive estimate that establishes the scope of the costs associated with using the Clintons as surrogates. By the time the rest of the filings come in, the number will likely exceed $1 million.” http://goo.gl/14JQec

KING GETS INTO IT WITH FOX HOSTS -- ‘It has to do with having insurance, man’: Sen. Angus King, the Maine independent who caucuses with Democrats, tussled with “Fox and Friends” yesterday morning after they sprang a video clip of Jonathan Gruber talking about voter ignorance and the Affordable Care Act. The hosts piled on King when he talked about how having insurance saved his life from cancer (“What does that have to do with it?”) and King shot back that it seemed the Fox hosts preferred to keep people off insurance (“Are you that cruel?”). Mediaite’s got the video and the transcript: http://goo.gl/M8y1uS

CRUZ SAVES AMERICA -- In coloring book form: Shout-out to @timkmak for flagging this one down. There’s a new coloring book featuring Sen. Ted Cruz doing things like wrestling the snakes of Obamacare and riding a bald eagle that is pretty necessary viewing on a Wednesday morning. http://goo.gl/FHvRmR

Cruz “fighting for all citizens of America”: http://goo.gl/06ak8K

TUESDAY’S TRIVIA WINNER – Lucas White was the first to answer that John McCain will be the longest-serving senator to succeed a member of his own party (Barry Goldwater).

TODAY’S TRIVIA – I’ll take today’s question: Been a lot of talk about President Obama wielding his veto pen next year, but he’s done so twice already to little fanfare. One was a stop-gap defense spending bill, but what was the other bill and why did Obama veto it?

The first person to correctly answer gets a mention in the next day’s Huddle. Email me at beverett@politico.com

GET HUDDLE emailed to your Blackberry, iPhone or other mobile device each morning. Just enter your email address where it says “Sign Up.” http://www.politico.com/huddle/

** A message from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and FairReform.com: It’s not a red or blue issue. It’s a red, white and blue issue: America's largest employers face tough global competition every day AND the highest statutory tax rate of any major country in the world. America needs comprehensive tax reform to allow U.S. businesses to compete successfully in the global economy. America needs comprehensive tax reform to attract foreign investment. America needs comprehensive tax reform to increase capital for investment and drive job creation in the U.S.

America needs comprehensive tax reform today – to protect American employers and American jobs. Learn more and find out what you can do to help at FairReform.com . **

** A message from Wine & Spirits Wholesalers of America: The American beverage alcohol industry has established an eight-decade record of success, fostering competition and innovation while at the same time preventing underage access, ensuring social responsibility and guaranteeing product integrity through strict regulatory oversight. This record is a result of the three-tier system established in the wake of Prohibition.

The 21st Amendment, gives states the primary authority to regulate the manufacture, distribution and sale of beverage alcohol. As Congress works to make the U.S. Postal Service (USPS) solvent, it is imperative that state laws concerning direct to consumer shipping of wine, beer and spirits be respected.

WSWA opposes legislation that permits USPS to circumnavigate current federal and state laws by shipping beverage alcohol as part of mail delivery. http://www.wswa.org/facts-data **