Is there a Henry Ford-Kaiser Permanente deal in the works? Health care experts say a merger makes sense for both systems

Merger mania in Southeast Michigan since ACA Since the Affordable Care Act was approved in 2010, hospitals and health insurers have been merging and combining in various ways at a pace not seen in 20 years, according to a recent report by Irving Levin and Associates, a Norwalk, Conn.-based consulting firm. Read story.

Could there be some sort of affiliation deal underway between Detroit-based Henry Ford Health System and Kaiser Permanente, the nation's largest nonprofit group health plan?



Talk is circulating in health care circles in Southeast Michigan and nationally that the two systems are discussing a business arrangement.



Several sources told Crain's the affiliation could range from a nonasset transfer joint venture involving managed care and population health management services to a full merger with Henry Ford becoming Oakland, Calif.-based Kaiser's eighth regional market.



Based on conversations with knowledgeable officials connected with Kaiser and Henry Ford, the talks began earlier this year.



Henry Ford officials, who have acknowledged they have been seeking a partner since a proposed merger with Beaumont Health System collapsed in 2013 because of cultural differences, are mum on whether they are talking with Kaiser or other systems.



Requests for interviews with Henry Ford CEO Nancy Schlichting and President Wright Lassiter III have been unsuccessful.



Henry Ford officials issued a statement to Crain's through Brenda Craig, the system's director of media relations.



"Henry Ford is continually engaged in discussions with health systems locally and nationally regarding opportunities to partner to improve quality, efficiency and the overall experience for our patients and members," said the statement. "A major focus of our discussions is on learning, benchmarking and sharing best practices. We do not comment on specific organizations or rumors."



Kaiser spokesman Marc Brown declined an interview request.



"A Kaiser partnership with Henry Ford would not surprise me," said one of Crain's sources. "It does seem like a natural fit compared to the other options that have been previously explored."



Sources told Crain's a merger or business deal between the two systems is logical for a variety of reasons.



First, Kaiser is flush with $3.1 billion in net income generated in 2014, a 15 percent increase from 2013. Second, Kaiser's CEO, Bernard Tyson, is in expansion mode, said Jeff Goldsmith, president of Health Futures Inc., a Charlottesville, Va.-based consulting firm.



"Kaiser is talking with everybody," Goldsmith said. "They want to enter Washington, metro Seattle, with Group Health. They want to start a medical school in Southern California. Bernie wants to be everywhere."





Related Links