UCF may require students to have health insurance

Officials said they want students to have access to health care so that untreated illness and injury do not interfere with their academic careers. One in five students at the University of Central Florida are uninsured.

UCF is considering requiring most new students to have health insurance as a condition of enrollment starting next year.

Mandating insurance has benefits for both students and the university. But it could add another financial burden for students who already have faced rising tuition costs.

The move mirrors a trend among colleges and universities nationwide. This summer, University of Florida will begin requiring most of its newly admitted or re-admitted students to show proof of insurance before they can register for classes. Florida State University introduced a similar rule in 2007.

Rollins College, a private school in Winter Park, has required health insurance for all of its full-time students for more than 25 years.

As UCF debates the issue, at least two other public universities — University of South Florida and New College — also are considering a health-insurance mandate.

"It just makes a lot of sense because we know that healthy students are good students," said UCF Health Services Director Michael Deichen, who noted that poor health can cause students to miss class and interfere with their performance on tests and assignments. "Students who don't have insurance are at a real disadvantage."

Today, UCF requires its medical-school students and some graduate students to carry health insurance. International students also must be covered.

Under the proposal, all full-time and many part-time students entering UCF for the first time in fall 2015 and later would need insurance.

Current UCF students who are not already required to carry coverage would not be affected by the change, which officials said is not related to the Affordable Care Act, the law requiring most Americans to be insured. Individuals who earn less than about $10,000 annually, which includes many college students, are exempt from the law.

Beginning in fall 2015, these new students who do not have insurance or whose insurance does not cover them in the Central Florida area would be required to purchase it. UCF would offer insurance to students for about $1,460 a year, less than half the cost of the current health insurance plan the university offers students on a voluntary basis.

For 2014-15, UF is offering an insurance plan through UnitedHealthcare that costs $1,897 per student a year. The plan charges UF students as much as $9,813 a year to include all of their dependents.

UCF's student-body president, Melissa Westbrook, said she supports the change even if it means the price of attendance will rise. She did not have health insurance a couple years ago, she said, and remembers putting off going to the doctor because of the expense.