Elaine Hays

Age: 55



Work resume: Certified financial planner, former stock broker





Education: M.S. in finance and economics from West Texas A&M University; 51 hours toward doctorate in economics, Texas Tech University



Community experience/past political experience: Board member at Mission 2540; membership at Messiah’s House; former board president, vice-president and treasurer of the CareNet Crisis Pregnancy Centers of Amarillo; precinct chair and state convention delegate the Republican Party of Texas; member of Financial Planning Association; member of Amarillo Republican Women







Video







Q&A

The nation remains in a budget crisis. What areas specifically would you slash from the budget?

I would begin by eliminating overlapping and duplicative departments as identified by the Government Accountability Office. I would also restore zero-base budgeting requirements for all agencies instead of the current system of automatic across-the-board increases. I would certainly not begin by reducing retirement benefits for our young veterans.



Many Texas Panhandle residents are concerned about immigration. What specifically do you support in terms of legislation to address this issue?

First, secure our borders. Otherwise, reforms will continue to multiply our immigration problems. I do not support the Senate recommendations of a path to citizenship that combines an open-border policy with our social welfare system. This drastically increases the financial strain on the country and accelerates our national debt.



Efforts to defund the Affordable Care Act have so far proved unattainable. What types of medical reforms, if any, do you support to reduce the spiraling cost of medicare?

First, we have to continue fighting to repeal this destructive legislation that takes away our free market choices. Instead, I support measures that would increase competition: allow purchasing of health insurance across state lines, expanded use of Health Savings Accounts and providing individuals the same tax deductions as corporations.



Online: elainehaysforcongress.com