A fire that ripped through a home and killed a couple who had lived there for decades apparently started in the basement, authorities said Wednesday.

Two dead in Mt. Pleasant Township fire A couple died in an early morning fire at a home where they had lived for more than 50 years in Mount Pleasant Township. More

VIDEO: Watch the report by Pittsburgh's Action News 4 reporter Katelyn Sykes

The Westmoreland County coroner identified the victims as James Kochis, 81, and Katherine Kochis, 75, of Mount Pleasant Township. Autopsies are planned to determine the cause and manner of death.

Firefighters say the fire happened just before 4 a.m. at a home on East Laurel Circle. When crews arrived, the house was fully engulfed.

"Fire was coming out of multiple locations," said Mark Hudec, of the Norvelt Fire Department. "Guys had difficulty getting in because of the fire."

Once they were able to get inside, firefighters were able to put the fire out pretty quickly, Hudec said. They also discovered the bodies of the Kochises, who had lived in the house for more than 50 years, Hudec said.

"It's tough," he said. "I've known these people. I actually babysat their kids when I was younger so I've known them my whole life."

SLIDESHOW: Photos from the fire scene

Hudec said knowing the victims made fighting this fire even harder. He said this is a close-knit community and several firefighters who responded knew the couple.

"It probably hasn't really hit," Hudec said. "But we're doing what we're supposed to be doing now."

"Everybody that knew them you never saw them apart," he said. "They were liked."

A couple that was well-liked and respected by their neighbors as well.

"I am in total shock," neighbor Deborah Stairs said. "I am just I can't believe it. It is just too real."

"They're just beautiful people," she said.

Firefighters believe the fire started in the basement of the home, but aren't sure how. Investigators spent several hours on scene Thursday morning trying to pinpoint the cause. They didn't believe it was suspicious.