The scoreboard didn’t match the elation. The Broncos beat the Colts 31-24 on Sunday, but the victory felt partially empty because of the expectations. Denver aims to be the first Super Bowl loser to win the next season in three decades.

Was there disappointment in victory after the second-half survival?

“You try to set a mindset where you are not like this. I don’t think disappointment. As I told the team, you never make excuses for ‘Ws’ in this league. I don’t care if it’s one, 21 or 101 (point win),” coach John Fox said. “It’s hard to win in this league. But we are going to make the corrections and learn from this. Guys won’t be sensitive to coaching.”

The Broncos raced to a 24-0 lead then held on with white knuckles, requiring critical defensive stops to escape. Denver’s offense sputtered in the second half, totalling 88 yards. Denver’s receivers dropped five passes, including multiple drops by Demaryius Thomas.

“It’s something we’ve got to clean up,” Fox said.

The Broncos ran more on third-and-short, going three-for-three in those situations. That was a passing down 92 percent of the time a year ago, according to offensive coordinator Adam Gase. Fox wants the team to establish a more physical presence. The idea is sound, but the execution beyond the third-and-shorts was inefficient.

The Broncos rushed on 22 of their 31 first-down plays, gaining 50 yards. Montee Ball finished with 67 yards on the ground, forcing nine missed tackles on his 23 attempts, according to Pro Football Focus.

Other notes from Fox’s news conference:

— Asked for his reaction to the Ravens cutting Ray Rice after the release of a TMZ video showing the running back punching his then-fiance, Fox was direct: “My personal feeling is that there’s no place for (domestic violence) in our league or society.”

— Broncos safety David Bruton is not expected to miss time after dislocating his left shoulder. It popped back into place, with the co-captain Bruton saying Sunday night he could have returned to the game. Indianapolis’ safety Colt Anderson wiped out Bruton on a touchback, upsetting the Broncos.

“You make plays (on special teams) and you are considered a threat. Don’t worry, every player seeks revenge on a shot like that,” Bruton said. “Nah, I am not worried (about being unavailable this week). Honestly, I felt like I could have gone back in there.”

— Fox was pleased with the performance of Von Miller and Chris Harris in their return from knee surgery. Miller played 59 of 76 snaps, with Harris in on 41 plays. Miller graded out well on run defense, but wasn’t able to consistently pressure Andrew Luck.

“Von played well. I think he’d tell you — and I’d tell you — that he’s capable of better, just like everyone in that (locker) room,” Fox said.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck