Leadership: President Obama was in Germany the last few days, but too many of his recent remarks sound like he’s been in high orbit — around another planet.

America has never been held in greater esteem than under Obama’s leadership. Counterterrorism worked well in Yemen until the emergency evacuation of embassy and Special Ops forces — and the loss of millions in arms.

The president’s half-hearted “war” on the Islamic State is also a “success.” As is ObamaCare, never been working better. Just as he promised.

Jobs are finally humming along with unemployment numbers down (because so many gave up looking). The economy actually shriveled in the first quarter, but that’s because of some unexpected phenomenon called winter.

The Mexican border is secure now because the president says so. Since Bill Clinton was already named the first black president, the actual first black president claims he’s given such staunch support to Israel that he’s in reality the first Jewish president.

Oy vey! What gives with this guy? If Obama says something, it’s true. He’s Obi-wan Kenobi employing The Force: “These are not the droids you’re looking for.”

At his news conference closing the G-7 meeting Monday, Obama declared that ObamaCare’s costs “have come in substantially lower than even our estimates about how much it would cost. … None of the predictions about how this wouldn’t work have come to pass.”

Everyone here keep the doctor they liked? Anyone’s hours cut to part-time? Premiums steady? Everyone get their promised $2,500 health care savings?

On IS, Obama admitted that nine months after announcing his hastily written strategy to “degrade and ultimately destroy” the terrorist army, “We don’t yet have a complete strategy.” This is Obama speaking, so of course, it’s someone else’s fault: The Iraqis for not being trained fast enough.

Nothing prevents Obama aides from declaring his strategy a “success,” even as Ramadi fell. That’s a mere “setback,” as in the Mosul setback and the Fallujah setback. We’re setbacking ourselves to victory.

The setbacks occur because IS is “nimble, and they’re aggressive, and they’re opportunistic.” No kidding. Wait till these JV guys play varsity come fall.

As opposed to, say, the brave pilots who venture out hunting IS targets with no ground support, then must circle an hour or so awaiting White House permission to attack each target. Three of four U.S. planes return with ordnance undropped.

Or take Obama’s illegal executive order strategy on illegal immigration. Those darned federal judges pestering the imperial president to a halt. If only they understood the Constitution as well as the part-time constitutional law lecturer who clearly says they’re legal.

A promising politician back in 2008 accurately spoke out on a major political affliction. Americans, he said, “are tired of hearing promises made and 10-point plans proposed in the heat of a campaign only to have nothing change.”

That was Obama himself, whose disconnected, empty blather has now become a major American affliction.