For more information about Ascent Community Church visit http://ascentcc.org/

LOUISVILLE — — The arrangement is only temporary, but attendees of Louisville's recently-formed Ascent Community Church this morning will celebrate countless hours of hard work when they hold their first service inside the revitalized McCaslin Boulevard space formerly occupied by Sam's Club.

Vacant since 2010, the 129,000-square-foot building at 550 McCaslin Blvd. was sold to a group of local investors earlier this year. Those investors intend to find a permanent, single tenant. But in the meantime, they struck a deal with the leadership of the fledging church, which will occupy it on a month-to-month basis, according to church founder and co-pastor Jim Candy.

Candy was among about a dozen people who gathered at the building Saturday to put the finishing touches on the church's worship hall, kids' areas and other community spaces. Dozens of people put in an un-calculated number of volunteers hours over the past few months to transform a large, empty concrete slab into a church that expects to welcome hundreds of worshippers each week, the pastor said.

"We'll probably be here until midnight," Candy said with a smile, Saturday.

Holding its first service in December- — and welcoming a very healthy crowd of more than 300 people that day —- Ascent attendees have been gathering every other week in a rented space in Broomfield's Omni Interlocken Hotel, Candy said. Even knowing that the arrangement in the old Sam's Club might not last long, he said it's a big step in helping the church set down roots in the community.

"We think moving into a new space like this and being able to go weekly is a huge thing for us," he said. "We want to be the kind of church that the city loves and we think the city should be a better place because the church cares about it."

Volunteers at the Ascent space Saturday echoed Candy's excitement to finally hold services there.

"I think it's a huge thing just to be able to get established and let people know it's here and it's going to be here for a while," Louisville resident Dave Parkhill said as he wiped down chairs.

Parkhill said that not having to set up equipment just to tear it all down and put it in storage after each service should allow people to focus their energy more fully on establishing community connections with their fellow church-goers, a major focus of Ascent.

Jackie Stephens, wife of co-pastor Bill Stephens, on Saturday sewed together Velcro connectors that will hold in place the floor-to-ceiling cloth dividers that separate the stage and worship center from the rest of the space.

She spoke very highly of Tom Garvin, the registered agent for the building's ownership group, and the man who, according to church members, worked out a very generous deal to allow Ascent to occupy the space until a new tenant can be found.

"Tom has been incredible," she said. "Hopefully us being here will bring a highlight to the space and attract the right tenant."

The local business community has been hugely supportive, Candy said, as evidenced by the sheer amount of donated items Ascent has received in the lead up to their first service in Louisville.

The local Home Depot fabricated and donated large sandwich-board style signs, Candy said, and the Smiling Moose Deli located just across McCaslin on Sunday will donate sandwiches for lunch.

Artine Yapoujian, the owner of Boulder County coffee house chain, The Brewing Market, is an Ascent attendee and donated about 80 chairs, and several tables to the church, as well as coffee machines so fresh cups of Joe and hot chai tea can be served before services.

Yapoujian said he recently listened to a sermon at Ascent that talked about heeding the call to minister and saw his donations to the church as a way to do that.

"I don't sing and dance. I know coffee. I've been doing it since 1977, so I thought this could be part of my ministry," he said as he worked behind the counter of what is now Ascent's cafe area. "It's amazing what they've done with this space."

The Albertsons grocery store located at 910 W. Cherry St., which years ago competed with Sam's Club for customers, has also been extremely welcoming and helpful, Candy said.

The store will be donating doughnuts and bagels for the Sunday service.

Store director Joan Adams said she is very excited to see Ascent move into Albertsons' long-empty neighbor and feels having it there will benefit area businesses.

"It's great to finally have somebody there," she said. "I think it will be good for Louisville and good for the community

"I understand they have a lot of youth programs over there," Adams added. "We'll just amp them up with some sugar to get them going."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328 or rubinoj@dailycamera.com