I watched the President’s State of the Union speech with admiration. How could anyone not like Obama? Or at least cede that he is intelligent, humane and graceful in his civility.

Of course, a university town is always rife with liberal Democrats. My friends, the members of my bridge club, the women in book club: liberal Democrats all.

So, never having to defend myself against the swelling tide of Trump, et al, I decided to address the question: why I’m voting for a Democrat in the upcoming election.

Please read to the end of the column for an offer you might possibly refuse.

1. I’m voting Democrat because my family were all Democrats. This is not entirely fatuous reasoning. We talked politics at the dinner table; I recall my immigrant grandfather’s pride describing how his union protected workers from long hours and unsafe conditions. In the 1960s, my parents were philosophically allied with the northern Democrats who supported integration and civil rights.

2. I’m voting Democrat because I understand that raising taxes on the wealthy did not cause a depression as many Republicans warned. The “trickle-down” economic policy which proposed that great wealth would somehow leak down to the poor and the middle class also never happened. It is a fallacious notion that cutting taxes accelerates growth. The economy was in free-fall in 2008. Now those were scary times. Under democratic presidents, growth in the economy goes up.

3. I’m voting Democrat because I believe in the necessity of governmental regulation. I want a safe food supply. Clean water. Unpolluted air. Why would we entrust these decisions to companies whose financial self-interest might be in conflict with these goals? I remember a time when the tobacco industry argued that there was no connection between smoking and lung cancer.

Today corporate interests argue about whether fracking causes earthquakes. It does.

Corporate interests claim that voluntarily action from agri-business is the solution to water pollution? It isn’t.

Maybe there is too much regulation. But I would trust the opinion of the Environmental Protection Agency over the big oil companies.

4. I’m voting Democrat because I think that science must be unfettered from corporate or political or religious control. This includes telling the truth about climate change.

This means zealously supporting alternate energy sources and listening to environmentalists who are skeptical of pipe lines.

This means not explaining phenomena with biblical references. Perhaps creationism may be taught in our schools. But never in a science class.

5. I’m voting Democrat because Democrats do not use fear mongering in quite the same way that Republicans seem to enjoy. Ebola. Death panels. Baby parts. Mexicans. The hysteria that makes for good television on Fox News makes for terrible public policy.

6. I’m voting Democrat because I believe in marriage equality. Having just spent the Christmas vacation in Florida with my wonderful niece, Lizzie; her wife, Sarah; and their two adorable little boys, I know it is ludicrous to believe that “traditional” marriage is threatened by this happy family.

8. I’m voting Democrat because I believe that more “more guns” is not a solution to stopping the violence that plagues this country. Why should anyone own an assault weapon? Why must we accept the gun’s lobby’s misinterpretation of the Second Amendment?

7. I’m voting Democrat because I am pro-choice. I want my daughter and granddaughters to be able to make decisions regarding their own bodies. I support Planned Parenthood and I am saddened by the smear campaign against them. I was in college when abortions were illegal. I had a friend who nearly bled to death in a motel room. Another who became sterile from an infection following an illegal abortion. We must never, ever return to those bad old days.

8. I’m voting Democrat because I believe that the Republicans have shown absolutely no leadership in managing health care. Voting almost 60 times (60 times!) to repeal the affordable health care act and having no clear plan of their own is unconscionable. The Affordable Health Care act may be imperfect but it is a start: millions more people have access, no one is denied insurance because of pre-existing conditions and young adults are able to stay on their parents’ insurance plans until the age of 26. Why dismantle this effort and start from square one?

9. I’m voting Democrat because I believe that macho posturing about “leadership” is not a foreign policy. Invading another country is usually a bad idea, one we should have learned after Vietnam. The invasion of Iraq did not “turn out pretty OK,” as Jeb Bush has dimly observed. Ted Cruz’s threats to carpet-bomb a middle-Eastern city “into oblivion” is wildly irresponsible. Why would anyone vote for a party whose candidates talk like this?

10. I’m voting Democrat because I believe that the exceptionalism of America is a result of a multi-ethnic brew which defines and enriches us. Immigration may be a problem to be worked out, but not by vile, xenophobic rants. Again: Why would anyone vote for a party whose candidates talk like this?

Here’s an offer to any reader who disagrees: Write a top 10 list defining why you are voting Republican. This newpaper will publish it in next Sunday’s paper. I’ll be happy to take you to lunch. We’ll talk.

Editor’s note: All submissions in response to this offer must be signed. No anonymous submissions will be accepted. The Tribune reserves the right to limit the number of responses it publishes