MOUNTLAKE TERRACE, Wash., July 13, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Premera Blue Cross today announced the launch of Checkup Challenge, a social media campaign encouraging people to take advantage of the preventive care benefits available in most health plans.

Now through October 31, Washington and Alaska residents who pledge to schedule a doctor's appointment for themselves or a family member before the end of 2015 and complete the entry form at www.checkupchallenge.com will be automatically entered in a weekly random drawing for an Amazon $200 gift card. Residents don't have to be Premera members to enter.

"Going to your doctor for appropriate screenings is one of the most important things people can do to stay healthy and one of the primary benefits of having a health plan," said Ted Conklin, MD, Premera's vice president of medical services. "This campaign is distinctive because we are not only promoting the importance of using your preventive benefits, we are offering an incentive as well."

The Checkup Challenge campaign was created to shed light on an important aspect of staying healthy—preventive care. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, chronic diseases, including diabetes, high blood pressure and high cholesterol, are responsible for 7 in 10 deaths each year in the United States. Additionally, treating people with chronic diseases accounts for 86 percent of our nation's healthcare costs. Regular checkups include screenings and exams that can save lives and money through early detection of these chronic diseases and other potential health risks.

"Early identification of risk factors and diagnosis of common health conditions can save or extend lives," Conklin said. "We want to encourage people to take advantage of the preventive care benefits available in maintaining good health for you and your family."

Many health plans cover recommended checkups and preventive screenings at little or no cost. Individuals with Affordable Care Act (ACA) metallic plans have the most comprehensive set of preventive benefits at no cost. If a plan is grandfathered (meaning it was in effect before federal healthcare reform was passed in 2010), a more limited range of preventive benefits are included in the plan's coverage. Washington and Alaska residents who have a health plan are encouraged to contact their health plan's customer service department or go online to determine their specific benefits and cost. If you get your plan through your employer, your preventive benefits may be different.

For more information on Premera's Checkup Challenge, visit checkupchallenge.com for details, official rules and eligibility. Follow campaign social media posts using the hashtag #checkupchallenge on Premera's Facebook page and Twitter profile.

About Premera

Our mission is to provide peace of mind to our members about their healthcare coverage. We provide health insurance and related services to approximately 1.9 million people in Washington and Alaska. Premera Blue Cross has operated in Washington since 1933, and Alaska since 1952. Premera Blue Cross is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association.

Premera Blue Cross is a member of a family of companies based in Mountlake Terrace, Washington, that provide health, life, vision, dental, stop-loss, disability, and other related products and services. For more information, visit www.premera.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140811/135242

SOURCE Premera Blue Cross