This maroon Civic was being chased by Tulsa police.

A police pursuit unfolded along one of Tulsa's busiest highways during rush hour Monday evening, as the suspect threw weapons out of the car window.

The chase started near Pine and Apache and continued across Tulsa and coming to an end in the Promenade Mall parking lot at 41st and Yale.

Police say the chase started with a traffic stop of two cars. Officers said the people inside the cars were associated with a Hispanic gang and police believe they were headed to carry out a shooting.

One of the cars did pull over, and police said they found two guns, but the car then drove off which began the chase.

A line of police cars trailed closely behind the maroon Honda Civic as it weaved in and out of traffic. The driver even used his blinker to signal lane changes.

Osage SkyNews 6 pilot Will Kavanagh watched the whole thing unfold.

"Police, as they were chasing them, speeds reaching 75 to 80 miles per hour through this rush hour traffic," Kavanagh said.

Four men were inside the car. Sergeant Sean Larkin said officers saw the men toss three hand guns and ammo out of the car along the route.

"I think these guys just wanted to separate themselves from the guns," Larkin said. "Each one of these guns is a trigger pull away from a homicide."

The pursuit lasted a good half hour, taking officers from I-244 to 169, then over to I-44 and finally to 41st and Yale, where the driver, again, let police know he was making a turn, this time into the Promenade Mall parking lot.

The car came to a stop and the men surrendered, sticking their arms out the windows.

"He's just stopped here, on his own, hands up, so we're gonna see how this is gonna play out," said Kavanagh.

"Eventually, I think they got to a point where they knew just weren't gonna be able to get away and finally just pulled over," Larkin said.

One by one the men stepped out of the car with their hands up.

"As you can see here, they're backing him up right to the car," Kavanagh said.

Police handcuffed all four men.

Police believe the four are in their late teens. They also say officers recovered the guns that were thrown out during the chase.