Topics: American Revolution, chattel salvery, Civil War, confederate flag, Editor's Picks, Fourth of July, Independence Day, July 4, juneteenth, slavery, war of independence, white supremacism, White Supremacy, News, Politics News

It’s been a little more than two weeks since nine human beings, all African-American, were murdered in a Charleston, South Carolina, church by a young white supremacist. In some ways, the public reaction has been predictable; all have expressed outrage, disgust, sadness, following a post-massacre routine that has become depressingly familiar. In at least one way, however, the response from America’s mostly-white mainstream has been something it usually isn’t, especially isn’t when it comes to race: genuinely introspective.

The most obvious manifestation of this collective soul-searching is the sudden toxicity of the Confederate battle flag, and the calls for its removal from government property. The demand has come not only from liberal activists and people of color but, more surprisingly, from Southern Republican politicians and multinational corporations, too. For the first time in many years, perhaps ever, it seems like many white Americans are willing to reassess not only the Confederate battle flag, but the influence white supremacy still holds over their society.

That this process has unfolded in the run-up to the Fourth of July strikes me as especially appropriate. No other holiday is endowed with the same kind of Americanness (though there’s a strong case to be made that Super Bowl Sunday, an unofficial holiday, comes close). No other holiday so clearly elevates secular values, such as liberty and self-government, to almost metaphysical heights. If there’s one day of the year when Americans collectively remind themselves of who they are and what they profess to believe, Independence Day is it.

This is a good thing, in many ways. For Americans who don’t regularly participate in organized religion, the Fourth of July is a rare moment of unity, one of the precious few times every year when an increasingly balkanized society coalesces into a single, shared experience. But the Fourth of July has its problems, ones connected to the evolution of America’s self-perception, of which the debate over the Confederate battle flag is a part.

Simply put, while it’s intended to be a day to honor the fundamental values motivating the American experiment — liberty, independence, justice and self-determination — the promise of Independence Day is not for all Americans. It never has been and it never will be. For nearly 100 years following July 4, 1776, there were millions of Americans whose lives were the antithesis of free, and for whom justice, equality and self-determination were effectively fantasy and myth. These people — the chattel slaves of the American South — were not just unfree when compared to their white compatriots; they were among the most unfree and maltreated people in the history of the world.

This is why establishing the Fourth of July as a de facto “America Day” is so incoherent. It’s true that something calling itself the United States of America asserted its independence during the summer of 1776; but the country I’ve lived in for my whole life is not it. In some sense, my country — a multiethnic, pluralist, secular and democratic republic — only came into being during the civil rights struggle of the mid-20th century. Yet even if we aren’t so exacting in our standards, today’s America came into being during the Civil War, not the War of Independence.