Buy Photo Monica Wehby listens to Sen. Jeff Merkley while they talk with the Statesman Journal Editorial Board on Saturday, Oct. 18, 2014, in Salem. (Photo: ASHLEY SMITH / STATESMAN JOURNAL)Buy Photo

The two major party candidates running to be Oregon's next U.S. Senator talked about Ebola, middle income jobs and their political weaknesses during a one-hour editorial board meeting with the Statesman Journal Saturday.

Ebola

Both candidates agreed that the Ebola outbreak

outbreak poses a serious threat to the economic and physical health of the affected African countries, but Democratic Sen. Jeff Merkley and Republican Monica Wehby differed on what would be the best course of action.

Wehby, a pediatric neurosurgeon, called for a nonessential travel ban from the countries in western Africa. Screening for temperature at the airport isn't the most effective method because people can naturally have a lower body temperature or artificially lower their fever in an attempt to seek treatment in the U.S.

"Doctors know that you isolate the source," Wehby said.

Merkley said he favored a partial travel ban.

He also supports a "massive international effort" to build treatment facilities, research a vaccine and explore other more effective methods of screening for early symptoms of the virus.

Wehby also criticized the Obama administration for statements it made in September that it was unlikely someone infected with Ebola would reach our shores.

"When you put out false reassurances ... that's what makes people panic," Wehby said. "Those are the things that cause the problems."

Buy Photo Sen. Jeff Merkley talks with the Statesman Journal Editorial Board on Saturday, Oct. 18, 2014, in Salem. (Photo: ASHLEY SMITH / STATESMAN JOURNAL)

Middle income jobs

Oregonians lost about 137,000 jobs — or about 8 percent — during the Great Recession. And 88 percent of those jobs paid between $25,000 and $50,000 per year.

The problem for middle-income earners is that those jobs haven't returned as the economy started to turn around.

Merkley wants to create jobs by investing in infrastructure like building bridges and dredging ports because those jobs can't be outsourced. He also wants to restore shop classes and increase the capital available to start-ups by allowing them to crowd source for their initial investment.

Wehby wants to revise the federal tax code to remove regulations on businesses put in place by the Affordable Care Act, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Dodd-Frank Act, which governs financial institutions and lending practices.

"My staff spends more time on paperwork than they do on patient care," Wehby said.

Partisanship and plagiarism

Buy Photo Monica Wehby talks with the Statesman Journal Editorial Board on Saturday, Oct. 18, 2014, in Salem. (Photo: ASHLEY SMITH / STATESMAN JOURNAL)

When asked to explain some of her campaign missteps, including allegations that her website used un-sourced material from national GOP figures and groups, Wehby's response was two-fold.

She said a former staffer copied health and economic policy materials.

"We held him accountable. He is no longer with the campaign," Wehby said. "I'm not a career politician. This is my first campaign."

Merkley was asked about his reputation for being one of the Senate's most liberal senators and whether that's the best way to represent Oregon and to effect change in Washington D.C.

Oregon's junior senator said he's worked with several Republicans on legislation where they could both find common ground.

For example, he worked with then Arizona Sen. Jon Kyl to write a bill banning the sale of crush videos where small animals are mutilated.

"I've probably done more of those partnerships than any other first-term senator," Merkley said.

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/1wcBWJM