Wisconsin is ending its wolf hunt today, closing the last of six hunting and trapping zones three months early because the quota for wolf kills has already been exceeded. The hunt began on October 15 and was scheduled to run through the end of February.

Minnesota, too, announced closure yesterday, on December 4, of one of its three hunting and trapping zones after hitting the state’s target number. Some hailed the hunt, which was controversial in both states, as a sign that wolf numbers have rebounded significantly.

“That there can be a hunting and trapping season is evidence of the tremendous success of the recovery program,” according to David MacFarland, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources carnivore specialist.

Others felt differently.

“I feel that the only reason a person would hunt a wolf is bragging rights,” said Nigaanigiizhig (Jim St. Arnold), Ojibwe elder and the Traditional Environmental Knowledge (TEK) coordinator for the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission in Odanah, Wisconsin. “They can't eat the meat of a wolf, they can only have a trophy.”

In Wisconsin about 80 percent of the wolves taken are by trapping. There is no limit on the number of traps set, but a trapper can only kill one wolf. Any other live-trapped wolves must be released. In Minnesota, which has an early hunt with guns only and a later hunt with shooting and trapping, about 50 percent of the kill is from traps.

The gray wolf has been delisted as an endangered species in several regions, and six states have since enacted wolf hunts. The total population of gray wolves in the lower 48 states is estimated at about 5,500, according to the International Wolf Center, and the population in Alaska is estimated at 8,000 to 11,000. Within the Great Lakes region, most tribes have officially opposed any recreational hunting or trapping of wolves, including the 11 member tribes of the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission.

“As a member of the Wolf clan, I was taught that the wolves are my brothers and sisters. They are my teachers and protectors,” said St. Arnold. “As such, it is important for me to do what I can to protect them as I would any member of my family.”

Controversy is arising in states like Wisconsin, where the target quota set by the DNR is being exceeded. This year, while the overall quota of 150 wolves was only exceeded by four wolves as of the morning of December 5, the number of wolves killed in one zone—29—was nearly double the 15 that had been permitted, and the season was closed in that zone three days after it opened. It continued in the other five until December 5.

“The overage is a reminder that the State of Wisconsin is still really operating on its learning permit when it comes to harvesting wolves,” said Peter David, Great Lakes Commission’s wildlife biologist, in a recent agency publication.

The Wolf and Wildlife Action Group, a national advocacy organization, will hold a protest on December 8 at the state Capitol steps and at Governor Scott Walker’s office, according to The Capital Times of Madison.