Grafton hockey standout Joe Benson practices on the ice at the Ozaukee Ice Center in Mequon. Credit: Gary Porter

By ,

Don't even bother asking Dan Wade what's next.

"So many times people came up to me and asked what else can go wrong, that I finally said stop saying that," said the second-year coach of the Grafton/Port Washington/Milwaukee Lutheran hockey team.

The string of bad luck began in 2012, and it wasn't even hockey season yet.

Defenseman Joe Benson, then a junior, was hurt in the last game of the football season and missed the hockey season.

"Just to show you the black cloud that is over us, he's a Milwaukee Lutheran student and he gets hurt in a football game against Grafton," Wade said. "So we hurt our own guy."

Hockey season wasn't even three games old when Port Washington's Brad Karrels was checked headfirst into the boards and broke both wrists. He was in arm casts for eight weeks and returned for the final three games of the season.

Adrianna Covert was a sophomore at Port Washington and was the first female in the program to play a varsity game. She also competed in some junior varsity games, and that's when she was cross-checked in the head and missed the rest of the season. Covert is also out this year and is only in school part-time due to post-concussion syndrome.

The same week, Grafton's Devon Lohr was on the ice when he was accidentally kicked in the head and sustained his third concussion in the last several years. He was ruled out the rest of the season and the defenseman did not return for his senior season.

On Jan. 25, Grafton was en route to play a road game and was about 10 miles west of Hartford when the team bus was in an accident. Three players went to the hospital and two had to miss the rest of the season.

"At that point, we were down to 11 guys that could skate," Wade said. "We almost couldn't even field a team the last couple of games."

Shortly after the accident, the brother of Grafton senior Tim Grams died unexpectedly.

"It was extremely sad seeing Tim and the Grams family go through the loss of his brother and their son," Benson said. "All I could do is pray with them and for them and know that God had a plan for them."

The season mercifully ended and Grafton was the only team in the state to not win a game. Only three boys played in every game.

"It was so ridiculous how many things happened," Wade said.

But it only continued.

Karrels began his senior year of school tearing his anterior cruciate ligament in football practice and is out until at least Feb. 6.

Port Washington junior Dylan Scharnweber, who would have been a defenseman, separated his shoulder in an October football game and is out for the season.

"I can't stand football season," Wade said. "I just hold my breath during football season."

Wade had to have surgery Oct. 24 as a result of injuries he sustained from the bus accident. He had bone spurs, so doctors shaved a half-inch off his shoulder bone and a third of an inch off his collarbone.

"They told me when it gets cold it would hurt," Wade said. "Holy moley, did it hurt (last week)."

Grafton's Kyler Huck, a sophomore, was checked from behind headfirst into the boards Thanksgiving weekend and was out until mid-December.

That was the same month Grafton senior Zach Schermer dislocated his kneecap in a game. He's still on crutches and in a knee brace and is likely out for the year.

As a result of all the injuries, there are eight freshmen or sophomores among the 15 varsity players.

But on the bright side, Grafton has already won two games.

Yeah, there's 15 losses, but it's about more than the record, according to Benson.

"I'm extremely happy to be back on the ice this year," said Benson, who is fourth on the team with nine points. "Winning is always great but having fun playing the sport you love is even better."