MILLBURN — T.J. Davis noticed security had beefed up today outside The Mall at Short Hills.



And with holiday shoppers still on edge after last Sunday's fatal carjacking, in which a 30-year-old Hoboken man was killed, that was a welcome development.

"You feel more comfortable," Davis, a 31-year-old accountant from Jersey City said of seeing both local police and county sheriff's officers patrolling the parking lots. "But you never expect something like that to happen."

Authorities late Friday and earlier today arrested four men on murder charges in connection with the shooting death of Dustin Friedland six days ago. Friedland and his wife had returned to their 2012 Range Rover on the second floor of a parking deck after shopping at the mall when they were confronted by at least two persons.

Authorities said Friedland then scuffled with at least one of the assailants. He was shot once in the head at close range and taken to Morristown Medical Center where he later died. His wife was not injured

Karif Ford, 31, Basim Henry, 32, Kevin Roberts, 35, all of Newark, and Hanif Thompson, 29, of Irvington, were charged today with murder, felony murder, carjacking, conspiracy and weapons offenses, authorities said.

All four suspects are being held at the Essex County jail in Newark in lieu of $2 million each, Acting Essex County Prosecutor Carolyn Murray said.

Despite the arrests, Hoboken resident Anokah Maynard, who was shopping with Davis at the upscale mall this afternoon, said she refused to have him park in a parking deck.

Davis said he paid $10 for valet.

"I'm terrified," said Maynard, 29, a fashion designer, who clutched a bag from MAC where she had just purchased makeup. "That's where we were about to turn in. I was like 'absolutely not,'" she said.

The mall was bustling with shoppers this afternoon but Belinda Pond, 38, said it's quieter than she expected for the last weekend before Christmas. Around 2 p.m. a line of cars stretched onto Route 24 westbound waiting to enter the mall parking lot. Mall staff directed traffic into the parking decks and lots in an effort to ease congestion.

Pond's friend, Jolene Bushman, 43, of Madison, said she waited in line for less that 10 minutes for her purchases at Justice, a children's clothing store.

"It's not a madhouse," said Pond, a teacher in Linden who worked at The Mall when she was in college. She sat on a bench outside Justice next to three shopping bags.

"You can tell there's heightened security, but it's not like you're walking into an airport," she said.

The fatal carjacking didn't keep away 38-year old Kafi Thompson-James and her husband, Andre Brown. After two hours of shopping, the couple from East Orange had three large bags filled with gifts for their kids.

"I don't feel unsafe in anyway," Thompson-James said. "It's the holiday and people need to finalize (shopping)."

Farrah Khan, a North Jersey resident, said she stopped going to Garden State Plaza in Paramus after a shooting there earlier this year. Since then, Khan, 33, said she switched her shopping to the Short Hills mall. She considered shopping elsewhere today.

"I was hesitant," said Khan, who gave her younger daughter a coin to drop into the fountain in front of Macy's. She and her husband have a Christmas party tonight and were looking for outfits for their two young daughters.

"I have a lot to do," Khan said before she hurried off to the next store.

While she said she's shocked at the violent nature of the crime, Pond said she isn't surprised the carjacking took place in the suburbs. "It's gonna happen anywhere. It's a tragedy, absolutely."

A Pittstown resident, Pond said today was her second to last day of shopping.

"I found something I couldn't live without - it was 40 percent off," she gushed.

FOLLOW THE STAR-LEDGER: TWITTER • FACEBOOK • GOOGLE+

NOTE: We have decided to close the comments on this post because many commenters violated our community rules by posting comments that were racist, vulgar and off topic. We apologize to our many readers who followed the rules.