Anheuser-Busch InBev NV said it was disappointed and increasingly concerned by the National Football League’s handling of recent incidents, which the brewer said “have overshadowed” the league’s current season.

The company’s statement represents the strongest remarks yet from a national sponsor of the NFL, although Anheuser-Busch didn’t say if it was pulling back on any sponsorship.

“We are not yet satisfied with the league’s handling of behaviors that so clearly go against our own company culture and moral code,” the maker of Budweiser said on its website Tuesday. “We have shared our concerns and expectations with the league.”

Anheuser-Busch’s sponsorship fees alone are worth an estimated $50 million a year, according to sponsorship consultancy IEG.

The NFL has come under criticism for its handling of the Ray Rice domestic-violence investigation, which initially resulted in a two-game suspension for the Baltimore Ravens running back. Mr. Rice was later released by the Ravens and suspended indefinitely by the league after a new video emerged from media website TMZ showing Mr. Rice hitting his wife inside the elevator.

The NFL then faced another issue on Friday, when Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson was indicted on a charge of injury to a child. Mr. Peterson was deactivated for Sunday’s loss to the New England Patriots, but the Vikings said Monday that he is expected to play this week at the New Orleans Saints.

Despite the recent criticisms, the NFL remains popular. NBC said Tuesday that its ratings for the first “Sunday Night Football” after the scandal rose 8 percent to 22 million viewers.

Overall, the NFL remains one of the few reliable ways to reach a massive audience. The league claimed last year that 205 million unique people watched an NFL game. As a result, advertisers spent more than $3 billion out of a total $70 billion on the NFL.

The NFL has a cozy relationship with its major advertisers and broadcasters. Last year at an owners meeting in Arizona, journalist Charlie Rose moderated a panel for league employees featuring, among others, McDonald’s Chief Executive Don Thompson and CBS CEO Leslie Moonves. These types of events are common, as are other business leaders in owners’ boxes at big games. The week of the league’s opening game in Seattle, Goodell and his top executives dropped by for friendly visits to Microsoft and Nike.

NFL owners continue to support Mr. Goodell both publicly and privately. New York Giants owner John Mara; the McCaskey family, owners of the Chicago Bears; and Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones, among others, have supported Mr. Goodell in the last week. Privately, owners say there wouldn’t be real pressure unless the ongoing investigation into the matter, run by former FBI-head Robert Mueller, finds evidence of a coverup in the league office or that Goodell saw the tape.

Sponsors pulling out could apply major heat to Mr. Goodell, but those familiar with the NFL say that’s unlikely.

“Any sponsor can be replaced. There’s competition in all their key categories,” said Kent Atherton, a former vice president of sports at DirecTV, who now runs a media and marketing company. “The NFL does exert leverage. They don’t like to talk about it, but they carry a big stick. You want to play nice, you want to make sure you have a good relationship with them when it comes time to renewals.”

Len DeLuca, a longtime executive with CBS and ESPN, who now runs a media strategy company, said that evidence of how carefully “league partners” are treading in the past week is evidence of how important the NFL is to large companies.

“The networks and “traditional media” are walking the fine line between covering the story with its news and sports-news divisions, and offending the client that produces 90 percent of the highest-rated shows in television,” he said, citing the fact that TMZ broke the Rice video scandal in the first place.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.