The date and location of the premiere for Star Wars: The Force Awakens has been announced, with Disney and Lucasfilm confirming that the screening for the seventh instalment to the much beloved franchise will take place in Los Angeles.

The Hollywood Reporter has confirmed that Star Wars: The Force Awakens’ world premiere will be held in the City Of Angels on December 14, just four days before the film is released around the United States on December 18.

Disney and Lucasfilm are trying to keep the exact details of the world premiere for Star Wars: The Force Awakens in Los Angeles under wraps, with the location still being withheld.

If those in control of picking out its location want to follow history they could have it at Hollywood’s Chinese Theatre, which is where the original Star Wars had its premiere in May of 1977. That film was subsequently subtitled Episode IV: A New Hope following the release of sequels for the series, and serves as a middle story to the saga, so far.

All that’s for certain about the event is that the cast and crew for Star Wars: The Force Awakens will gather together to watch it. This will more-than-likely be the first time that each of them have been seen in one place together.

Sure, various cast members and the film’s co-writer and director J.J. Abrams have appeared at Comic-Con and Star Wars Celebration over the past 12 months, but never all together.

This means that we can expect to see Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Mark Hamill, Peter Mayhew, and Anthony Daniels, each of whom appeared in the original trilogy and are returning for the new instalment, as well as new stars John Boyega, Daisy Ridley, Oscar Isaac, Domhnall Gleeson, Adam Driver, Gwendoline Christie, Max Von Sydow, and Lupita Nyong’o will appear too.

This is almost certainly going to be the most coveted and hottest ticket in Hollywood this year, with studio executives, journalists, and other film employees going above and beyond to get into the screening.

There probably won’t be too many additional Star Wars: The Force Awakens screenings for press and cast and crew ahead of the premiere as they want to keep all of the spoilers and secrets for the blockbuster under wraps.

That’s just the beginning though. Because from there the Star Wars: The Force Awakens gang will move onto London for another premiere, before they then proceed to various other events around the globe too.

Set 30 years after the event of Star Wars: Return Of The Jedi, The Force Awakens revolves around the new leads in the franchise Finn (John Boyega), Rey (Daisey Ridley), and Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), who will mingle with Han Solo (Harrison Ford), Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), and Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill). Meanwhile the Dark Side will once again be represented by Kylo Ren (Adam Driver) and Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis).

Star Wars: The Force Awakens will hit cinemas in the United Kingdom on December 17, 2015, one day earlier than those in the United States, as it will be released here on December 18. French cinemas are the truly lucky ones though, as Star Wars: The Force Awakens will be in cinemas on December 16.

Star Wars: The Force Awakens will then be followed by the eighth instalment to the beloved franchise, which will be written and directed by Rian Johnson (Brick, Looper) and will hit cinemas on May 26, 2017. Meanwhile the ninth Star Wars film will be released in 2019, and it will come from a story by Rian Johnson, while Jurassic World and Safety Not Guaranteed director Colin Trevorrow will oversee it.

[Photos by Jesse Grant/Getty Images for Disney & Disney Lucasfilm]