Title company CEO Richard Talley killed himself with a nail gun the very day auditors from a Texas title-insurance firm he worked for were likely to uncover years of embezzled escrow funds, according to a federal lawsuit.

Title Resources Guaranty Co. says in the lawsuit filed Monday in U.S. District Court that it first uncovered inequities in ledgers kept by Talley companies — American Title Services and America’s Home Title — in late January, which it said “appeared to be altered to create the facade of balanced trust accounts.”

When a closer look showed “large negative balances” in the accounts used to hold escrow funds on real estate deals that Talley companies oversaw, TRGC sent an audit team to see where the money had gone.

The lawsuit was filed in part to help learn that answer.

Talley, 56, killed himself at his home Feb. 4 with at least a half-dozen shots from a nail gun to the “trunk and head,” according to the Arapahoe County coroner’s office.

TRGC’s audit team had requested a meeting with Talley earlier that day, presumably to ask him to explain the ledger discrepancies, the lawsuit says. He did not attend.

Title companies handle large amounts of money in closing real estate transactions, keeping funds in trust or escrow and then paying them to the appropriate party.

The extent of the alleged embezzlement is unclear, although TRGC said in its lawsuit that American Title’s controller, Bill Krieg, 69, admitted funds had been misappropriated from the trust accounts.

The Colorado Division of Insurance initiated an investigation into TRGC’s allegations Feb. 5, the day after Talley’s death, according to the lawsuit. A division spokesman earlier told The Denver Post that the investigation had begun before Talley’s death. The spokesman on Wednesday said he had been misinformed.

At the division’s request, TRGC said it filed the lawsuit to shut down various bank accounts that might still contain escrow funds, all at a single Denver bank. It said it needed access to Talley’s files to “identify what escrow obligations remain outstanding.”

American Title’s several offices across Colorado were shut down Tuesday, and all phones were disconnected. Efforts to reach Talley’s wife and business partner, Cheryl Talley, were unsuccessful.

TRGC said in the suit that it believes Cheryl Talley on Monday entered the company’s headquarters and removed items from her husband’s office, including “operating bank statements.” It is seeking those records.

Calls to the couple’s home, near the southwest part of Cherry Creek State Park, were not returned. Personal and business pages on Facebook were no longer available Wednesday.

The landlord at American Title’s seventh-floor headquarters at Peakview Tower in Greenwood Village on Friday filed a demand for back rent in Arapahoe County for $41,164, records show.

The company had been there since December 2011.

TRGC said state insurance investigators told it that Talley’s death “raises concerns” that critical information about the company “may be irretrievably lost or exposed to the public.”

The division has refused to comment further.

Title companies typically handle real estate closings, where funds are set aside — escrowed — to pay off existing mortgage loans, property taxes, homeowner insurance premiums and other charges associated with the culmination of a real estate purchase or sale.

The impact of Talley’s alleged conduct reaches further than the altered ledger entries, TRGC says in the lawsuit.

“Innocent homeowners are subject to potential foreclosure actions, harm to their credit ratings, and disclosure of private, sensitive, personal and financial information,” the company said.

American Title was an agent for TRGC, which underwrote the policies protecting an owner’s or lender’s financial interest in real estate against loss due to defects in the line of title or liens.

Talley had been an agent for TRGC since March 2009, the lawsuit shows.

An employee at American Title said Wednesday that Talley was “a wonderful person, just amazing to us employees.” The employee, who asked that her name not be used because she’s looking for work, said the company’s demise was a shock and that she was unaware of the escrow allegations noted in the lawsuit.

David Migoya: 303-954-1506, dmigoya@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/davidmigoya