Publisher and trade show operator delves into data, startup accelerator

Kai Jarmusz, left, and CEO Marks Owens work on packaging Olomomo nuts on Friday. Boulder s Olomomo Nut Company is part of New Hope Natural Media s NEXT Accelerator program. ( CLIFF GRASSMICK )

New Hope Natural Media, a Boulder-based provider of information and resources for the natural products industry, is getting into the businesses of data analytics and startup acceleration.

New Hope, a division of Penton Media, recently launched the NEXT Accelerator, an online effort aimed at providing resources to startups, and the NEXT Trend, an online program designed to highlight burgeoning trends for manufacturers and suppliers in the industry.

"It's been a long time coming for New Hope to really get into the data and insight (segments)," said Fred Linder, president of New Hope.

The new business arms for New Hope came as the result of a "seven-figure investment" from parent company Penton and after several months of market research with industry members, including Boulder's Olomomo Nut Company.

"Basically they had the idea of creating an online community like we have in real life here in Boulder," said Mark Owens, chief executive officer of Olomomo. "They started picking our brains, especially the young entrepreneurs, as to what we'd like to see in this web platform that would help us grow our business."

One of the suggestions was to recreate what happens in a tight-knit community such as Boulder, which has a deep history in the industry and serves as a hub of natural products firms.

That led to the development of a forum where entrepreneurs can pose questions to the community at large and receive answers.

Additional features such as a content library of articles and videos from industry veterans could be of great help to young firms such as Olomomo, Owens said.

"When I look at it, it's exactly what it's geared toward -- every question that we had early on, the answer could be found," he said.

In a way, the accelerator is similar to a business incubator, an avenue for manufacturers to connect with advisers and other industry experts, Linder said. Those connections could help provide critical information to firms to help them avoid common costly pitfalls, he said.

The NEXT Trend, alternatively, was created to help companies grow by making them aware of burgeoning trends.

The idea came to Linder after a recent Natural Products Expo trade show. Linder, who has walked the floors of 35 Natural Products Expos, said he got to the point where he could identify what products would be present in households by the next year.

He wanted to find a way to take the pre-shelf information that primarily was anecdotal and turn that into useful information for suppliers.

New Hope hired Bill Tuohig, a veteran in the data insights industry, and started building a database of information obtained through trade shows and other interactions with natural products firms.

"From there we really put together more of a business plan on how to launch a business that was driven by fact," Linder said. "More play-by-play rather than color commentary."

The NEXT Trend was developed to deliver information on micro trends on products and ingredients. The program serves as a "predictive model" to pinpoint what pre-shelf products are "poised for wide acceptance," officials said.

The NEXT programs are meant to supplement New Hope's existing information and resource base and serve the greater community as a whole, Linder said.

"If we can get these guys to survive, it's good for them, it's good for us, it's good for everybody," he said.Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com.