BOULDER — Rodolfo Villanueva always worked hard and kept his spiritual fires burning.

But it wasn’t until he started working for the Boulder Shelter for the Homeless that he began getting some stability in his life.

Villanueva, 60, recently got an apartment through the Shelter’s Transition Program, which helps clients move into permanent living space after they have done work to qualify.

“The shelter is a wonderful thing,” said Villanueva, who worked as an assembler and dishwasher while trying to get a roof over his head in Boulder. “It’s a big, huge blessing. We have bedding, soap and a towel. Everything we need is right here for us to get back on our feet.

“It doesn’t matter where, how you got here or who you are — the shelter is here to help you,” he said.

The Boulder Shelter for the Homeless, which is a past recipient of Denver Post Charities Season to Share funding, is primarily aimed at providing a safe place to sleep, food and support services for homeless adults in Boulder.

The shelter also provides an avenue for its clients to become self-sufficient, lead case manager Tim Schaaf said.

“We get people ready to work but who, for some reason, can’t afford to pay rent, at least right now,” Schaaf said.

The Boulder Shelter, which was organized in 1982 in response to the death of a homeless veteran who died from exposure, is not run by a government agency.

Rather, it is a private nonprofit group that relies on financial support from community members.

Men and women who wish to stay at the shelter — which is closed from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. daily — must be 18 or older and abide by basic rules of conduct.

Staff members as well as volunteers work closely with other agencies, including WorkForce Boulder County, to lead clients to employment training and jobs.

About 60 percent of the shelter’s clients are on disability. The rest are either underemployed or are working to pay off bills before they can move into permanent housing, Schaaf said.

“A lot of them have a family who can’t help them out or they don’t have any family ties at all,” he said. “If you don’t have anybody to rely on when you have an accident or you lose your job, a lot of times you have no place to go.”

There are also clients with severe mental health problems who have nowhere else to go, Schaaf said.

“We are seeing more and more people showing up with mental health problems, and because of budget cuts, they are out on the street and now with us,” he said. “It’s just another aspect of what we do here.”

Monte Whaley: 720-929-0907, mwhaley@denverpost.com or twitter.com/montewhaley

Boulder shelter for the homeless

Address: 4869 North Broadway, Boulder

In operation since: 1982

Staff: 45

2013 budget: $1.7 million

Percentage of funds to clients/services: 78

Number served last year: 1,179