Tickets sold out for both screenings of the original "Friday the 13th" movie at The Historic Blairstown Theatre last night as horror fans, traveling either for miles across the state or from just down the street, lined the block to secure a seat.

"I've been here before just to visit, but coming here for this is pretty awesome," said J.T. Mills, who wore a Camp Crystal Lake shirt.

Mills and his friend Sam Donato, both traveled an hour from Scranton, Pennsylvania after hearing about the event on Facebook. The pair even made the long trek up Sand Pond Road to visit Camp NoBeBoSco, the filming location for Camp Crystal Lake or Camp Blood.

"It's just so cool to hear the locals talk about it too," Donato said.

Blairstown resident Jenny Hovell goes to the screening every time it's offered.

"It's definitely the coolest thing here," she said. "Just seeing this many people and cars is out of the normal."





However, her friends Faith Torppey and Debbie Magalhaes, other locals, were seeing the movie for the first time and were excited to be able to point out the Blairstown landmarks.

During the screening, the delightfully campy premise of the movie was reinforced as the audience cheered for scenes shot in Blairstown on Main Street at the Old Mill and at the local diner.The Historic Blairstown Theatre itself, previously Roy’s Hall, is featured in the film as it appeared in 1980.

When the theater opened as an art venue in 2011, owner Mark Clifford showed the film on its opening night, also a Friday the 13th. He calls it their lucky day and plans to screen the film again on the next Friday the 13th in December.

The Historic Blairstown Theatre is not typically a movie venue, but instead features a regular schedule of live music and theatrical performances, classic film and community events. Local artists also display their work in the lobby and entrance hall.

Upcoming Events

Elephant Revival — Friday, Sept. 27

Vienna Teng — Saturday, Oct. 5

An Evening with RICKI LEE JONES — Saturday, Oct. 12

Tim Shelton & NewFound Road — Friday, Oct. 18

Ballet Enchante — Saturday, Oct. 19

Zinghoppers: A Superhero Learning Adventure — Sunday through Monday, Oct. 20-21

An Evening with The Patrick Fitzsimmons Band — Friday, Oct. 25

WNTI Benefit with the Todd Wolfe Band — Saturday, Oct. 26

For tickets and information visit thehbt.com

More Warren County news: NJ.com/Warren • Twitter