Topics: 2014, 2014 elections, 2016, 2016 Elections, Affordable Care Act, Barack Obama, Emergency Unemployment Compensation, Food Stamps, Immigration Reform, John Boehner, Newt Gingrich, Obamacare, Republican National Committee, RNC, Unemployment, unemployment benefits, Politics News

I had been tempted to retire this semi-regular feature, where we take stock of the various ways the GOP’s post-2012 outreach efforts have gone absolutely nowhere.

But a few things happened this week that convinced me it was worth one more go. First, a whole bunch of Republicans decided to applaud the Republican National Committee for the “success” of its so-called Growth and Opportunity Project. This was the GOP’s election postmortem, which contained a fair amount of real talk that party leaders briefly attempted to heed, then ignored altogether.

The autopsy called for Republicans to embrace immigration reform; House Republicans have sidelined immigration reform, but advanced legislation to force the Obama administration to deport DREAMers. It called for Republicans to broaden their appeal to minorities, women and LGBT people; House Republicans are sitting on legislation that would protect minority voting rights, raise the minimum wage, and give LGBT people recourse against discriminatory employers.

Newt Gingrich examined this factual record and declared the Growth and Opportunity Project “an historic success.”

Tomorrow is the first anniversary of the 'autopsy' of the GOP called the Growth and Opportunity Project. It has been an historic success. — Newt Gingrich (@newtgingrich) March 17, 2014

So that was one thing. Taken alone, it wouldn’t be worth mentioning, except maybe for the opportunity to be condescending and self-righteous, which can be very fun. But it happened to coincide with a series of Republican #rebrand face plants that reflect an incoherence between the party’s near- and medium-term goals. The big, elusive goal for the party is to win the presidency again. Become a national party with a more diverse coalition. In absence of an unexpected Democratic meltdown or exogenous economic or geopolitical event, it will require Republicans to make more than merely superficial changes — and even those have eluded them. They’ll have to move convincingly into a policy niche that Democrats currently occupy, much like the Growth and Opportunity Project advised.

But that’s way off on the hazy horizon. Right now, the big goal is taking control of the Senate. And their plan for accomplishing that — don’t let President Obama post any victories, don’t let anything distract from Obamacare, reduce Democratic turnout — is not compatible with the presidential election strategy.