Buy Photo Rumson-Fair Haven running back Bryan Hess (No. 20), shown running against Long Branch on Oct. 9, will be a key player for the Bulldogs against Shore on Thursday. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

Football: What to look for Thanksgiving Day

It is that time of year again when some schools, because of the tradition of the Thanksgiving Day game, are in the situation of having to play their final regular-season game before they attempt to win an NJSIAA sectional championship the following week.

Five Shore Conference schools are in that position today.

Christie pardons recovering drug addict for 1972 crime

Gov. Chris Christie pardoned a Philadelphia man Wednesday for a boardwalk robbery he committed as a drug-addicted young man more than 40 years ago.

John Berry, 61, is now a case manager for the Philadelphia Treatment Court and has been sober for more than 28 years, and Christie pointed to him at a Statehouse announcement as an example of why treating addicts is better for society than punishing them.

A Sayreville man was convicted Friday by a federal jury for his role in a conspiracy to import heroin from India into the United States. (Photo: ~File)

The heroin epidemic in Monmouth County: 2006-2014

The heroin epidemic continues to ravage the Jersey Shore as well as much of the country. More than 350 people have died of heroin or other opiate overdoses since 2013 in Monmouth and Ocean counties.

While the number of admissions for treatment kept by the state Division of Mental Health and Addiction Services does not reflect an exact number of addicts in a given place, those figures are the best indicators of problem areas.

5 things Chris Christie can’t remember

Chris Christie, like most people, says he forgets things, but critics say New Jersey’s Republican governor has been claiming forgetfulness a lot more since he began thinking about being president.

The Grand Arcade at Convention Hall will transform this holiday season. (Photo: COURTESY OF JENNY VICKERS)

Holiday markets to take over Convention Hall

The Grand Arcade at Convention Hall in Asbury Park will transform in a winter wonderland this holiday season.

The Asbury Park Bazaar and Market at Fifth Avenue have partnered up to present the pop-up holiday markets from noon to 5 p.m. every Saturday and Sunday from Nov. 28 to Dec. 20 at the Grand Arcade.

How can NJ afford Gateway project? 4 takeaways from Moody's report

Before the first shovel hits earth on the Gateway project, the various partners -- including the states of New Jersey and New York -- must find a way to make the finances work, according a report released by Moody's on Tuesday.

A funding plan for the Gateway project has been agreed upon, with the federal government splitting the cost with the states of New Jersey and New York. But with a $20 billion price tag, Moody's said the partners will have to find new ideas to increase revenue and move money around to pay for the project.

Buy Photo Fins, a fast-casual "tropicali" restaurant is moving it's Brick location down the road to Point Pleasant. (Photo: DEVIN LORING/STAFF PHOTO)

Where is 'tropicali' restaurant Fins moving?

Fins, a staple fast-casual restaurant for “tropicali” Mexican cuisine at the Shore, is moving one of its locations.

At Fins, “It’s always summer on the inside,” which is a good thing for Point Pleasant residents.

The essentials:

Thursday's weather forecast

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1jl2JRY