John Koufos knows about desperation, but he didn't always.

In 2011, he was a prominent criminal defense attorney, fighting cases before the Supreme Court and representing gang members in court around New Jersey. But he had a longstanding drinking problem.

In June of that year, Koufos said it caught up to him. Koufos struck and seriously injured a teenager while driving in Toms River, covered it up and let his friend take the wrap. He was eventually caught and spent 17 months in prison.

When he was paroled in 2014, he was sober, but had lost his home and was months away from being formally disbarred. He came to Martin's Place, a jail re-entry program in Jersey City championed by former Gov. James McGreevey, to begin to make it right.

"As an accomplished criminal defense attorney, you think you know everything," said Koufos. "Everything I thought I knew changed when the door closed behind me. I saw my former clients in a way I never had before."

Koufos now manages the Martin's Place jail re-entry program, which opened about five years ago. The program helps frequent residents of the Hudson County jail reestablish their lives upon release, clearing outstanding warrants, supplying housing and helping them find employment.

"Every day for me is giving back for what I did," he said, before McGreevey chimed in.

"We're like the 'Island of Misfit Toys,'" said McGreevey, who famously resigned as governor in 2004.

Martin's Place has achieved notable success in its infancy and has been pushed as a model for re-entry programs around the country. According to data supplied by Martin's Place, the re-arrest rate for members of the program is 23 percent, about half the rate for the general population of the Hudson County Jail.

They now hope to replicate that success across the state. Gov. Chris Christie announced plans to expand the program to five counties in his State of the State address last year and helped make good on his promise during budget negotiations in June.

The state earmarked $3.5 million to the New Jersey Reentry Corporation, which McGreevey said will be used to launch pilot programs in four other counties, first in Newark and Paterson, and eventually in Ocean and Monmouth counties.

"It's the first time the state has provided for significant commitment to grapple with the reality that these people are coming back into the community," McGreevey said. "Overwhelmingly the people who are returning from jail are addicts or alcoholics, so we'll be providing them treatment, housing and job opportunities."

More than 57,000 people were arrested in New Jersey on drug offenses in 2013, and McGreevey said the majority of those incarcerated in state jails were brought there through some connection to substance abuse. The state is currently grappling with a heroin crisis that claimed nearly 800 lives in 2014, and many abusers end up in jail before they receive any form of treatment.

In Newark, McGreevey and Koufos will partner with Integrity House, one of the largest substance abuse treatment centers in the state. In Paterson, Eva's Village has agreed to lead efforts. Negotiations with officials in Ocean and Monmouth counties remain underway.

On Tuesday, McGreevey, Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno and Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop unveiled a new $4.2 million facility, which will be the new centerpiece for the Hudson County program.

Koufos said the goal is to provide offenders exiting county jails with substance abuse treatment for several months, housing for 12 to 18 months, registration for healthcare through the Affordable Care Act and employment training and placement.

Koufos said his time in prison taught him about the hurdles many approaching release face, from outstanding warrants to lack of identification. He said he uses his background to connect former inmates with attorneys who can help clear up legal issues and has partnered with the state Department of Motor Vehicles to assist in reacquiring formal identification, a lack of which can hinder many aspects of life upon release.

He said he views the work as a second chance for himself, one that hopefully can provide the same for someone else.

"If we can help these people shake some of the concrete off their wings before it hardens, they can fly," Koufos said.

Stephen Stirling may be reached at sstirling@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @sstirling. Find him on Facebook.