An increase in the number of walk-in clinics is one of the outcomes of new national health care reforms, according the chairwoman of the Health Care Management and Organizational Leadership program at Quinnipiac University’s Business School.

Angela Mattie said the surge in the number of so-called urgent care centers is the result of adding 170,000 people to the ranks of those with health insurance. Mattie, also an associate professor of management at Quinnipiac, said that while the number of people who have health insurance has increased because of what has become known as Obamacare, the number of doctors available to treat them has not.

“In the past, people who were uninsured might have avoided going to a doctor completely or gone to a hospital emergency,” she said. “Now these people have a method to get appropriate health care, they are looking for convenience, which is what these clinics provide.”

While getting an appointment with a doctor who is general practitioner might take weeks and require the patient to take time off from work, walk-in clinics offer prompt service, Mattie said. But she warned that people should not expect certain types of services that are available in hospital emergency rooms.

Advertisement

“If you’ve got chest pains or some other real medical emergency, you should got to an emergency room,” she said. “Walk-in clinics are for things like strep throats and other minor ailments.”

Greenwich-based ASAP Urgent Care is one of the types of urgent care companies that is benefitting from the reformed health care system.

The company, which was founded by a group of doctors, opened its first clinic in Hamden at 2165 Dixwell Ave. in November. Since then, it has opened a clinic in Madison and the grand opening of its new center, at 195 Cherry St. in Milford, was Wednesday.

A fourth center is expected to open in North Haven later this spring, according to company officials

“Getting sick isn’t convenient, but getting better should be,” Traver Hutchins, ASAP Urgent Care’s chief executive officer, said in a statement.

ASAP Urgent Care doesn’t have a waiting room or a receptionist: Patients are greeted by a concierge in the lounge where they can listen to music and enjoy a beverage. Children have their own private play area.

ASAP Urgent Care also offers annual physical exams and other health screenings needed for work, school or sports, as well as travel vaccinations and prescriptions and a number of basic lab screenings.

All of the companies centers are open Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., and Saturday and Sunday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., except on Thanksgiving and Christmas.

Call Luther Turmelle at 203-789-5706. Have questions, feedback or ideas about our news coverage? Connect directly with the editors of the New Haven Register at AskTheRegister.com.