It's not a news piece, but there is a lot of chatter out in mainstream media right now about that Joshua Rothman essay in The New Yorker that ran under the headline "The Church of U2."

I'll be honest. I have no idea what that piece is trying to say, just in terms of the on-the-record facts about the band's history. It's like the last three or four decades of debate about what is, and what is not, "Christian" music never happened. It's like Johnny Cash, Bruce Cockburn, T-Bone Burnett, Mark Heard, Charlie Peacock, etc., etc., never happened.

Here are the opening paragraphs, including the buzz term that everyone is discussing -- "secretly Christian."

A few years ago, I was caught up in a big research project about contemporary hymns (or “hymnody,” as they say in the trade). I listened to hundreds of hymns on Spotify; I interviewed a bunch of hymn experts. What, I asked them, was the most successful contemporary hymn -- the modern successor to “Morning Has Broken” or “Amazing Grace”? Some cited recently written traditional church hymns; others mentioned songs by popular Christian musicians. But one scholar pointed in a different direction: “If you’re willing to construe the term ‘hymn’ liberally, then the most heard, most successful hymn of the last few decades could be ‘I Still Haven’t Found What I’m Looking For,’ by U2.”

Click pause for a moment. I love "Still Haven't Found," and it's crucial to discussions of the band's offerings on faith, but U2 has released songs like "Magnificent" that only make sense -- as coherent statements -- when viewed as hymns. More on this later. Moving on to the key paragraph.

Most people think of U2 as a wildly popular rock band. Actually, they’re a wildly popular, semi-secretly Christian rock band. In some ways, this seems obvious: a song on one recent album was called “Yahweh,” and where else would the streets have no name? But even critics and fans who say that they know about U2’s Christianity often underestimate how important it is to the band’s music, and to the U2 phenomenon. The result has been a divide that’s unusual in pop culture. While secular listeners tend to think of U2’s religiosity as preachy window dressing, religious listeners see faith as central to the band’s identity. To some people, Bono’s lyrics are treacly platitudes, verging on nonsense; to others, they’re thoughtful, searching, and profound meditations on faith.

So is this a piece about Bono and crew being confused about what they do or do not believe, or is it about the fact that some people on the secular side of the cultural aisle are -- after three-plus decades -- still struggling with their grief because one of the planet's most popular and important bands is, well, meaningfully Christian?

On the other side, of course, there are plenty of Christians arguing about whether U2 is, as a band, "Christian" enough. I understand that argument, because it's linked to the tragic art vs. evangelism divide in modern Protestantism. (Over to you, Charlie Peacock, in 1999.)

I also understand (in fact, I wrote my Universal syndicate column on this topic this week) that some people simply like to argue about U2 lyrics -- period.

But "secretly Christian"? Say what? It's like that Huffington Post take on the "surprising" friendship between Bono and Billy Graham.