Budget cuts could jeopardize Belknap project

A man crosses Belknap Street at Ogden Avenue in Superior on Wednesday morning. Plans to reconstruct Belknap could be in jeopardy as the Legislature considers $450 million in transportation cuts. (Jed Carlson/jcarlson@superiortelegram.com)

As the Wisconsin Senate and Assembly wrestle with paying for transportation projects for the next two years, officials in Superior are watching with deep concern about the status of a planned reconstruction of Belknap Street.

The road, part of U.S. Highway 2, is in rough shape; deteriorating pavement at expansion joints can force a vehicle to veer from its path of travel. Patches rarely last long on a stretch of highway that carries 18,000 vehicles a day and has an accident rate three times higher than other highways in the state.

"Putting it in perspective, our project is $22 million. In Milwaukee, the Zoo Interchange (project) is over $1 billion," said Superior Mayor Bruce Hagen, who noted that the city is footing the bill for portions of the planned project. "If (state officials) have to decide where $500 million is going to go, I think a lot of projects in the state, including Belknap, are going to be in so much jeopardy."

In a budget deal announced last week, the Republican legislative leadership said it will fund a study to determine how to raise revenue for transportation to make the state less reliant on bonding for projects; Gov. Scott Walker's proposal to bond for $1.3 billion for highway projects was rejected.

"The GOP leadership is no longer considering revenue increases," said Curt Witynski, assistant director of the League of Wisconsin Municipalities. "The argument is over how much to bond ... how much to reduce the governor's suggested bonding amount of $1.3 billion."

Both caucuses shared concerns about that level of bonding, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester said during a news conference Wednesday, broadcast on wiseye.org.

The agreement reached this week proposes $500 million in bonding with another $350 million in bonding as an appropriation in Joint Finance. The legislative committee will have the opportunity to review the projects submitted by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation to ensure they meet the goals of growing the economy, Vos said.

"The north leg of the Zoo (Interchange) will be put on hold," Vos said. He said balancing the projects across the state was important to the Assembly caucus.

The Senate has argued that cuts cannot be applied to the Zoo Interchange, Witynski said.

"After retreating behind closed doors for the past five weeks, Republicans emerged (Wednesday) to announce nearly $500 million in cuts from needed road and bridge projects," Sen. Jennifer Shilling, D-La Crosse, said in a prepared statement. "This unprecedented cut threatens the safety and reliability of Wisconsin's transportation network and is estimated to cost the state more than 5,000 private sector jobs."

Until the budget is passed, transportation officials are not able to say what the effect will be on specific projects, said Peg Schmitt, a spokeswoman for WisDOT in Madison.

The debate in Madison could mean delaying reconstruction of Belknap Street, initially scheduled for 2017 and 2018.

Replacing the stretch of Belknap Street that runs from Hill to Banks avenues is in design stage. The project includes not only replacement of the deteriorating pavement, but includes plans to improve the stormwater sewer system in the area to alleviate flooding problems that have contributed to the poor condition the pavement.

Superior's Public Works Director, Todd Janigo, said that if the state only provides half the funding needed for projects this year and then half the funding needed next year, it could mean putting off the much-needed highway and sewer project in Superior at least two to three years longer.

The construction project, originally slated to begin in 2016, was delayed once to bring it in line with the state's budget cycle, Hagen said.

Wisconsin Eye in Madison contributed to this report.