Before you suggest that friends or family members start to exercise or improve their diets, you might first want to ask a question: Are they saving for retirement?

What do retirement savings have to do with physical health? A new study from the journal Psychological Science finds that people who are good at planning their financial future are more likely to take steps to improve their physical health — and then actually become healthier.

The research, scholars say, offers a keen insight into the sorts of people who are likely to make short-term sacrifices in the name of a brighter future.

“It suggests that there is something very abstract and fundamental about caring for the future,” said Gretchen Chapman, an editor for the journal and a psychology professor at Rutgers University. “The sort of person who invests in retirement is the sort of person who takes care of their health.”

The results echo previous research showing that some people are more predisposed than others to invest in the future. But much of that work, Chapman said, has been in the area of addiction — why heroin addicts, say, think differently about future consequences than nonaddicts. And this paper adds another interesting twist: The results come not from a laboratory experiment but from realworld data.

The researchers gleaned the findings from a trove of financial and health information that a midsize industrial laundry company in the Midwest collected from its employees, with their consent. The data was gathered anonymously by a third party and in turn provided to researchers at the Olin Business School at Washington University in St. Louis.

Broadly, the researchers looked at employees’ contributions to their 401(k) plans and compared them against various measures of their health, including blood test results; cholesterol, kidney and iron levels; exercise frequency; and whether they smoked.

First, the measures of about 200 employees were taken to establish a baseline. Then all the employees were told their health results and given instructions on how they might improve. A year later, they were tested again, in some cases more than once.

Employees who contributed regularly to their 401(k) plan were not only more likely to take steps to improve their health but also, in aggregate, had a 27 percent improvement in their blood scores.

“Noncontributors continued to suffer health declines,” the paper said. The 401(k) contributors also showed relative improvements in safety behaviors, like seatbelt use.

The paper’s co-author, Lamar Pierce, an associate professor of organization and strategy at Olin, said the findings should inform public policy debates about nutrition and personal finance. Some people, he said, respond well to information and education, but others — like the employees who neither saved nor took care of themselves — may need stronger solutions.

“Having a single-pronged policy is not effective,” said Pierce, whose co-author was a graduate student, Timothy Gubler.

Pierce said that people who didn’t respond to education might need tougher remedies — such as taxes on sodas to discourage consumption or, in corporate settings, cafeterias that offer only healthy foods.