Many of us associate drones, satellites, and related technology with an uncomfortable sense of Big Brother — after all, who wants to live with the threat of being watched while going about their daily business? But these technologies also have some incredibly valuable uses. Satellites, for example, can help map the ocean and search for lost planes, while drones are proving useful in the fight against poaching. And now, at the American Association for the Advancement of Science’s annual meeting in San Jose, California, researchers revealed another fascinating use: archaeology.

One researcher, David Mattingly, works on Saharan civilizations, particularly the Garamante culture, which was active around 1000 BCE. Their culture is difficult to study because it’s in hot, remote, arid regions of the Sahara where sites are extremely difficult to identify and they’re hard to work in — though rest assured, at the time people inhabited them they were likely lush, fertile regions. Still, today’s arid conditions presented the problem of how to find sites and learn more about them. To do that, Mattingly started harnessing satellites. This led to a wealth of sites being discovered, including settlements and cemeteries, which would help his team identify places on the ground to conduct excavations and related research.

Taking a large-scale overhead view also provided fascinating information about the layout of communities and their movements, something that wouldn’t have been possible from the ground. Thus, Mattingly turned what could have been a disadvantage into a serious advantage for his work, creating perspective that would enrich his understanding of the Garamante civilization.

Another researcher, José Iriarte, works in an area that might seem like the Sahara’s polar opposite: the Amazonian rainforest. However, the region actually presents challenges similar to those seen in the Sahara. The landscape can be quite forbidding, it’s difficult to mount expeditions to search for evidence of lost civilizations, and getting perspective on the environment is nearly impossible because of the thick tree cover. In fact, the dense Amazon canopy makes satellites functionally useless, but drones can fill in, scanning the ground for signs of civilization where a casual glance might not reveal any. For example, numerous Amerindian cultures dedicated significant energy to building up the soil, creating a nutrient-rich, highly fertile mix known as “black soil” — and it remains active in the rainforest to this day, betraying the presence of former human inhabitants. Likewise, scanning with tools like LIDAR can reveal buried structures.

These fascinating applications of technologies people often associate with surveillance and warfare raise some uncomfortable questions. Even as the FAA finally starts to regulate the use of drones on US soil, recognizing that they’re an issue that won’t go away any time soon, many people are expressing concerns about the use of drones and satellites here and abroad. The fact that they have benign and even critically important civilian uses illustrates that sometimes questionable technologies can be used for good — and it might not be advisable to throw the baby out with the bathwater. However, it’s clear that responsible and well-informed uses of drones, satellites, and related surveillance tools are critical to retain civil rights while still taking advantage of their benefits.

Photo credit: Don McCullough