On Jan. 15, 2013, The New York Times published an article asserting that the Obama Department of Justice would be significantly expanding its definition of racial profiling to prohibit federal agents from considering religion, national origin, and gender and sexual orientation in their investigations.

These new prohibitions were the result of complaints by Muslim groups, undocumented immigrant advocates, and gay, lesbian, and transgender groups. In short, the Obama DOJ continues its ultra-liberal bias disregarding national security and border security.

Any prosecutor or criminal investigator will tell you in terrorist attack cases a suspect’s religion, ethnicity, and country of origin are factors to be considered. The recent Boston Marathon bombing is an example. Ask any Border Patrol agent what factors he or she considers when making the decision for an apprehension. Will the Obama DOJ enforce any immigration bill’s alleged strict national and border security requirements? No!

President Obama raises class warfare to new heights in an effort to deflect public concern about his flawed Affordable Care Act, about the Benghazi killings cover-up, and about former Secretary of Defense Bob Gates’ book, "Duty."

Obama has promised continued use of executive orders and bureaucratic fiat to promulgate dictatorial decrees as part of his ideological change of America, notwithstanding the Constitution. He has demonstrated this with immigration bureaucratic changes in 2011 and 2012. A recent Gallup poll shows immigration is a priority with only 3 percent of Americans.

His political ploy of concern for the Americans suffering from income inequality rings hollow for — he omits the middle class’s wage stagnation, he omits the chronic and ever rising unemployment of black and brown youths (18-25 year olds), he omits the downgrading educational rankings worldwide, and he omits the muddled immigration law policies.



The president has shown himself to be a master manipulator as he halfheartedly pushes for the Democratic-controlled Senate’s comprehensive immigration reform legislation. As the Obama immigration policy has been on 5-year psychedelic trip — careening from zealous deportations to “prosecutorial discretion” to backdoor amnesty for illegal alien “youths” to faux border security.

Since 2007, Obama has promised immigration reform, with a pathway to citizenship for illegal aliens as well as entitlements for them and their families. In his second term, the president is flexing his social justice muscle by adopting as his what is the Senate’s immigration bill — actually it is Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid’s immigration bill, flaws and all.

The Senate bill gives national security a wink and a nod, while the Democrats’ and DOJ’s attitude is, “What difference does it make!”

Americans will learn what difference an open-borders immigration bill makes, as school districts’ costs rise, as taxpayers learn the costs for subsidizing healthcare for millions of legal and illegal immigrants, as the environmentalists see ecological damages increase, and as the nation’s security is in greater jeopardy. The impact of at least 20 million people receiving the benefits of citizenship with no real background checks will have serious security ramifications. What difference does it make!

The Democrats’ Senate bill ignores the costs to U.S. taxpayers and the related impact on the middle class and all classes. Short-term financial costs of the bill will be unsustainable with estimates of $366 billion for one year of implementation. The short-term entitlements of the bill will strain the educational, social services, and welfare systems to the point of breaking. The long-term entitlements of the bill will cost an estimated $3-4 trillion for U.S. taxpayers over seven years. What difference does it make?

The Kaiser Health News reported on Feb. 12, 2013, the Medicaid pays out $2 billion in free “emergency” medical coverage for illegal aliens even tough illegal aliens are not supposed to receive Medicaid benefits. A major portion of the money is for child-birth costs for illegal alien women. These births which now are 50 percent on the total yearly births give automatic citizenship to the newborns which in turn helps the undocumented parents to rise in eligibility status for legal U.S residency. What difference does it make?

Obama, the Democrats, social justice and immigrant advocates refuse to publicly acknowledge that a high number of illegal aliens are undereducated and have few work skills. Immigration history shows, that while this demographic benefits certain employers, it means more persons receiving entitlements. The bill includes “family unity” provisions that for each alien given residency, permits 4-6 others would secure entry with health and social welfare entitlements. What difference does it make?

Combine the nation’s unemployment and underemployment figures — present and future — and the failure to educate children with the necessary skills for the jobs — present and future — then one understands the impact the Senate’s open-borders immigration legislation will have on America. Today, 3.9 million jobs go unfilled due an unskilled workforce.

What difference does it make?