Alderman James A. Bohl Jr. speaks at an April 2013 committee meeting in Milwaukee. Credit: Journal Sentinel files

A year after opening an investigation of Milwaukee Ald. Jim Bohl, Milwaukee County prosecutors have yet to decide whether to file criminal charges against him.

Such a delay wouldn't normally be a big deal.

But the allegations are serious, and Bohl's colleagues on the Common Council have to vote this week on whether to confirm his appointment to a plum assignment on the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District board.

That three-year post brings with it an annual bump of $10,683. Aldermen are already paid $73,222 a year.

"The ball is in the DA's court," said Mike Maistelman, an attorney for Bohl. "It's their decision."

District Attorney John Chisholm's office took its time, most notably, with a nearly three-year John Doe probe into Scott Walker's aides and associates during his time as Milwaukee County executive.

In Bohl's case, prosecutors opened an investigation in late 2013 into whether the fourth-term alderman used city resources to put the squeeze on a particular landlord.

Specifically, Bohl has been accused of directing city inspectors to hit the landlord with numerous code violations because he refused to evict two sex offenders from a property in the alderman's district.

A search warrant indicated investigators were seeking evidence of misconduct in public office and threats to injure or accuse of a crime. Both are felonies.

Authorities seized two desktop computers from Bohl's office. The warrants say investigators also were seeking phone and email records for Bohl, aide Todd Peterson and a city Department of Neighborhood Services inspector.

WISN-TV (Channel 12) reported in March that the prosecutors were wrapping up work on the case. The station said a decision on charges could come in a couple of weeks.

That was more than eight months ago.

Today, officials say the investigation is ongoing.

"The matter is still open," said Chief Deputy District Attorney Kent Lovern. "No timetable on completion."

That leaves the Common Council in a difficult spot. Aldermen are scheduled to vote Tuesday on Bohl's nomination. A committee already approved his appointment.

A spokesman for Mayor Tom Barrett said his office has no regrets about recommending Bohl for the post.

"We did as much homework as we possibly could," said Patrick Curley, chief of staff for the Democratic mayor. "We felt confident moving the appointment forward."

Earlier this year, Bohl set up a legal-defense fund to help pay his lawyers. Under state law, a legal-defense fund can be used by public officials only if they are being investigated for or charged with violations of campaign finance laws.

The warrants allege that Bohl had offered to take money out of his campaign fund to make the landlord whole for three months of rent if the landlord ousted the two sex offenders. Bohl has denied the allegation.

So far, Bohl has raised no money for his defense fund.

Chapter and verse

President Barack Obama recently quoted a nonexistent Bible verse to help sell his executive action on immigration, earning the scorn of his conservative foes.

But it appears that Gov. Scott Walker — whose father was a Baptist minister — made a similar mistake when talking to The Wall Street Journal last month about Obamacare and Medicaid. Walker is angling to run for president in 2016.

"It's probably not fair to ask the son of a preacher to use biblical metaphors," Walker said. "My reading of the Bible finds plenty of reminders that it's better to teach someone to fish than to give them fish if they're able. ... Caring for the poor isn't the same as taking money from the federal government to lock more people into Medicaid."

OK, where exactly does the Bible say that?

In one of his best-known miracles, Jesus feeds a crowd of 5,000 by giving them fish and bread. Jesus performs a miracle on another occasion after telling fishermen where to throw their nets, prompting them to follow him. In yet another instance, Jesus directs his disciples to be "fishers of men."

But those passages don't make Walker's point.

The recently re-elected Republican governor is actually referencing an old Chinese proverb:

"Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime."

Team Walker disagrees.

"The governor specifically says it's in his reading of the Bible," said Laurel Patrick, press secretary for Walker. "He's not quoting scripture."

Obama came under fire earlier last week by attributing a cliché to the Bible while talking about immigration during an event in Nashville.

"The Good Book says, don't throw stones in glass houses," the president said.

Walker was himself the butt of a number of jokes — including a bit on "The Colbert Report" on Comedy Central — after an old letter surfaced last week from his days as Milwaukee County executive in which he told a Jewish lawyer: "Thank you again, and Molotov."

Walker probably intended to say "mazel tov," a Yiddish term used to congratulate someone. He has chalked up the gaffe to a typo.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.