Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

Jason Perrin, 18-year-old senior at Boulder's Fairview High School

Jason is the head of the Fairview website team and manages the continual development and maintenance needs for all the website information. The website was designed by students, and the continual additions, changes and improvements are challenges that Jason takes on enthusiastically. Each new idea may require self-training and hours of his own time to develop.

What was the Fairview website like before students started working on it?

The old website was mostly just a confused bunch of pages that each had different designs, so it was confusing to navigate and tough to find the pages you wanted.

What do you like most about the redesigned site?

I like the notifications that appear when new files, messages or events are added to a class that you are subscribed to. It really helps me to see what is happening in my classes and what might be upcoming. I'm also a little biased because I added the feature, but I would still consider it my favorite.

What have you liked most about high school?

I have really liked the students and teachers I am with for my classes. I can not think of one bad teacher I have had, and my peers have been wonderful.

Anything you would change?

Advertisement

I live about half an hour away from school by car, so I think I would move the school closer to me. But seriously, if I could do something more realistic, I think I would try and join the school soccer team my freshman year.

Favorite class?

AP/IB Computer Science, although Physics II takes a close second.

Favorite book?

I really liked "1984" by George Orwell. I read it recently and it just seemed to fit in a lot with privacy issues that have been occurring.

What do you like to do for fun?

Recently I have been participating in some online programming competitions where the goal is to solve problems to obtain some text called the "flag." They have been really fun. I have also been playing soccer.

What's your dream job?

I would like to work at some kind of a technology company. I think my dream job would be working at somewhere like GitHub, because they work with the same kind of web application I have been working on, and they also offer free code hosting for open source projects, which really helps the programming community to share and be more cooperative.