Topics: AlterNet, Monsanto, Business News, Life News, News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Monsanto has been reeling from a number of setbacks around the globe. Here’s a look at some of the main reasons that 2015 has been a giant headache for the biotech giant. But that headache could find some reilef if the U.S. Senate hands them a legislative victory that would keep American consumers in the dark about what’s in their food.

Roundup Probably Causes Cancer

In March, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), the World Health Organization’s cancer arm, said that the controversial herbicide glyphosate — the main ingredient in Monsanto’s popular weedkiller Roundup — is “probably carcinogenic to humans.” IARC noted, “Case-control studies of occupational exposure in the USA, Canada, and Sweden reported increased risks for non-Hodgkin lymphoma that persisted after adjustment for other pesticides.” Used by home gardeners, public park gardeners and farmers, and applied to more than 150 food and non-food crops, Roundup is the Monsantot’s leading product and the world’s most-produced weedkiller.

In June, France banned Roundup. French Ecology Minister Segolene Royal said, “France must be on the offensive with regards to the banning of pesticides.” She added, “I have asked garden centers to stop putting Monsanto’s Roundup on sale” in self-service aisles. And earlier this month, California issued a notice of intent to list glyphosate as a carcinogen. “As far as I’m aware, this is the first regulatory agency in the U.S. to determine that glyphosate is a carcinogen,” said Dr. Nathan Donley, a scientist at the Center for Biological Diversity. “So this is a very big deal.”

Big news! California EPA Moves to Label Monsanto’s Roundup ‘Carcinogenic’ http://t.co/gbIK0XVkhd #BanRoundup pic.twitter.com/6QZqUw9oxm — Center 4 Food Safety (@TrueFoodNow) September 6, 2015

In April, U.S. citizens filed a class action lawsuit against Monsanto, claiming that the company is guilty of false advertising by claiming that glyphosate targets an enzyme only found in plants and not in humans or animals. The plaintiffs argue that the targeted enzyme, EPSP synthase, is found in the microbiota that reside in human and non-human animal intestines. In addition to its potential cancer-causing properties, Roundup has been linked to a host of other health issues, environmental problems and the record decline of monarch butterflies. And in September, another of the company’s herbicides got slammed when a French appeals court confirmed that Monsanto was guilty of chemical poisoning, upholding a 2012 ruling in favor of Paul Francois, whose lawyers claimed the company’s Lasso weedkiller gave the cereal farmer neurological problems, including memory loss and headaches. Tweet Backfires Monsanto would probably love to forget one of their recent tweets that tried to put out the glyphosate-fueled public image fire. A day before the cancer-listing announcement by California’s EPA, Monsanto posted a tweet, asking if people has questions about glyphosate with a link to a FAQ page:

Do you have questions about glyphosate? We’re answering the most common questions here: http://t.co/liwzBzdwCm pic.twitter.com/qLof0WxVfs — Monsanto Company (@MonsantoCo) September 3, 2015

The tweet wasn’t the PR success that the company had hoped for. Instead of helping to alleviate consumer fears about the chemical, the tweet became a target for the Monsanto-hating Twitterati:

@MonsantoCo can u drink a glass of some on TV so we can see what happens? U like conducting experiments on us. Try it on your self first. — Raul Duke (@GoForBronze) September 3, 2015

@MonsantoCo how much exposure do I need to guarantee I get cancer? — Tom Pratt (@TomDLPratt) September 3, 2015

@MonsantoCo if I drink more than a few glasses, my tummy hurts. Can you help? — Tom Payne (@areasonablefee) September 3, 2015

@MonsantoCo yes I do have questions about Roundup, like when will you stop killing your fellow man along with soil and water?#MakeItRight — Lisa Canning (@LisCanning) September 9, 2015

@MonsantoCo new pub: honeybee navigation affected by traces of #glyphosate,negative consequences 4 colony foraging http://t.co/VY8701EHaw … — Klaus Riede (@KlausRiede) September 5, 2015

Anyone want 2 ask @MonsantoCo why shoving known carcinogens down ppl throats world-over? Money, ya think? #Roundup #glyphosate #cancer #GMOs— Positively Joan (@PositivelyJoan) September 18, 2015

@PositivelyJoan @MonsantoCo HR1599 is the Deny Americans Right to Know Act If #GMO food is safe label it. No #DarkAct pic.twitter.com/jXUwGr6ZST — bob mcree (@zeus_bob) September 18, 2015

EU Nations Ban GMOs In addition to the glyphosate backlash, Monsanto has had to deal with several EU countries who have said no to the company’s GM crops. A new European Union law signed in March allows individual member countries to be excluded from any GM cultivation approval request. European opposition to GMOs has been strong: Unlike in the Americas and Asia, where GMO crops are widely grown, only Monsanto’s pest-resistant MON810, a GMO maize, is grown in Europe. Several nations have taken advantage of the new exclusion law: Scotland, Germany, Latvia, Greece, France and recently, Northern Ireland, have all invoked it. In August, Scotland became the first EU nation to ban the growing of genetically modified crops by requesting to be excluded by Monsanto’s application to grow GMO crops across the EU. “Scotland is known around the world for our beautiful natural environment — and banning growing genetically modified crops will protect and further enhance our clean, green status,” said Rural Affairs Secretary Richard Lochhead. Germany cited strong resistance from farmers and the public when it made its opt-out request. “Germany has committed a true act of food democracy by listening to the majority of its citizens that oppose GMO cultivation and support more sustainable, resilient organic food production that doesn’t perpetuate the overuse of toxic herbicides,” said Lisa Archer, food and technology director at environmental nonprofit Friends of the Earth. “We are hopeful that more members of the EU will follow suit and that the U.S. Congress will protect our basic right to know what we are feeding our families by requiring mandatory GMO labeling.”

Soon after Germany’s decision, Latvia and Greece announced that they too are taking advantage of the EU law. France, too, is using the opt-out law to ensure the country’s GMO ban remains in place.

Breaking: Europe is rejecting Monsanto's GMOs, 2 more countries Greece & Latvia Just Say No! http://t.co/hGzuIQjsDS pic.twitter.com/xqPh9MAY8K — food_democracy (@food_democracy) September 2, 2015

While anti-GMO activists warn of the dangers that genetically modified foods pose to health and the environment, the Big Food industry and many scientists argue that GMOs are safe and can help feed a skyrocketing human population. Monsanto told Reuters: “We regret that some countries are deviating from a science-based approach to innovation in agriculture and have elected to prohibit the cultivation of a successful GM product on arbitrary political grounds.” There is a significant political dimension as well: Newswire reported that the GMO opt-out law “directly confronts U.S. free trade deal supported by EU, under which the Union should open its doors widely for the U.S. GM industry.” It remains to be seen how the opt-out law will play out in the long run.