So, why have African-Americans and the elderly become less supportive of redistribution? On the former, AKW find that it is connected to the corresponding changes in black views about economic fairness—whether income is deserved or not. Using the General Social Survey (GSS), AKW find that “blacks are on average more likely than whites to say luck is more important hard work.” That’s not surprising since blacks face far more economic and societal disadvantages than whites do. But while the black-white income gap has not decreased substantially over the past few decades, the black-white gap on the role of luck in success has decreased considerably.

As the authors conclude, “Blacks view the economic system as becoming increasingly fair and are decreasingly supportive of the government targeted aid based on race.” When AKW use that GSS question as a control, they find it “explains 45% of the decline in black support for redistribution.”

What about for the elderly? AKW also discovered that the declining support for redistribution among older Americans is “a uniquely American phenomenon.” While the language of the questions varied, surveys in the United Kingdom, Germany, Sweden and Australia all found that the elderly’s views of redistributive policies has increased or stayed constant over the past few decades. This is important because, as the authors note, “the U.S. social insurance system exhibited a key difference, relative to that in other developed countries, vis-a-vis the elderly: they alone were guaranteed government provided health insurance.” Maybe, AKW posit, older Americans have become more fearful that increased government redistribution will threaten their Medicare. In turn, as those fears have grown, their support for redistribution has declined.

An interesting theory, and there's evidence to back it up. The GSS survey also asks respondents about whether the government should cover medical bills. Over the past few decades, the elderly have seen a steep drop in support for government health insurance, while the rest of the country has become more supportive of government health insurance.

“More relevant for our analysis,” the authors write, “controlling for this variable has a meaningful effect on the elderly differential trend over redistributive preferences.” Using data from a different government survey delivers the same results.

What can Democrats, as the party looking to build greater support for redistribution, learn from AKW’s findings? For African-Americans, there may not be much. Democrats can reiterate that luck does play a part in success and emphasize that the black-white income gap is still substantial. But they should still strive to close that gap. If doing so further erodes support in the black community for redistributive policies, so be it.

However, Democrats can learn a lot from the elderly’s declining support for redistribution. As AKW note, it’s a bit strange that the elderly have become less supportive of government health insurance. “One might ask how,” they write, “by the end of our sample period, seniors can be less supportive of the idea that government cover medical bills given that they, uniquely, are categorically entitled this coverage.” There's a simple explanation: Seniors don’t think the government helps them pay for health insurance. A recent Economist/YouGov poll found that 93 percent of Americans over the age of 65 said they don’t receive a government subsidy to pay for health insurance. (Nearly all seniors receive a subsidy via Medicare.)

This throws a small wrench in AKW’s theory. How can seniors think that further redistribution is a threat to them if they don’t think they receive a government subsidy for health insurance? Yet, the fall in support for government health insurance indeed did explain their declining support for redistribution. I think that their theory needs a small tweak then. Seniors don’t feel threatened by further redistribution but they find it unfair. I’m not receiving government help for my insurance, they might (wrongly) say, so the poor shouldn’t receive help either. This would also explain why seniors are so opposed to Obamacare.

As professor Suzanne Mettler explained in her 2011 book, The Submerged State, many government policies are not easily visible to the vast majority of Americans. These include health insurance programs and the more than $1 trillion in tax credits, deductions and exemptions that benefit Americans each year. The problem is that Americans don’t realize that they benefit from these policies, creating no constituency to support them. That makes them politically vulnerable.

If Democrats want to create sustained support for redistributive policies, they should make them more explicit. Instead of using the tax code to deliver those benefits, they should do so through government spending. Instead of expanding tax credits for child care, for instance, they should propose a monthly child allowance. Like everything these days, it would be hard to get Republicans to support such a plan. But if passed, it would build a powerful constituency (parents) who would fight any attempt to roll it back.

The fact that three decades of increased income inequality has not led to a corresponding increase in support for redistribution should concern Democrats. AKW have done useful work in finding that support has declined most for seniors and African-Americans. But there are no silver bullets that will reverse those trends. Instead, Democrats need to learn from their failure to build greater support for more redistribution. How policies are designed doesn’t only matter for policy reasons. It matters politically, too.