Please enable Javascript to watch this video

MILWAUKEE (WITI) -- The city of Milwaukee is taking care of its kids and community by making sure they are healthy and up-to-date with their vaccines.

Even after a few deep breaths, 11-year-old Corey Rattler still feels anxious.

"Feeling very nervous," said Corey.

Just moments away from getting stuck with several needles.

"I said, let's go get up, let's get those shots," said Charita Harvey, Corey's mother.

Harvey brought him to the Milwaukee Health Department Keenan Health Center Saturday morning, October 11th, after getting a concerning notice from school.

"He attends St. Marcus Lutheran School and they gave me a letter stating that he is missing a dose of shots," said Harvey.

The family's doctor wasn't available until November, and time is of the essence.

"They were saying that he couldn't attend school after October 13th," said Harvey.

Wisconsin law requires that children be immunized against a myriad of illnesses such as mumps, measles, and pertussis in order to attend school and child care settings. Harvey was told about MHD's event where free vaccines are provided for children.

"We are able to provide vaccines for children who are on Medicaid or who have no insurance at all. We are not able to provide vaccines for children who have private insurance," said Jill Radowicz, from the city of Milwaukee Health Department.

Young Corey's hesitance for getting shots changed once he realized the repercussions of not having them. He said he would miss learning his favorite subject, math -- and the beginning of basketball season.

So with cheerleaders by his side, he put on a brave face and powered through it and was finally able to breath a sigh of relief.

"Yes, it was very worth it," said Corey.

If you missed the special clinic and can't get in with your primary care provider, you can still get your child vaccinated.

The health department has vaccination clinics available just about every day of the week. CLICK HERE for a complete schedule and hours.