CHICAGO (AP) - In a story Feb. 13 about ride-hailing company Uber releasing a panic button on its app for Chicago, The Associated Press, based on information from the Chicago Sun-Times, misspelled the last name of Uber’s Midwest regional manager. His name is Andrew Macdonald, not Andrew MacDonald.

A corrected version of the story is below:

Uber: Chicago to get panic button in app that alerts police

Uber says Chicago to get panic button in app that alerts police after adding feature in India

CHICAGO (AP) - Officials with Uber say the ride-hailing service will soon put a panic button in its mobile app that will allow Chicago users to alert police.

The Chicago Sun-Times reports Andrew Macdonald, the Midwest regional manager for Uber, did not give a specific timeframe in a meeting Thursday with the newspaper’s editorial board. But he said the change would happen in the “next several months.”

The company’s general manager, Chris Taylor, said it’s not clear whether Chicago would be the first U.S. city to have the panic button. Uber said last week that it was introducing the panic button feature in India, where a passenger sued the San Francisco company in January after she said she was raped by a driver.

The company, valued at $40 billion, is facing multiple legal and regulatory challenges. It offers services through its app in more than 250 cities across the world.

Two Uber drivers in Chicago were recently charged with sexually assaulting a passenger. About 2 million rides a month are organized through Uber in the city.

Since January, Uber has employed 10 off-duty Chicago Police officers to take rides and give feedback about their experiences. Phillip Cardenas, the company’s head of safety, said telling drivers about this program acts as a deterrent.

The wealth of information Uber has about the driver and rider helps with safety, company officials said, especially GPS tracking during rides.

“The reality of it is, if you have bad intent, an Uber trip is the worst place to commit a crime,” Macdonald said. “To put it crassly, you’re going to get caught.”