4087443

Dr. Ben Carson criticized Republican politicians who voted for the pork-ridden trillion dollar farm bill this week, claiming that “both parties have people that believe in big government control” and calling on Congress to “get courage.”

Fox News’ Neil Cavuto invited the conservative doctor onto his program Friday to discuss new developments on Obamacare, but the TV host seemed more interested in discussing the giveaways tucked into the farm bill — including $170 million over ten years on a duplicative catfish inspection program.

“On this farm bill doctor, I’m told it’s tilted towards fish,” Cavuto began. “You’re big into healthy eating. Do you find it at least encouraging that it is tilted to fish, particularly catfish?”

“I find it not encouraging at all,” the doctor responded, “because basically what we’re trying to do now is take a whole ‘nother industry — the farm industry — and put them also completely under the thumb of the government. It’s a systematic thing. … I hope people are able to see what’s going on, be able to look at the big picture here. There’s an utter contempt for the intelligence of the people, the things that this administration is doing.”

“Hey doctor, not just this administration,” Cavuto retorted. “With all respect, sir, Republicans signed onto this thing. … I’m wondering as you — someone who says conservatives have to stand on principle and go line-by-line through this stuff — when you see the shenanigans on the part of both parties to keep foisting this stuff under the guise of a farm bill that sounds good, how different is that from just wasting gazillions of dollars on a health-care law that’s not panning out?”

Carson took aim at his own party. “I have to confess that both parties have people who believe in big-government control,” he noted. “I want people to start vocalizing, in a tangible way, their dissent, so that we can present this to Congress and we can get the kind of people in there who have the courage that is necessary to stand up to the abuses.”

“The abuses come from both parties,” he continued. “So what we’re fighting against here — it’s not Republicans and Democrats. We’re fighting [between] those who believe in the freedom of the people — and that this country is for, of, and by the people — and those who feel that it’s for, of, and by the government.”

Follow Brendan on Twitter

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@ dailycallernewsfoundation.org.