× Country music legend Charlie Daniels rips Congress in online rant

(CNN) — Country music legend Charlie Daniels, famous for his number one hit “The Devil Went Down To Georgia” and inducted into the Grand Ole Opry in 2008, delivered a blistering screed against Congress and the Obama administration online. Taking aim at the potential nuclear deal with Iran among other targets, Daniels pulled no punches.

After praising the United States as a “counter balance that has cancelled out a lot of tyranny, evil and conquest” and briefly recounting highlights of American courage, Daniels quickly sounded a much darker tone, declaring that “The courageous politicians that once championed this nation have been replaced, for the most part, by a breed of milksop, politically correct, scared of their own shadow, pushover, pathetic excuses for public servants.”

Daniels directed his first broadside at the Iran deal, accusing Congress of lacking “the courage to face down an out of control president, even when he makes a deal with the devil.” He then challenged members to ask themselves, “Do I really believe that Iran will not use the money we’re releasing to them to finance terrorists to kill Americans, and, when, not if, but when, the Iranians develop their nuclear device, will they really use it against America and Israel?”

“You can’t hide from the truthful answer to that question forever,” he added, “an answer that will be required of you one day.”

The country legend then ripped through a litany of complaints about a variety of hot-button political issues, saying “You [Congress] have allowed Obama to tilt the Supreme Court so far to the left that they’re little more than a shameful extension of the Executive Branch,” presumably referring to recent high-profile Supreme Court rulings in favor of gay marriage and Obamacare.

He added “You have allowed cities in this nation to declare themselves sanctuary cities where they protect the worst of the worst criminal aliens, American citizens paying an awful price for your silence.” On July 1st of this summer, an undocumented immigrant shot and killed a young woman in San Francisco, sparking a national debate about ‘sanctuary cities’ in which local law enforcement defer the enforcement of immigration laws to protect undocumented immigrants.

Daniels also attacked Congress for watching “an impossible National Debt balloon completely out of control” and allowing “corrupt government agencies like the IRS to run over the very people you are sworn to protect.”

Focusing squarely on Congress’ perceived negligence, Daniels argued “You compose a third of the constitutionally mandated ruling system and you shirk your duty and allow this nation to move a little close to the edge every day.”

“I wish you bunch of sold-out, jaded, burned-out hacks would just go home,” he continued, “and let some people who still have some vision and whose consciences haven’t been seared past the point of reminding them when they’re wrong take over and start to claw this nation back on to the path of sanity.”

Saving his harshest denunciation for last, Daniels closed saying “You’re no longer men, you’re puppets, you’re caricatures, jokes, a gaggle of fading prostitutes for sale to anybody who can do you a political favor” before adding “Pray for our troops and the peace of Jerusalem. God Bless America.”

In the so-called “summer of anger,” Daniels is hardly alone in his contempt for the political establishment. As of this writing, the post had accumulated thousands of likes and shares.