Patti Davis, Ronald Reagan’s daughter, has a simple question for President Obama: ‘Why am I losing my health insurance?’ And she is not alone.

As the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare as it is otherwise known, rolls out, millions of Americans are losing the healthcare coverage provided by their employers.

Davis, who unlike her very conservative father, is a liberal activist, and voted for Obama on both elections, is expressing her disappointment on losing the healthcare coverage she likes.

When Obamacare was signed into law on 2010 and as far back as 2008, when the President was selling the benefits the law would bring to millions of uninsured Americans, Obama has tirelessly repeated:

“If you like your insurance plan you will keep it. No one will be able to take that away from you. It hasn’t happened yet. It won’t happen in the future.”

But as Patti Davis and millions more are finding out, even though they are happy with the insurance company and plan offered by their employers, businesses across the country are no longer offering health coverage.

Could the president please explain why I and others are losing our health ins. plans? Wasn’t supposed to happen! — patti davis (@patti_davis) October 25, 2013

Davis also seems to be disappointed with the President’s handling of the government shutdown, prompting her to write Obama an open letter on October 13, which reads in part:

“We all remember your campaign tag of “no drama Obama. Interesting that there has been one drama after another in your presidency, this last one really tipping the scales.”

Patti Davis contrasts Obama’s style of governing with her father’s saying, “it was how he lived, how he conducted himself.”

Davis has always been known for speaking her mind, which led to an estrangement from her parents that lasted many years.

While she blames Republicans for the government shutdown, Patti Davis is not happy with how Obama handled the three-week impasse.

“If 80 percent is the fault of the Republicans, you could have dealt with your 20 percent a little better. Announcing that you won’t negotiate is not showing leadership, it’s showing a pouting face to the country and the world.”

It is worth noting Davis is avidly promoting her book on Twitter while criticizing Obama.

What do you think of Patti Davis’ statements? Are you surprised?

[Image via Patti Davis Website/Kara Fox]