Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley and Lt. Gov. Anthony G. Brown, left, wait for guests at the Governor's House after their inauguration ceremony on January 19, 2010. (Photo by Ricky Carioti/The Washington Post) (Ricky Carioti/WASHINGTON POST)

As Maryland Lt. Gov. Anthony G. Brown (D) campaigns to become the state’s next governor, he can’t escape being directly associated with his boss of the past eight years, Gov. Martin O’Malley, who is thinking about running for president and has recently seen his approval rating fall to an all-time low.

During a forum for gubernatorial candidates hosted by the B’nai Israel Congregation in Rockville on Sunday morning, the moderator asked Brown to explicitly explain how his positions differ from those of O’Malley, if at all. Here’s what Brown said:

I’m asked that question regularly on the campaign, and I always start by saying: First of all, Martin O’Malley and I are different people. We share fundamentally the same values, right? Good schools, safe neighborhoods, a clean environment and access to affordable, quality healthcare.

We’re different people. I’m a first-generation American. My parents came to this country, my father out of poverty in Kingston, Jamaica. I spent 30 years in both active and reserve Army... [which included] a year in Iraq. And I sort of cut my teeth in public service in Maryland in the General Assembly, where Martin O’Malley started as a council member in Baltimore and then a big-city mayor and now our governor.

The question that I often get... Marylanders say: ‘What’s next for Maryland? Right, so you said that we built some of the best schools in the nation, what’s next?’

But whether you ask a college president or a kindergarten teacher, one of the things we want to do to improve the quality of education — not just in Maryland but in this country — both the president and the kindergarten teacher will say: greater investment in quality pre-k. That’s what’s next for Maryland: greater investments in pre-k education.

And that’s why I support what we did in the General Assembly this year and my plan to extend to all Maryland 4-year-olds by 2018, on a half-day basis, universal, voluntary pre-k.

In fact, my plan is different from many of the expansion plans that you may have seen over the years as we’ve improved and expanded educational opportunities in Maryland. How’s my plan different? This is the first time when we’re promoting an expansion in education, and we are going to partner with non-profit providers.

What does that mean? It means Jewish day schools are going to be able to compete to offer early-childhood education to Maryland 4-year-olds. Never been done before. And already this year when we announced 20 award recipients for the 4.3 million dollars to expand universal pre-k, many of those providers were non-public providers... So that’s what’s next in Maryland.

When you look at healthcare, what’s next? We’ve implemented the Affordable Care Act... and we’ve done a number of things. And what’s next? We’ve got to address health disparities. So that’s why I led the effort on creating health enterprise zones where we incentivize providers to deliver greater resources, primary care resources, into the community to help address disparities.

I think the greatest challenge that we face as a state, and as a nation, is addressing the disparities and inequities and the gaps that exist, so as we build on the progress that we’ve achieved — and no one is satisfied with that — we need to ensure that we’re eliminating the gaps, the disparities and the inequities that exist.

That’s the question that I get asked: What’s next for Maryland? And I believe that’s some of the answer of what’s next in Maryland in education and healthcare.