Sioux Falls

Tech companies - they're cool places, usually filled with computer geeks that are, well, young.

In fact, the median employee age for technology companies is about 32. That's a whopping 10 years younger than the median age of the U.S. labor force.

Those in the industry say there are good reasons for this and it doesn't necessarily mean age discrimination.

One look around the Internet marketing company Click Rain and you'll notice that the average age of its employees is about 26. Eric Ellefson is the "old man" around here at 40.

"I get teased a lot, mostly from Paul, but then everybody else follows up with that," Ellefson said.

Paul is Ellefson's younger boss; Paul Ten Haken is 37 and started the company seven years ago.

"I think it's just purely that the nature of technology in and of itself is often times looked at as a younger person's industry," Ten Haken said.

Ellefson says sometimes it's tough for different generations working together to relate to one another.

"We started talking about bands and I'll quote a lot of 80's bands and a lot of the younger people we have working for us--they don't even know who the bands are," Ellefson said.

While they may not know 80's bands, Millennials do know technology.

"And I think that's because they're digital natives. They were raised in technology. They're very comfortable in technology. They enjoy technology," Ten Haken said.

That's one of the reasons why companies hire Click Rain.

"In today's tech world, I think the younger you are you may actually have more credibility with a client than if you're older," Ten Haken said.

Ten Haken says he's not discriminating against people over 40. It's just that in the case of Click Rain, rarely--if ever--do people over 40 apply for jobs here.

"We always obviously hire the best applicants we get. It just so happens that 99 percent of the time, those applicants are young people," Ten Haken said.

Down the street another tech company is known for its high energy atmosphere. Medical software company DocuTAP has a young CEO too, but out of its more than 200 employees, 12 percent are over the age of 50.

"I thought maybe there was five of us in our 50's that was here, because the CEO is so young, but it's good. It's a good vibe. It's fun," Wingert said.

Renae Wingert's software career has spanned nearly 30 years.

"I think a lot of that is staying current with the technology. When I was in college, it was main frames. Now it's gone to so many different devices," Wingert said.

Rather than feeling out-of-touch, Wingert says her age and experience works to her advantage.

"There is a lot more to a job than just doing your skill set. You have to get along with your coworkers and communicate. It doesn't matter the age," Wingert said.

54-year-old Julie Shaw was a little nervous about being a more experienced worker at a young company when she took a job at DocuTAP.

"I think we fear it more--are we going to be accepted? But I think it's actually an asset to that company," Shaw said.

But when it comes to tech workers, 42 percent of those over 50 say age is a liability to their career. That's double the rate of other industries and based on stereotypes that older workers are set in their ways and can't learn new things.

“And the truth is, none of those things actually hold true. And there actually started to be some research in the tech industry that actually debunks those myths,” Sarah Jennings of AARP said.

Back at Click Rain, Ten Haken says he's even noticing a technology gap between himself and his youngest employees.

"It's kind of scary to think of me, as CEO of the company is being surpassed by the knowledge of our younger workforce," Ten Haken said.

Ten Haken says that's because they're more immersed in the current culture and tech trends than their older counterparts.

Nationally some tech companies have posted jobs that call for "digital natives," "recent" or "new" graduates. The EEOC says it’s cracking down on that practice.

Facebook settled a case over a job posting that said "Class of 2007 or 2008 preferred."

Featured Stories

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.