Days after NASA confirmed 2014 was Earth’s hottest year on record, a leading climate scientist will sit with first lady Michelle Obama for the president’s State of the Union address Tuesday night.

Nicole Hernandez Hammer, who leads the Florida chapter of Moms Clean Air Force, an advocacy group, has studied how cities most at risk from the effects of climate change and rising sea levels also have large Hispanic populations.

Her invitation to the address reflects President Barack Obama’s intense second-term focus on mitigating and adapting to climate change. Faced with congressional lawmakers who have opposed environmental regulation, the Obama administration has used its executive authority in the past year and a half to introduce sweeping greenhouse gas restrictions for power plants, tighten fuel economy standards for vehicles and curtail methane emissions for the oil and gas industry.



[READ: 2014 Was Earth's Hottest Year on Record]

Obama touted natural gas production as a key part of his administration’s “all-of-the-above” approach to energy and environmental policy last year, and while taxes, the economy and immigration are expected to figure prominently in Tuesday night’s remarks, experts predict oil, gas and climate change will also play a role.

"I believe that President Obama sees climate change as a legacy issue for his administration," says Steven Cohen, executive director of The Earth Institute at Columbia University. "President Obama will likely discuss America’s renewed global environmental leadership: his use of executive power to regulate greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane, and the landmark agreement with China to reduce greenhouse gases."



[ALSO: White House Moves to Rein In Methane Emissions]

In November, Obama struck a historic accord with Chinese President Xi Jinping, vowing to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions up to 28 percent from 2005 levels by 2025, while also winning the first-ever commitment from China to reduce its own carbon emissions.

As part of that pledge, Obama has used the Environmental Protection Agency and Energy Department to take aim at emissions and institute new energy efficiency standards. The administration's support for and investment in renewable energy sources like wind and solar – such as through the Energy Department's loan guarantee program – might earn a mention Tuesday night, but it's more likely the recent collapse of oil and gasoline prices will be noted.



[DATA MINE: Most Republican Voters Support Carbon Regs]

“He may focus a bit on the price of oil and how the drop has a lot to do with it happening during his term," says Paul Sullivan, an economics professor at National Defense University.

The price of Brent crude oil, the benchmark for U.S. gas prices, has fallen below $50 a barrel, down from a high of more than $110 in June. As Sullivan points out, the drop in prices "really has nothing to do with anything [Obama] has done,” but instead stems from the shale oil and gas boom of the past decade.

Still, the drop in oil and gasoline prices has proved an economic boon for motorists and manufacturers, and the shale revolution itself has helped spur hiring.



[MORE: EPA to Complete 'Clean Power Plan' Carbon Rules by Summer]

“He may claim success on the unemployment front,” Sullivan says.

Hernandez Hammer's invitation to join the first lady at the speech may be symbolic in another way, too, Cohen says.

"The president is beginning to think about the lasting record he will leave as president," he says. "A healthier America will be a theme – from the Affordable Care Act to a clean and healthy environment. The first lady’s emphasis on wellness, exercise and nutrition, the Affordable Care Act and climate policy should be seen as a single central priority of the Obama years."