The story of Ben Winslett, and his ongoing frustrations with the Affordable Care Act, has already been told.





He's been writing it since October 7. That's when he received notice from Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alabama that the premium on his health insurance policy would be more than doubling, from about $450 a month to more than $900 per month -- and for a policy offering lesser coverage.





The shock drove Winslett to share his story online, first over social media. When that story was quickly shared dozens of times and drew hundreds of comments, Winslett decided to take it one step further: He built his own website, called My Obamacare Tale , and has been blogging about his Obamacare experience there for four months now.





"I have told this story to anyone who will listen," he says.





The story is one of technical frustration, financial fear, and injured pride -- themes that appear commonly in the stories of those Alabamians who have been disappointed by the impact of the Affordable Care Act on their access to health insurance. Over the past few weeks, more than 200 Alabamians have shared with AL.com specific personal experiences that explain why they’re in favor of the law or against it. In 2014, AL.com is looking beyond the political battle lines to examine how the Affordable Care Act is affecting the cost, availability and quality of health care in Alabama. Your stories will help guide and inform our reporting.









'Moral conviction'





Like many other Americans, Winslett's experience with the Affordable Care Act and healthcare.gov started with technical problems.





"The day that I made [my family's] account, I couldn't even log in," Winslett says.





Winslett went through weeks of unsuccessful log-in attempts. Eventually he decided to try a suggestion offered by others facing a similar problem, which was to create a completely new user name. But that fix was hardly easy -- because his family is seven members strong, Winslett says each attempt to re-register took him roughly an hour. And because health coverage is so important to his family, Winslett says he tried to re-register "near a dozen times" before looking for another answer.





Winslett would eventually get through to the federal health insurance exchange -- but only on the last available day for acquiring coverage, and only with the help of a call to a website administrator. After his family's application was processed and accepted, the next bit of information he received was bittersweet.





The good news was Winslett's family would be covered for 2013, and it would only cost $77 a month for all seven members of his family. But the forces that drove that dollar amount down were also frustrating to the father of five.





The $77 Winslett is set to pay each month will go toward a BCBS Silver plan for himself and his wife. The plan's premiums are actually much higher on paper, but the family is eligible for a substantial subsidy, based on household income. (Winslett is the pastor at the Flint River Primitive Baptist Church, near Huntsville, and his wife is a stay-at-home mother for the family's children.)





A Silver policy for all seven family members would have cost much more, but upon being processed through the federal exchange, Winslett's children were deemed eligible for various forms of state-administered health coverage. His two youngest children will now be covered by Medicaid, and his three eldest will go onto the state's ALL Kids program.





It all might sound like a great deal for Winslett and his family. But the economics of the situation, however favorable, go against some of his core beliefs.





"I have a moral conviction against taking money from another person that I don't need," Winslett says. "I don't want to be on government assistance." But he has no choice: The Affordable Care Act made it illegal not to have health insurance, while at the same time changing the cost picture completely.





This is not to say that Winslett is against government assistance in general. "We have an obligation to take care of those that are downcast," he says. But for him, going from paying his own way to being unwillingly entered into a government program defies logic.





"The math of this doesn't work," he says.





'Nothing is free'





Laurie Sullivan, a grocery store employee living and working in Theodore, shares Winslett's view regarding the numbers of Obamacare.





"If it looks too good to be true, it usually is," she says.





Because of her age (over 60) and income level, Sullivan will not have to pay anything toward her monthly insurance premiums. She'll be covered by a BCBS Silver plan, and has been told that what money she would owe toward her premiums will be taken out of her tax return at the end of the year.





As far as her health goes, the fact that Sullivan will be covered by health insurance is welcome news. She says she's behind on certain preventative wellness tests that are recommended by the medical community for adults of a certain age.





"I couldn't afford them," Sullivan explains. She says she has gone without health insurance for nearly a decade, prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act.





Still, when asked about her opinion of the Affordable Care Act, Sullivan says she is strongly against it. Part of that is driven by what she was told insurance would cost prior to her being receiving subsidized coverage.





"I was told that my insurance would be $576.00 a month," she told AL.com. "I still have rent to pay."





The fact that Sullivan is eligible for a subsidy changes her view of whether or not she can afford health insurance -- clearly, she does have coverage now. But the rapid switch from "seemingly unaffordable" to "basically free" leaves her suspicious.





"I'm just a little leery of it all still," she says.





COMING WEDNESDAY: The greatest financial burdens resulting from the Affordable Care Act will likely be borne by those stuck in the middle -- those with incomes too high to qualify for Medicaid, but not high enough for a subsidy on the federal exchange. Alabamians who find themselves in the so-called Medicaid gap will be the subject of Wednesday's #ACAinAL coverage.