The Turnbull Government has been forced to overhaul its $185 million nanny trial, which has seen nannies appointed to just 60 families who are paying an average of $35 an hour for care.

'Absolutely shocking': $35 an hour nannies forces government scheme overhaul Annie Dean of Colo Vale, with her children Sophie, 10, and Angus, 7. Photo: Kirk Gilmour Tweet Facebook of ╳ exit

The Turnbull government has been forced to overhaul its $185 million nanny trial, which has seen nannies appointed to just 60 families who are paying an average of $35 an hour for care.

In response to overwhelming negative feedback that the pilot was unaffordable, the government boosted in the budget the maximum subsidy available for each child from $5.95 to $8.50 an hour. It also extended the two-year trial which began in January for a further six months.

The nanny pilot is designed to provide childcare for people who work non-standard hours, or live in regional or remote areas. The government planned for up to 3000 families to use this subsidised care.

Although approximately 2800 families have registered for the trial, to date only 60 families with 140 children have engaged nannies, for an average of 20 hours a week. A further 30 families are due to start in coming weeks.

Fairfax Media can reveal that families involved in the pilot are paying an average of $35 an hour for a nanny, according to evidence given at a recent Senate Estimates hearing. This potentially puts it out of reach for many of the shift workers and casuals it is meant to benefit.

In a recent childcare survey by CareforKids, 22 respondents who had been involved in the nanny pilot said it had failed them due to the high cost. One respondent said the trial was "ridiculously expensive and higher than my hourly income".

Australian Nanny Association vice president Annemarie Sansom said the government "heard it from everyone" that the subsidy was too low. "They're obviously open to change which is really good," Ms Sansom said.

Labor's education spokeswoman, Kate Ellis, said the program was "nothing but a joke" and showed how out of touch the Liberals were.

"You only have to do the basic sums to see that the program is completely unaffordable and families have every right to feel cheated," she told Fairfax Media."How can Malcolm Turnbull think the average nurse, police officer or firefighter can afford such a massive hit to their family budget?"

Labor had similar problems when it was in government with the take up of its flexible childcare trial. Six months into its trial, only 29 children had signed up for the family day care offered and 15 children for the long day care.

Federal education minister Simon Birmingham said the Coalition nanny trial was in its "early stages".

"Matching of families in the pilot program with appropriate nannies is underway and will continue over coming months," he said. "We are committed to delivering additional flexibility to more Australian families – the pilot will help us to learn more about how best to structure longer-term support and engagement."

The government is also spending almost $800,000 on an official evaluation of the program.

NSW Family Day Care Association, which is providing all the nannies for the trial in NSW and the ACT, welcomed the changes to the Coalition government's scheme, which come into effect on June 1.

"The first feedback [the government] got from some families was it wasn't that affordable for them. I think it's great the Commonwealth has listened," chief executive Anita Jovanovski said. There are 800 families registered to participate in the trial in NSW.

Nanny providers said the trial was most affordable for families who had two or more children, or families who decided to share a nanny with another family.

Annie Dean is still waiting for her nanny to arrive. Although she was accepted into the trial at the end of last year, NSW Family Day Care is only paying her a home visit next week.

"It seems to be taking a long time," Ms Dean said. "I'm not holding out hope the nanny will be starting in two weeks' time. If he or she starts next term that would be great."

A single mother who works full-time as a nursing manager, Ms Dean would like the nanny to look after her two children in the mornings before school. This would save her relying on extended family so she can get to work on time.

Ms Dean said it would cost her $30 an hour to hire a nanny privately. In the trial she will pay just half that amount, as she has calculated she'll be eligible for a $15 subsidy for her two children. "That brings it down to a much more manageable amount."

Sydney couple Megan and Russell Sullivan heard about the pilot program in last year's budget and were initially very keen. Mrs Sullivan is a police officer and her husband is a firefighter, meaning they're both shift workers with often unpredictable hours.

The Heathcote couple who have three young children were accepted into the pilot program and contacted by a nearby provider last year.

"Then they came out with their fees, which was absolutely shocking. Completely unrealistic," Mrs Sullivan said.

The provider said they'd be looking at between $35 an hour for regular, weekday shifts.

"But for weekends, the one-off, the shift here or shift there – it adds so many more penalties it took it up to $90 an hour."

Mrs Sullivan is still waiting on the provider to get back in touch to organise a "risk assessment" of her home. But even if she does end up progressing in the queue she doesn't think her family can afford the care.

She said it was good to see the government announce an increase in the subsidy: "But it's still not enough for us to take up the scheme."

Under the scheme, families earning up to $60,000 per year are eligible for the maximum subsidy of $8.50 per child per hour.The means-tested subsidy decreases to a minimum of $5 per child per hour for those families earning between $165,000 and $250,000. Families earning $250,000 per year or above are not eligible.

The story 'Absolutely shocking': $35 an hour nannies forces government scheme overhaul first appeared on The Sydney Morning Herald.