Minnesota Timberwolves coach Flip Saunders died from cancer days after reports he would miss the 2015-16 season. (Source: AP Photo/Andy Clayton- King)

(RNN) - Minnesota Timberwolves coach Flip Saunders died Sunday after a battle with cancer. He was 60.

The team announced his death Sunday afternoon. The news comes days after reports indicated he would not be on the sideline for the upcoming season.

Saunders had been diagnosed with Hodgkin's Lymphoma in August, but it was thought his prognosis was good and he would be able to remain with the team. However, he took a leave of absence from the team in September when the disease worsened.

It is with extreme sadness to report that today Phil “Flip” Saunders has passed away at age 60. pic.twitter.com/l8tthTocAt — Timberwolves PR (@Twolves_PR) October 25, 2015

Saunders had coached the team from 1995 to 2005 and returned in 2013 as team president. He took over again as coach in 2014 when the team had the worst record in the NBA.

Saunders had help build a team full a young talent over the last two years, including the No. 1 overall draft pick in 2015.

Saunders also coached in Detroit and Washington and compiled a 654-592 record as an NBA coach.

Born Philip Daniel Saunders on Feb. 23, 1955 in Cleveland, OH, Saunders coached the NBA All-Star Game twice and led the Detroit Pistons to a franchise-record 64 wins in the 2005-06 season. He was fired following the 2007-08 season after the Pistons lost in the Eastern Conference Finals.

As a player, Saunders led the University of Minnesota to the best record in school history. He started his coaching career at Golden Valley Lutheran Community College before returning to Minnesota as an assistant.

He spent several years as a head coach in the defunct Continental Basketball Association before behing hired by the Timberwolves.

Saunders has four children, including a son who is an assistant coach with the Timberwolves. Sam Mitchell was named interim head coach of the Timberwolves when Saunders took his leave in September.

Minnesota is scheduled to open its season Wednesday against the Los Angeles Lakers.

My condolences to the Saunders and @Timberwolves family! Lost a great person in our fraternity way to early. So sad #RIPFlip — LeBron James (@KingJames) October 25, 2015

Flip you were one of a kind. Great basketball mind and even better human being. You had a great… https://t.co/W84KYPitsx — Kevin Love (@kevinlove) October 25, 2015

Copyright 2015 Raycom News Network. All rights reserved.