America needs to stand up for what is right in the 2016 election.

WASHINGTON, Aug. 1, 2015 – There is an election in 2016, an important election. Between now and then, Americans have a few questions to ask themselves. Some will ignore all that has been going on and allow things to go on as before. But many Americans know deep in their hearts that America is in trouble.

America needs to use the election for change. We need to elect candidates in all positions, local and federal, who are proven to have a deep abiding belief in the Constitution and the republic so many have fought so hard for. We can no longer go along to get along.

Hillary Clinton has stated she wants to earn our trust and wants us to follow her on this journey. What journey? To become a socialist third world country, created by someone with Saul Alinsky as a mentor? To cement lies as part of our leadership? A few words to demonstrate how this can happen: Whitewater, Vince Foster and, most of all, Benghazi. Not to mention hidden emails. America cannot elect a president who lies so easily and so often.

Honesty is imperative. No more lies about healthcare, no more lies about Obamacare.

We need to elect a strong commander-in-chief who will represent America. How many of our brave fighting men are in prison because they did the job they were told to do? How many Americans are imprisoned overseas, by countries we support with massive amounts of aid? We cannot free them because we are negotiating from a position of weakness. We need a president who values our military and our veterans. One who will not allow our veterans to die while waiting for care. One who will not continue to decimate our fighting forces, prohibiting us from fighting effectively. We cannot afford to elect another anti-military president.

We need a candidate who believes in American exceptionalism, who backs U.S. citizens and stops illegal immigration. When illegal immigrants have more rights and benefits than American citizens, it is time for major policy changes.

Stop with the homophobe, Islamophobe and all the other phobias our politically correct academics have devised to pervert our culture. Stop the attacks on the First Amendment by trying to silence those who disagree.

The big government bureaucrats need to go. They are in both parties. They have done enough damage to this country. Our federal budget has exceeded all government spending from the start of this country until Obama took office. We are leaving our children an unsupportable debt so that politicians of both parties can keep winning elections. Throw them all out and start over with candidates with some economic sense.

The 2016 election is important. It is time to stop talking about moral relativism and understand that there is right and there is wrong. America needs to stand up for what is right.