Government forms have become far too plentiful, time-consuming

Posted: May. 6, 2016 8:35 am

THERE'S a new analysis that shows it takes 11.4 billion hours a year for businesses, agencies and taxpayers to complete forms required by the federal government. That amounts to 35 hours per U.S. resident, nearly a full workweek, according to the American Action Forum. And those billions of forms then have to be handled, checked or filed by untold numbers of government workers.The AAF's report is filled with other numbers -- we choose not to call them fun facts -- about the mountains of regulations and red tape that entangle federal agencies.More than 23,000 forms are involved. The largest paperwork requirements, by a large margin, come from the Health and Human Services Department, with 5,005 forms. That number includes the 943 forms related to the Affordable Care Act. The Agriculture Department has more than 3,700 forms. The Commerce Department comes in third with more than 2,000 forms.Many people are shocked to learn that the Treasury Department, home to the Internal Revenue Service, ranks no higher than fourth, with 1,599 forms -- 1,053 related to the tax code. Not surprisingly, these forms impose by far the greatest time burden on Americans, accounting for 77 percent of the total. Authors of the AAF report say those tax forms take about 24 hours for the average taxpayer to obtain, calculate and file because of "the incomprehensible individual and corporate tax system in the U.S."One particularly troubling fact about the paperwork is that 28 percent of forms cannot be submitted online. More than 1,400 USDA forms, more than 1,000 Treasury forms and nearly 450 Health and Human Services forms have to be handled in the same way they were in the 1950s.Certainly, some forms are necessary. People should have to verify eligibility for payments or other government benefits. Signatures are needed to provide a paper trail and identify responsible parties. But 23,000 forms seems more than a little excessive.What's hard to fathom is why so many forms cannot be submitted online. Once a person or business gets a federal ID number or routing code, it would seem that computer record keeping would be far more efficient for the government and everyone else.Presidents, members of Congress and the people leading government agencies should find ways to streamline the paperwork that takes so much time and effort. Many of the documents that are necessary still could be computerized or simplified.Anything that helps trim back the 35 hours per capita for paperwork each year would be appreciated.