3-D mammography available in Northern Colorado

Kathy VanDress, a radiologic technologist with UCHealth's Breast Imaging Center in Fort Collins, repositions a mammography machine at the center. The machines are now capable of providing 3-D mammograms to patients. The process for a 3-D mammogram is similar to the traditional 2-D except the machine acquires images from multiple angles in a single compression. The images are then reconstructed and allow the radiologist the opportunity to better evaluate the breast tissue. ( Kati Blocker / UCHealth )

We're fast approaching a new year. For some it will be a time of resolutions, possibly including a resolution to take better care of one's body and have recommended health-care screenings.

To that end, women in Loveland and Fort Collins can now access a new option to aid in the early detection of breast cancer within their own communities.

UCHealth recently began offering 3-D mammography (tomosynthesis) in its Breast Imaging Centers in Fort Collins and Loveland. The imaging is also available at Banner Health's Summit View Medical Commons in Greeley.

"The process for a 3-D mammogram is similar (to traditional 2-D mammography) except the machine acquires images from multiple angles in a single compression," noted Amanda Wood, manager of breast imaging in Northern Colorado for UCHealth. "The images are then reconstructed and allow the radiologist the opportunity to better evaluate the breast tissue."

Using 2-D mammography, normal breast tissue can overlap, which may lead to some patients being asked to return for further evaluation. Wood shared that, "3-D helps to reduce the call backs, because a radiologist is able to evaluate the breast tissue at both 1 mm and 1 cm thicknesses, which results in the increased sensitivity in interpreting mammograms.

Advertisement

Along with a reduction in the number of callbacks, early research suggests 3-D mammography leads to increased rates of earlier detection.

In addition, 3-D mammography may allow radiologists to better detect invasive cancers — breast cancers that have spread beyond the ducts — that may not have been detected using 2-D.

"We can often find breast cancer earlier, which may give a woman more choices and options about how her breast cancer is treated, than if we found it at a later stage," said Wood.

Amanda Wood serves as the manager of breast imaging in Northern Colorado for UCHealth. (Kati Blocker / UCHealth)

Karen Ronkainen, an admissions secretary at UCHealth's Breast Center, was the first woman to undergo a 3-D mammogram using the new technology at the Breast Center in Fort Collins. "I was due for a mammogram. We knew that we were going to be transitioning to the 3-D technology. It was a perfect opportunity to fill my needs. I wanted to benefit from the newer technology."

When it comes to the actual scan, most women will not recognize a difference between the two options. "I did not feel that there were any differences," said Ronkainen, "outside of the fact that you are in the machine a little longer."

Wood pointed out that, "Radiation exposure to the breast is low with all mammograms. A 3-D mammogram may take a few more seconds to complete, but both exams expose patients to less radiation than they would get on a sunny Colorado day."

Who should consider a 3-D mammogram? "The literature states that in the overall screening environment, it can be helpful for all women. Women with dense breast tissue should also consider having 3-D mammography, but it is not limited to them," said Wood. "We feel strongly that this technology is extremely valuable in the fight against breast cancer. We encourage every woman to consider choosing 3-D as her first choice, but we understand that the cost may make it prohibitive."

At the present time, 3-D mammography is covered by some, but not all, insurance companies. If a woman does not have coverage for 3-D, she may have an additional out-of-pocket charge of approximately $75 to cover the additional cost.

"The American College of Radiology recommends that a woman of average risk begin routine annual screening mammography at age 40 and continue for as long as she is in good health. The American Cancer Society recommends that women begin mammograms at age 45. In cases where breast cancer runs in the family, or in other special circumstances, a doctor may recommend starting mammograms at an earlier age," noted UCHealth in a recent release.

With new technological advances, a woman has more options to choose from. Initiating a discussion with your primary care provider may help in deciding what is best for you.