If one of your new year’s resolutions is to secure health insurance for 2016, you’ve only got 20 more days to reach your goal through the Affordable Care Act.

Since going into effect two years ago, more than 16 million Americans have used the health insurance marketplace to sign up for coverage for themselves, their families or their employees, according to an analysis by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. New Yorkers make up nearly 13% of that overall number.

In the Empire State, ACA health insurance can be found through New York State of Health, the insurance marketplace operated by the New York State Department of Health.

Between Medicaid, Qualified Health Plans and Child Health Plus programs, more than two million New Yorkers have obtained affordable health coverage as part of Obamacare.

If you're uninsured or thinking about updating your insurance through the Marketplace for the year ahead, here’s a word of caution: Don’t wait to deliberate.

Since open enrollment started last November, the Department of Health has reported a record response from New Yorkers seeking to sign up through New York State of Health. Last month it was averaging 34,000 calls per day through its customer service center, and its website, nystateofhealth.ny.gov, has been viewed more than 43 million times since enrollment started on Nov. 1.

With the Jan. 31 deadline for 2016 enrollment drawing nearer, the countdown for acquiring coverage is on.

“A lot of people are deadline driven, so unfortunately we see this sort of rush coming in toward the end of the month, right before a deadline,” says Elizabeth Hagan, senior policy analyst for Families USA.

MAJORITY OF NEW YORKERS QUALIFY FOR FINANCIAL AID IN STATE MARKETPLACE HEALTH PLANS

“I would encourage consumers to really not wait until the last minute, but to start now getting an idea of their plans. If there are any complications they can’t answer, they have time to go back and get the information they need to finish their application. (Jan. 31) is likely to be a very busy day on all of the various state-based marketplaces, as well as healthcare.gov, so getting in there now would be a good idea.”

Despite being the third open enrollment period for Obamacare, there will be plenty of new information for people to consider this time around, says Karen Pollitz, senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation.

“This is the first year that the full tax cycle will have been in effect,” she says. “When you sign up for coverage in the marketplace and get a tax subsidy, you are required to file a tax return for that year. If you fail to do that, it’s going to make it difficult for you to continue coverage in the marketplace in subsequent years. People who either didn’t file at all or didn’t file appropriately in 2015 should have received a letter from the IRS.”

Another thing to watch for this year is a change in subsidy requirements, adds Pollitz.

“To be eligible for subsidies in the Marketplace, you must not be eligible for subsidized coverage through a job — either your own or a family member’s where you would be eligible to receive coverage as a spouse or a dependent.”

New Yorkers will also benefit this year from a new, more affordable health insurance option for low-income residents known as the Essential Plan.

Hundreds of thousands of state residents whose incomes fall between 138% to 200% of the federal poverty level will be eligible to apply for the new program.

The Essential Plan is designed to offer the same basic health care coverage as any other Obamacare plan, but with the added benefits of no deductible, free preventative care services and a monthly premium of either $0 or $20, depending on income. New Yorkers can find more information about the new program at nystateofhealth.ny.gov.

Medical clipboard and stethoscope. (Zoonar RF/Getty Images/Zoonar RF)

Those who meet the qualifications for enrollment should take note: While the deadline to apply through the state’s traditional marketplace is Jan. 31 for coverage in 2016, enrollment for the Essential Plan is open year-round.

OBAMACARE ENROLLMENT REACHES 11 MILLION MARK

Even if you already have a health plan you’re happy with, it still pays to shop around during Open Enrollment. Financial aid assistance can fluctuate from year to year depending on your circumstances, which means not taking time to compare your coverage options could wind up costing you money.

Nearly 75% of New Yorkers who signed up for Qualified Health Plans had their health care costs reduced by financial aid assistance in 2015, according to the DOH.

New Yorkers can use the interactive View Plans Now feature, found at nystateofhealth.ny.gov/individual, to anonymously compare health plans and check their eligibility for financial aid.

When comparison shopping for health coverage, there are six factors to consider: premiums, out-of-pocket costs, metal levels, covered services, in-network doctors and drug formularies.

Assessing any potential health insurance plan based on these six factors will help give the clearest understanding of its benefits and costs. Typically, out-of-pocket costs tend to be lower for health plans with higher monthly premiums. These costs include deductibles, co-pays and possibly co-insurance expenses.

One factor that will impact both your out-of-pocket costs and premiums is the metal level — bronze, silver, gold or platinum — you pick for your coverage plan.

Insurance plans in the Marketplace are categorized by this four-tier system, and each tier offers the same basic coverage, though higher tiers might offer additional benefits to the insured not found at lower levels, such as dental and vision care.

No matter the plan or the metal level you opt to go with, every insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act covers the same 10 basic tenants: doctor visits, hospital stays, emergency care, maternity and newborn care, mental health and substance abuse disorder services, prescription drugs, rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices, laboratory services, preventative and wellness services, and chronic disease management.

Finally, look to see which doctors, hospitals and prescription drugs are covered under a particular plan if you already have preferred providers or particular medications you want to ensure stay in your network.

While financial assistance, tax credits and comparison shopping can all help save you money on your health insurance this year, there is one thing that will definitely cost you: failing to sign up for some form of coverage.

Uninsured individuals in 2016 face an Individual Mandate Penalty fee of 2.5% of their household income or $695 (whichever is larger).

“There is a penalty for not having health insurance, and it has gone up again this year,” Pollitz says.

“It may be one reason why enrollment trends have picked up over where we were this time last year. It’s an annual penalty, but it’s assessed on a month-by-month basis. If you have your coverage in effect by March 1, you won’t be penalized for being uninsured in January or February.

“So if people have waited, they should really hurry up.”