Lynn Steenberg owns Sports Physical Therapy of New York -- known as Sports PT. The Syracuse company has nine offices, from Buffalo to Saratoga Springs, with 85 employees. A tenth will open this spring in Malta.

Steenberg is active in many community organizations, and especially praises the Women Presidents Organization. She's been inducted in the Nottingham High School Wall of Fame and she's won a number of other awards -- including the aptly named "Women Who Mean Business" from the Red Cross.

Her advice for success:

"Effective leaders need to be able to listen to ideas. Recognize and embrace everyone's different talents as a strength.

"Ineffective leaders, rather than embrace it, will see that as a negative challenge, as in you're challenging my authority.

"A maverick, as long as the maverick has the values and the goals and the best interests of the organization in mind, is very useful."

Your company had a significant sale last summer.

It was my entire Downstate business — 21 offices. The majority of the business was in Manhattan.

After 8 1/2 years, I realized that I couldn't support them from afar to the degree needed. So I divested. I sold in July to a Downstate organization. It was a wonderful decision for everyone, but it was two-thirds of our company.

How is your industry doing?

The health-care industry right now is in a challenging time.

Why is that?

There's a lot of consolidation going on making it difficult for the small physical therapy provider to survive.

The Affordable Care Act has put pressure on insurance companies. Insurance companies have cut our reimbursement, but our costs aren't going down.

A lot of the medical providers are creating an ACO, an Accountable Care Organization. It's a large organization of providers under one umbrella. Insurance companies are changing their reimbursement structure according to that model.

Physicians are getting back into the physical therapy business. If physicians are going to refer to their own PTs, the independent practitioner becomes the outsider. It's a challenging time for the independent practitioner.

We're focused on educating the public on a paradigm shift to more consumer choice and consumer-driven health care.

Many individuals think they have to go their doctor first. So they go to their primary care doctor, who will frequently, not always, but frequently send them to an orthopedist or a specialist, maybe after they've done an X-ray. They go to the orthopedist or other specialist, who many times orders an MRI or a CAT scan. All they had to do was start at physical therapy first.

If I'm in pain and I bypass the physician for physical therapy, will my health insurance pay for it?

Yes.

For aches and pains, impingement, for sprains, strains, whatever it might be, the physical therapist really can be your first stop.

If you come and you have 10 visits of physical therapy, for instance, at $80 a visit, that's $800. Total cost. And nine times out of 10, your symptoms will be resolved in that 10-visit period.

Let's look at the reverse: You go to your primary care physician and they do an X-ray. Nothing shows up on that X-ray. You still have back pain. Now you go see the specialist. Whatever time delay in there, you continue to dysfunction.

If you go the doctor route first, the total bill sometimes is $2,500 or $3,000. And they'll send you to physical therapy, but you've spent $3,000 before you've even begun.

We want to maintain our relationships with the physicians. But we want to be seen as a side-by-side partner with physicians. When we can get to that point, physical therapy can provide a tremendous vehicle for reducing health-care costs.

My physical therapists have their doctorates -- they're doctors of PT. The laws in New York state allow physical therapists -- those with their doctorate degrees or with three years of experience -- to evaluate and treat you and your condition for a period of 30 days or 10 visits, whichever comes first. If you have specific signs that indicate, for instance, a herniated disc, I'm going to call up the specialist and I'm going to have a conversation and facilitate that referral.

It sounds like you're trying to lead change in your industry. Were you in leadership roles growing up?

I'm the oldest of six. The first five of us were all less than two years apart. As an 8-year-old I was helping to take care of a 6-year-old, a 4-year-old and a 2-year-old.

I was an athlete in school. I played whatever sport was in season -- soccer, basketball, gymnastics, softball. I played in the band and was a cheerleader. I was elected captain of multiple sports teams, but I didn't want to be school president. Instead, I got voted most active.

Tell me about early influences.

My parents (David and Ellen Bacon) laid the foundation, a strong value system. They gave me the tools and encouragement. They stepped back and let me find my way. My father's a developer-contractor here in Central New York. My sister (Sue Kimmel) is now the president of that family business (Two Plus Four Construction Co.).

Other influences?

I went to Ithaca College, majoring in physical therapy and athletic training. I was able to do both, which was unusual at that time. As a physical therapist, I was in a female-dominated world. But I was also an athletic trainer and that was a male-dominated world. I was the first female athletic trainer to work with a men's sport -- football -- at Ithaca. That was in 1975.

I love reading leadership books. I love Jim Collins' work. We study those research-based books here as an organization. That's part of our leadership development program.

Previous employers have been good mentors. Early in my career, I was the supervisor at the physical therapy department at Cornell University. I was surrounded by strong leadership.

I came to Syracuse and with a couple of physician partners opened Onondaga Sports Medicine in 1986.

I worked at that time with the head athletic trainer at Syracuse University, Don Lowe. I learned a lot of valuable lessons from him, and I think he learned from me, too.

What kind of lessons?

He taught me to be a little firmer, and I taught him to be a little softer. Effective leaders have balance between professional will, the professional determination to get things, and the personal humility associated with "It's not all about me." It's about everybody else.

Over the years, I've learned valuable lessons. One is: It's not for me to expect you to think like me. You're not me.

Those lessons develop over time. A lot of it is through making mistakes. The only bad mistake is one we don't learn from and make again.

Your advice for overcoming obstacles or setbacks?

The seven-option rule.

This was an important lesson my father taught me. In his business, whenever they were faced with a challenge, they would force themselves to come up with at least seven options.

I asked Dad: Why seven?

He said: It forces you to think beyond the obvious. It's easy to come up with two or three options. It really isn't easy to come up with seven.

We've used that within our organization for my entire Sports PT career. When we're faced with an obstacle, we get our flip chart and get out a Sharpie. The first option does nothing. The second option will be way at the other end of the spectrum.

Then you work to fill in. It forces you to think broadly.

What other advice would you give a new leader or someone who aspires to a leadership role?

In leadership training -- the favorite part of my job -- we start with the five hallmarks of leadership. They drive everything.

The first hallmark is goal setting. It has to be a smart goal. Naturally, everything has to have an acronym, so smart would be specific, measurable, attainable, realistic and time-bound.

The second hallmark is effective communication. An effective leader has to listen way more than speak. Listen first, then process. Listen first and think. Ask questions and think before reacting.

The third hallmark is trust. We do that by developing credibility. Who we are and what we do and what we say. Are we modeling what we're expressing? Are we reinforcing what we're modeling? It becomes that cycle.

Accountability is number four. People want to be held accountable. To build effective teams, people have to be held accountable. If you're not holding one accountable for something, it's demotivating to another member of the team.

The last is sincere recognition. Never underestimate the simplest act of kindness -- write a simple thank you.

So live by the hallmarks. Then surround yourself with people who are smarter and more skilled than you are and learn from them.

Jim Collins' "Good to Great" book was the first research-based leadership book that we studied as an organization. Get the right people on your bus and in the right seats. Get the wrong people off the bus.

"CNY Conversations" feature Q&A interviews with local citizens about leadership, success, and innovation. The conversations are condensed and edited. They also run regularly on Sunday in The Post-Standard's Business section. To suggest a person for CNY Conversations, contact Stan Linhorst at slinhorst@syracuse.com.

Last week: Manufacturing executive Vinny Lobdell talks about his keys to success. A sample: A key to success is being eternally optimistic. Optimism moves you in the right direction. So surround yourself with positive, upbeat people. Life is way too short to surround yourself with a bunch of people who are negative and unhealthy.