WEST BLOOMFIELD, Mich., Nov. 26, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Eagle Advancement Institute (EAI), and its doctors who have pioneered the development of its patented Clarity™ Intensive Outpatient Opiate Treatment (IOOT™), today announced that it can accept many forms of insurance for its services through provisions within the Affordable Care Act. EAI is the only provider who can accept insurance for IOOT™, a highly effective approach to helping people addicted to various forms of opioid substances, such as heroin or prescription painkillers.

"Insurance providers have historically not covered many services associated addiction treatment," noted Dr. Ricardo Borrego, M.D., a board certified anesthesiologist and director for EAI. "We see a lot of people who are interested in getting clean before the holiday season and the provisions within the Affordable Care Act allow us to help so many more than we previously could have."

The Clarity Intensive Outpatient Opiate Treatment has demonstrated a high degree of efficacy since its introduction - success rates are five times greater than industry average. Unlike so called "rapid detox" programs, medical intervention techniques used within IOOT achieve patient comfort without general anesthesia, intubation or external ventilation, resulting in a much safer procedure.

"Insurance payors prefer low-risk procedures that produce results and IOOT employs 10 key components towards the patient's recovery," added James Carpenter, managing partner for EAI. "IOOT enables abstinence through a procedure that utilizes semi-conscious sedation, similar to those used in minor dental procedures, to eliminate the pain and suffering of withdrawal and a process that significantly reduces the potential for relapse and addresses the patient's psychological needs thereafter."

Patients, families and referring parties such as medical and insurance providers, schools and courts can find more information at the Clarity™ website or by dialing 1 (877) 987-3324.

About Eagle Advancement Institute

Eagle Advancement Institute (EAI) is a developer and provider of the most advanced substance abuse treatments and pain management techniques, using FDA-approved medications and therapies. EAI's patented Clarity™ Intensive Outpatient Opiate Treatment (IOOT™) is part of overall drug rehabilitation regimen performed in a (ASAM) American Society of Addiction Level III.2-D & III.7-D facility that includes National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) recommendations of detoxification coupled with both medication, behavioral therapy, followed by relapse prevention.

Media Inquiries:

Kevin Sangsland

Anura Strategies

734.834.2536

Sangsland@anurastrategies.com

SOURCE Eagle Advancement Institute