Dogged defender: Jacques Faty (right) battles for the ball with South Africa's George Maluleka during an international friendly at Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban. Photo: Getty Images

Sydney FC's summer of shopping in the transfer window has been kept in the family – literally – with new Senegalese signing Jacques Faty the cousin of their other new signing, Mickael Tavares.

Faty arrives at the club as a product of the famed French youth development school at Clairefontaine, with a decade of experience in Ligue 1 at clubs such as Rennes, Marseille, Sochaux and Bastia, along with a stint at Turkish club Sivasspor and most recently with Chinese Super League club Wuhan Zall.

The 30-year old will join the club as an injury-replacement for Sasa Ognenovski, meaning he will get four months to prove to coach Graham Arnold he is worthy of a permanent deal. "Jacques is a very experienced defender having played regularly in one of the top leagues in the world," Arnold said. "I am very pleased to be able to add him to our back four as I believe his defensive abilities and leadership qualities will prove extremely valuable to us throughout the remainder of the season."

Faty said he was "very happy to join this famous team", claiming he'd "heard a lot of good things about Sydney FC" and the A-League before committing to a stint in Australia. "I know [Alessandro] Del Piero did well in his time there," he said. "And I know some French players who play in the A-League, [Melbourne Victory duo] Matthieu Delpierre and Falid Ben Khalfallah, who have told me what a big club they are and how good the league is."

Advertisement

He's also looking forward to linking up with his cousin for the rest of the season. "Our mothers are sisters and it will be a double motivation to play well for the team and for each other," he said. "We used to play together as children and also for Senegal together and now this is another great challenge for us."

Faty captained France's under-17 team to being world champions in 2001 – before switching his international allegiances to the homeland of his parents – and has the experience of having marked some of the best players in the world.

"I've played nine years in the top league in France and two years in Turkey," he said. "I won the World Cup with the French national under-17's playing against the likes of [Fernando] Torres, [Carlos] Tevez and Robinho so I have some experience I can bring to the team."

The Sky Blues are slowly rebuilding their squad after copping a run of four season-ending injuries just a few weeks apart. Arnold is still likely to look for another player to replace Corey Gameiro in attack. Faty, however, should solve the defensive and leadership problem left by Ognenovski's absence.

"My best position is central defender, I'm quite quick and I like anticipating and reading the game. I also like to break the lines with my passing," he said. "I hope to win as many games as possible, to win the Championship and to finish as high up the A-League as possible. I think we can also qualify for the Asian Champions League too."