A man looks over the Affordable Care Act (commonly known as Obamacare) signup page on the HealthCare.gov website in New York in this October 2, 2013 photo illustration. REUTERS/Mike Segar

3904467

Obamacare’s roll-out has been such a debacle that even the president’s largest cheering section can’t help but take notice.

“Media outlets have struggled to find anyone who’s actually been successful,” CBS News reported. “The Washington Post even illustrated that sought-after person as a unicorn, and USA Today called the launch an “inexcusable mess” and a “nightmare.”

“It wasn’t designed well, it wasn’t implemented well, and it looks like nobody tested it,” a programmer who supports the health care law told the network, adding, “I would be ashamed and embarrassed if my organization delivered something like that.”

The most famous example of someone who actually successfully navigated the website turned out to have never purchased health insurance through it. “I saw so many numbers in one night, I was tired,” he explained.

For Obamacare’s most dogged supporters, there can be only one logical explanation. Cue the Beastie Boys: it’s sabotage.

Liberal groups were taking this line long before the 404 errors started popping up, churning out lists like “Five major ways that Republicans are trying to sabotage Obamacare.”

It’s a variant of one of the most annoying arguments of the last five years: Republicans just want Barack Obama to fail.

Rush Limbaugh wants him to fail. Mitch McConnell wanted him to be a one-term president. Now Republicans are frantically trying to stop Obamacare, because they know its awesomeness will help millions of people, exposing the country to a Democratic president’s benevolence and wisdom.

This is a childish way of looking at political disagreements. There was scarcely a Democratic elected official in the country who wanted to see George W. Bush re-elected. I think we can say with confidence that position was etched in stone pretty much from the moment Bush v. Gore was handed down.

John Kerry even joked about the need for “regime change” in the United States. Kerry was as successful at securing that regime change as he has so far been in Syria, so perhaps this was a harbinger of what he would be like as secretary of state.

Most Democrats didn’t like Bush’s tax cuts and many wanted to repeal them, especially for the upper earners. This was the case even though the Bush tax cuts, unlike Obamacare, were set to expire.