WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court issued an order on Monday that allows certain nonprofit religious groups to avoid compliance with federal rules concerning insurance coverage of contraceptives for women.

The order bars the Obama administration from enforcing the rules against the religious groups and church officials until the court decides whether to hear an appeal they filed this year.

Eric C. Rassbach, a deputy general counsel at the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, who has closely followed the issue, welcomed the order.

“This is another instance in which the government fought all the way to the Supreme Court and lost again,” Mr. Rassbach said. “Doesn’t the government have something better to do than fight charities serving the poor?” Plaintiffs in the case included the Roman Catholic bishop of Pittsburgh, the Most Rev. David A. Zubik, and Catholic Charities of Pittsburgh.

In their lawsuit, Zubik v. Burwell, they challenged procedures established by the Obama administration to address religious objections to a federal requirement for coverage of birth control. The Affordable Care Act generally requires insurers and health plans to cover preventive services without co-payments or deductibles, and the administration has said that those services include all approved forms of contraception for women.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In February, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia, rejected challenges to the contraceptive coverage requirement filed by Bishop Zubik and a number of nonprofit organizations that objected to it on religious grounds. The court said that the nonprofit groups were “eligible for an accommodation to the contraceptive coverage requirement,” and that this arrangement “places no substantial burden” on them.

Under the accommodation, the court said, the nonprofit religious groups can refuse to pay for contraceptive services. If that happens, the court said, “coverage for those services will be independently provided” by an insurance company or by a third party that administers health benefits for the organization.

The plaintiffs said the accommodation violated the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 because it forced them to “facilitate” the provision of coverage for contraceptive services.

Religious groups can minimize their role by sending the government a form certifying their objections, but that does not make them “complicit in the provision of contraceptive coverage,” the appeals court said.