Advertisement - story continues below

I’ll let Carly Fiorina speak for herself, because I’m not that smart:

This has to do with the moral foundation of our nation. If a woman was sitting outside of Planned Parenthood in, for example, her OBGYN’s office looking at this ultrasound at precisely the same point in her pregnancy, her doctor would be saying to her, “Look at your baby. Look at it’s heartbeat. Look at it’s fingers and toes.” This is an abomination that Planned Parenthood has lobbied against a woman’s opportunity to look at an ultrasound before she makes an incredibly difficult choice to end the unborn life within her, and yet, they are using that same technology to harvest body parts – which they claim are not a life – in order to sell them to save another life. Advertisement – story continues below Related Stories Proclaiming A Culture Of Life

Abortion Activists Blast Hillary, You Won’t Believe Why

Why Is Donald Trump Making News On Abortion?

Boom goes the dynamite. The glorious, kind of sexy in a mature/distinguished way, dynamite…

She also ripped into the pro-abortion lobby’s hypocrisy in that it claims to stand up for actual women’s health.

And when asked about cutting federal funding for all the other “services” Planned Parenthood allegedly provides women, Fiorina quipped:

Advertisement – story continues below

Well gee, I thought Obamacare was supposed to take care of all that.

And then she really went into BEASTMODE.

Thank you Carly Fiorina. Here’s hoping that when people wake up from their Donald Trump hangover, they start to pay attention.

NOTE: Beastmode was meant as a compliment, and not in any way a slight at Carly, nor any other strong woman’s physical appearance… Though many SJW feminists really do look like beasts, so we apologize for any confusion.

Advertisement – story continues below

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.