Not long before the collapse of Oklahoma City’s Penn Square Bank in 1982, the bank’s high-flying executives were raucously handing out $2 billion in loans and drinking champagne out of cowboy boots.

Today, executives in the health insurance industry may be drinking champagne out of specimen cups.

A wild, frenzied merger mania has taken hold as health insurers, awash in cash, look to devour their competition. Centene Corp., a Medicaid insurer, is buying Woodland Hills-based insurer Health Net for $6.8 billion. Aetna is buying Humana for $35 billion in cash and stock, and Anthem is trying to buy Cigna.

The cash is flowing thanks to the Affordable Care Act, which requires every American to have a health insurance policy and provides taxpayer funds to insurance companies to help pay for it. The U.S. government is on track to spend $1.2 trillion over the next decade on these subsidies and related costs.

Yee-haw.

On June 30, the U.S. government’s Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services released an interesting report about a temporary program that reimburses insurers for claims over $45,000 and up to $250,000. For 2014, the U.S. will pay about $7.9 billion to insurance companies, which pay a fee of $63 per customer to fund this reinsurance program.

A second program for “risk adjustment” transfers money from insurance companies with a greater proportion of healthy customers to insurers with a greater proportion of sick customers.

The programs are intended to protect insurance companies from the full risks of covering people with expensive health problems.

You know, that’s all we really needed in the first place.

If there was one thing everybody could agree on during the debate over health care reform, it was that people with pre-existing conditions needed help getting health insurance.

All the rest of the Affordable Care Act — the “essential” benefits required in every policy, the exchanges, the subsidies, the individual mandate, employer mandate, data collection, “Cadillac” tax, medical device tax, Medicare tax on investment income, costly compliance requirements — was pushed through Congress on the coattails of guaranteeing coverage for pre-existing conditions.

We could have had a risk-sharing program for insurance companies, a subsidy for high-cost claims, and a guarantee that people who were willing to stay continuously insured could never be turned away for a pre-existing condition.

Advertisement

Instead we have a trillion dollars of taxpayer-funded subsidies pouring into insurance companies, which are gleefully merging away their competition and already raising rates for 2016.

Meanwhile, employees are paying a greater share of their health premiums — an increase of 93 percent in 10 years — while wage growth has stagnated. And 37 million Americans now have high-deductible policies that require them to pay as much as $6,000 for medical care, sometimes even more, before the insurance company pays anything.

The ACA is giving us giant insurance companies, too big to fail, supported by government force against customers who have fewer and fewer choices.

Perhaps an onslaught of angry voters, or math, will deliver the ACA to the fate of Penn Square Bank. Then what? Maybe this:

• Preserve the risk-adjustment and reinsurance programs in a way that allows guarantees access to health insurance for people with pre-existing conditions.

• Allow medical providers and insurance companies to decide for themselves what services and products to sell, and at what price.

• Lift the mandates on individuals and employers.

• Maintain Medicare and Medicaid/Medi-Cal with adequate funding.

• Get the government out of the business of collecting personal health data and evaluating treatments.

For once, champagne all around.