Boulder Homemade Inc., the locally based firm behind Boulder Ice Cream and the newly launched Figo! Organic Gelato, recently inked a lease for a new facility at 3220 Prairie Ave. in Boulder, according to local commercial real estate firm Freeman Myre that, in addition to CBRE, helped broker the transaction.

Boulder Homemade plans to move to the 12,296-square-foot space next month and be operational by March.

The Daily Camera spoke with Scott Roy, Boulder Homemade's president, about the move and the trends that could affect the company in the future.

The following has been edited for clarity and length.

1. How did Boulder Homemade's revenue and earnings fare in 2013 and 2012?

Sales and earnings-wise have been great. We've been in a growth mode that is one part a result of the economy. Usually in slow economies, ice cream, cigarettes and liquor (sales) all do better.

But this past year we introduced a new organic product line, Figo! Organic Gelato, that is the only organic gelato nationally. We're the only one out there, and that's gotten some great response.

That brand will provide quite a bit of growth in 2014.

2. How about the ice cream side of the business?

Ice cream's been growing at 20 (percent) to 30 percent the last few years. All the flavors are now organic in the line and that's created quite a bit of interest for some new distribution for that brand as well.

3. How will the new facility affect the structure of your operations?

Right now, our operations are quite complicated. We store in one location northeast of Denver, all of our food-service products are manufactured north of Denver, the pint production is in Louisville and the fluid products (including frozen yogurt mixes and soft serve mixes) are in central Denver.

What we'll be doing is consolidating all of that into our (new) site. We won't be able to manufacture all of our fluid products; however, we'll probably pull 30 percent back up here.

4. What broader trends could affect your business this year?

The big trend in the industry is really gelato. They called 2013 "the year of gelato" on the frozen shelves in grocery stores. We saw two other companies beyond us introduce gelato, but no one seems to be following the (genetically modified organism)-free, organic path. So we're seeing that as a continuing opportunity for us in 2014 and beyond.

5. The merger-and-acquisition activity within the natural and organic products industry last year resulted in area firms WhiteWave Foods and Boulder Brands snapping up other companies — including Boulder's EVOL Foods. Do you envision such an exit for Boulder Homemade?

Eventually we're hoping get to a growth position where we actually create some interest in that M&A area where somebody comes along and says, "You've done a great job" and (makes a sale offer).

— Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace