The ABC morning talk show co-host and her collaborators offer their own State of the Union address

Tuesday night saw President Obama address the nation in his final State of the Union speech, and on Wednesday morning it was Whoopi Goldberg and her “View” cohorts’ turn to assess Obama’s performance as chief executive.

Spoiler alert: By and large, they gave him a big collective thumbs-up.

Goldberg praised Obama’s economic record, opining that he’s left the country in much better shape than he found it.

See Video: Rand Paul Tells 'The View' Co-Hosts Why Semi-Automatic Weapons Should Stay Legal

“I remember what the 401(k) looked like when he came into office,” Goldberg offered. “There is no way around the fact that he did fix it. You may not like how he did it, but he did it, because everybody’s 401(k) is in a better place than it was. And those are facts.”

Goldberg continued, “He’s not leaving a poop storm for the next person coming in that he was left. And he was left a real poop storm.”

Then it was Joy Behar‘s turn to chime in.

See Video: 'The View' Rips Trump Ad for Using Morocco as Mexico

“And yet there’s so many people in this country who don’t agree with that, who believe that he hasn’t done a great job. It’s right there in their face in my opinion,” Behar offered.”I don’t understand that disgruntledness, frankly.”

Likewise, on the healthcare front, Goldberg gave Obamacare a rave review.

“I will speak for the small amount of people that I know who had no health care, who had no way to take care of their kids,” Goldberg said. “They’re really happy about it.”

And, she cautioned, opponents of Obamacare would be wise to accept it.

Also Read: Don't Forget Who Killed Bin Laden: 5 Takeaways From Obama's Last State of the Union

“You’re not going to be able to get rid of it. That’s the thing you have to understand. You’re not going to be able to get rid of it because too many people now need it,” Goldberg said. “It may not be what you need, but it’s what we need as a nation. We don’t always get to have what we want.”

Raven-Symoné, meanwhile, lamented the divisiveness in which the nation has found itself mired.

“In America, we only tend to come together when there’s a problem … but after that, we go right back to fighting each other, and we go right back to accusing one another of crazy things. I’m sorry, what kind of country do we live in?” Raven-Symoné marveled. “I’m trying to have a baby and grow up and let them live in a country that Obama described last night.”

“You’re trying to have a baby? I never heard this,” Behar responded, which earned a rapid pivot from Raven-Symoné.

“Back to politics, ladies!” Raven-Symoné responded.

Obama First-Date Movie 'Southside With You' Reveals First Look (Photos) IM Global has released the first images from itsÂ film depicting the first date of Barack and Michelle Obama, "Southside With You." The film covers the First Couple's first night out in 1989 when a young associate named Barack Obama (Parker Sawyers) triedÂ to woo lawyer Michelle Robinson (Tika Sumpter) one summer day. They went toÂ the Art Institute of Chicago, then a screening of Spike Lee's "Do the Right Thing" and finallyÂ to an ice cream parlor, where they shared their first kiss. "Also: "HBO Richard Tanne will makeÂ his directorial debut onÂ the project from his own screenplay. IM Global is producing along withÂ State Street Pictures, the production company behind the "Barbershop" franchise. See the photos below. President Barack Obama Speaks at DreamWorks (Photos) President Obama quotes Roger Ebert in speech about the economy. “I was fortunate enough to get to know Roger, and was always inspired by how he handled some really tough stuff,” Obama said. “He said, ‘Kindness covers all of my political beliefs.’ … When I think about what I’m fighting for, what gets me up every single day — that captures it.” “Believe it or not, entertainment is, in some ways, part of American diplomacy,” he said. “Entertainment is one of America’s biggest exports.” President Obama greets the crowd after finishing his speech. President Obama gets a kiss from a supporter while greeting the crowd after stepping down from the podium. President Obama watches Steve Martin and Jim Parsons perform their voices for characters in DreamWorks Animation production "Home." President Obama visits actors Steve Martin and Jim Parsons on the set of upcoming DreamWorks animation film "Home." President Obama gives Steve Martin some bow. President Obama on the set of "How to Train Your Dragon 2." President Obama with "How to Train Your Dragon 2" director Dean DeBlois. President Obama observes the motion-capture process with DreamWorks animation CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg. President Obama applauds motion capture performers on the set of "How to Train Your Dragon 2." Previous ; Next 1 of 12 The POTUS toured the animation studio in Glendale on Tuesday before giving a speech on the nation’s economy President Obama quotes Roger Ebert in speech about the economy. Richard Tanne will makeÂ his directorial debut onÂ the project from his own screenplay. IM Global is producing along withÂ State Street Pictures, the production company behind the "Barbershop" franchise. See the photos below.

Previous ; Next 1 of 1 Film tells story of First Couple’s inaugural day together in 1989 IM Global has released the first images from itsÂ film depicting the first date of Barack and Michelle Obama, "Southside With You." The film covers the First Couple's first night out in 1989 when a young associate named Barack Obama (Parker Sawyers) triedÂ to woo lawyer Michelle Robinson (Tika Sumpter) one summer day. They went toÂ the Art Institute of Chicago, then a screening of Spike Lee's "Do the Right Thing" and finallyÂ to an ice cream parlor, where they shared their first kiss. "Also: "HBO Richard Tanne will makeÂ his directorial debut onÂ the project from his own screenplay. IM Global is producing along withÂ State Street Pictures, the production company behind the "Barbershop" franchise. See the photos below. President Barack Obama Speaks at DreamWorks (Photos) President Obama quotes Roger Ebert in speech about the economy.

“I was fortunate enough to get to know Roger, and was always inspired by how he handled some really tough stuff,” Obama said. “He said, ‘Kindness covers all of my political beliefs.’ … When I think about what I’m fighting for, what gets me up every single day — that captures it.”

“Believe it or not, entertainment is, in some ways, part of American diplomacy,” he said. “Entertainment is one of America’s biggest exports.”

President Obama greets the crowd after finishing his speech.

President Obama gets a kiss from a supporter while greeting the crowd after stepping down from the podium.

President Obama watches Steve Martin and Jim Parsons perform their voices for characters in DreamWorks Animation production "Home."

President Obama visits actors Steve Martin and Jim Parsons on the set of upcoming DreamWorks animation film "Home."

President Obama gives Steve Martin some bow.

President Obama on the set of "How to Train Your Dragon 2."

President Obama with "How to Train Your Dragon 2" director Dean DeBlois.

President Obama observes the motion-capture process with DreamWorks animation CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg.

President Obama applauds motion capture performers on the set of "How to Train Your Dragon 2." Previous ; Next 1 of 12 The POTUS toured the animation studio in Glendale on Tuesday before giving a speech on the nation’s economy President Obama quotes Roger Ebert in speech about the economy. Richard Tanne will makeÂ his directorial debut onÂ the project from his own screenplay. IM Global is producing along withÂ State Street Pictures, the production company behind the "Barbershop" franchise. See the photos below.