LANSING, MI – Open enrollment on the federal health exchange starts Nov. 15 and even those already enrolled will want to take a second look to avoid possible tax penalties, experts say.

If an enrollee’s family size or income has changed, the amount of subsidy for which they're eligible may have changed as well. That could go two ways: either somebody could be receiving less than they’re eligible for, or they could accidentally be claiming more than they should be getting.

“If that were to happen then when you file your taxes the following year you would need to pay back the amount that you owed the government,” said Get Covered America National President Anne Filipic.

Her organization is a non-profit working to get people enrolled in the exchange nationally, but also urging people already enrolled to register any changes that could affect their subsidy levels.

Another reason existing enrollees may want to hop back on this year is because there’s more to see. For example, the federally run marketplace will offer 18 health insurance companies, five more than participated last year, according to the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan Vice President of Communications Andy Hetzel said the company, which participated last year as well, is offering more plans this time around. Many are.

“What people who enrolled in plans last year will see is that competition in Michigan has increased. There are more choices of plan options available to them and their subsidy levels may have changed. So just because you may have enrolled in a plan last year doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t do your homework this year,” Hetzel said.

The enrollment period for coverage starting in 2015 is much shorter than it was last year. It runs from Nov. 15 to Feb. 15.

Get Covered America is also aiming to enroll more people who have not previously enrolled in the exchange. Filipic said from the last enrollment period they learned that people who used in-person assisters to enroll were twice as likely to complete the process as folks who logged in online. Because of this, Get Covered America is recruiting 75 more of those volunteers in Michigan.

“There are hundreds of thousands of folks in Michigan that we know are eligible and did not enroll the first time,” Filipic said.

For those with no insurance, the penalties are increasing this year. In 2014 you had to pay the higher amount: $95 per person for the year or 1 percent of your yearly household income. In 2015, people without health insurance have to pay the higher of $325 per person for the year or 2 percent of their annual income. In both years, the penalty for uninsured children is half-price.

People pay the penalties on their taxes for the year in which they are uninsured. The fee is slated to increase every year.

“You don’t want to pay a significant tax penalty form the IRS essentially to own no financial protection and no health care protection,” Hetzel said.

But for folks who do take the time to navigate or re-navigate the exchange, the subsidies are significant, Filipic said. For those having to re-do some of the work they did last year, “I think it’s well worth taking those few minutes to update it,” she said.

While the exchange doesn't open until Nov. 15, people can learn more about subsidies and start making plans for next year at healthcare.gov.

Emily Lawler is a Capital/Lansing business reporter for MLive. You can reach her at elawler@mlive.com, subscribe to her on Facebook or follow her on Twitter: @emilyjanelawler.