Maria Ramirez, a teacher at Angevine Middle School in Lafayette, is one of eight caring people who will be honored Thursday at the 26th annual Multicultural Awards Banquet. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Related Stories Meet those who make a difference in Boulder County

If you go What: 26th annual Multicultural Awards Banquet When: Thursday, Oct. 2. Reception, 6 p.m.; dinner, 7 p.m. Where: Best Western Plus Plaza Hotel, 1900 Ken Pratt Blvd., Longmont Tickets: $65 a person Info: 303-441-3976 or sgoetz@bouldercounty.org

Maria Ramirez knows the children she teaches.

She also knows their families.

"I know a lot of these families personally," said Ramirez, who worked in child care for 10-plus years before embarking on a teaching career that is in its 30th year. "I go to their homes. I eat dinner with them. When it's winter, they let me stay with them because I live in Brighton.

"So I know their struggles, and I know a lot of kids would love to have a better future, even though family is important to them and they love them."

Ramirez, 58, teaches at Angevine Middle School in Lafayette and is an award-winning educator, teacher, poet, and activist. In 1995, she was chosen Colorado Bilingual Teacher of the Year; in 1996, she was selected the National Bilingual Teacher of the Year.

She will be honored again Thursday at the 2014 Multicultural Awards Banquet at the Best Western Plus Plaza Hotel, 1900 Ken Pratt Blvd., in Longmont.

The Multicultural Awards, presented by Boulder County's Community Action Program, honor people of different ethnic backgrounds who have made significant contributions to Boulder County in the areas of arts, business, community service, education, government, health, partners, science and youth.

Ramirez was honored for her work in education. The other honorees:

• Art: Tamil Maldonado, Boulder

• Business: Jose Beteta, Boulder

• Community Service: Jann Oldham, Lousiville

• Government: Christina Pacheco, Lafayette

• Health: Yanina Gomez, Longmont

• Partners: Kirsten Wilson, Boulder

• Youth: Naat'áanii Todea, Boulder

For the past six years, Ramirez has taught in the English Language Development (ELD) program. In her ELD role, Ramirez works with students who might have arrived in the United States with very little English skills or might have significant emotional, social or behavioral problems. Her goal is to provide these students with the skills and encouragement they need to be successful and to be proud of their cultural heritage.

"I love it, but it's challenging because these kiddos come to me that are behind in their reading — they can't do the reading if they don't have the language — so they fall behind a bit academically," she says "... It's just a challenge to try to get them there, to support the teachers, and to get them what they need with all their diverse needs."

Ramirez created monthly ELD parent meetings as a way for parents to be heard and advocate on behalf of their children. These meetings also have helped build bridges to other parent organizations and strengthened relationships among families at Angevine.

Ramirez has cofounded Club Mestizo, an afterschool program that meets once a week and offers classes for students with Su Teatro Cultural and Performing Arts Center, a professional theater group in Denver. Whether the students are peforming in Lafayette or Denver, the goal is for them to gain a transformative life experience through arts training, while increasing self-esteem, and learning to work cooperatively.

"I like the fact that I believe that I make a difference in their lives," Ramirez said. "It is very challenging, yet I love doing it because I push them. I make them see that education is the key for them to have a better future, because the majority of them are like I was, struggling financially with their families."

Ramirez was born and raised in Texas but later moved to Oregon as a migrant worker. She came to Colorado in the 1980s to go to college. She graduated from Metropolitan State University in Denver with a Bachelor of Arts in education with a bilingual minor and then earned a Masters of Arts in Bilingual Special Education from the University of Colorado-Boulder.

She faced poverty finishing college while caring for her oldest daughter, who was 3 at the time. Ramirez now has three daughters. The oldest is a bilingual teacher in Denver, the middle child is working for a Denver law firm and the youngest lives in Florida with her two young daughters. In all, Ramirez has 11 grandchildren.

"It's great to be a grandmother," she said. "It's like getting a second chance to do all the things you wanted to do with your own daughter that you couldn't."

And working at Angevine has allowed Ramirez to provide assistance to those who need it.

For instance, she founded the Angevine poetry club, which helps students gain language skills and learn how to express themselves. Ramirez uses her own voice to help overcome barriers and inequities and helps students to find their own voice on the way to a better future.

She teaches students in Grades 6-8 who range in age from 10 to 14.

"They are in a time when they are beginning to grow into adolescence and want to be popular and yet try to do what's right — and peer pressure is there" Ramirez said. "I remind them of how hard their parents work and the sacrifices they have made to come to this country.

"Some of them stray off a little bit, or a lot, and so that's the struggle as the teacher — to try and keep them focused. The majority of these kids are going to take longer, and the chances of them succeeding diminish if they don't take it seriously or do the work."

Ramirez has taught hundreds, and her teaching experience ranges from day care to college to parent language training.

"It has been quite a journey," she said.

Certainly a successful and fulfilling one.