War relic: Commuters pass the air raid shelter sign uncovered at Town Hall station. Photo: Getty Images/Brendon Thorne

It was painted at a fearful time when the threat of Japanese bombing raids hung in the air and train commuters had more to worry about than minding the gap.

A sign at Town Hall station pointing to a World War II air raid shelter has been discovered under layers of paint by workers carrying out upgrades, providing a sobering reminder of the wartime anxiety that gripped Sydney 75 years ago.

National Trust NSW advocacy director Graham Quint has called on Sydney Trains to make sure the sign, on a steel staircase beam leading to platforms 1 and 2, is preserved.

A war time photo of the shelter at St James station.

“It is very important evidence of the use of … railway stations as emergency shelter during World War II, and in fact it may be the only evidence,” he said.

Advertisement

“It would become a landmark at Town Hall station … we want to see this safeguarded.”

A Sydney Trains spokesman said the sign is temporarily sealed off until heritage advice is obtained.

Deep, unused railway tunnels at several inner-city stations were considered ideal bomb shelters during World War II. Sydney Trains says it is “unaware of any other residual signage”.

At St James station, a locked steel gate from the southern disused platform leads to a tunnel which was intended as an air raid shelter. According to NSW Environment and Heritage it includes concrete blast doors and walls and “historic graffiti dating from the war years”.

Although Sydney was never bombed from the air, Mr Quint said people may have hurried to the tunnels during drills or following the Japanese midget submarine attack on Sydney Harbour in May, 1942.

Other bomb shelters still dot Sydney, including at Cockatoo Island, the Eveleigh railway workshops and Luna Park Reserve.

At Waterloo Town Hall, now used as a library, a bomb shelter at the rear of the building was converted into an office.

Bill Phippen, of the Australian Railway Historical Society NSW, said to uncover something as ephemeral as a sign painted on a wall was unusual. “It’s quite amazing that after 100 coats of paint, it’s still there,” he said.