California is ahead of many states when it comes to health insurance coverage. Because it has embraced the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to its fullest potential, California is leading the way for a new era of accessible health insurance coverage. As a result of the Affordable Care Act, over a million and a half Californians now have new financial assistance to afford health coverage. With one in 10 Americans living in California, our success here will determine the success for the nation’s future.

The ACA empowers state-run health insurance marketplaces thereby allowing Americans access to affordable health coverage insurance. This means healthier people will have access to a doctor while fewer tax dollars are spent on unnecessary emergency room visits.

It has also offered the opportunity for young adults to gain affordable health coverage through common sense provisions included in the law. Over 3 million young Americans in the U.S. can remain on their parent’s plans until the age of 26. Across the nation, the 17 million children that were denied health care coverage under the old system because of their pre-existing conditions will now get covered.

The ACA is also strengthening California’s Medi-Cal, allowing families struggling financially the opportunity to gain health care coverage. We are one of a few states in the nation to take full advantage of the opportunity provided through the ACA.

Last year, local governments, public officials and I hosted town hall meetings to discuss the ACA in California. These meetings gave residents the opportunity to learn and ask experts questions about the new changes in health coverage in the state.

In San Bernardino County alone, 31,837 residents have already enrolled in the county’s low-income health program. In the 35th Congressional District which I represent, more than 40,000 people are now eligible for Medi-Cal.

Small-business owners are seeing the benefits of the ACA through tax credits while older Americans and those with disabilities are benefiting from the ACA through provisions cutting unnecessary administrative costs in Medicare. As a result, prescriptions drug costs have dropped saving Medicare beneficiaries on average $635 a year. In the 35th Congressional District alone, 59,000 seniors are now eligible for Medicare preventive services without paying any co-pays, coinsurance or deductibles.

There have been many attempts by House Republicans to defund, repeal and amend the Affordable Care Act — 48 times, to be exact. I voted against the attempts because supporting such legislation would mean taking away affordable health care coverage to thousands of San Bernardino County’s children, adults and seniors. For the 35th District, this would mean 34,000 children and 52,000 women going without health insurance if the ACA were repealed. This cannot happen!

Receiving quality health care at an affordable cost is what the American people needed and wanted, and it is exactly what the Affordable Care Act delivers. Inland Empire families can continue signing up for health insurance coverage. Open enrollment for plans on the exchange for Californians ends March 31, with enrollment in Medi-Cal open year-round.

Advertisement

As a nation our children will live better because they will have better health coverage. Through the Affordable Care Act, quality health insurance coverage is now accessible to millions of Americans. The law, upheld by the Supreme Court as constitutional, is working in California.

Congresswoman Gloria Negrete McLeod represents the 35th Congressional District, which includes the communities of Bloomington, Chino, Montclair, Ontario, Pomona, and portions of Fontana and Rialto. For health care coverage information, visit CoveredCA.com.