Finally, President Barack Obama has publicly recognized that ISIS is "a perverted interpretation of Islam" and that "this extremist ideology has spread within some Muslim communities." Since "they are a tiny fraction of more than a billion Muslims around the world," as Obama claims, I wish he had issued a clarion call to Muslim countries to marshal their resources and their armies to excise this "cancer" of unspeakable brutality.

Sadly, the solution will not be forthcoming unless we go beyond ISIS and examine the state of Islam in several Islamic countries wherein theocratic authoritarianism reigns supreme: women are subjugated; barbaric forms of punishment are meted out to free thinkers and apostates; infidels are barely tolerated, more often persecuted; intolerant versions of Islam are exported and financially supported; and hatred for the other, especially Western civilization and Jews, is inculcated from youth.

Unless these Islamic states subscribe to "religious tolerance, mutual respect and human dignity," as the president obliquely recognized, we can expect other ISISs with another name to sprout from this intolerant "soil." It is an Islamic problem which demands an Islamic solution.

Mervyn D'Souza

Edison

Time for women to advocate for health care access

Last year, the Supreme Court decided in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby that for-profit employers can use religious exemptions to avoid paying for contraceptive coverage under the Affordable Care Act. Soon after the decision was handed down, pro-choice protestors descended upon the grand opening of a Hobby Lobby store in New Jersey. Some of the seasoned protestors held their original and dog-eared NOW (National Organization for Women) signs.



Here we are in 2015 still fighting for equal access to health care for all women. For many years, women's health-care providers have faced a barrage of anti-access legislation at the state level, including restrictions on medication, abortions, bans on private insurance coverage and unduly burdensome doctor and clinic regulations. Many providers have been forced to close their doors making it increasingly difficult for women to access health care. As evidenced last week in Colorado, anti-choice extremists will go to frightening lengths to limit choice.



Supporters of equal access to women's health care must set aside complacency and join forces with women like those who held their NOW signs in the 1970s and who still hold them today. We cannot assume that the right to control our own reproductive destiny or to access affordable and quality health care is a given.

Mandi Perlmutter is Coordinator of Advocacy and Community Engagement for the National Council of Jewish Women Essex County Section.

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @starledger. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.