The HealthCare.gov site is displayed on a laptop screen Nov. 12 in Portland, Ore. (Photo: Don Ryan, AP)

Sign-ups have generally gone more smoothly than last year for HealthCare.gov, although some consumers and insurance agents are having problems with the site that are reminiscent of last fall's open enrollment experiences.

Numerous log-in and password failures were reported Monday, but federal officials call these cases the exception.

Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said Monday that 1 million people had logged onto HealthCare.gov over the weekend. HHS officials say account unlocks and password resets happen almost immediately most of the time.

"Earlier today, we saw an issue and fixed it. Consumers are able to log in to their accounts and create applications. We have built a system designed to identify and fix issues as they arise," said Lori Lodes, spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the part of HHS that runs the federal exchange.

By 2 p.m., Wichita Falls, Texas, insurance agent Kelly Fristoe posted an anguished message on his Facebook page.

"They said this wasn't supposed to happen," wrote Fristoe, who included a screen shot of the screen telling him the site was overloaded. "Well, it's happening."

Fristoe has 50 people who asked for his company's help, but he hasn't been able to sign anyone up because of password or user name problems. Clients would forget one of the three security questions — or answer with lower-case letters or abbreviations — and he says their issue would be forwarded to the call center. Those lines were either busy or, in one case, required a 54-minute hold.

In Brick, N.J., Brian Shannon wanted to renew the plan he got on HealthCare.gov last year for himself and his wife. He spent most of the weekend trying to reset his password and get on the site.

"My experience this year is identical to my experience this time last year," Shannon wrote in an e-mail.

Late Monday, Shannon tried to log back on to see if access to his account had been fixed, and he got the same "overload" message many got last year: "HealthCare.gov has a lot of visitors right now!"

HHS says most consumers are successfully resetting their passwords online and retrieving their user names, if they forgot them, and the call center has been able to help the overwhelming majority.

Retail commerce expert Kevin Sterneckert, a former Gartner Group analyst, said the call center shouldn't be involved at all with password or user name resetting. Major financial institutions don't require customers to call in to get their passwords or user names reset, and the practice is more susceptible to hacking than changing them online, he says.

Health insurance information may be "sensitive, but it's not your bank account," says Sterneckert, chief marketing officer for OrderDynamics, a retail software provider. He says the fact that 200,000 people had to contact the call center, as Burwell tweeted, is an unnecessary burden for consumers and the site.

Officials said some of the cases are because consumers can't recall their user names and some are because of simple miscommunication.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Here's advice on how to prepare and sign up for health insurance under Obamacare. (News, USA TODAY)

Several problems were reported across the country.

•In San Antonio, agent Justin Holland said there were some delays as agents tried to help clients. The site would pause, or they would get an error message. "It looks like there are some bugs and glitches in there," he said.

•In Richmond, Ind., agent Tyler Vanderpool of RMD/Patti Insurance said HealthCare.gov was slow, probably because "everybody's trying to jump on there." He used insurer websites to shop and get quotes because the sites responded faster, probably because they weren't getting as much traffic. "I don't know if (HealthCare.gov) has ever been prepared for the volume," Vanderpool said.

•In Tennessee, Shervin Eftekhari, president of Zander Insurance Group, got a warning on HealthCare.gov that the site was really busy just as he was contacted by USA TODAY. He had seen problems throughout the day, but he said, "If you stick with it and hit refresh, eventually it lets you in."

•In Naples, Fla., Wayne Sakamoto asked a client who is also an early morning type to meet him at his office at 6 a.m. Saturday, so he wouldn't face delays. He was able to get the client into a plan, slowed only by numerous questions requiring verification of income.

"It was a successful experience," Sakamato says. He's going to ask all clients to come in around 7 a.m.

As Fristoe posted on Facebook Monday: "There's only 720 hours between November 15th and December 15th to (get) people enrolled and re-enrolled for a January 1st effective date. Ain't nobody got time for this."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1uHwWgU