Next week, Tupelo residents will have an opportunity to extend a program unique to the All-America City that has improved the quality of life in this area over the past 25 years. Tupelo’s unique Major Thoroughfare Program is up for renewal Tuesday, May 3, as city residents head to the polls to vote to renew the program for a sixth time.

Since 1991, this program has widened and improved the city’s major roadways and even built some new ones to alleviate traffic congestion.

While I wasn’t here at the time, I often hear people refer to the constant backlog of traffic around parts of the city prior to some of the improvements done through the Major Thoroughfare Program. At that time, Tupelo had been steadily growing. The city absorbed an additional 6,700 residents between 1980 and 1990 – an increase of 28 percent – as well as a substantial surge in commercial development.

But the city’s network of mostly two-lane roads hadn’t changed much over the years, and the extra traffic load threatened to choke various parts of the community.

The city needed to widen its roads and intersections. But an undertaking that vast would take serious money – millions of dollars – and the general fund budget couldn’t support it.

City leaders got together then and hatched a plan. They formed a committee to compile a list of major thoroughfare needs – both long and short term – that eventually totaled $96 million. From that list, city leaders set priorities and established a funding plan. They’d decided to pay for the work through a 10-mill property tax levy tacked onto the city’s existing 19.97 mills.

The group also decided to appoint an oversight committee to manage the program, later dubbed the Major Thoroughfare Program.

The tax that drives the funding amounts to $1 for every thousand dollars of assessed property. Somebody with a $100,000 house, for example, pays $100 annually for the program along with regular property taxes. The money is collected each tax season, from December to early February, and deposited into a special account.

All money raised is spent by the Major Thoroughfare Committee, a 19-member group made up of volunteer citizens appointed by the mayor and City Council to oversee the program.

The members meet monthly with a project manager, a head engineer and the city’s chief financial officer to monitor the program’s implementation and to plan additional work.

To determine what work needs to be done with the funds, members consult traffic studies, accident reports and direct feedback from community members.

The list of possible projects for Phase VI of the program was compiled using a combination of traffic studies estimating the area’s needs in the next 10 to 20 years, as well as significant public involvement, such as responses from 600 public surveys conducted at meetings and online.

Planned projects for the upcoming phase include items all over the city ranging from adding right-hand turn lanes at certain places on North Gloster Street to alleviate traffic backups from people turning into the shopping centers to widening West Jackson Street between the stretch of Clayton and Robins streets.

This phase also includes some traffic signal timing and optimization work for the city’s two biggest arterial roadways – Main and Gloster streets. That project would work to link traffic signals to available fiber optic cable infrastructure and implement signal timing plans.

Anyone who has ever been stopped at, what seems like at times, every single stop light on one of those roads will appreciate this part of the program – myself included. Phase VI also includes dedicating $5 million of the funds for maintenance of the city’s arterial and major collector roads. These include roadways like Barnes Crossing Road, Cliff Gookin Boulevard and Lawndale Drive, among others, that see a high volume of traffic every day and feed into major thoroughfares in the city.

It’s worth noting that, not unlike the rest of the program, those funds can’t be moved around or used to improve roadways that aren’t on a predetermined and approved list. Rest assured, those funds won’t be used to improve basic neighborhood streets, which fall under the purview of the city to repair, or the street in front of the home of a committee member or city official.

Maintaining those arterial and collector roads now in order for them to be able to successfully and safely move motorists throughout our city for years to come is and should be a top priority.

The Major Thoroughfare Program was created with the intent to anticipate and facilitate growth in Tupelo – undoubtedly one of the major hubs of Northeast Mississippi. The program is unique to Tupelo because many cities across our region and state don’t have such a vehicle to pay for improving the major arteries that keep traffic flowing into, around and out of their cities. Thanks to five successful rounds of phases and numerous roadway improvement projects, Tupelo is a much better place to get around in than it was prior to the program’s creation.

But the demands of economic growth remain and are just as vital now as they were in 1991 when the program was first created.

In order for us to continue thriving, our city must be supported by good infrastructure planning that is executed effectively and financed responsibly with significant oversight.

A vote to renew the Major Thoroughfare Program for a sixth time will keep Tupelo on the right course to achieving those goals.

Rod Guajardo is editor of the Daily Journal. Connect with him through Twitter: @rodgjournal, by email: rod.guajardo@journalinc.com or by phone: (662) 678-1579.