Tapped to introduce Scott Walker at Joey’s Diner in Amherst, Cliff Hurst was ready to uncork a classic stem-winder. After a glance at the packed eatery, he opted to keep it short.And so, without further ado, he made way for the Republican presidential hopeful.A lot of folks are now being introduced in New Hampshire as “the next President of the United States.”Sometimes it ends with a plea to donate to the candidate. Or to like them, really “like” them, on social media.And then it’s “on with the show, this is it.”As Hurst demonstrated last month, people do not show up to pick over the appetizer: They want the hot main plate.It’s an honor to be chosen to introduce a candidate. Sometimes these opening remarks are abbreviated. Sen. John McCain, the two-time New Hampshire primary victor, was known to dislike a lengthy opener.At a business roundtable in Portsmouth earlier this year, former Virginia Sen. Jim Webb, who is running for the Democratic nomination, interrupted his friend’s verbose introduction to jump into his own remarks.At New England College, undergraduate students are given the privilege of introducing presidential hopefuls.Wayne Lesperance, a political professor at NEC, says he cannot think of another instance in which a candidate walked into a room to their own theme song. He’s referring to Donald J. Trump, who spoke at the college on April 27. He walked in to “Money, Money, Money,” the song used on “Celebrity Apprentice.” The place was jam-packed, and Trump’s stroll to the front of the room was synched to the music’s fade.“It was a little surreal, frankly,” Lesperance said.Some of these presidential candidates are so well-known they really need no introduction. A good introduction depends on a number of things, according to Lesperance, who has made a few himself. He recalled introducing Rudy Giuliani with this line: “Now America’s Mayor wants to be America’s President ....”Introductions vary by candidate and by setting, he said.Brevity, particularly when audience members have been waiting for some time in a stuffy room, can be more than just the soul of wit. Sometimes, for a campaign surrogate introducing the candidate, it’s a quick call to action, like “get out and vote,” Lesperance notes.When Hillary Clinton held her first town hall meeting in New Hampshire in July, the introductory honors went to former Dover Mayor George Maglaras, now a county commissioner.Maglaras is an old Clinton friend. He was there when Bill Clinton gave his “last dog dies” speech at the Elks Lodge in Dover almost a quarter century ago.“We all know why we’re here,” Maglaras said, a nod to the Clinton family connection to the Garrison City.With a touch of humor, Maglaras offered, “I was told to mention a lot of things, but I’m not going to do that.”A local marina owner, Maglaras talked about the economy. “A rising tide floats all boats,” he said. “We need a new rising tide in America and it’s my privilege to introduce to you that person who’s going to bring us that tide: Hillary Rodham Clinton, the next President of the United States.”He spoke for nearly four minutes before handing over the microphone to the Democratic presidential hopeful at Dover City Hall.At recent stops in Franklin and Milford, N.J., Gov. Chris Christie was introduced by Merrimack County Sheriff Scott E. Hilliard and Paul Chevalier, respectively. Local and state dignitaries sometimes get the nod to welcome a candidate.Juliana Bergeron, a Republican national committeewoman, introduced Ohio Gov. John Kasich and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush when they spoke in Keene, her home city. She remains neutral in the primary because of her RNC role, but her introductions carry a certain gravitas.When Trump spoke earlier this summer in Laconia, his Belknap County leadership team spoke before the candidate. Who had the honor of introducing him? Matthew Ciepielowski, Trump’s state director, recalled that Trump took the stage to a VOG announcement.VOG? It’s an acronym for a booming, energetic announcement, usually pre-recorded. It stands for Voice of God.dtuohy@unionleader.com