Piers Morgan, the former CNN host who once appeared to be truly in love with President Obama, recently trashed the President in column for the British Daily Mail newspaper. After the network cancelled his talk show in March, Morgan remained under contract until September and then returned to his native Britain, where he writes a Daily Mail column.

Morgan has never been a man of integrity; his entire career has been built upon a relentless quest for personal publicity and a willingness to promote any political agenda, if it pleases whomever happens to be signing his paychecks at the time. Thus, he was a perfect fit for CNN, a network that slavishly praises President Obama’s every breath and encourages it’s show hosts and reporters to denigrate the Constitution at every opportunity. The network’s Progressive, anti-American agenda – which almost puts MSNBC to shame – has assured it two things; firstly, that its remain in the gutter, where they have been for years and, secondly, that there is no shortage of unprincipled publicity-hounds who need to make a buck and are willing to shoot their mouths off in front of the CNN audience, which can basically be calculated as everyone in the country who isn’t watching Fox News, minus a handful of people who are so delusional that they are watching MSNBC.

That, in a nut-shell, is the story of how Piers Morgan ended up working as a host at CNN. Morgan can be eloquent, sarcastic and quite the wordsmith, but he will say whatever his paymaster du jour wants him to say, even if he knows that it’s all lies. Even for Morgan, however, the cheap deceptions coming from the White House were, at times, so blatant as to be beyond the pale. In November 2013, while hosting his show, Morgan took the President to task for lying about what Obamacare would do for ordinary Americans. “I find it very difficult, this ObamaCare thing,” said Morgan, “when I see the repeated footage of him [Obama] standing there saying ‘you can keep your doctor, you can keep your plan,’ just telling an outright porky pie to the American public. I don’t like it. It’s not the Barack Obama that I expected.” Morgan, being from the United Kingdom, knows better; when the government controls the healthcare system and, therefore, the cost of healthcare, the ordinary person does not get to make any choices about doctors, plans, what hospital to visit or anything else.

Never before, however, has Piers Morgan actually trashed Obama. In his October 1 column for the Daily Mail, however, that is exactly what the former CNN host did. The main focus of Morgan’s ire appears to be Obama’s recent attempt to shift the blame for a major policy failure. The President has built a much-deserved reputation for blaming everyone and everything else for every setback, scandal, lie and spectacular failure that has frequently originated directly from the White House. Indeed, it was beginning to look as if George W. Bush had actually continued to run the country for some three years after the end of his second term, since he was still, apparently, responsible for every problem – even after Obama’s nearly 800 trillion-dollar ‘stimulus’ and two years of a Congress completely controlled by the President’s own party.

Recently, the President used a 60 Minutes interview to attempt to shift the blame for his failure to address the threat of the Islamic State onto his intelligence services. Having ignored warnings about ISIS for a year – during which time the President attended less than half of his daily security briefings – Obama had the audacity to lay the blame squarely at the feet of his intelligence chief. When asked if the swift gains made by ISIS had come as a surprise, the Commander-in-Chief responded “Well, I think the head of our intelligence community Jim Clapper has acknowledged that, I think they underestimated what had been taking place in Syria.” His use of the word “they,” rather than what would have been the correct word – “we” – is what stood out for many observers, including Piers Morgan, who described Obama’s words as “A more shameless, reprehensible display of buck-passing it would be hard to find from a sitting President.”

Morgan went on to slam the President for his lack of resolve in dealing with the Jihadists, emboldening them to “think they can behead American citizens with impunity in glossy snuff movies.” He went on to say Imagine how emboldened they must have felt when Obama made his ‘heartfelt’ speech about journalist James Foley’s execution, and was then seen laughing and joking on the golf course SEVEN MINUTES later.”

Whatever one’s opinion of Morgan, there can be no doubt that he makes a good point; it is probably true to say that never, in the history of this country, has President displayed such callous lack of regard for the murder, by terrorists, of an American citizen. The former CNN host concluded by stating, in no uncertain terms, what Obama should do, were he a real leader: “It’s time he got off the damn golf course, got up to speed with his intelligence briefings and focused on wiping out ISIS.”

It is truly a wake-up call to the American people when a British journalist – himself a staunch defender of the President – is the one to so succinctly point out the colossal failure to lead. The nation deserves better and, when even Piers Morgan can see that whilst so many Americans still worship Obama almost as a god, the situation has become dire enough to warrant immediate change – by any means and at any cost, since the cost of allowing Barack Obama and his party to remain in power is far higher than any other imaginable.

Opinion by Graham J Noble

Sources:

Daily Mail

USA Today

Newsbusters

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr