That time the line at Jim’s Steaks broke into a Boyz II Men sing-along at 3 a.m.

That time the line at Jim’s Steaks broke into a Boyz II Men sing-along at 3 a.m. May 19

A campaign urging young Americans to say no to Obamacare is using a creepy video to get its message across.

OptOut.org, headed by the right-leaning non-partisan group Generation Opportunity, is a campaign that aims to dissuade audiences – specifically college students – from accepting President Barack Obama’s health care plan. The message:

You are not required to purchase health insurance through an Obamacare exchange! There are cheaper, better options for young people.

The campaign's website features minute-long PSAs (which you can see above) that shows the “dangers” of choosing Obamacare. Young people are led into a doctor’s offices (there are both female and male versions of the ad), where the young person declares that they are choosing Obamacare as their preferred health care coverage. The doctors exchange judgmental glances and from there, sh*t gets weird.

When the doctor leaves the room, a creepy Uncle Sam reminiscent of the Burger King mascot rises from the floor with a speculum (a terrifying tool used by gynecologists) in the female version and a snappy pair of blue latex gloves for the male version. What the commercial seems to imply is that, quite literally, Obamacare is Uncle Sam violating you and your rights to choose. Extreme? We think so.

The ads then encourage visitors to sign their petition that you will opt-out of Obamacare.

Add your voice to those young Americans who know the truth about Obamacare. The more who sign the petition the greater our voice. Opt out!

The campaign is designed to deter young America from signing up for the health care law when the enrollment period for health care exchanges starts on October 1. So what options do they have?

In an interview with Yahoo News discussing the ads, Generation Opportunity's president Evan Feinberg said this:

"What we’re trying to communicate is, 'No, you’re actually not required to buy health insurance,'” Generation Opportunity President Evan Feinberg told Yahoo News in an interview about the campaign. “You might have to pay a fine, but that’s going to be cheaper for you and better for you."

Generation Opportunity claims on their website that they’re “a free-thinking, liberty-loving, national organization of young people promoting the best of Being American: opportunity, creativity and freedom.”

The organization is funded by the billionaire Koch brothers, who have given money to and gathered an empire of independent groups seeking more influence with public policy – and are known for their anti-Obama ways.