Eight entrepreneurial high school seniors organized a TEDx conference, an independent local version of the global TED series of events that aim to share “ideas worth spreading,” at Fountain Valley High School last month.

Student Steven Truong applied to sponsor the conference in May. Three months later, an unrelated group of students gave a presentation on TED during a staff development event where students taught teachers.

When those students found out that Truong had applied for a permit to host a TEDx conference, a planning committee was formed. Because none of the students had ever attended one of the conferences, senior Brittany Lee entered a contest to win tickets to the annual TEDx conference at Orange Coast College in September. She won two tickets to the event, which served as inspiration and a blueprint for Fountain Valley's TEDx.

The biggest obstacle the group faced was finding interesting speakers who would be willing to come speak at the school. The students reached out unsuccessfully to apparel manufacturer and Fountain Valley alum Bob Hurley.

The team tapped contacts they had through family and friends and eventually secured four speakers: Bill Phillips, chief technical officer of NeoSync Inc. in Newport Beach; Jin Yi, CEO of Newport Brain Research Laboratory Inc.; Sabastian Huynh, CEO of Minus Zero in Irvine; and Anna S. Lau, associate professor of psychology at UCLA.

TED rules allow only 100 attendees at local events, unless the host has attended a full-blown TED conference. Parents and teachers showed up, but the sold-out audience was mostly students who paid $5 to attend the event on a Friday night.

— Jordan England-Nelson

New ventures

FieldConnect Inc., a company in Irvine that makes software for mobile workforces, is looking to hire salespeople with experience selling software or mobile technology and developers with Web technology experience to support its expansion. For more information, visit fieldconnect.com and click on the “careers” link.

Official Cali Prime, a streetwear company in Huntington Beach that sells its products at a Montclair skate shop, is now going directly to consumers with a website, online store and its first clothing line at officialcaliprime.com.

SwitchRay Inc., an Internet phone service company in Mission Viejo, acquired the rights to market and sell Voice Over Internet Protocol products made by Aloe Systems Inc., a telecom software developer in Toronto. Aloe continues to be an authorized sales agent for SwitchRay. Aloe software license, maintenance and support service agreements have been assigned to SwitchRay.

KBS Strategic Opportunity REIT, a real estate investment trust in Newport Beach, bought the Maitland Promenade II, a 230,366-square-foot office building in Orlando, Fla., for $31.2 million.

True South Renewables, a solar operations and maintenance business in Huntington Beach, is partnering with Power Pro-Tech Services Inc., a company in Orlando that services power generators, to grow their combined ability to service solar systems and electric-vehicle service equipment. True South acquires the Arizona, California and Colorado field personnel of Power Pro-Tech to bolster its West Coast operations. In the Eastern states, Power Pro-Tech will provide services where True South doesn't have local field personnel.

Leadership

Chad Franks, vice president and general counsel at Decton Inc., a staffing firm in Irvine, will serve on the board of directors of the Orange County Bar Association Charitable Fund, the charitable giving and fundraising arm of the association.

Milestones

Aggios Inc., an Irvine maker of energy management software, will receive $93,000 from the California Energy Commission, the state's energy policy and planning agency, to demonstrate a device that would reduce energy use in television set-top boxes. Aggios was one of 12 small businesses, researchers and entrepreneurs – and the only one from Orange County – to receive funds as part of the commission's Energy Innovations Small Grant Program, which helps bring environmentally safe, reliable and affordable energy services and products to market.

Coming up

Small business leaders can learn about how the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, can affect their companies during a free event at the Fullerton Public Library at 6 p.m. on Thursday. The three-hour session is hosted by SCORE, a nonprofit group affiliated with the U.S. Small Business Administration that provides business advice to entrepreneurs. Topics include penalties, government subsidies and the health insurance marketplace. The library is at 353 West Commonwealth Ave. Registration is recommended. Contact workshops@score114.org for details.

Overheard

"In November, PIMCO lost its top dog status as the world's largest mutual fund." Business Insider's take on a rough year at the Newport Beach investment firm founded by Bill Gross

Contact the writer: 714-796-3589 or ksablan@ocregister.com