The 2016 contest for the White House will get its first official big-name entrant on Monday, in a move likely to upend the dynamics of the nascent presidential race.

Sen. Ted Cruz, the combative conservative who has made liberty the clarion call of his politics, will announce his intention to pursue a presidential bid Monday morning at Liberty University in Lynchburg, according to a tweet he sent Sunday evening: 'I am running for president'; formal speech to come Monday.

The announcement by Cruz, R-Tex., will make him the first major 2016 contender to formally declare. By skipping the step of forming an exploratory committee and jumping right into the race, he is providing a jolt to a field that has so far been relatively sleepy and potentially pressuring other candidates to step closer to making their own announcements. His entry will also give other Republican contenders — including Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and former Florida governor Jeb Bush — a competitive rival on the right.

Cruz, 44, a Harvard-and-Princeton-educated lawyer who was elected to the Senate in 2012, is best known for championing controversial efforts to block implementation of President Obama's health-care law in 2013. The crusade led to a 16-day government shutdown.

Cruz's unrepentant battles against the Obama administration and with leaders of his own party have made him a hero to many conservatives and left him with a powerful national network of small-dollar donors. He will aim to raise $40 million to $50 million for his presidential bid.

Advisers said that in coming weeks, as he launches his campaign in states with early caucuses and primaries, Cruz plans to build upon that base of support and cast himself as an uncompromising GOP conservative who has challenged both parties during his short time in Washington.

The Houston Chronicle first reported his planned announcement, and Cruz was expected to call attention to his decision in a Twitter message early on Monday, aides said.

Speaking over the past month to voters in early primary states and college students at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference, Cruz has previewed what his campaign will aim to look like: a grass-roots movement that spreads nationwide his message of intransigent conservatism, including repeal of the Affordable Care Act, abolition of the Common Core education standards, opposition to same-sex marriage and a hawkish foreign policy. He has urged people to participate in a "grass-roots guerrilla campaign" modeled on the one that helped propel him to the Senate.

"The only way we're going to make this happen is by building a grass-roots army in New Hampshire and in all 50 states," he said last week in Lincoln, New Hampshire.

Cruz is scheduled to give the convocation at Liberty University on Monday. By selecting the school, a private Christian college founded by the fundamentalist preacher Jerry Falwell, as the site for his announcement, Cruz is sending a clear signal to conservative Republican primary voters about his candidacy and his political positioning heading into the race.

He has assiduously courted evangelicals and other social conservatives as part of an attempt to build a coalition of conservatives frustrated with Republican Party elders in Washington.

The choice of venue also underscores Cruz's intention to actively court young conservatives. Last month, he told a group of mostly 20- and 30-somethings at CPAC to be "entrepreneurs for liberty" and spread his message of conservatism with a smile.

"If we carry young people, we can turn this entire country around," he said.

A Cruz aide said the campaign chose to announce at Liberty because it is the largest Christian university in the world and has an extensive base of activist alumni — many of whom live in Cruz's home state of Texas.

"Liberty enforces a strong message that taking a stand for what is right speaks volumes about character," said the aide, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to comment ahead of Cruz's remarks in Lynchburg. Making the announcement there sends a message that the campaign will compete in the race for evangelicals and social conservatives and not run a conventional operation, the aide said.

When Cruz appeared before an enthusiastic crowd at Liberty last year, he spoke urgently about what he sees as a moment of crisis for religious Americans — and received a standing ovation.

"These are troubled times," Cruz said. "Religious liberty, the very first liberty in the Bill of Rights, the very first protection we have, has never been more in peril than it is right now."

Rep. Steve King, R-Iowa, an influential figure in his state's first-in-the-nation caucuses, said in an interview that he welcomed Cruz's move toward a run and called him an immediately formidable candidate in Iowa, which has a deeply conservative Republican electorate.

"Constitutional conservatives around the country see he is anchored in a fundamental set of values," King said. "There is also no question he is a very smart man, and a lot of presidents did not have his raw computing power."

Cruz, who lives in Houston with his wife, Heidi, and two young daughters, graduated from Princeton University in 1992 and from Harvard Law School in 1995. He went on to serve as an attorney in the George W. Bush administration and later was appointed Texas's solicitor general.

In 2012, after working in private practice, Cruz rattled the Texas Republican establishment when he beat the lieutenant governor, wealthy businessman David Dewhurst, in the state's GOP Senate primary. His primary campaign was aggressively conservative and suspicious of the party's mainstream voices, and it was cheered on by conservative leaders and editorialists in Texas and nationally.

Heidi Cruz, a managing director at Goldman Sachs, will take a leave of absence from her job to campaign with her husband, according to a campaign adviser.

Ted Cruz was born in Canada, but legal experts have said that having a mother who was a U.S. citizen qualifies him as a "natural born" American eligible to be president. Cruz's father, Rafael, left Cuba in 1957. Now a Christian minister, the elder Cruz frequently travels with his son to political events, building relationships with conservative pastors and occasionally introducing the senator to crowds.

Other expected GOP candidates are mulling exploratory committees this month with an eye on formalizing their campaigns in April, once a new federal filing period for political financing begins. Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., a friend of Cruz's and another conservative favorite, is planning a rally in Louisville early next month.