The Oasis of Praise (TOP) Ministries is committed to changing people’s lives using a freedom-oriented strategy — offer a nondenominational worship experience that is free from judgment and encourages free praise.

This is a narrative shared not just by the church’s leadership, but by the congregation as well, including those who have been at the church for several decades, and affirmed that though their lives have been anything but perfect, they’ve become better because of the church.

“What makes us special is our love of God and our love for people,” said Senior Pastor William T. Bael III. “Most people when they come, they say it feels different. And it’s not just an act. We believe Jesus is love. We believe Jesus is a healer. [And] we believe in the need to get in touch with God, then we feel the love of God.”

TOP helps people in this journey, largely with professional counseling. Bael said several on the ministerial staff have been trained to administer counseling and do so as people request it. If an issue, is beyond the scope of what they can offer, he said the church will connect them with other resources that can help.

“When I first came here, I was very wounded,” said Jacqueline Hooper, a TOP member for nine years. “I was in a crazy relationship and it broke my heart. Life itself broke me down. [But] pastor and the elders — they took their time and ministered to me. The love they showed me was overwhelming.”

Hooper detailed that when she “needed counseling, she got it” and several times when she needed prayer, the pastor and congregation were there to wrap around her with prayer. Beyond the spiritual aspect, she shared she was also in financial need when she joined the church. TOP answered that as well, giving her money when she was unable to afford her medicine, providing food and helping her with transportation.

To further help her in the future, Hooper said one of the other members, Sister Terri, “took time with me to show me how to budget on time with my bills. They care about your whole life.”

Chris Jones, 25, grew up at TOP. And although he said he does not come to church often, he has always been guided and accepted by the ministers, something that has helped him along, even as he attends church every now and then.

“it’s always been straightforward here,” he said. “The people don’t let you fall of. And Pastor Will definitely wants the best for you. Throughout my life, I have been real curious-minded but they would always take the time and explain why some things aren’t OK. Growing up I didn’t have my father. And going in the world — not knowing how to look at things, you can be lost. [But] they will keep it real with me. It’s a foundation they set.”

For Zegeory Smith, a member for four years, TOP’s love is also life-impacting, not so much through the counseling, however, as through the acceptance from the congregation.

“It’s a very loving atmosphere,” he said. “The people accept you as you are. When I joined, I had a whole lot of different problems — alcohol was my number-one problem. I talked to a lot of different people — that helped [and] it was acceptance.”

Smith added that “the church — it turned my life around. I used to work for the state [liquor store] full time. Now, I praise the Lord full time.”

Praise and worship at TOP is a significant part of the experience.

On the Sunday of the Tribune’s visit, the praise and worship team, accompanied by praise dancers, opened the service at 10:30 a.m. After they finished, a little after 11, the church continued to sing and praise well into noon, led by Minister Daniel Mack, who also jumped up and down and shouted.

Worshippers were free to shout as they pleased and several worshippers danced with each other. One member, whose foot was in a cast, danced as best she could as well.

“We believe, according to the Scripture, ‘Let everything that have breath, praise the Lord,’” said Bael. “We believe in freedom in praise and worship — expressing yourself spontaneously.”

Evangelist Tonie, a member since 1991, describes the entire TOP experience as free.

“Our church has a freedom — from how we dress to what we do,” she said. “It’s not organized but it’s controlled.”

Another major way Bael said TOP works to touch people’s lives, in the physical sense, is through several external ministries.

Three times a week, through a partnership with Target, they distribute groceries — including food and household items to members and nonmembers in need. Quarterly, they host fellowship events so members can socialize.

They also operate a daycare, offering affordable care for parents and families. The daycare began as a volunteer service to help parents during service and meetings.

Bael added that they are in the process of renovating their building to serve as a multipurpose training facility to teach life skills and career development skills to teens and adults.

“Whatever we can do to help, we will,” Bael said. “We believe in the whole Bible — prayers, miracles, that Jesus is a healer. [And] we believe in Scripture — practicing what you preach and being the model for what you preach.”