RUSKIN — A Gibsonton man faces first-degree murder charges after investigators say he confessed to robbing, kidnapping and beating Octavio Reyes, whose body was found in woods Saturday off U.S. 41 near the Little Manatee River, deputies said.

On Sunday, Hillsborough County sheriff’s detectives arrested 20-year-old Javier L. Bermudez Jr., of 10413 Ray Street, after he told deputies he ambushed Reyes at a residence in Ruskin on the night of Aug. 30, deputies said.

Bermudez also identified the location of Reyes’ grave and told detectives that Reyes’ pickup truck had been taken to an empty lot and burned, according to a release from the Hillsborough County Sheriff’s Office.

The Hillsborough County Sheriff’s office identified Reyes’ body Sunday, and the medical examiner later ruled his official cause of death as “homicidal violence.” His pickup was found burned on Shell Point Road in Ruskin on Aug. 31, deputies said.

Bermudez also faces charges of kidnapping, robbery and conspiracy to commit robbery, the sheriff’s office said.

Reyes, 36, had six children, ranging in age from 18 to 4, and was separated from his wife, according to his niece, Juanita Reyes.

She said the family is struggling to understand what happened to her uncle and why.

“This would have been the last thing we expected for anybody to do to him,” Juanita Reyes said. “He was a very hard worker, very dedicated.”

Reyes said her uncle was a welder who worked in Ft. Lauderdale, but often stayed with her in Riverview on weekends.

Octavio Reyes was reported missing on Aug. 31 after leaving his home on Woodside Drive the previous day to go to Club 301, deputies said. A family member last saw him in the parking lot of a store on Gibsonton Drive at 10:20 p.m. Aug 30.

Juanita Reyes said her uncle had been laid-off from a welding job, but was scheduled to return to work after Labor Day. She said her uncle spent much of his leisure time around his children, and liked to go to a shooting range.

“He had a registered gun and he liked to do that in his off time,” she said.

Juanita Reyes said the family must delay making funeral arrangements until they receive his body from the sheriff’s office. She said her cousins and other family members were at her home on Sunday, trying to piece together what could have happened.

She didn’t know of her uncle having any enemies.