A federal appeals court on Friday shot down a bid by New York Catholic-affiliated employers to bar their workers from getting contraceptive coverage under Obamacare.

Overturning a 2013 decision by a Brooklyn federal court judge, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals found an accommodation for nonprofit affiliates of the Catholic Church under the Affordable Care Act "relieves, rather than imposes, a substantial burden on plaintiffs' religious exercise."

Under the ACA, employers are expected to provide "coverage, without cost sharing, for all Food and Drug Administration approved contraceptive methods, sterilization procedures and patient education and counseling for all women with reproductive capacity, as prescribed by a (health care) provider," the ruling says. The "contraceptive coverage mandate" has an exemption for religious employers, including, "churches, their integrated auxiliaries, and conventions or associations of churches," the ruling notes.

It also provided for an "accommodation" for religiously affiliated nonprofit organizations that don't qualify for the religious employer exemption.

That accommodation allows them to opt out of paying for contraceptive coverage, but allows employees who do "not share the religious beliefs of their employer" to still get those services from the company's health insurance provider.

The cost for those services are then picked up by the feds, not the religious employer.

Four Catholic nonprofit groups, including Catholic Health Services of Long Island and Cardinal Spellman High School, said that still puts them in a position where they "facilitate access to products and services they find objectionable."

Employees who do ‘not share the religious beliefs of their employer’ are able to get contraceptive coverage from the company's health insurance provider, the law states. (Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg)

The accommodation has them "indirectly facilitating the provision to their employees of products and services that have contraceptive and ‘abortion-inducing’ effects, an act which violates their religious beliefs," the ruling says.

The three judge panel, however, looked at it differently.

"Plaintiffs' decision to opt out is not the cause of the ultimate contraceptive coverage; rather this coverage happens in spite of them," the ruling says.

"Once plaintiffs indicate their desire to have no involvement in the provision of contraceptive coverage, the government steps in and acts to ensure contraceptive coverage without any participation by plaintiffs."

The ruling notes that six other federal appeals courts have made similar findings since Brooklyn Federal Court Judge Brian Cogan issued his ruling siding with the nonprofit employers in 2013.

Four of those cases have been appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.