ALBANY >> Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s running mate Kathy Hochul has a credibility problem and can only offer excuses for a pro-Republican, anti-Obama voting record in Congress, lieutenant governor candidate Tim Wu said Thursday.

“If you look at the record, she was one of only 16 Democrats to join a vote that eliminated preventative care from Obamacare, in particular cervical screenings and breast cancer screenings,” Wu said at a press conference.

“Barack Obama had made it clear he was going to veto ... (and) there was 130-something other Democrats who somehow found a way to not vote for that bill,” Wu said, calling her explanation of why she went along with the GOP in Congress to try to roll back Obamacare a “weak excuse.”

Wu also released a memo on Hochul’s voting record that detailed her support for House GOP positions on drilling for oil offshore and in nature preserves, the Keystone XL pipeline, shale gas hydrofracking, limiting EPA power, curtailing renewable energy, and climate change.

Advertisement

Fresh off winning the endorsement of The New York Times editorial page, Wu predicted that he and running mate Zephyr Teachout would score “the upset of the century” on Sept. 9, when they face off against Cuomo and Hochul in the primary. Though the two sides are running as teams, the two offices are separate, which raises the possibility that Cuomo could beat Teachout yet have Wu as his running mate in November.

“I think there’s a lot of people who are dissatisfied with the Cuomo administration,” Wu said. “I also think my Chinese-American and Asian-American brothers and sisters are really interested in the possibilities of having the first Asian-American statewide official. Every time I go to Flushing or any other Chinatowns in New York, the response has been incredibly enthusiastic.”

The Times, which is influential in deciding Democratic primaries in New York, declined to endorse Cuomo this week, saying he has done little to address corruption in state government and shut down the Moreland investigation of his supporters. The paper did not endorse Teachout, saying she is too inexperienced. But the editorial board enthusiastically backed Wu Thursday, sending shock waves through Democratic circles.

In a sign of how the stakes have been raised in what had been a sleepy race, the Cuomo campaign released a Youtube video Thursday of Hochul trying to establish her bona fides as a Democrat. The video followed an earlier pro-Wu video with archival footage of Hochul detailing her votes and alliances with House Republicans.

“Despite the politics of my district, I never backed down from our core Democratic values,” she says in the new video. “Pro-choice, pro-marriage equality and pro-worker values. I nearly lost by re-election bid because I wouldn’t turn my back on the president and millions of Americans who deserve quality healthcare.”

“Believe me, as someone who has a progressive record in the most Republican district in the state, I know these issues are not rewarded at the ballot box, but they are the morally right stands to take,” Hochul said.

Hochul has refused to debate Wu, and Cuomo has ignored debate challenges from Teachout as well as Westchester County Executive Rob Astorino, the Republican candidate in the fall.

Wu is given a good chance of beating Hochul on Sept. 9 because of Cuomo’s strained relations with Democratic Party core activists and Wu’s potential to become the first Asian-American elected to statewide office in New York’s history.

Wu is a Columbia University law professor and a nationally recognized expert on “net neutrality” and other Internet law issues. He said Thursday he was taking a short break from campaigning to return home to help his wife out with childcare responsibilities.