LANCASTER — The three Democrats vying in Pennsylvania's U.S. Senate race drew perhaps their biggest distinctions during Tuesday's debate when asked about their favored candidates for the race at the top of the ticket.

Former state environmental protection chief Katie McGinty, who has endorsed former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, noted her work with Clinton in the White House and tied the presidential candidates' discussion of economic issues to her own campaign.

"The issues that the Democrats are raising — this historic loss of value and economic standing of working families and the middle class — is the vital issue of our country right now," McGinty said.

Retired Navy admiral and former Delaware County congressman Joe Sestak hasn't endorsed Clinton or Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, saying he has "neither asked for nor given" endorsements involving other elected officials or candidates.

Sestak did praise Clinton as someone who would be "a very fine commander in chief," while describing Sanders' approach to addressing income inequality as one that "takes care of the fever, not the source of it."

John Fetterman, mayor of the Allegheny County borough of Braddock, has backed Sanders, saying he is "where the party is going."

"Inequality is more than just one issue," Fetterman said. "It pervades everything: education, health care, housing, you name it."

The debate — broadcast live by WGAL-TV in Lancaster and co-sponsored by Franklin & Marshall College — had a more civil tone than a forum last week in Pittsburgh, when the candidates sparred over a number of issues.

The three Democrats seeking to face off against Republican incumbent Pat Toomey this fall showed broad agreement as they answered questions on the minimum wage, natural gas drilling, foreign policy and lesbian, gay bisexual and transgender rights.

Responding to a question about the federal Affordable Care Act, all three praised the law and offered a distinct approach for improving it.

Sestak credited the law with cutting overall health care costs but said it could be boosted by finding ways to reward doctors for improving their care and reducing the number of times a patient needs to return.

McGinty said negotiations with pharmaceutical companies are needed to lower the cost of prescription drugs, and that insurance companies must work to reduce their operating costs.

Fetterman said the law has been a first step toward providing universal health care for all Americans, praising its provisions extending health care as policies that should not have been politically controversial.

The candidates again waded into natural gas drilling policies, an area in which McGinty's opponents had previously criticized her as not taking a tough enough stance when she led the Department of Environmental Protection.

While Sestak didn't criticize McGinty by name, he did say that state officials weren't ready when natural gas drilling in the state's Marcellus Shale began to ramp up about a decade ago.

The state DEP "didn't have the manpower, the regulations, the oversight to do it," Sestak said.

In an email after the debate, Fetterman's campaign described her as having "tried to obscure her lax attitude toward fracking."

McGinty pointed to her work boosting Pennsylvania's use of renewable energy as evidence of her environmental record, while also saying she would support more stringent state and federal laws on disclosing chemicals used in fracking.

"If you've got nothing to hide, you should be willing to comply with the law," McGinty said.

All three candidates said there should be a extraction tax on natural gas pumped out from beneath Pennsylvania, describing the current per-well impact fee as insufficient.

Tuesday's debate came two weeks ahead of the April 26 primary election and days before the latest round of campaign finance reports are due from federal candidates.

McGinty previewed her report earlier Tuesday, with her campaign announcing that she raised $1.8 million through April 6. She did not disclose how much cash was left in her campaign account at the end of the reporting period.

Sestak and Fetterman have not yet announced their fundraising totals, which are due to the Federal Election Commission on Thursday.

lolson@mcall.com

Twitter @LauraOlson

202-824-8216