ALDERSON, W.Va. (AP) - All that’s missing are Ike and Corabeth Godsey. The homey feeling of a bygone era that was embodied by the Godseys’ country store on the venerable TV show “The Waltons” has been resurrected in Alderson’s newly expanded Green Grocer store.

The cash register is of a decidedly more recent vintage, and familiar staples like sugar and flour vie for shelf space with 21st century products that are sweetened with agave nectar and boast that they are gluten-free, but the old-fashioned country store appeal shines through.

A project of the Alderson Community Food Hub (ACFH), today’s Green Grocer is an ambitious expansion of a modest co-op that came to fruition thanks to community support and volunteer sweat-equity.

“The Food Hub’s board members had this store as a long-range plan for a good while, but when (Gadd’s IGA grocery store) closed, they decided the time was right to go ahead,” explained Green Grocer manager Ann Knott, one of only three paid employees at the compact store at the corner of W.Va. 63 and 12.

The turn-around for the project was quick. Gadd’s closed in November, and volunteers began remodeling the Green Grocer space the first of February. The full-service fresh grocery store opened a few weeks ago.

The expansion of the usable space included co-opting a former storage area to provide room for a small cafe, as well as painting all of the walls, installing equipment and constructing a rustic wooden produce stand.

“We’re trying to keep a good mix of conventional foods and ingredients, along with organic and gourmet foods for those who want them,” Knott said.

“The biggest challenge so far has been finding grocery providers to deliver to us. We’re off the beaten path.”

Knott said she called providers in Pennsylvania, Ohio and Virginia, to no avail. “They said we were too far away (from a major highway) for them to deliver,” Knott said, noting she finally located a company in Princeton that was willing to ship goods to the store every week. In addition to those goods, the Green Grocer also found providers of organic and gourmet items in the Midwest who have agreed to ship products to the Alderson store on a monthly basis.

Closer to home, word of mouth has been the most effective way of getting local farmers involved, Knott pointed out. ACFH’s AmeriCorps VISTA worker Rick Allen has been instrumental in organizing that effort via social media and community outreach, she said.

Among the local products on the shelves and in the commercial coolers along one wall are beef from Swift Level Farm in Greenbrier County, stone-ground cornmeal from Reed’s Mill in Monroe County and fragrant loaves of artisan bread from The Bakery in Lewisburg.

“A lot of people are interested in healthy, locally grown, pesticide-free foods,” Allen said. “They cost a little more, but people have decided it’s worth the price.”

He said he expects to have even more local products when “people get their gardens going” later this spring.

Recently the Green Grocer already had a few locally grown vegetables available, including bags of certified Greenbrier Valley Grown baby spinach produced in a high-tunnel operation in Caldwell and firm Kennebec potatoes (at 50 cents a pound) grown by local farmer Roy Loudermilk.

And then there were the ramps, a sizable basket of which nestled just under the produce bin nearest to the front door. An Appalachian delicacy since time immemorial, ramps in recent years have also found their way into dishes served in high-end restaurants, amplifying the popularity of the wild onion.

“Ramps are one of our best sellers,” Allen said, smiling. “People bring them in, and we sell them out every day.”

The Green Grocer was envisioned by its founders as a way to “help people get what they need without going to Lewisburg,” Allen explained. It’s a vision that is already being fulfilled.

“The first day, people just poured through the door,” Allen said. “One lady said she wanted to make a pot of stew, but she needed an onion and didn’t want to drive all the way to Lewisburg just to get an onion. So she bought that onion here.”

Shopper Marybeth Hopkins echoed Allen’s words when asked for her opinion of the new store.

“It’s awesome!” Hopkins exclaimed. “I brought my mother in the store today just to look, but they have more here than you might think. They have fresh vegetables, and now if you need an onion or a tomato - who wants to go to Lewisburg for an onion? - you can just come here instead of driving all that way.”

In addition to the food, Hopkins said she is glad to see familiar faces behind the store’s counters.

“I grew up around here with these folks; it’s like family,” Hopkins said. “And it’s not just this store; they help in the community, at ball games and all. They’re good people.”

Hopkins’ mother, Bernice Hopkins, was less effusive than her daughter but nonetheless seemed pleased to have a local grocery option once more.

“I’m so glad they opened this place,” she said.

Another visitor to the Green Grocer was Anna Osborne, a Food Hub board member who also teaches at Alderson Elementary School.

“I see a lot of people becoming curious and inspired by what’s happened here,” Osborne said. “They know it’s a place to get groceries, but when they come in they’re seeing it’s a community effort, it’s a chance to connect.”

Providing a place for people to gather informally is another of the Green Grocer’s goals, Allen agreed, pointing to the tables and chairs that invite visitors to take in the river view through the store’s expansive front windows.

“We want to encourage people to come and gather, to give this space a community atmosphere,” Allen said.

The tables and chairs also provide a place for patrons of the cafe in the back of the store to enjoy a quick lunch. Billy and Dawn Painter operate the cafe as a commercial venture separate from - yet complementary to - the nonprofit grocery store.

Formerly a manager at the Federal Correctional Institution in Beckley, Billy Painter now revels in his reputation as a master of the art of barbecue - a pitmaster whose workday revolves around a custom smoker that was built in Houston, Texas.

“I retired from my real job, and now I work seven days a week,” Painter said, laughing.

“I love cooking real barbecue,” Painter confided. “It is hard, dirty, greasy, sweaty work - not glamorous at all. I’m not (famed TV chef and restaurateur) Gordon Ramsay.

“We do everything the old-fashioned way. Just about everything we use is fresh.”

Among Painter’s smoked specialties are brisket, pulled pork, ribs and chicken, although he said at times he branches out into other proteins, like turkeys, upon request. He and his wife also fix up appropriate side dishes for the barbecue, including mashed potatoes, green beans, Mexican corn, macaroni and cheese, assorted salads and cabbage with bacon and cheddar.

Although some of Painter’s barbecue sauces are store-bought, many are of his own creation - like the mayonnaise-based Alabama white sauce. “It’s wonderful,” he boasted. “My wife didn’t think she’d like it, but when she tried it on some chicken, she had to agree it’s really something special.”

In addition to the barbecue, the cafe inside the Green Grocer offers daily lunch specials and deli sandwiches and sides.

The Green Grocer is open 10:30 a.m. to 7 p.m. Tuesday through Sunday. For more information, call 304-445-7893.

___

Information from: The Register-Herald, http://www.register-herald.com