Conspiracy theorists who think ObamaCare was just a steppingstone to a single payer system now have a shred of evidence to back up their claim.

Next November, a voter initiative on the ballot in Colorado would, if approved, dump ObamaCare and replace it with ColoradoCare, a Medicare-type program for all of the state’s residents.

To finance it, the initiative would impose a new 10% payroll tax, which amounts to a $25 billion tax hike. ColoradoCare would, its backers say, be run by a nonprofit cooperative.

Despite the fact that it easily obtained more than the number of signatures needed to make the ballot (although the state hasn’t verified that yet), the initiative seems oddly timed.

After all, Vermont — home to socialist Sen. Bernie Sanders — had already tried to implement a single payer system instead of ObamaCare. In fact, an article in the New England Journal of Medicine said that Gov. Peter Shumlin’s “exploration of a single-payer health care system, which included three assessments by different expert groups, was among the most exhaustive ever conducted in the United States.”

But Shumlin backed down last December once he realized the problems that it would create for the state.

“It is not the right time for Vermont” to pass a single-payer system, Shumlin said. The state was considering a payroll tax of about 15% to fund the program, which he decided “might hurt our economy.”

Then there’s Colorado’s own recent and dismal record running health care.

The state’s ObamaCare exchange has seen its projected operating costs more than double, forcing Connect for Health Colorado to boost the fee that it charges all insurance consumers in the state, and more than double the user fee charged to those who sign up through its exchange. Even that won’t cover all of its costs.

On top of that, Colorado’s existing nonprofit cooperative — created with $72 million in federal loans courtesy of ObamaCare — just went belly up.

In its first year of operation, the co-op lost $23 million, according to a government audit. And before it decided to close shop, Colorado HealthOP had requested shockingly high rate increases of up to 24% for next year.

As a result of the HealthOP closure, more than 80,000 people in the state will have to look for another ObamaCare carrier when they go to sign up, starting in November.

If all this isn’t enough to convince Colorado voters that driving further down the road of government-run health care is a bad idea, you’d really have to start to wonder what it is they’re smoking over there.

Follow John Merline on Twitter: @IBD_JMerline.