Topics: From the Wires, News

LOUISVILLE, Ky. (AP) — A mother and child remained missing Friday, hours after they were swept into a flooded creek in eastern Kentucky, as torrential rains swamped portions of the state and forced emergency crews to make more than 160 rescues farther west in Louisville.

Kentucky State Police Trooper Robert Purdy said the two were stranded in their vehicle in high water about 9:30 a.m. on a rural highway in Lee County, near the Estill County line.

Local authorities could see them in the vehicle and attempted a water rescue, Purdy said. But about 11:30 a.m., the rushing water swept them away and rescue workers lost sight of them. A search was continuing late in the day.

As rain pushed through parts of the South and Midwest, severe thunderstorms were also blamed for the death of a woman who was camping with her family at Natural Bridge State Resort Park in eastern Kentucky and a second woman who went outside to look at the rising river.

Meanwhile, thousands of people in south central Kansas lost power amid winds that reached nearly 90 mph, downed trees and damaged buildings overnight and early Friday, and a possible tornado was being investigated in Oklahoma.

In Louisville, Simone Wester awoke Friday to the sight of boats carting away her neighbors.

“It looked like a hurricane struck,” said Wester, whose apartment complex was surrounded by floodwaters, waist-deep in some places. “I didn’t know what to do.”

Wester, 20, and her 7-month-old son, Jeremiah, were rescued by a man who removed his socks and waded through the floodwaters toward her. The man, Kevin Mansfield, charted a navigable path and ushered her out of the flooding.

Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer said more than 160 water rescues had been made.

In Powell County, Kentucky, Catherine Carlson, 45, was killed and her husband was injured when a large tree limb fell on their tent, said Coroner Hondo Hearne. Their three children didn’t appear to be injured, he said.

The campground where the family was staying was evacuated due to flash flooding, said Gil Lawson, a spokesman for the state Tourism, Arts and Heritage Cabinet.

In Wayne County, a woman living along Upper Newcomb Creek was apparently swept away and drowned when she stepped outside her house to look at the rising water Friday night, The Herald-Dispatch reported.