Gov. Terry Branstad (Photo: Special to the Des Moines Register)

Gov. Terry Branstad has rebuffed a request to delay penalties for hospitals, nursing homes and other health care providers that don't soon sign contracts with private companies set to manage the state’s Medicaid program.

Democratic senators asked the Republican governor Monday to delay a Jan. 1 deadline for health care providers to sign contracts with four national managed care companies. The senators noted that the hospitals, clinics and nursing homes are slated to face a 10 percent reduction in their Medicaid payments if they don’t meet the deadline.

“This policy is not only punitive and predatory, it will put many health care providers out of business and further reduce access to affordable, quality health care for tens of thousands of vulnerable Iowans,” according to the letter. It was signed by state Sens. Amanda Ragan, Liz Mathis and Joe Bolkcom, who are among the Democrats’ leaders on health care issues.

The senators and other Branstad critics have complained that his administration is rushing to turn over Iowa's $4 billion Medicaid program to private companies. They have repeatedly urged him and federal officials to slow the transition.

Branstad told reporters Monday morning that he would not grant the senators’ request to delay the deadline for health care providers to sign managed-care contracts.

“First of all, we’ve been working on this and they know we’ve been working on this diligently from January,” he said. “We’re doing what 25 other states have already done.”

RELATED:

He reiterated the controversial claim that the shift to private management would save money by better coordinating health care services, and he denied allegations that the transition is being rushed.

“There’s no speed to this. It’s being phased in over a period of years. And we started working on this in January so we’re looking at almost a whole year,” he said. “And basically I know there are people that want to protect their funding stream and are afraid of change. But the truth is, this has proven to be effective in other states at improving medical outcomes. That’s what we want to do. We also think that it is something that will make it possible for us to provide better services to people and do it at less cost.”

Iowa Hospital Association spokesman Scott McIntyre said Monday that the association does not believe state officials have the authority to impose the 10 percent penalty on providers that fail to sign managed care contracts. He said such a penalty was not mentioned in government documents that set up the new arrangements.

"What we do know from the state’s own information is that the state is required to pay current rates for the first six months — the penalty obviously conflicts with that commitment,” he wrote in an email to the Register.

Branstad contended that health care providers expressed similar fears in 2013 about Iowa’s version of Medicaid expansion, called the Iowa Health and Wellness Plan. “The providers were up in arms. They were: ‘It’s terrible, we’re afraid of this!’ And you know what? Today, we have more people insured than we’ve ever had insured. Providers are making more money than they ever have. The charity care at hospitals has gone down significantly,” he said. “So the hospitals that strongly objected to that have now seen it’s really worked effectively. And we believe that given the opportunity, the managed care for Medicaid has the same potential to really provide better services, increase the beneficial outcomes and not damage the income stream for the providers.”

Kirk Norris, president of the Iowa Hospital Association, disputed the governor’s recollection that hospital leaders opposed the overall Iowa Health and Wellness Plan in 2013. Norris wrote in an email Monday that the hospital association consistently supported expanding the state’s Medicaid program under the Affordable Care Act, as the Iowa Health and Wellness Plan effectively did.

Norris added that although some other groups opposed Branstad’s proposal to require many participants to have wellness screenings and to share costs, the hospital association helped lobby federal officials to approve those changes.

“The irony of the governor’s position on Medicaid managed care is that if enacted, the very benefits of the (Iowa Health and Wellness Plan) that he touts, beneficiary responsibility, accountable care organizations and reductions in charity care, will be lost," Norris wrote.

Department of Human Services officials declined at a hearing last week to tell legislators how many health care providers had signed managed care contracts. However, the managed care companies acknowledged that no major hospitals had done so yet.

The plan still needs approval from federal officials, because Medicaid is jointly financed by the federal and state governments.

Des Moines Register staff writer Brianne Pfannenstiel contributed to this article.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1NFcreC