Topics: Body Wars, Breasts, Cancer, Coupling, dating, Editor's Picks, Life stories, Love and Sex, mastectomy, Sex, Life News

It’s my first date with the boat captain, and I’ve already told him I’ve had early-stage breast cancer, a double mastectomy and reconstructive surgeries.

I’ve also told him some of the good stuff — about my recent, post-divorce New Year’s trip to Costa Rica where I zip-lined, spotted baby monkeys and sailed on a catamaran.

In the eight months since my separation, he’s the only man from the dating site with whom I’ve felt a strong connection. I have longed for and dreaded this moment. If this continues, I’ll have to reveal even more. I’m afraid it might make him reject me.

It was his coat and his no-nonsense manner that first put me at ease. At 4 p.m. on Friday, I was sitting in a Lake Union oyster bar when I saw this tall, ruddy-complexioned man enter with a ready smile. I recognized him from his profile pictures and noticed he was wearing a pea coat. A real, honest-to-god, working pea coat, not the kind you buy at Abercrombie and Fitch. This coat had seen some action. This coat had been drenched in salt spray.

At 8 p.m., after four hours of drinks and appetizers and dinner, we vacate the table because another party is waiting. We look at each other reluctantly. Just outside the restaurant and feet from the lakeshore, a circle of Adirondack chairs surrounds a roaring fire pit contained by wired-in stacks of oyster shells. “Want to sit for a while?” he asks.

We sit. He steals sideways looks at me in the dark, his face glowing with the light of the flames, and slowly shakes his head. It’s the middle of winter, a clear, freezing night and our fingers are getting numb. I reach over to the arm of his chair to hold his hand and pull it under the scratchy wool blanket on my lap. The fire pit shuts off at exactly 11 p.m. We stand and kiss. Then we kiss in the parking lot, our cold noses touching while a man in a passing car rolls down his window and yells, “Get a room!”

The captain asks if I want to see his place. It’s close by. He lives on a boat docked just around the bend on the lake. It’s got the prime slip spot, furthest out with an unobstructed view of downtown Seattle and Gasworks Park. Inside, it has a wooden steering wheel, a galley, a salon, a bunk, a head. There’s a port and a starboard, a bow and a stern. He has crafted the interior woodwork, he has drawn the framed miniature sketches hanging on the walls, he has read all of the books lining the built-in bookshelves.

He turns on Pandora blues and Stevie Ray Vaughn wails as we sit on the cushion he has made for the wrap-around bench in the salon and make out. He says, “You’re a real, complicated, grown-up woman and you don’t know how rare that is to find.”

At the end of the nine-and-a-half-hour first date, I wrap my arms around his neck and say, “Good night, honey.” He likes that I call him “honey.” He had watched me walk into the restaurant from his boat that afternoon, and was hoping I was his date.

I like him too much. I’m afraid of what comes next.

*

A few days later, I stand with the backs of my thighs pressed against the edge of the dining table in my beach house and kiss him. When I close my eyes and concentrate on his kisses, it feels right. It feels more right with my eyes closed. I don’t want to talk to him. I just want to experience him, feel him. I touch my tongue against the front part of his teeth. I nuzzle the top of my head under his chin, against the soft part of his neck. I open my mouth against his open mouth and just breathe.

I can’t put it off any longer. I pause and tell him, “I want to take my shirt off and show you my breasts.” In an act of solidarity, he says, “Me, too” and pulls his Henley off over his head. We both stand there bare-topped in our jeans and I explain the territory of my chest to him like it’s a map and I’m the tour guide. “These are all saline. Here, feel them. This is where the scars are. These are tattoos. These aren’t real nipples, they’re just nubs of tissue. They don’t move.”

He says, “You’re gorgeous.” He moves closer to kiss me and holds one of my reconstructed breasts in each of his hands. He looks me in the eyes and says, “These are still a part of you.”

Later that day, he emails: “I can only imagine the courage it takes for you to open your heart and your body to a new person… I am grateful that you seem to trust me enough to take a few first steps in that direction.”

I cry when I read this. He gets it. He understands me.