Topics: Bob Dylan, Jimi Hendrix, Johnny Cash, lists, Music, Neil Young, sly stone, The Beatl, The Beatles, Video, Social News, Media News, Life News, Entertainment News

Bob Dylan may be the most overrated performer in the history of popular music. This is especially impressive since he’s often great; a talented songwriter with a quick wit and (at least early in his career) an ability to assimilate diverse styles without compromising his own vision. These strengths, though, were accompanied by real weaknesses. As a singer, he mimicked the roughness of roots sources without capturing their nuance or power, often resulting in self-parody. As a lyricist, he had a tendency to mistake Beat poet doggerel bathos for profundity. It often seems like he’s been celebrated as much for the flaws as for the virtues — his incompetence seen as punk rock authenticity and his pomposity as literary bona fides.

Inevitably, given his status as ultimate awesome courageous rock God, Dylan has influenced just about everybody. And, inevitably too, given the gap between his standing and his sometimes quite good but rarely godlike music, many of those he’s influenced have outshown him. Below is a list of just a few performers influenced by Dylan who are better than he is.

Jimi Hendrix, “Wait Until Tomorrow”



This is probably the least controversial suggestion on the list; Hendrix is one of the few performers whose reputation approaches the stratospheric heights of Zimmerman’s. His cover of “All Along the Watchtower“ is his most famous Dylan lift, and the song certainly benefits from Hendrix’s more expressive singing, as well as from the hard rock sturm und drung that distracts somewhat from the half-baked fantasy lyrics. But I think something like “Wait Until Tomorrow” is maybe a better showcase. The humor and the forays into tongue-twisting wordplay (“the mixed-up mind of you”) touch on Dylan, even as the song employs a gut-bucket, loose-limbed virtuosity that is simultaneously more swaggering and rootsier than anything Dylan ever put together.

Donovan, “Get Thy Bearings”



Donovan was initially billed as the British Bob Dylan, and early tracks like “Catch the Wind” were certainly heavily influenced by Dylan’s latter-day Guthrie shtick. Donovan’s range was always greater than his American contemporary’s, though, and his combination of ominously fey British folk with pop and rock was significantly odder and more original. “Get Thy Bearings” sounds like Steely Dan for faerie singalong; certainly a funnier, and slyer, folk betrayal than Dylan going electric.

Johnny Cash and June Carter Cash, “It Ain’t Me, Babe”



Cash loved Dylan’s music, and covered a number of his songs over the years. This duet with June is probably the most famous — and also a good indication of why Cash is superior to his source material. Dylan’s version of “It Ain’t Me, Babe” is fairly straightforward; a kiss-off song that teeters on the edge of puerile bad-boy self-mythologizing. Cash’s version doesn’t teeter, though; he hams it up, from the sneered “No, No, No” which is phrased as “Nyah, Nyah, Nyah” to the way he spits out “Babe!” all done with mountain chorus harmonies and horns in the background. Cash is willing to emphasize the song’s ridiculousness. Dylan wasn’t — either out of misplaced sedateness or, less charitably, because he didn’t realize how ridiculous it was.

Velvet Underground, “Run Run Run”



Dylan’s influence on Lou Reed’s New Yawk talk-singing is obvious, but you can hear “Highway 61 Revisited” and “Blonde on Blonde” in the artsy rootsy groove of something like “Run Run Run” as well. Reed’s collaborators were a lot more well-equipped to combine high-art cool and primitive throb than Dylan was, though, and Reed’s lyrics, at this stage of his career, anyway, channel Dylan’s snark without his forays into bathos (need I mention the embarrassment that is “Just Like a Woman”?) In a lot of ways, “The Velvet Underground and Nico” could be seen as the perfect Dylan album, the one the man himself never quite managed.