The National Hispanic Leadership Agenda announced Thursday a set of policy proposals with an accompanying questionnaire for presidential candidates.

Héctor Sánchez, chairman of NHLA, announced the 20-question survey on Hispanic issues, saying, "We are going to give presidential candidates one month to respond to the priorities of this community."

Rep. Xavier Becerra Xavier BecerraWasserman Schultz fights to keep her job Minority lawmakers bash Trump over housing crisis Pelosi, Dems rush to defense of Wasserman Schultz MORE (D-Calif.), chairman of the House Democratic Caucus and the highest ranking Hispanic in Congress, called the four-year plan "America's agenda," arguing it reflects general needs, not just those of the Hispanic community.

The NHLA, a coalition of 40 Hispanic associations, said the candidates' responses will be made public.

While the issue of immigration is traditionally a key topic for Hispanic voters, Sánchez said the plan addresses all aspects of public policy. "We are not a single issue community," Sánchez said.

Becerra said the NHLA represents "over 50 million Americans who believe in this country."

The policy concerns included recommendations on economic security and empowerment, education, immigration, government accountability, civil rights, health and environment and energy.

Controversy over the Hispanic vote has affected both parties in the 2016 primary race.

Democrats Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersDem senator: Sanders ‘doesn’t have a lot of answers’ Team Sanders pressures Trump for debate AP: Trump clinches nomination MORE and Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonTeam Sanders pressures Trump for debate AP: Trump clinches nomination Trump aide: It's a 'touch early' for Hispanic outreach MORE have both claimed primacy, with Sanders arguing the community is responding to his message of economic equality and Clinton attacking Sanders for past votes on immigration-related bills.

On the Republican side, leading candidates Donald Trump Donald TrumpTech entrepreneur funding Hulk Hogan's Gawker lawsuit Team Sanders pressures Trump for debate AP: Trump clinches nomination MORE, Ted Cruz Ted CruzAP: Trump clinches nomination Eleven states sue Obama over transgender bathroom directive Poll: Clinton leads Trump in Wisconsin by double digits MORE and Marco Rubio Marco RubioAP: Trump clinches nomination Senate GOP ties Iran sanctions fight to defense bill Analysis: Pa. senator missed most Budget Committee hearings MORE have all generated controversy related to Hispanics and the issue of immigration.

Entrance polls showed Trump won 46 percent of the Hispanic vote at the Republican caucuses in Nevada, despite his harsh anti-immigration stance and incendiary comments about Mexican immigrants.