More Pennsylvanians continue to sign up for health insurance, although a blitz to get coverage made more accessible under the Affordable Care Act has slowed to a crawl.

In 2013, more than 16 percent of Pennsylvanians were uninsured. Over the next two years, that figure fell by nearly one-third with only about 10.9 percent of people ages 18 to 64 uninsured last year in the state of nearly 13 million people.

Figures released last week by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention show the nation as a whole hit a milestone in 2015 with less than 10 percent of all Americans uninsured — the first time.

However, the rise of insured people stalled in 2015 for Pennsylvanians with only about 100,000 more people signing up. About 1.4 million people in the state remain uncovered.

“Pennsylvania was pretty aggressively average in terms of reduction in uninsurance and current uninsurance rates,” said Mark V. Pauly, Ph.D., a health care economist with the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. “We still have a way to go to get from 11 percent or so down into the single digits.”

With nearly 90 percent of the population on some kind of insurance plan, that positions the Keystone State about 1.5 percentage points ahead of the national average. Pennsylvania has more large employers and fewer farmers, which explains why it leads the nation, Dr. Pauly said.

Enrollment numbers for at least one Pennsylvania-based insurer reflect the surge. Since 2013, Geisinger Health Plan has increased its membership by about 84 percent.

“We’ve seen growth pretty much over all our lines of business,” said Geisinger Health Plan Communications Manager Amy Bowen. “So those who are covered by their employer, those who are purchasing insurance on their own through the (Affordable Care Act) exchange, as well as those who are covered by Medical Assistance and Medicare.”

In March 2013, Geisinger began offering GHP Family Medical Assistance Coverage, preempting the largest area of growth in those public insurance plans, she said.

In 2015, 17.8 percent of Pennsylvanians were on some kind of public health plan, according to the HHS/CDC survey, up from just 13.8 percent the year before. The percent of people on private plans actually declined in 2015 by more than two percentage points to 73.2 percent.

If nothing changes, progress from this point on will be “close to glacial,” Dr. Pauly said. Rising premiums will keep people away, and weak penalties the uninsured pay are not enough to push them toward getting coverage, he said.

On the other hand, he said, Medicaid expansion in Pennsylvania will help a little in getting more people covered.

Contact the writer: joconnell@timesshamrock.com, @jon_oc on Twitter