Gov. Scott Walker (left), talks with Sen. Joni Ernst (R-Iowa) before Ernst's fundraising ride Saturday in Des Moines. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Boone, Iowa — Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker hopped on a Harley Saturday to raise his profile in this early presidential nominating state.

A half dozen other presidential candidates were on hand for a gathering afterward, but Walker was the only one to participate in the ride with U.S. Sen. Joni Ernst (R-Iowa) and 300 other bikers. The 39-mile tour honoring veterans wove from the Big Barn Harley-Davidson dealer in Des Moines to the Boone County exposition grounds that will host the Iowa Straw Poll in August.

"When Joni told us in January she was going to have this, I said, 'Sign me up,'" Walker told one rider before mounting his bike.

Walker regularly promotes the motorcycle company headquartered in Milwaukee and owns a 2003 Road King that his wife, Tonette, bought for him used as a surprise gift. He left that bike at home Saturday and instead rented a silver 2014 Road King from Big Barn.

Harley enthusiasts at the event said they liked that Walker was a rider, but it wouldn't play a role in their decision on whom to support for president. Ernst said being able to ride a Harley was "not a qualifier (to be president), but an interesting factoid."

Nonetheless, Walker's ability to lead the ride with Iowa's newest senator gave him an advantage, in part because he had a media throng to himself for part of the day. A photo of him in a mirrored helmet was featured on the front page of the Drudge Report on Saturday with the headline, "Leader of the pack."

In a talk with reporters after his speech, Walker struck back at the Democratic front-runner, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who criticized Walker and other Republicans by name on Thursday for establishing policies that she said make it harder for minorities and young people to vote.

Walker held up his driver's license — flashing his Harley wallet in the process — to tout the voter ID law he signed in 2011. Asked if he supported a national voter ID law, he said he would prefer to leave the matter to the states.

"In our state we have a law that makes it easy to vote but hard to cheat," Walker said. "It's a common-sense proposal that Americans overwhelmingly support. It's another example of how Hillary Clinton is squarely out of touch with where mainstream America is at."

Walker has signed two laws restricting early voting in Wisconsin, including one ending weekend voting, but he discounted the notion he had made it tougher to vote.

"It's still easy," Walker said. "The voter turnout was very significant even with that."

Kevin McAlister, a spokesman for the Democratic group American Bridge 21st Century, scoffed at that idea.

"Scott Walker made it harder for people to vote, plain and simple," he said in a statement. "He shouldn't be proud of his record — from limiting the right to vote to Wisconsin ranking last in the Midwest for job creation."

On Saturday, Walker wore a leather Harley jacket, motorcycle boots and fingerless gloves, and afterward he took the stage in jeans and a black Harley T-shirt.

"I love a senator who knows how to castrate a pig, ride a hog and cut the pork from Washington, D.C.," Walker told the crowd of Ernst, in a nod to a TV ad she ran that drew national attention. "Now wouldn't it be nice to give her an ally in the White House to help her get the job done?"

Ernst's "Roast and Ride" had a festive atmosphere, despite a bank of gray clouds that threatened rain. The Nadas played country-tinged rock, trucks sold barbecued meats and campaign aides passed out fliers and bumper stickers. A giant U.S. flag attached to the extended ladder of a firetruck fluttered.

After his speech, Walker headed to Mason City to help the Hawkeye State's other U.S. senator, Chuck Grassley. Walker spent his early youth in Plainfield, Iowa, and he told the crowd in Boone that Grassley was his state representative at the time.

In addition to Walker, speaking at Saturday's event in Boone were retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina, U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry and U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida.

Though none of them joined Ernst on her ride, Perry led his own group of motorcyclists on a ride from Perry to Boone. Ernst joked that she and Perry wouldn't get into a "rumble" over rival events.

Of those appearing Saturday, all but Walker have announced their candidacy. Walker says he won't make a formal declaration until he signs the state budget.

That is scheduled to happen later this month, though delays are possible because Republicans who control the Legislature have been unable to agree on transportation funding and public financing for a new arena for the Milwaukee Bucks.

In addition to the trip to Iowa, Walker this past week visited Florida, Georgia and North Carolina. Next up: political stops in Texas and Utah and an official trip to Canada for a meeting of Great Lakes leaders and a trade mission to try to lure Canadian businesses to Wisconsin.

"Governors do that routinely," Walker said of his trip to Canada.

Walker dodged questions Saturday about whether he would participate in the Iowa Straw Poll, an August event put on by the state Republican Party that is in turmoil because some candidates are skipping it.