Topics: David Brooks, Economics, Income inequality, Paul Ryan, Social Mobility, U.S. Economy, Politics News

A new “bipartisan consensus” is brewing: 2014 will be the year in which Very Serious People argue that America’s primary economic goal should be increasing social mobility, not decreasing inequality. “Shame on Obama and De Blasio for talking about class, and trying to divide us,” they’ll smarm. “Let’s focus on something everyone can agree on: upward mobility.”

It’s already happening. At the Brookings Institution, Richard Reeves argues that while inequality is important, the defining issue of our era is “the shocking, illiberal, immoral transmission of poverty and affluence from one generation to the next.” Social mobility is the new deficit reduction, and luminaries from the left (Kirsten Gillibrand) and right (Paul Ryan) can both agree it’s a problem. Even David Brooks is concerned. Marco Rubio has already sketched out the battle lines: “It is this lack of mobility, not just income inequality, that we should be focused on.” At the core, the question about whether our society should focus on inequality or mobility gets to a significant schism built around one central question: Is inequality fundamentally immoral?

Economics, by textbook definition, is the study of how to distribute scarce goods in a world of unlimited desires. When we use markets to distribute goods in an unequal society, two important failures appear. First, there are people who are denied the right to have a say in the distribution of those goods, and second, some goods that are not marketable are distributed poorly.

If we imagine markets as a type of democracy in which we “vote” through our dollars about how to distribute goods, we can immediately see the problem. Those without income, or with only a little of it, cannot make their “votes” heard in the marketplace. In a 2004 comedy bit, Louis C.K. exposes an absurd example of this dilemma by proposing that with Bill Gates’ wealth, the Microsoft founder could “buy all the baseball teams and make all the players wear dresses.” Other, less benign examples of the disconnect between capital distribution and need present themselves in everyday life. For example, Jeffrey Sachs recently wondered on Twitter why the world can’t come up with $5 billion each year to fight AIDS, TB and malaria. He could just as easily have wondered why 90 percent of the world’s health research budget is spent on combating conditions that account for 10 percent of disease (i.e., diseases that affect wealthy Westerners).

In a society that accepts high mobility without equality, one accepts that whoever reaches the highest income bracket (as decided by the ephemeral concept of a “market”) should have an outsize influence in determining the distribution of resources. Thus, we have both Prada shoes and extreme poverty. Hermès and homelessness. We have Elon Musk working on private space flight and a hyper loop while starving children die for want of medicine protected by intellectual-property law. And that’s even before we consider how millionaires and billionaires have used their wealth in an attempt to distort democracy: Sheldon Adelson and his wife spent more money on the 2012 election than the combined contributions of citizens from 12 states.

In “The Spirit Level,“ Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett show how inequality negatively affects societies. They find that many of the negative phenomena that are generally attributed to culture — high levels of teenage pregnancy, obesity and criminality, for example — are not the causes of inequality, but rather the effects of it. I have made the case elsewhere that there are empirical reasons to believe that this is the case. But to take a simple example, research shows that it is poverty and inequality that make the working class more likely to bear children out of wedlock, which in turn further stifles upward mobility.

Inequality is inherently degrading. Adam Smith writes: “A linen shirt, for example, is, strictly speaking, not a necessary of life … But in the present times, through the greater part of Europe, a creditable day-labourer would be ashamed to appear in public without a linen shirt, the want of which would be supposed to denote that disgraceful degree of poverty.” Likewise, Wilkinson and Pickett find that, “There are now numerous studies that show the same thing … low social status has a clear impact on physical health.” That is: Simply having a low-wage, low-social status job can lead to depression, anxiety and obesity. The problem is not only poverty, it’s also inequality.

While Very Serious People worry about mobility, the problem remains: Even if we achieve it, “the poor will always be with you,” as one Jesus Christ said. There will always be those who cannot develop the skills or talents to make their efforts marketable. Because of this, some people will never be able to enjoy the new opportunities provided by upward mobility or the new jobs provided by growth.

To accept that upward mobility alone can cure society ill’s, to accept meritocracy as the ultimate goal, is to accept markets as the means of determining merit. When we talk about “upward mobility” and “meritocracy,” we implicitly assume that those who succeed have “merit,” while other do not. However, it was Friedrich Hayek, a free-market champion, who noted that capitalism should not be considered a “meritocracy,” because markets don’t distribute based on merit, but rather demand. Jamie Dimon and Lloyd Blankfein, markets have decided, deserve more than Hannah Gay, Katherine Luzuriaga and Deborah Persaud — the scientists who cured a newborn of HIV this year. Thus, when we accept upward mobility as a goal we must also be willing to accept that markets determine who goes up and who falls down, rightly or not. And when we accept “growth” as a goal, we assume that GDP is a useful metric to determine social progress (which it is not).