The Iowa Senate debated a bill Thursday morning to terminate the contracts with private companies to manage Iowa's Medicaid system.



Gov. Terry Branstad's plan would privatize the system in an effort to save money.



Democratic Sen. Pam Jochum told lawmakers during the debate that this is not the right plan and not the right model for people with disabilities or others.



"Is the governor's plan the right plan for people with disabilities?" No," said Jochum.



Jochum said 39 states did not put their entire system under this type of system, only three states have. She said those states only put part of their systems under managed care. She called for an end to the plan and said Branstad should instead work with the Legislature to develop a better health care system.

Jochum said the privatization plan will impact 560,000 Iowans.

Senate File 2125 passed the Senate 29-19 on Thursday morning, and then the Senate adjourned until Monday morning. It now goes to the Iowa House where GOP House Speaker Linda Upmeyer has said the bill would have no chance passing the Republican-led House.

"This bill directs the Department of Human Services to provide 30 days' written notice, upon the effective date of the Act, to terminate the contracts with each managed care organization with whom the department executed a contract to administer the Iowa High Quality Care Initiative," reads the bill.

Read the entire bill at https://www.legis.iowa.gov/legislation/BillBook?ga=86&ba=SF2125

AFSME REACTION:

AFSCME Iowa Council 61 President Danny Homan issued a statement following the vote:

"Thank you to the 29 senators who stood up to vote for the bill to stop the disastrous Branstad-Reynolds Medicaid outsourcing plan. These 29 senators clearly heard and responded to the concerns of Medicaid patients, families, and providers. This vote should be a wake-up call to the Branstad-Reynolds Administration that they need to start listening to Iowans and abandon this plan that threatens the health care of over a half million Iowans."