Leaving a good taste in fans’ mouths was important to the Nuggets.

Post-game giveaways will have to do, and there were plenty of them. On the the court, the Nuggets have to hope the things they accomplished prior to Sunday afternoon’s 100-84 loss to Utah will be good enough.

The Jazz let the air out of the Pepsi Center by first taking the air out of the Nuggets’ offense. As they had done three other times this season. Utah was the one team the Nuggets not only didn’t beat, losing the season series 0-4, but couldn’t even begin to solve.

In four games, the Jazz held the Nuggets to 84.2 points per game and never allowed the Nuggets more than 88 points in any of them. They ground the Nuggets offense to a halt every single time, and many times made it look frighteningly simple to do.

“You get beat four times by a division opponent, there’s no mixed or magical reason,” Nuggets coach Michael Malone said. “They’re a better team than us. They defend, we can’t score against them…they’re right now ahead of us. They’re on the cusp of making the playoffs and we’re on the outside looking in.”

The worst moment of the series came in the third quarter, when the Nuggets scoring dried up altogether. When Nikola Jokic made a bucket with 6:56 in the third, the Nuggets were up 62-58. Then, the Jazz put the screws to them on defense.

The Nugget did not score another point, and Utah sprinted past them using what became a 24-0 run to end the third. The Nuggets went 0-for-12 with four turnovers in the stretch.

“That’s where the game was lost,” Malone said. “You can’t let a team go on that type of run where you don’t get stops, you don’t score, where you don’t execute.”

The drought stretched into the fourth quarter with the Nuggets missing their first two shots of that period, too. By the time Will Barton made a breakaway dunk with 10:28 in the fourth, the Nuggets had not scored in 8 minutes, 28 seconds of game time.

And it was still a 24-2 run.

They never recovered and ended their home schedule the way it began — with a loss. The Nuggets finished their home schedule with an 18-23 record, one win shy of last season’s 19. Establishing a home court edge was something the Nuggets desperately wanted to get to but never truly did.

Their best stretch was a 5-2 record in a seven-game homestand in March. But, in the end, it wasn’t the turning point the Nuggets had hoped it would be. They finished with two wins in the final six home contests.

“I think 18-23 at home is poor. It’s one less than they won last year so we took a step back in that area, which is disappointing,” Malone said. “If you want to be a playoff-caliber team, if you want to be a competitive team, you have to protect your home court.”

Rudy Gobert dominated the Nuggets front line on both ends, finishing with 16 points, 14 rebounds and a career-high six blocks.

Meanwhile, the Nuggets did put five players into double figures, led by Nikola Jokic’s 19 points and 11 rebounds. Emmanuel Mudiay finished with 19 points as well.

“They did a better job of executing their plays in the second half,” Mudiay said. “They kind of slowed us down.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost