Dana Loesch, one of the founding leaders of the modern-day Tea Party movement, endorsed U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) for president on Tuesday. ( The Blaze Image )

Presidential candidate U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) got the endorsement Tuesday of one of the founding leaders of the grassroots Tea Party movement.

Dana Loesch co-founded the St. Louis Tea Party and quickly became one of the movement's most outspoken national voices. She was an original Breitbart News editor, handpicked by Andrew Breitbart himself, but today is a nationally syndicated radio and television host.

In deciding to back Cruz, Loesch said she was vetting the Republicans to find the "most consistent conservative" in the race. In a statement provided shortly after she announced her endorsement on-air, she said:

"As one of the original founders of the modern-day Tea Party movement, I watched grassroots conservatives support Ted Cruz' David and Goliath success against Dewhurst and the Republican establishment. Cruz has fought to repeal Obamacare, shrink the size of government; he has defended our gun rights, our right to privacy, our sovereignty and borders. I personally feel that Ted Cruz is the best choice to reverse America's road to ruin and am proud to support him in the 2016 Republican primary."

Loesch appears regularly on FOX News, ABC, CBS and CNN, where she advocates relentlessly for conservative principles. She most frequently discusses the Second Amendment, President Obama's executive orders, defunding Obamacare and protecting Americans' Constitutional liberties.

"Dana is a fearless conservative who is not afraid to confront the liberal media bias head-on," Cruz said. "She is a passionate fighter for liberty and an important voice for conservatives. I am thrilled to have Dana on our team and work together to win the White House in 2016."

Draw closer to God. Experience the presence of the Holy Spirit every month as you read Charisma magazine. Sign up now to get Charisma for as low as $1 per issue.

Has God called you to be a leader? Ministry Today magazine is the source that Christian leaders who want to serve with passion and purpose turn to. Subscribe now and receive a free leadership book.

-

See an error in this article? This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.