Westcliffe welcomes riders on Saturday at the end of 30th annual Ride the Rockies. ( Sally Seck / Special to the Daily Record )

Around 2,000 tired and triumphant bicyclists coasted into Westcliffe under the hot summer sun Saturday, bringing the 2015 Ride the Rockies to a close. Brightly-painted bicycles decorated the way through Silver Cliff and Westcliffe, and locals were lined up with cowbells and homemade signs to cheer each racer to the finish line after the seven-day bike tour. Cyclists started the day in Cañon City, rode up Hardscrabble Canyon and arrived in Westcliffe throughout the day.

The warm welcome didn't end at the finish line, and riders continued to be greeted with smiling faces, home-cooked food, live music and cold beer at The Bluff Park. The Westcliffe community stepped up to the challenge to host the conclusion of Ride the Rockies in its 30th year, seizing it as an opportunity to show bicyclists and their family and friends what the area has to offer.

Westcliffe welcomes riders on Saturday at the end of 30th annual Ride the Rockies. (Sally Seck/ Special to The Daily Record)

"We've been working on this event for eight months," said Donna Hood, Custer County Chamber of Commerce president, clad in an orange volunteer shirt and carrying two walkie talkies. "I'm pretty proud of this community. We needed 100 volunteers to make it work, and we got over 250," said Hood.

"We've got 13 organizations cooking that have never worked together before," said Hood.

Organizers seemingly thought of everything, and care was taken to have healthy, gluten free and vegan options available for bicyclists. Food offered by the non-profit organizations ranged from quinoa salad to grass-fed beef burgers, and the lines were long all day, particularly for the Hillside Amish's homemade ice cream and pie.

Advertisement

"We've never had something quite like this in Westcliffe, and the Valley looks even more beautiful than usual because of all the recent rain," said Monica Backse of Community United Methodist Church, selling homemade cookies baked by congregants eager to be involved in the event.

The outpouring of enthusiasm by the community was evident to everyone in attendance.

"I've never been to Westcliffe before," said first time rider, Mike Brown of Park City, Utah. "This town has a lot of potential. If they try any harder to be nice, all they're gonna get is a bunch of people moving here."

Brown wasn't the only rider impressed with the celebration.

"Ride the Rockies came through Westcliffe in 2013, and they gave such a warm welcome," said Steve Eddy of Arvada, cooling off after his third year participating. "When I heard the ride was finishing in Westcliffe, I had a feeling they were gonna roll out the red carpet, and here it is."

The red carpet entertainment consisted of Cañon City bands Deja Bluz and Flash Cadillac, as well as Westcliffe's Second Street Dance Team. In addition to Fort Collins' Odell Brewing Company beer on tap, wine was for sale in the Chamber of Commerce tent, which was decorated with an authentic chuck wagon, hay bales and cowboy boots. Event organizers also implemented infrastructural improvements to the town in order to accommodate technological needs of visitors.

"The event was a catalyst for installing permanent Wi-Fi on Main Street," said Hood.

The free public Wi-Fi extends along Main Street from Adams Boulevard on the west end of town to 6th Street, and is owned, operated and maintained by the Custer County Economic Development Corporation. The installation was completed a week ahead of schedule, well in time for Saturday's event, but the plan is to continue to expand as additional funds are raised.

As a way to give back to the communities it passed through, every year Ride the Rockies donates to a local non-profit in each stop along the route, and in Westcliffe, $5,000 was given to Club America of the Wet Mountain Valley.

"We think it's a fabulous thing to have a foundation support our mission to teach every kid how to swim," said Barbara Sutton of Club America.

For four years, Club America has been holding a triathlon for children in grades 4-6. Free swim lessons and facility memberships are offered to the kids in these grades to help them train for the competition each May.

Club America will be holding a marathon on September 19th.

"The marathon will run up Hermit Pass from A Painted View Ranch, then back down to the ranch, as will the half marathon. There will also be a 13k on the Valley floor," said Sutton.

From Club America and beyond, nonprofits and businesses in Westcliffe and Silver Cliff benefited from the event, and hope to see these visitors return in the future.

"This was an amazing opportunity for Westcliffe," said Hood. "Ride the Rockies is already asking to come back next year. That's not our decision, but the Chamber of Commerce would love it."