STEAMBOAT SPRINGS — Fifteen months after a gruesome crash nearly ended his red-hot cycling career, Boulder’s Taylor Phinney lowered his head and hammered his BMC bike down Steamboat Springs’ Lincoln Avenue on Monday.

Thousands screamed and clanged bells. Riders in the USA Pro Challenge’s 123-strong peloton elbowed for position.

“It was that kind of electric moment we all live for,” said Phinney, whose dramatic sprint in the last kilometer of Stage 1 earned him his first win since a May 2014 crash shattered his left leg and severed his patellar tendon. “I’ve had 15 months to think about putting my hands up in the air again, and it was everything I thought it would be.”

Almost 27 years ago to the day, a then 29-year-old Davis Phinney won the 15th stage of the final Coors Classic in his hometown of Boulder, a career apex for Colorado’s cycling giant. Davis and his wife, Connie, herself a world champion cyclist, were watching their son on the big screen on the lawn of Steamboat’s downtown courthouse on Monday when the peloton rounded the final turn.

PHOTOS: USA Pro Challenge 2015 across Colorado

“Davis and I were really just floored, but we’ve always been floored by what our kids can do,” said Connie, who last May simply hoped her son would regain use of his mangled leg. “He’s a changed person from before the accident and, man, he’s still a good bike racer too.”

“The sky is the limit for Taylor,” said Davis, who is battling Parkinson’s disease.

On the final of two 49-mile laps, things didn’t look good for Phinney as the peloton suddenly surged on the final of three steep climbs. He felt himself falling back. Teammate Rohan Dennis of Australia gave him a look and dropped the hammer, leading a two-man breakaway that would last until the final kilometer.

Dennis seemed poised to win the stage for most of the downhill push from Oak Creek into Steamboat. With only 5 kilometers to go, the 25-year-old Dennis and Canadian national champion Guillaume Boivin of Optum shared drafting duty in a two-man breakaway that stretched 25 seconds ahead of the peloton.

WATCH: Taylor Phinney wins Stage 1 of the USA Pro Challenge

Dennis’ sprinting breakaway wasn’t part of the BMC plan.

“I was talking with Taylor on the way up the last climb and was like, ‘What is happening?’ ” said BMC’s Brent Bookwalter, who rode Phinney’s tail to a third-place finish. “We had some tentative plans going into today. But when we have a strong Rohan Dennis, the script of the plan goes out the window.”

In a Boulder-forged finish, Boulder’s Kiel Reijnen of UnitedHealthcare squeezed into second place in the theatrical finish that saw the top three finish within one second of one another.

Phinney said he thought Dennis was going to win the stage. He wasn’t planning a late sprint. But coming downhill with a tailwind into the final kilometer down Lincoln Avenue, Phinney felt good. He made what he called a “spur of the moment” decision. The peloton flew past Dennis. Phinney found a line on the far right side and stood up on his pedals.

“I knew we could come in with a lot of speed and somebody, if they wanted to, could jump early and get a pretty good gap and potentially hold that,” Phinney said. “It was a Davis Phinney special. Get dropped and come back and win.”

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasonblevins

Tuesday’s stage 2

Distance: 115.3 miles

Start time: 10:55 a.m.

Projected finish time: 3:35 p.m.

Start: Steamboat Springs

Brief description of course: 1.3-mile neutral start in Steamboat Springs before traveling out of town over Rabbit Ears Pass (9,391 feet) through Kremmling and Parshall and over Ute Pass (9,570 feet) into Silverthorne before heading through Dillon and Keystone and ending with a mountaintop finish at Arapahoe Basin (10,789 feet). Intermediate sprints for the green jersey in Kremmling and Dillon.