JACKSONVILLE, Fla. - The deadline for the Affordable Care Act has expired and if you have chosen not to have medical insurance, then you have likely decided to just pay the fine at the end of the year. One local doctor's office says for the uninsured, or those who have chosen minimum coverage that may include a sky high deductible, it may have an option that's right for you. It's a trend we may soon see offered in more private offices.



It's called an 'insurance contract' and is isn't the best option for everyone. However, if you're uninsured or have a plan costing more than 200 dollars a month, with a deductible above 3500 dollars, this may be worth considering.



Last year, Anthony Blackburn, a self-employed attorney, went with a plan he found on the health insurance marketplace. "I got what they called the bronze plan," Blackburn said. "I signed up the last day not realizing how big these deductibles are. In my case it was $3500 before they paid cent."



Blackburn says he paid all that money out of his own pocket because he needed to see the doctor sometimes twice a month. "the first time I saw the doctor it was $250," Blackburn told us. This year, Blackburn was looking at a similar payout until he heard about the supplemental contract offered at Alaric Health & Wellness. For $85 a month, he can see the doctor for a $25 co-pay, and there's no deductible for primary care procedures offered in the office.



Jim Whited is one of the providers at Alaric. "That means if you come to Alaric for all of your primary care health needs, you are going to be covered," Whited said. "And we do everything from diabetes, hypertension, weight control, all of that. It's going to save you a tremendous amount of money."



Dr. Bethoven Reudas says they came up with this plan because they knew some people who needed to see the doctor just couldn't afford to. "I wish I could do more." Dr. Reudas admitted. "It's terrible feeling because I wish I could have done a better job for these patients getting them healthcare, but without insurance they just forgo proper treatment."



In Blackburn's case, he's says he's getting the treatment he needs without emptying his checking account. "Now that I have signed up here, I have already saved about $950 in three months."



A few things to consider with this plan, it mostly covers things like sick visits and primary care services offered in the office. If you need to see a specialist, they will help you find one but the costs you incur outside of Alaric will not be covered.

In addition, this plan is not recognized by the government. If this is your only means of coverage, you still face that annual fine.



To see the service agreement that Alaric is offering, click here.



Copyright 2015 by News4Jax.com. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.