Q: I now have a hearing aid and have discovered that it has made me a better driver. I also think it has improved my balance when I walk. Is there any science behind that? — Janet R., Tempe Arizona

A: You’re so smart to get a hearing aid; less than 25 percent of folks who need them get them!

A hearing aid reconnects you to the world around you, and researchers are discovering that it can even affect your balance and help prevent falls. Balance is dependent on a complex system that processes information from your feet, skin, eyes and (there’s some indication) hearing. It all comes together in your inner ear, where the so-called labyrinth — the centerpiece of your balance or vestibular system — sends data to your brain.

The exact way hearing and balance are related remains a mystery. Regardless, there have been good epidemiological studies that show a strong correlation. For example, a 2012 study from Johns Hopkins found that people with even mild hearing loss were nearly three times more likely to have a history of falling than folks with no hearing problems.

Funny thing, though — Medicare pays for a hearing exam, but Medicare/Medicaid doesn’t pay for hearing aids. That puts them out of reach for many people. But if you consider that in 2012 the price tag for direct medical costs associated with falls of older adults was $30 billion, it makes good medical and financial sense for our health-care system to start covering hearing aids.

Here’s an idea: Maybe the health-care system could offer them to people who achieve five “normals” — normal blood pressure, normal LDL cholesterol, normal fasting blood sugar, normal waist circumference to height ratio and normal use of tobacco, which is to say none. More than 97 percent of folks CAN get to those five normals with lifestyle changes and/or medication, and the cost savings from THAT would be stupendous. Do we need to say it more loudly?

Q: I’m turning 65 next year and am looking at getting an advanced directive for health care written up. Should I get the rest of my family to sign up, too? — Tammy R., Norman, Oklahoma

A: An advance directive is a good idea for you, your husband and adult children.

It’s sometimes called a living will or a durable power of attorney for health care, and it protects your point of view or specifies who can speak for you and what you want them to say if you can’t speak up for yourself about health and medical issues. It also can spare your family the agony of making decisions about your medical treatment or end of life. Although it’s tough to think about these kinds of issues, it’s important. Almost 65 percent of people don’t have any form of AD.

Once you create an AD, you can always change it as your circumstances shift or you change your point of view. After all, when The Who released “My Generation” in 1965, Roger Daltry (then 21) sang, “I hope I die before I get old.” Now, the 71-year-old drinks herbal tea, advocates healthy living and says, “I hope I die before I get too old.” Seems over the years, his attitude changed — and yours may, too.

Two good resources are the websites caringinfo.org or nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/advancedirectives.html. And talk to your family about your point of view; discuss your wishes with your doctors to make sure they support your directives and make sure they all have a copy.

To help individuals take this important step, and to help the health care system avoid costly wrangles, former senator Dr. Tom Coburn (R-Okla.) introduced the Medicare Choices Empowerment and Protection Act (S.2240) last April. It proposed an incentive to get Medicare beneficiaries to voluntarily create an AD in conjunction with a certified and accredited advance directive vendor.

Since then, Dr. Coburn has retired — he’s fighting prostate cancer — but the bill is important and we hope it makes its way through Congress.

Dr. Mehmet Oz is host of “The Dr. Oz Show,” and Dr. Mike Roizen is chief medical officer at the Cleveland Clinic Wellness Institute. Submit your health questions at www.doctoroz.com.