Affordable Care Act help available this week

The Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium and staff from the Maniilaq Public Health Center will be answering questions and assisting residents of Kotzebue in signing up for coverage under the Affordable Care Act and Alaska Native/American Indian exemptions.

The event is open to everyone in the community and they will also be signing up people for VA and Medicaid.

Help is available today and tomorrow (Thursday and Friday) at Maniilaq Health Center in the lobby from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. and 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. tomorrow.

Those interested in signing up for ACA must have: state photo identification, social security cards (one for each person needing health insurance), income verification (pay stubs, W-2 forms, 2012 taxes), birth certificate, U.S. passport (or anything else verifying qualifying?immigration status), policy numbers of current insurance of those in household, current email address and password. Help is also available for those who might not have an email account.

Those filing for an exemption must have a tribal enrollment card, ANSCA shareholder card (Regional/Village), certificate of Indian blood and social security numbers for each member of your family.

For further information about the sign-up, please contact Lucy Jensen at 442-7343.

KIC, ASRC dividends announced

Kikiktagruk Inupiat Corporation (KIC) announced last week that shareholders will receive $3 per share this year as their annual dividend.

KIC has given out dividends for the past four years and the amount is tied directly to the corporation's profitability, said CEO Cole Schaeffer last week.

He added that most shareholders have 100 shares unless they have acquired more through inheritance.

The decision on whether to give out a dividend and how much it will be is decided, after careful review by the board of directors.

"We had a good year considering the environment with sequestration and then the shutdown," Schaeffer said. "It didn't impact us until the end of the year."

KIC operates the Polaris dealership in Kotzebue, and Shaeffer added that the large Arctic Slope Regional Corporation dividend distributed late last year helped them out because of an influx of snowmachine sales. "We're very thankful for that," Schaeffer said.

Also last week, ASRC announced a plan to break up its dividend into quarterly allotments starting in March, rather than giving it out twice a year as it has for the past 20 years.

The $50 per share annual target that was previously established remains in place.

The first quarterly dividend payment of $12.50 per share is scheduled for early March. The average ASRC shareholder owns 100 shares of stock and will receive $1,250. The other 2014 quarterly dividend distributions are scheduled for July, September and December. When the March dividend is paid, ASRC will have distributed a total of more than three quarters of a billion dollars in dividends since its incorporation, read a release from ASRC.

"This is a program that our shareholders have requested for some time, and we've listened," said ASRC president and CEO, Rex A. Rock, Sr. in a release last week. "Thanks to a new digital stock management system we are finally able to make it happen, and I look forward to seeing the difference it can make in the lives of our owners."