Grammy winner Wayne Toups performs at Lafayette’s Road to Recovery Concert Aug. 14 at Parc International. (Photo: David Simpson)

An all-star musical lineup of Wayne Toups, Keith Frank and Cupid will entertain for Lafayette’s Road to Recovery Concert at 6:30 p.m. Aug. 14 at Parc International in downtown Lafayette. Country singer Blaine Roy and accordion ace Joel Martin are also part of the lineup.

Admission is $10, with proceeds going to a mental health fund that concert organizers have set up with the Community Foundation of Acadiana. CFA serves as a resource that connects donors to organizations in need.

Chris Foreman, a concert co-organizer with Patrick Mould, said the event was sparked by musicians wanting to help victims of the July 23 shooting at the Grand Theatre. But since a number of memorials and vigils have accomplished that goal, Foreman said the event’s focus was shifted to mental health awareness.

Officials said the theater shooter, who killed two and injured nine, had a history of mental issues. Last year, the National Alliance for Mental Illness reported that between 2009 and 2012, states cut $4.35 billion from their mental health budgets, raising concerns about public safety and more.

Foreman said the CFA will distribute funds raised to NAMI, a grassroots organization with volunteers across the country. The Extra Mile and other local groups working in mental health awareness may also receive help.

“When you ask the social workers, psychologists and psychiatrists about where’s the best place for this money to go to, the first, the first word out of their mouth is NAMI,” said Foreman. “The Community Foundation also has a list of foundations that would also fit the criteria for mental health awareness.

“The money we would raise would be added to the funds already in that category. When those people need money, they apply for a grant and the Community Foundation decides if they issue a grant.

“The money will go to the Community Foundation first, so it will go where it needs to go eventually.”

“For us, this is more about the big picture and long term,” said Mould. “I’m concerned about what the long-term ramifications of this shooting are going to be on the people of Lafayette. That’s why we wanted to bring some awareness for the forefront.”

Beer, soft drinks, water, hamburgers and hot dogs will be sold at the concerts. Ice chests are not allowed.

For more information, visit the Lafayette’s Road to Recovery Concert page on Facebook.

Want to go?

Lafayette’s Road to Recovery Concert

6:30 p.m. Aug. 14

Parc International, downtown Lafayette

Admission: $10

Information. Road to Recover Concert page on Facebook

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/08/08/concert-raises-funds-mental-health-awareness/31356571/