Years ago, I acquired an odd-shaped, blue velvet autograph book, purchased by a friend at a yard sale.

The little book was dated 1891 and had belonged to someone named "Fannie," who apparently had lived in the Boulder County community of Caribou. I looked through the book, then put it on a shelf and forgot about it.

A recent visit to the site of the former silver mining town, west of Nederland, renewed my interest. I wondered about Fannie and who she was.

A little historical detective work gave a whole new meaning to the artifact.

Long before the days of high school yearbooks, students (and others) used blank-paged "books" to collect wishes, poems and sentimental sayings from their peers. I had a hunch Fannie was a teenage schoolgirl, and that proved true. As it turned out, she was born and raised in Caribou and was 16 when she passed the book around for friends and family to sign.

One of the keys to discovering Fannie's full name was an entry from her brother, Ed. Another was from "your loving schoolmate, Alice Dunn." By accessing the Caribou census records on Ancestry.com, I learned that Alice was born in 1874. The only "Fannie" living in Caribou then was born about the same time (1875) and had a brother named Ed.

Suddenly, Fannie became Frances "Fannie" A. Jones and was much easier to research through genealogical records. Her father, George, was Caribou's blacksmith.

Fires and the declining price of silver took a toll on the once-thriving town. After the silver market collapse, in 1893, the family moved to Boulder. There, Fannie entered Mount St. Gertrude Academy, a Catholic girls school, where she was a member of its first graduating class.

In a Boulder wedding in 1899, Fannie married Howard Ullmer, an older man she knew from Caribou. The couple moved to Goldfield, Nev., where Howard became a superintendent of a gold mine. If Fannie had opened her autograph book and reread the entry of one of her school friends, she might have felt her friend's wish was coming true.

The friend had written: "May you always be happy, May you always be blest, And live in a mansion, With the one you love best."

Sometime after that, however, Howard and Fannie divorced, and Fannie's life began to change. Howard moved to California and remarried; Fannie moved back to Boulder. In the 1920s, she led groups of tourists to Arapaho Glacier. And she lived for more than 30 years in Boulder's Monticello Hotel, on the southeast corner of 13th and Walnut streets.

Fannie never remarried and never had any children. She lived to be 99, and her cremated remains are buried in her family's plot in Boulder's Columbia Cemetery. Although her parents, siblings and even Howard Ullmer all have gravestones, Fannie doesn't. No one in her immediate family was alive to give her one. And that's probably why the little blue book ended up at a yard sale. It has since been donated to Boulder's Carnegie Branch Library for Local History.

As Alice Lytle, another school friend wrote in Fannie's book: "In this quiet little spot, I place a sweet forget-me-not."