In a one-on-one situation with a defenseman, two things typically happen when Nathan MacKinnon takes the puck wide and drives to the net.

1) He creates a scoring opportunity.

2) He draws a penalty.

Pulling up and looking for a trailer above the circles usually does neither. If anything, it says young MacKinnon is not comfortable challenging men in one-on-one battles in which he should win.

But MacKinnon — perhaps the NHL’s most powerful skater — promises to be more aggressive in his third year as the Avalanche’s electrifying offensive star.

“That was just a habit, I think. There’s times to pull up and times to drive, and obviously I didn’t drive enough. I know that,” said MacKinnon, the 2014 Calder Trophy winner who is coming off a disappointing second season. “But you have to make a decision pretty quick out there and sometimes you’re not going to make the best decision. I can drive more, for sure, and I need to get deeper when I do pull up — it needs to be closer to the goal line. I have to at least try to get to the net, and if I can’t, I’ll pull up. But for sure, this year I’m going to try to be more aggressive.”

MacKinnon, who turned 20 on Sept. 1, is better equipped to compete this season. He is a quarter-inch taller, up to nearly 6-foot-1, and he gained 15 pounds, up to about 210.

He’s even faster.

“I feel faster, more powerful. I can say all that stuff, but I have to bring it to the games. But I do feel good out there,” he said.

MacKinnon knows he still has plenty of growth — because he continues to grow. His new beard is proof. He couldn’t grow more than a peach-fuzz playoff beard as an 18-year-old in 2014.

“I’m young and growing, still filling in my body. I don’t know how heavy I’ll be. Still trying to figure that out,” he said. “But I’m in good shape and whatever weight I am, as long as I feel light on the ice I should be OK.”

MacKinnon was drafted as a center, played wing most of his rookie season and was back at center early last season — until the coaching staff realized he had too much responsibility on his plate.

This season, he is pegged to start at right wing with center Carl Soderberg and left wing Gabe Landeskog.

Ultimately, your most gifted forwards with elite speed play center.

“We’ll see how it shakes out,” MacKinnon said.

In looking back to his sensational rookie season and his sophomore slump — which ended in January when he fractured his foot — the difference was confidence. Like the Avs as a team, they were a confident bunch in 2013-14 and lost that belief last season.

“There’s not exactly one thing I didn’t do my second year that I did my first year. I was probably a better hockey player my second year, in terms of my skill set and skating,” MacKinnon said. “My mind-set was obviously not as good. I wasn’t as confident and having as much fun. Those things definitely affect your play.”

Matt Duchene, 24, has been there. He could write a book about the ebbs and flows of an 18-year-old becoming a man against men in the NHL. Duchene, Landeskog and MacKinnon began their careers at 18 and never played in the minors.

“I think he’ll bounce back,” Duchene said of MacKinnon. “For me, when I went through that, you have to ask yourself tough questions and you have to reflect the right way. You can’t kid yourself.

“You have to look in the mirror and be realistic. Obviously, he had such a great first year. You’re not going to fix what’s not broken. But when you address the things that went wrong, and do it the right way, there’s no way a player of his caliber can’t succeed, and won’t succeed.

“I have nothing but confidence that he’s going to have an amazing year.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or @mikechambers