Health Care: Two more signs that all is not well in ObamaCare land: The administration has pushed back the enrollment deadline while refusing to say how many have actually paid their ObamaCare premiums.

ObamaCare has become like that old quip of Mark Twain’s about the weather in New England. If you don’t like it, wait a few days and it will change.

Less than two weeks ago, the administration was emphatic that there would be no delay of the March 31 enrollment deadline for ObamaCare. In fact, the spokesman for the agency in charge of ObamaCare said, “We don’t actually have the statutory authority to extend the open enrollment period in 2014.”

The next day, HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius was asked point-blank at a congressional hearing if she was going to delay the deadline. “No, sir,” was her response.

The reason ObamaCare imposes a limited open enrollment period in the first place is to prevent people from gaming the system — buying insurance only after they get sick. So extending the deadline would just encourage abuse.

Nevertheless, this week Obama officials suddenly changed their minds. They claim the two-week delay will just provide leeway to those who started the ObamaCare enrollment process but couldn’t finish it in time.

Unlikely. The White House has claimed since early December that all the HealthCare.gov glitches were fixed and that it could handle mass volumes.

Plus, anyone who wants to can take advantage of the extension. All a person has to do is check a box saying he or she tried to enroll before the deadline. Federal officials won’t try to figure out who is, or isn’t, telling the truth.

No, the real reason for the deadline delay is that Obama is desperate to get lagging enrollment numbers as high as he can, any way he can.

It’s the same reason the administration refuses to produce data on how many ObamaCare “enrollees” have actually paid their premiums: HHS officials insist they just don’t have that information.

But this week Reps. Dave Camp and Kevin Brady discovered that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has been telling insurers to report both enrollment and payment data. That, the lawmakers say, strongly suggests “the administration knows who has enrolled and paid their first month’s premium.”

In addition, eight state-run exchanges — each built with federal grant money — have managed to produce nonpayment data for some time now.

That picture isn’t very pretty. In Maryland, 46% of enrollees haven’t paid their premiums so far. In Vermont, 36% are unpaid. Overall, about one in five people in these states has yet to pony up.

If that average holds nationwide, it means that fully 1 million people haven’t paid for their ObamaCare plans yet and could lose their coverage.

No wonder Obama wants to keep this number under wraps.

In running for office, he promised change you can believe in. When it comes to ObamaCare, what he’s delivering is change whenever it suits him politically.