LIMA — Before retiring five years ago, Lima resident Richie Crouch paid dues to his local union each month with an understanding he would be adequately compensated through his pension fund after he quit working.

A few months ago, Crouch learned the $2,500 a month in pension he had been receiving will plummet to a little over $1,000, representing a 65 percent cut in his retirement fund.

“It’s welfare money,” Crouch said. “If my wife wasn’t working, I could apply for food stamps or some other type of aid.”

Crouch, 60, is one of the more than 400,000 people who will see cuts in their pensions starting July 1. The cuts are a result of the Multiemployer Pension Reform Act, which President Barack Obama signed into law in December 2014.

The law allows for a reduction in benefits for multi-employer pension plans that were at risk of going broke. Prior to this legislation, pension plans in financial trouble could not reduce benefits to already retired workers.

As an employee of Nash Finch, a food distribution company that was acquired by Spartan Stores in 2013, Crouch was part of the Teamsters Local 908 union. Crouch explained the union is compensated by the Central States Pension Fund, a multi-employer fund that services mostly distribution and trucking companies. The money the union receives from Central States is then paid out to employees when they retire.

Crouch said he paid between $44 and $64 a month in union dues the entire time he worked at Nash Finch. He said they even took a 6 percent cut in wages to ensure their retirement benefits would be saved. However, Central States had become severely underfunded in the last 15 years and was heading toward financial failure if action was not taken.

“Our pensions amounted to quite a bit of money you could live off of for the rest of your life,” Crouch said. “Now, with us being cut 30 to 70 percent, there is no life after retirement.”

In a letter sent to Central States’ members, executive director Thomas Nyhan stated the fund’s decline is a result of a few factors, most notably a decrease in workforce coupled with an increased number of retirees, as well as two major recessions. According to the letter, the fund has more than three times as many retirees as active members, meaning fewer contributions are coming in than benefits being put out.

“To put this in perspective, for every $3.46 that the fund pays out in pension benefits, only $1 is collected from contributing employers,” Nyhan stated, “which results in a $2 billion annual shortfall. Clearly the math will never work.”

In order for the fund to survive, severe retirement benefit reductions were enacted through the Multiemployer Pension Reform Act.

Another Lima resident, Rodney Decker, is also feeling the effects of these cuts. Since retiring in 2000, Decker had been receiving $2,125 in retirement benefits each month. Starting July 1, his pension will be reduced to $1,333 a month.

“It took a long time to work and get this thing built up to where we could have a comfortable retirement, now it’s being taken away,” said Decker. “I’m 75 years old, and my knees are all busted up. Who’s gonna hire me?”

If the multi-employer plan fails, retirees will be guaranteed a maximum of $12,870 per year for people with 30 years of service. The amount can be as low as $4,290 for those with 10 or less years of service.

Crouch believes cutting pensions will also have a “trickle-down effect.”

“It trickles down to the employer,” he said. “How are you going to negotiate a contract or tell somebody to go work for Teamsters when the guys are going to have to work until they’re 70 years old?”

As a last ditch effort to save their pensions, Crouch and other local Teamsters are traveling to Washington, D.C. for a rally on April 14 on the front lawn of the Capitol Building. Crouch said Ohio Sen. Rob Portman will be in attendance.

“It’s the last stand we have,” Crouch said.

Before leaving for D.C., local Teamsters will hold a rally in Lima to explain the situation and outline details of the trip. The rally will be held at 11 a.m. Saturday in the old Kmart parking lot, located near Westgate Entertainment Center off Allentown Road in Lima. Members of all unions are welcome to attend.

A union member at a recent rally to protest pension cuts shows the back of his shirt, which reads: “Our pension cuts will have an economic disaster on retired seniors across America.” Local union members will hold another rally Saturday in Lima. http://limaohio.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/web1_pension-cuts-1.jpg A union member at a recent rally to protest pension cuts shows the back of his shirt, which reads: “Our pension cuts will have an economic disaster on retired seniors across America.” Local union members will hold another rally Saturday in Lima. Richie Crouch | Submitted photo

Union members will hold rallies in Lima, D.C. in an effort to save their pensions

By John Bush [email protected]

Reach John Bush at 567-242-0456 or on Twitter @bush_lima

Reach John Bush at 567-242-0456 or on Twitter @bush_lima

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus