“I just didn’t even realize until this weekend that it had the kind of momentum that it had,” Senator Bob Corker, a Republican of Tennessee, told The Hill yesterday. He was talking about the letter “to the Leaders of the Islamic Republic of Iran” that had been signed by forty-seven Republican senators, including Tom Cotton, of Arkansas, who led the effort. It was an open attempt to disrupt the Obama Administration’s negotiations with Iran on nuclear policy by telling the mullahs that the President of the United States wasn’t someone they should trouble themselves with. Even some Republicans seem a little embarrassed about it now. Megyn Kelly, of Fox News, reflecting conservative criticisms, asked Cotton what the point could be of corresponding with Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. (He said that “experts” told him that the Iranians didn’t understand the American Constitution.) No Democrats signed the letter. Corker was one of only seven Republican senators who didn’t.

The other Republican non-signers were Susan Collins, of Maine; Lamar Alexander, of Tennessee; Dan Coats, of Indiana; Lisa Murkowski, of Alaska; Jeff Flake, of Arizona; and Thad Cochran, of Mississippi. There was a certain amount of curiosity about why they hadn’t—as if sending a Dear Ayatollah letter was a fun group activity that they had skipped out on. Collins’s answer was fairly sensible: “I don’t think that the ayatollah is going to be particularly convinced by a letter from members of the Senate.” Others, meanwhile, were more circumspect. “I just didn’t think it was appropriate” (Flake). “I just don’t think we ought to be discussing it in public” (Cochran). Maybe they just didn’t think that the Republican Party had become quite so lacking in leadership. The real question, though, isn’t why the seven didn’t sign, but how Cotton, a freshman senator with a well-known habit of engaging in flights of destructive rhetoric, had persuaded forty-six colleagues to join him.

As he often points out, Cotton, who is thirty-seven, is both a veteran of Afghanistan and Iraq and a graduate of Harvard Law School. In 2006, when the Times published a piece revealing that the government, in the name of fighting terrorism, had collected the private financial information of Americans who had nothing to do with terrorism, Cotton, then an Army lieutenant stationed in Baghdad, sent a letter to the newspaper, saying that the editors should be put “behind bars.” The “next time I hear that familiar explosion—or next time I feel it,” he wrote, “I will wonder whether we could have stopped that bomb had you not instructed terrorists how to evade our financial surveillance.” He added, “I am well-versed in the espionage laws” that could be used to prosecute people at the paper. The Times didn’t publish the letter, but the conservative Web site Power Line did. Cotton was rewarded with praise from conservatives and, after he left the military and returned to his family’s cattle farm in Arkansas, a chance to run for Congress.

In 2012, he was elected to the House, where one of his first acts was to call for an amendment to a sanctions bill that would impose penalties not only on those who broke the law but also on their relatives, including their “great-grandkids,” “to the third degree of sanguinity.” The amendment failed—as the Washington Post pointed out, it was blatantly unconstitutional—but Cotton didn’t have much time for regret, because he had already decided to run for the Senate against Mark Pryor, the two-term Democratic incumbent, with the backing of the Tea Party Express, the Club for Growth, and national Republican figures who regarded his future as limitless. (Last September, the Atlantic ran a profile of Cotton entitled “The Making of a Conservative Superstar.”)

Cotton campaigned by opposing abortion rights and Obamacare, and by appealing to fellow veterans and foreign-policy hawks, while touring the state, as the AP reported, “in a bus decorated with a giant boot print on the front, the Arkansas flag and camouflage.” Last spring, on “Morning Joe,” when asked about suggestions that he was “extreme,” Cotton replied with a reference to Pryor’s record: “The only thing that’s extreme is casting the decisive vote for Obamacare five years ago.” He beat Pryor by seventeen points. In addition to trying to scuttle the Iran talks, during the two months that Cotton has been in the Senate he has attempted to block the release of any more detainees held at Guantánamo, even though nearly half of them have been determined to pose no threat to the United States. Cotton’s recommendation was that the prisoners should “rot in hell.”

Something seems to be out of kilter in the political marketplace that yielded Tom Cotton. How are younger legislators with assets like military experience—something in too short supply in Congress—deployed and, more crucially, developed, and which talents are rewarded? In last year’s campaign, Cotton had to answer charges that he was “reckless.” Recklessness now seems to be treated as a charm. Extremism, clumsiness, anger—other Republican members of the Senate, with a few hundred years of tenure between them, took a look and jumped on board. What was so appealing? Or what were they afraid of?

John McCain told Politico, “I saw the letter, I saw that it looked reasonable to me and I signed it, that’s all. I sign lots of letters”—as if he didn’t have to worry about anyone actually reading them. McCain told Greta Van Susteren, of Fox, that the Iranians needed to know that Congress had a serious role, but conceded, with what might be taken as a hint of regret, that the letter “maybe … wasn’t the best way to do that.” Bobby Jindal, the governor of Louisiana, said that he wished that he could sign Cotton’s letter and that he hoped that other potential 2016 Presidential candidates would, too. Senators Rand Paul, Marco Rubio, and Ted Cruz, of course, already have.

Cotton reportedly lobbied the senators personally and strenuously. And yet perhaps it wouldn’t have taken much for someone to stop him. Corker, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, declined to sign the letter because he had been trying to organize a bill that would undermine the Iran talks in a more dignified way. (“I just don’t view that as where I need to be today,” he told Politico. “My goal is to get 67 or more people on something that will affect the outcome.”) His fellow-Tennessean, Lamar Alexander, told the Knoxville News-Sentinel that he was guided by his colleague’s expertise. Murkowski’s spokesman noted that she was co-sponsoring the Corker bill. It may be relevant that, last year, Thad Cochran, though by traditional measures an archconservative, was targetted by Tea Partiers during a bitter campaign that involved a break-in at his wife’s nursing home and a suicide. Then again, the non-signers might just have had a sensible conversation on the subject before saying yes. If that were the case, perhaps it’s no surprise that so many others signed. The odds of having a chance encounter with rationality in today’s Senate are vanishingly small.