More Video...

Credit: Sgt. Zachary Sheely/Kansas National Guard

Four Black Hawk helicopters arrived in Medicine Lodge late Saturday morning to survey damage and dump water on the flames that continue to devastate Barber County.

"Where the ground crews have to spray, it takes a long time to get water on it. We can do water in either a long area, or 600 gallons in a small area and it delouses an area and puts the fire out quickly," said Chief Warrant Officer Steve Hood of the Kansas National Gaurd.

There are 15 crew members working to put out the flames. The helicopters are fueling at the Medicine Lodge Airport and taking water from a small lake on the north end of the town.

Crews are expected to spend the night as their assistance is wanted for Sunday.

"This is really rough country, and it is hard to get water sources to a lot of these places," said Shawna Hartmen of the Incident Management Team.

The fire has not spread out of its perimeter. Crews are working on extinguishing hot spots and flames.

The Barber County Attorney is asking for land owners to work with the National Guard as they fly over peoples ground an put out fires. Gaten Wood, the county attorney, says that it only takes 30 seconds for crews to dump the water. There has been an issue with land owners not giving enough space to crews putting out the fire.

It is advised that anyone near the Blackhawk Helicopters stay at least 100 yards away.

Black Hawks in Medicine Lodge: Posted by KAKE-TV on Saturday, March 26, 2016

Two Black Hawk helicopters from the Kansas National Guard will fly missions on Saturday to support firefighting efforts in south-central Kansas.

The Kansas Adjutant General's Department said each Black Hawk is manned by a four-person crew and will be equipped with a 660 gallon Bambi bucket, which can scoop water from local water sources to dump on the flames.

In addition to the aircraft, the 1st Battalion, 108th Aviation is sending a fuel tanker truck and another ground support vehicle with 2 crew members each.

The Kansas Division of Emergency Management continues to monitor the grass fires and is coordinating resources. The emergency operations center in Topeka is activated at a 24-hour watch level.

Current estimates indicate approximately 400,000 acres have been burned in Kansas and Oklahoma, 300,000 of those acres in Kansas alone.

No serious injuries or fatalities have been reported as a result of the fires, but five homes have been destroyed along with multiple outbuildings and an unknown number of livestock have been lost. Two bridges in Barber County have also been reported destroyed.

Barber, Comanche, Harvey and Reno counties have all issued state of local disaster emergency declarations. Gov. Sam Brownback signed a State of Disaster Emergency declaration on Wednesday for all affected counties.

The state requested and was granted a federal fire management assistance grant for Barber and Comanche counties.