Entities dedicated to the public welfare stay in business insofar as there is both a need and the wherewithal to keep them afloat.

When health and welfare improves, or funding models change, they can disappear, either outmoded or unsuited to the changing environment and thus leaving their work to be picked up by other entities.

At least two major private Pasadena agencies that long served some of the neediest people in Southern California abruptly had to shut their doors in recent months, and the city’s Public Health Department, which has seen to the welfare of thousands of citizens over its 120 years, is in a funding crisis, the victim, somewhat ironically, of the success of the Affordable Care Act — Obamacare.

Superb work though they did, the recently closed AIDS Service Center and El Centro de Accion Social existed for the purpose of serving deep needs, not as anything to be sentimental about. And the Pasadena Public Health Department is a most unusual entity in the first place, one of only three such departments in all of California — the others are in Berkeley and Long Beach — since all the other cities, including the state’s largest, defer to county health departments as more efficient providers of service to the needy.

As we reported in May, the Health Department, partially because of the sudden new availability of health insurance to so many uninsured people, has been in financial trouble for months now, with dozens of unfilled positions that won’t be filled and with layoffs occurring and more to come. Again, the department exists not to simply employ people but rather to fill a need, and when those needs are met elsewhere, its economics must change as well.

That’s a fact, both good and bad, for one prominent entity within the department that is already set to be closed entirely by September or October of this year. When it was created in 1991, the Andrew Escajeda Comprehensive Care Services clinic, designed to battle the then-devastating rise of deaths from HIV-AIDS, was a most unusual public entity at a time when most people — and cities — were in either ignorance or denial about the disease, raging almost entirely within the gay male population. The Pasadena City Council to its credit created an emergency task force, to propose ways the city could deal with the epidemic. One of the task force members, Andy Escajeda, a city employee, had recently been diagnosed with HIV. Escajeda’s health quickly took a turn for the worse and he died of AIDS-related complications within weeks of the task force taking up its work. The clinic that was created at the task force’s recommendation was named for him. And until recently it still had some 300 clients, whose health needs were ably overseen by Dr. Vivian Yeh. Now the remaining employees are scrambling to find new clinical homes for their patients — these days often poor Latinos and African-Americans rather than the original white gay male clientele. Monday the City Council rejected the idea of turning services over to the Community Health Alliance of Pasadena, so it’s not clear where patients will go.

What is clear, as with the funding problems that led to the sudden disappearance of the formerly large and prominent private AIDS Service Center and, separately, El Centro, which provided education, counseling and summer school for many Latino immigrants, is that changing economic realities and even the good news of more insured Americans create upheaval that government is not quite sure how to deal with.