The Obama administration is conducting a new experiment with the Affordable Care Act, but questions remain as to whether it will work.

It's called Comprehensive Primary Care Plus (CPC+) and it's considered to be the largest-ever initiative to transform primary care in America. Officials with Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) say under the five-year plan, doctors will be given more flexibility and the chance for rewards when patients stay healthy and require less-expensive care.

Politico reports many doctors will also share in the savings to Medicare, Medicaid, or private insurers. The announcement comes just after the sixth anniversary of ObamaCare and what the administration called new payment schemes and delivery system reforms.

"It looks like this new payment scheme is aimed at efficiency and reducing waste, lowering costs, which could be a good thing," says Hadley Heath Manning, director of health policy at the Independent Women's Forum.

Manning

"It sort of mimics some phenomena that we've already seen at work in the private sector that is like concierge medicine or direct primary care where patients pay a flat fee to their doctors for the services that their doctors will provide."

Manning says "we all recognize that there are flaws to the fee-for-service system" that happen within Medicare, Medicaid, or other third-party payment schemes.

"Of course, the problem with the way the government appears to be doing this new payment experiment is that it still involves a middle man or still involves a third-party payer," she continues.

"It would be better if these patients could contract directly with their healthcare providers for services – because if you want to shift incentives and reach the optimal efficiency in our healthcare system, then many services would be direct transactions between patients and doctors rather than having government step in and continue to sort of dictate the terms of these payments and these arrangements."

Meanwhile, doctors have already had one comprehensive primary care experiment, which offers practices $20 per-patient/per-month and then there are bonuses or other incentives if providers reach certain health outcomes for their patients.

"But we don't know what the details of the [CPC+] model will be; and of course, doctors need to know – if they're in private practice especially – whether or not this per-patient/per-month fee is going to be enough to cover their costs when it comes to seeing these patients," Manning explains.

"If it is, and [if] they have net revenues that are positive, this could be a good thing for doctors who participate. But of course, if the net revenues are negative, then this won't be something that physicians will want to participate in."

CPC+ is to go into effect in January 2017.