SOAP BOX logo (Photo: Provided )

First of all, I’d like to thank the hundreds of supporters who have called me to express their support and who refused to sign the recall petition. Their strong verbal support has been inspiring to me and is a reflection that they are committed to the 9,000 children in our school district. It’s all about the kids.

I have been singled out in this recall despite the fact that the votes I have participated in have been supported by a majority of the Salinas City Elementary School Board. The recall proponents want to control the board for the over 15,000 parents in the school district. Let’s be clear. This is not just about recalling me.

Most of the negativity began with a decision made last December to support making the acting superintendent, Dr. Juvenal Luza, to the permanent position of superintendent of Salinas City Elementary School District. Dr. Luza had been working for the district as the assistant superintendent for nine years and then as acting superintendent for over two years during the illness of the late Donna Alonzo. She hired Dr. Luza and believed in his commitment to children. His qualifications, dedication to the students, and experience led the board of trustees to approve his 18-month contract without an increase in salary.

Dr. Luza made several major personnel decisions to reassign staff which was within his authority. Whenever a governing body is dealing with personnel issues, in fairness to the employee and following the letter of the law, all discussions are confidential. Once again, the majority of the board voted to support the superintendent’s decisions.

All of this unnecessary conflict has taken the attention from the real issues impacting our district. Our mission is to educate the more than 9,000 students with the best quality education. Our $81,376,347 budget is balanced and all employees, from secretaries to the superintendent, received a 5 percent raise after a decade without any increase in salary.

Children at all schools continue to receive an outstanding education because of the highly qualified teachers in our district. Our teachers are well-equipped with textbooks, computers, classroom supplies, and a plethora of training. The school board has allocated money to hire district-wide vice-principals, program managers, and reading intervention teachers. It’s all about the kids.

Eighteen months ago, I ran for the school board seat and was unopposed. Since I have a long history of commitment to children, no one else decided to run for the position. During my tenure, I recommended to the board to have meetings twice monthly for additional study sessions, and we are doing it. I have initiated policies to save Outdoor Science Camp for every sixth-grader and was successful. I voted to improve literacy rates for all students by providing additional reading intervention resources for primary grades. I supported upper grade reading programs to ensure all students will have the opportunity to read at grade level. I strongly promoted preschools at every school site, increased technology resources, and authorized expenditures to upgrade and repair facilities.

For over 30 years, I have taught in Salinas and have educated over 1,000 students. My life has always been about the kids. Being a parent, grandparent, and teacher has been my highest priorities. Now, I have the opportunity to continue my professional contributions and improve the quality of education for 9,000 additional children in our district. It’s an obligation I have great pleasure in and understand the incredible responsibility that goes with it. Again, it’s all about the kids.

This recall campaign has been based on rumors, innuendos, insults and misrepresentations. My character has been impugned.

The negativity has distracted everyone from what should be our first priority – the students and their education. I, as an elected representative vote, as do my fellow board members, in the best interest of the children. It’s all about the kids.

The energy, money and time devoted to the recall are substantial. The Monterey County Elections Department reports that the cost of a recall is $20 per registered voter. The Salinas City Elementary School District has 9,374 registered voters. The cost is estimated at close to $200,000. This money would shortchange money designated for the classroom or services for students.

I look forward to working hard to support the work of our great teachers and support staff in our outstanding district. I am all about getting all of our students to be able to read at grade level and succeed academically.

The children of our community have always been my first priority. My supporters clearly understand this.

It’s all about the kids.

Janet Barnes is Salinas City Elementary School District Trustee No. 4

.

Read or Share this story: http://bit.ly/1wr76wW