When asked if Pelosi should resign from her leadership post, Rep. Stephen Lynch said, “right.” Rep. Lynch: Pelosi 'will not lead us back to the majority'

Massachusetts Democratic Rep. Stephen Lynch said Tuesday that Nancy Pelosi should consider stepping aside from her post as minority leader in the House.

Speaking on a local television program in Boston, Lynch was pressed on whether Pelosi should continue leading House Democrats after the party lost a substantial number of congressional seats in 2014.

Story Continued Below

“Nancy Pelosi will not lead us back to the majority,” Lynch said. Asked if Pelosi should resign from her leadership post, Lynch replied, “Right.”

Lynch, a moderate, has never been a Pelosi ally. He criticized the California Democrat’s tactics to pass Obamacare in 2010. And Pelosi endorsed neither Lynch nor then-Rep. Ed Markey when the two squared of in the primary for the Massachusetts special election for the Senate that Markey eventually won.

Rep. Michael Capuano also appeared on WGBH and said Democrats need to shake things up in leadership. Capuano did not directly call on Pelosi to resign, but said change is needed “if something you’re doing is not working.”

“I think we need leadership that understands that, if something you’re doing is not working, change what you’re doing,” Capuano said.

Capuano Democrat walked back his comments Wednesday, saying that Pelosi is making the “changes necessary to lead House Democrats back to electoral success and I still believe she will do so.”

After House Democrats lost nearly dozen seats in November, Pelosi established a series of task forces focused on messaging, voter turnout and minorities in an effort to improve Democrats’ chances in future elections.

Pelosi has led the Democratic caucus for years and while lawmakers criticized the party’s message after Democrats lost seats, no one stepped up to challenge the California Democrat after the election debacle. Democrats widely agree there’s no one ready to pick up her fundraising or legislative portfolio.

Drew Hammill, spokesman for Pelosi, noted that both Lynch and Capuano voted for Pelosi when she was elected minority leader last year.

“The Leader was re-elected unanimously in her caucus in November and appreciated the support of both of these members in the floor vote in January,” Hammill said. “While there are disagreements in the closest of families, the leader always values the input of her members as we develop our message going forward.”