ANALYSIS/OPINION:

When a locomotive crashes, it stops. Obamacare, on the other hand, just keeps on going like a cancer that’s ignored, perpetuating itself and destroying everything in its path.

While we thought the health care act was a train wreck, it’s more like cancer.

Discovering you’ve got a problem should be the first step on the road to recovery. You’re supposed to go in and confront it like you would if you found a tumor.

You wouldn’t just leave it there, wondering what it was up to, hoping it would go away on its own. No, you’d enlist some help and take care of business.

With all the anti-Obamacare rhetoric coming out of Republican leadership, they funded it for another year in the budget agreement.

That’s like thinking you can trash-talk your cancer into remission, while smoking three packs a day, and putting off that pesky surgery to remove the tumor until later. Genius.

This last week was a real wake-up call for those still living in the “Obamacare is great!” fantasy world, fueled by Richard Simmons videos, tweets by pro athletes, and now television ads (paid for with your tax dollars, of course) featuring singing animals imploring humans to “enroll today.”

One has to guess that President Obama’s little marketing gurus, once they put the bong down, think strange men exercising in short shorts and singing doggies will entertain you into complete Obamacare submission.

The happy lull you’re supposed to be in will presumably eclipse news of intelligence reports that Belarus, a former Soviet republic and current Russian ally, managed to insert malicious code into Healthcare.gov.

Heck, forget about hacking; if this is true, the hackers have built themselves into the Obamacare website itself.

Or maybe the Obama White House is hoping you’ll be lighting up your own joint, distracting you from allegations that Covered California, the poster child for “successful” Obamacare exchanges, has been misleading people looking for insurance by providing a “phantom list” of doctors attached to their plans.

You know, hypothetically, to make it seem like you’ll be getting a certain product (which doesn’t really exist), because what they’re really offering isn’t what you want and doesn’t even work.

So fooling you, by lying about what the situation is, will at least get you to buy into the scheme. That’s weird, but that sounds like something Mr. Obama would do.

One guy ruined the plan after he purchased health insurance on the California exchange and then had the gall to call doctors to set up an appointment. His temerity drove him to call every doctor listed as in-network, and none of them were.

In the normal world, this would be called “fraud.” In Obama’s America, it’s called a “snag,” and on a national scale, the Obama regime labels it “Shut up, Fox News!”

After all, isn’t the goal getting everyone insured? Who cares if you can’t actually see a doctor or get health care, because everyone will get a terrific piece of paper that says “health insurance policy.” Equality, at last — everyone’s got the same thing; namely, nothing at all.

One California woman — an avowed Obama and Obamacare supporter, and cancer patient — was quite taken aback by the disaster.

Danielle Nelson dutifully enrolled in an Obamacare plan, and then went to see her oncologist, but was greeted at the door by a sign announcing they did not accept any Covered California plans.

“I’m a complete fan of the Affordable Care Act, but now I can’t sleep at night,” Ms. Nelson told The Los Angeles Times. “I can’t imagine this is how President Obama wanted it to happen.”

Well, she doesn’t have to imagine. She simply needs to accept that her hero and his minions actually did have something else in mind — single payer, which would require the destruction of the individual marketplace.

Mr. Obama, who’s never run anything in his life, wasn’t thinking about anyone other than himself when he did this. Who has time to think about irksome cancer patients when you’ve got a legacy to build?

Then the latest gem from this week: The Congressional Budget Office issued a report stating that Obamacare will, as Forbes puts it, “drive 2.5 million Americans out of the workforce,” essentially disincentivizing work.

Running immediately into the fray with buckets of water and rhetoric on behalf of the White House, The New York Times offered up an editorial that actually declared this disaster a “good thing” and is “liberating” people from their work. You know what else would be “liberating”? All New York Times employees being “freed” from their work.

Jason Furman, the White House economic adviser, actually noted that these 2.5 million people were “a small percentage of the economy.” This shouldn’t be a surprise; it’s what happens when the leftist bureaucratic machine mistake people for the budget. You are no longer an individual, you are a number on a piece of paper, and an expendable one at that.

It’s strange, even a stopped clock is right twice a day. Mr. Obama and his liberal trolls have managed to get everything wrong, all the time. You actually have to work 24/7 to screw things up this badly.

So now Americans have Obamacare, a cancer that no one is trying to stop as it keeps replicating itself, metastasizing further into our body.

We do have a piece of paper, though, that says “health insurance.”

Tammy Bruce is a radio talk-show host, New York Times best-selling author and Fox News political contributor.