PLEASANTON, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Granite Insurance Brokers (http://www.graniteins.com) announces that Denise Ashford has joined the company to further develop their growing portfolio of its California Employee Benefits Division. Denise Ashford comes to Granite with over twenty years in employee benefits insurance experience. Denise specializes in the integration of technology, compliance within Human Resources, benefits strategy and focuses on firms with 10 to 500 employees.

Joining the Employee Benefits Team, Denise will help revolutionize the way employers and employees choose their benefits with Granite HealthPro software solution (http://www.granitehealthpro.com) powered by Maxwell Health. Denise will continue her success, by rolling her unique technology and HR expertise into her consultant-based platform, along with her innovative ideas that greatly set her apart from the competition.

“I am very excited to join the Granite team. The employee benefits platform utilizes Maxwell Health technology which is cutting edge. The commitment by Granite to provide excellent resources for human resource professionals to firms throughout the Bay Area will set them apart from many brokers. It’s an exciting opportunity for me and my clients,” commented Denise Ashford.

Shawn Edgington, CEO and President, states “Denise’s wealth of experience within the employee benefits arena and long-term industry experience has made her a key addition to the Granite family. With the Affordable Care Act and compliance requirements, employers are passing costs onto employees when it comes to healthcare. This has caused an increased demand from all businesses to find a way for employee’s to take a proactive role in their health management. I am confident that Denise will play a key role in providing and implementing the highest quality solutions for our clients.”

About Granite Insurance Brokers

Granite Insurance Brokers, Inc. is a leading insurance brokerage and risk management firms serving a variety of businesses nationwide. With Team Granite, we understand that your Employee Benefits Program is one of your biggest costs and it’s one of your priorities to get right. Simplicity, compliance and ease of administration are a must. At Granite, we’ve invested in best-in-class benefits administration software & services that’s mobile enabled, integrated with COBRA, and we also create customized employee benefits booklets, because we know how important these services are.