A British man learned the hard way that Viagra is nothing to mess around with.

Daniel Medforth, a 36-year-dld builder from Withernsea, East Yorks in the UK, took 35 little blue pills “for a laugh” at a friend’s house last Monday, the NY Daily News reported. The laughter quickly turned to concern after Medforth began to feel sick, dizzy, and experience hallucinations. "Everything I saw was green,” he said “And I had a massive erection that would not go away.”

Medsworth fessed up to his wife as soon as he got home, and she immediately sent him to the hospital. He told The Daily Beast that his wife was “a little mad” at him, which is most likely an understatement. Medsforth was admitted to the hospital for observation for a total of 36 hours.

“The paramedics were very professional, but you could see they were trying not to laugh," Medsforth said. "The doctors and nurses told me off."

Medsforth's erection lasted for five whole days after being discharged; it wasn't painful, but "it sprang to life" everytime he brushed up against something — not exactly useful, he explained.

Medsforth says his wife has since forgiven him, and that he realizes he was “very, very lucky.” It’s true, since Viagra overdoses can result in various negative symptoms, particularly symptoms associated with the cardiovascular system. Chest pain and low blood pressure are the most common, but fainting, irregular heartbeat, heart attack, and (in rare cases) even death can also occur, the Mayo Clinic reported.

Viagra’s generic name is Sidenafil Citrate, and it works by relaxing the blood vessels. So it's no surprise that taking too much of it can lead to dangerously low blood pressure, especially if taken in combination with nitrates — medicine used to combat chest pains.

Medforth’s case was serious, but men in the past have suffered even worse consequences for overdosing on the drug. A 66-year-old man had to have his inflamed, fractured, gangrene-ridden penis amputated because doctors were worried the gangrene would spread to the rest of his body. And in 2008, a 28-year-old Russian man had a heart attack after taking an entire bottle of blue pills in order to win a bet. He won the bet, but he died after the heart attack.

It may seem funny in certain situations, but Viagra is a serious drug with serious consequences. An overdose of it can — and has — lead to irreversible consequences.