Topics: From the Wires, News

PHOENIX (AP) — Workers at a farm saw hundreds of cactuses sweep away in a flood. Drivers on Arizona’s main north-south freeway watched in shock as muddy waters submerged the road. Rescuers across the state rushed to save people trapped in cars and homes.

The Phoenix area was battered by torrential rain storms Tuesday that caused severe flooding across the desert region. The National Weather Service said some areas received more rain Tuesday than they had all last summer.

“It looked absolutely devastating,” said Gov. Jan Brewer, who was glued to the TV all day watching the rescues. “For the last 10, 15 years, we’ve never seen anything the likes of this.”

A helicopter crew rescued two women and three dogs from a home surrounded by swift-moving waters in a town about 30 miles north of Phoenix, while elsewhere a small trailer park was evacuated, a school was flooded and first-responders pulled motorists from partially submerged vehicles.

The National Weather Service issued a flash flood warning for much of the metro area and north of the city, where up to 8 inches of rain fell by midday in some of the mountainous regions along Interstate 17, the main north-south freeway in Arizona.

A river of muddy water rushed down I-17 about 25 miles north of Phoenix as motorists changed lanes to avoid the deluge. A stretch of freeway was shut down and reopened later in the day.

In another dramatic rescue, authorities pulled an elderly woman from a van stuck in rushing floodwaters, scenes repeated across the region throughout the day as motorists became trapped.

Officials said nearly 5 inches of rain fell around the town of New River, where a helicopter dropped two rescuers onto the roof of a home after one had been waving a white piece of fabric from a window to draw attention. The rescuers later walked the women and dogs to safety as the water receded.

“It looks like the heavy rain is pulling out to the east and northeast out of that area,” Woodall said Tuesday afternoon. “But with all the rain that fell this morning, we’re going to see continued flooding, continued runoff probably into the early evening.”

Kathy Mascaro said her typical 15-minute commute from home to work in the Phoenix area more than doubled because of the traffic nightmares caused by the flooding.

“It’s crazy. You’d think, how could the desert flood, but it really does,” Mascaro said. “I’ve never seen it this bad. I’ve been here over 20 years and it has never flooded this bad.”