“They seem excited ­— and anxious,” said volunteer Nicolette Jacinto of the participants who came Thursday to the Cooper River Bridge Run Expo and packet pick-up at the Charleston Area Convention Center. It will be open Friday from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. to handle the tens of thousands of registered runners and walkers.

Barring a crush of registrants Friday, the 38th Cooper River Bridge Run will not reach its registration cap of 38,500 for the first time since it was lowered to that mark in 2012.

Run schedule Friday 8 a.m.-8 p.m. — Bridge Run Expo and Packet Pick-up, Charleston Area Convention Center, 5001 Coliseum Drive, North Charleston. Noon- 6 p.m. — Bridge Run Kids Run & Wonderfest, Hampton Park (races start at 5 p.m.). 5-8 p.m. — Taste of Charleston at three locations: Charleston Maritime Center, 10 Wharfside St., Charleston; Cinebarre, 963 Houston Northcutt Blvd., Mount Pleasant; Charleston Area Convention Center, North Charleston. Saturday 5-7 a.m. — Shuttle buses start loading and departing from five different locations, including Calhoun Street at Anson Street (last bus leaves at 6:45 p.m.), Charleston Area Convention Center in North Charleston, Mamie Whitesides Elementary, Mount Pleasant Towne Center and Laing Middle School in Mount Pleasant. 8 a.m. — Start of the first of 14 waves of the Cooper River Bridge Run, Coleman Boulevard near Simmons Street. 8:30 a.m.- noon — Finish Festival, Marion Square. Sunday Full coverage of the Bridge Run will start on postandcourier.com Saturday afternoon with a special print edition on the race, complete with nearly 10,000 finisher names, on Sunday. Flowertown Festival 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Friday and Saturday and 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Sunday at S. Main Street and Azalea Park in downtown Summerville.

As of mid-afternoon Thursday, registrations were at 32,500, according to Assistant Race Director Tami Varn.

“I think the reason why registrations are low is because it (the Bridge Run) is a week earlier than normal and because the weather has been so bad,” said Varn, noting that the date is bumped up one week early when Easter falls on the first weekend of April.

Speculation abounds on the lower registration numbers, but one fact that Bridge Run staff has been playing down has been the increased price of the race. Late registration is now $55, up $10 from last year.

Rainy Friday, chilly Saturday

For the Flowertown Festival in Summerville, rain may be an issue on Friday where chances of precipitation are about 70 percent in the late morning and early afternoon. The big arts and crafts festival starts at 9 a.m. Friday and runs through Sunday.

The weather forecast for Saturday certainly won’t rally more bridge run registrants — particularly walkers, who tend to favor fair weather — as temperatures at the 8 a.m. start are expected to be about 40 degrees, according to National Weather Service meteorologist Wendy Sellers.

Sellers said the wind is the result of cool high pressure building in behind a front expected to bring the rain Friday, which also does not bode well for the Bridge Run’s Kids Run & Wonderfest activities at Hampton Park.

Wonderfest activities start at noon, but actual races for children don’t start until 5 p.m.

For the bridge run Saturday, rain won’t be an issue, temperatures are going to be considerably lower and for the wind-adverse, the forecast also is breezier than normal for the morning with an anticipated northwest wind at about 10 to 15 mph, which means an indirect headwind for runners on the bridge.

Flowertown festival crowds

In Summerville, it’s all hands on deck as the town braces for an influx of an estimated 250,000 visitors for the Flowertown Festival.

Officers will man nearly every corner in the downtown festival area.

“I think we’re ready,” said Capt. John Rogers of the Summerville Police Department.

Some roads, including a portion of Main Street, are closed to vehicles and others are limited to one-way traffic.

Pete Frazier, who lives on Main Street, plans not to drive anywhere during the three-day event.

“It’s crazy trying to get down the street,” he said. “Traffic is incredible, and people park everywhere along the roads. I’ll go out and walk the festival, but I won’t drive anywhere all weekend.”

Safety measures

For the second year, security at the bridge run will be tight — the result of the Boston Marathon bombing in 2013 — for the Bridge Run events.

Law enforcement and Bridge Run officials have been trying to discourage people from bringing backpacks to hold changes of clothes, but with the relatively cold spring morning, people will need warm clothes.

Those bringing backpacks are encouraged to use clear ones, such as the ones provided by the Bridge Run this year and last.

“Sweat shuttles,” trucks that will carry backpacks from the starting area to the finish area, will be parked away from the starting line staging area for security reasons. Those shuttles will be near a vacant building at the former sites of the Pane e Vino, Sette and Pizza Hut restaurants near Coleman Boulevard and Mill Street, and at Sea Island Shopping Center at the back of the staging area.

Similar to last year, members of the S.C. State Guard will be stationed at every entry point of the corrals at the starting area to verify race numbers and inspect any suspicious gear or bulky clothing. Participants can wear costumes, but will likely be searched.

Weeks ago, Mount Pleasant Deputy Police Chief Stan Gragg and Charleston City Deputy Police Chief Anthony Elder met with the media to discuss this year’s security measures.

Gragg and Elder asked that participants and spectators continue to be cooperative, vigilant about arriving to the starting line on time and to report any suspicious activity by calling 911. Law enforcement, including federal, state and local agencies, will be manning a command center in the area.

Gragg reiterated Thursday, “If you see something (suspicious), say something.”

Road closures for Flowertown

In Summerville, some roads, including a portion of Main Street, are closed to vehicles and others are limited to one-way travel.

Northbound Main Street traffic will be rerouted two blocks over to Gum Street at Joyce Lane, returning to Main Street via East Richardson. Southbound traffic will be rerouted one block to South Magnolia. Main Street crossroads between Joyce and East Richardson are also closed.

Visitors can park in parking spaces, the town’s garage or along the streets. Handicap parking is available at First Citizens Bank at 218 S. Main St.

Festival organizers will also provide transportation to those in need. Golf carts can be requested at the Information Booth at 2nd Street and 5th Street.

Road closures

The earliest road closures for the bridge run will be the starting line staging area on Coleman Boulevard, between Page’s Okra Grill and Sea Island Shopping Center, as well as Calhoun Street between King and East Bay Street starting at 4:30 a.m. Saturday.

The closure of the Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge starts with the bike and pedestrian lane at 6:30 a.m. Saturday, followed by the entire bridge and race route at 7 a.m. Roadways will be opened as participants clear them. Typically the bridge reopens by 11 a.m.

Despite the closures, people who aren’t involved in the race can still get around by vehicle.

In Mount Pleasant, Johnnie Dodds Boulevard and Interstate 526 are still open. In downtown Charleston, people can drive around the race route segments of Meeting and King streets by using parallel routes of East Bay Street, St. Philip Street, Rutledge and Coming streets and crosstown routes such as Broad Street.

East Bay near Market Street, however, is expected to be more congested than normal as the Carnival Fantasy cruise ship, packed with about 2,000 passengers, will arrive at 7 a.m. Saturday, and unload passengers. The cruise ship will load passengers in the afternoon and embark at 4 p.m.

When the Fantasy arrived at 6 a.m. during the Bridge Run morning in 2011, local merchants complained about the traffic and how it was hurting their businesses. Some simply didn’t bother to open that morning.

Brenda Rindge contributed to this report.