Topics: 2016 Elections, avik roy, GOP, Gov. John Kasich, Gov. Scott Walker, Jeb Bush, Medicaid, Plutocracy, Republican Party, The Right, Elections News, News, Politics News

I wrote Tuesday about the way Jeb Bush is sucking the air out of the so-called moderate wing of the GOP, smothering the potential candidacy of people like Ohio Gov. John Kasich (at least for now). It’s also worth looking at the way Wisconsin’s Scott Walker is crowding out Kasich.

Just like Kasich is an actual reformist conservative who blends traditional GOP tax and budget cutting with maverick stands like expanding Medicaid and criminal justice reform – compared with supposedly reformist Bush, whose economic program consists of warmed over supply side policies – Kasich is what Scott Walker pretends to be: A practical Midwestern governor of a hugely important swing state with a track record of governing.

Kasich’s state is also rebounding well from the recession, while Walker’s is last in Midwestern job creation and first in the nation in middle-class wage decline. So why is Walker still considered Bush’s top primary challenger, especially for the donor class, while Kasich can’t get started?

There’s an important glimpse of an answer in this dispatch from a Kasich meeting with big New York donors. This is the group, by the way, that hosted Walker in February, though the gathering was hijacked by Rudy Giuliani insisting President Obama doesn’t love America. Luckily for Kasich – or maybe not – Giuliani didn’t upstage him.

But Kasich left the crowd unwowed anyway, says the National Review’s Eliana Johnson, who also wrote an influential piece about growing GOP worries about Walker this week. Johnson is well-sourced when it comes to monied Republicans’ concerns about Walker’s stumbles, so it’s interesting to see her explain why this group isn’t excited about Kasich.

Apparently Kasich turned them off with his “prickly” answer to a question from conservative intellectual powerhouse Avik Roy, about whether he wants to repeal Obamacare yet maintain its expansion of Medicaid. When pushed, Kasich defended Medicaid recipients: “Maybe you think we should put them in prison. I don’t. I don’t think that’s a conservative position. Because the reality is, if you don’t treat the drug addicted and the mentally ill and the working poor, you’re gonna have them and they’re gonna be a big cost to society.”