When nursing becomes painful or difficult in the days after giving birth, women can turn to certified lactation consultants for advice and relief. But some Illinois women say that when they tried to get their insurers to pay for the service, their claims were repeatedly denied.

The Affordable Care Act identifies breast-feeding benefits as a preventive service like contraception and lung cancer screening, which the law requires insurers to cover at no cost to policyholders. Recently a nonprofit that advocates for breast-feeding mothers sent a letter to the Illinois Department of Insurance requesting that insurers be forced to pay for the services of certified lactation consultants.

"Moms are not getting what they're supposed to be getting under the ACA," said Katrina Pavlik, board chairwoman of Breastfeed Chicago.

Insurers say they are complying with federal guidelines that require the companies to cover "comprehensive lactation support and counseling, by a trained provider during pregnancy and/or in the postpartum period."

UnitedHealthcare and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois, two of the state's largest insurers, said breast-feeding benefits are covered when provided by doctors, nurses and breast-feeding specialists in policyholders' provider networks.

"BCBSIL makes every effort to ensure that we abide by the rules and regulations outlined in the ACA," spokeswoman Mary Ann Schultz said by email.

Women often receive initial advice on breast-feeding from clinicians at the hospital. But several women reported that their nursing pain started after they returned home. When they asked their insurers about breast-feeding benefits, or hired a lactation consultant and sought reimbursement, many were told their networks included no certified consultants, according to Breastfeed Chicago. And when they billed for out-of-network service, insurers often denied their claims.

Breastfeed Chicago says that although some doctors and nurse practitioners have training in breast-feeding, "comprehensive support" should include certified lactation consultants. The group points to a 2011 surgeon general report that stated many clinicians are inadequately trained in breast-feeding.

Before the health law was passed, few insurers paid for breast-feeding services, said Anna Benyo, senior health policy analyst for the National Women's Law Center, based in Washington, D.C.

In a recent analysis of breast-feeding benefits in plan documents from insurers in 15 states, not including Illinois, the law center found that some insurers are not providing breast-feeding support and some are not covering supplies, such as breast pumps, as required by law. Some insurers have no in-network lactation consultants and don't cover the service out of network, and others impose administrative barriers that prevent women from getting timely support, the group found.

"It's an exciting new benefit, so it makes sense that there are some problems getting it implemented," Benyo said. "But that doesn't mean the insurance companies are off the hook."

Alyson Nelson, who lives in Lincoln Park, said she experienced pain while nursing her newborn daughter shortly after she returned home from a hospital in March. Friends recommended she see a lactation consultant, and she called her insurer, Indiana-based Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, to ask about her options.

Her employer and her plan are based out of state, but Anthem has a reciprocal relationship with Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois, meaning Nelson could rely on the Illinois-based insurer's network. She said she was told that her network included no certified lactation counselors but that she would be reimbursed if her doctor preauthorized the service out of network. She called her OB-GYN, where she said an administrator told her that the office had never had a request like hers before.

She ended up seeing the consultant before she received preauthorization, she said. The consultant recommended new nursing positions, and Nelson said the pain quickly vanished. Anthem eventually paid all but a $20 copayment for the $200 service. Now Nelson's fighting the copayment, on the grounds that the federal health law requires insurers to pay the full cost.

Schultz, of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois, said the insurer has tried to build a network of certified lactation consultants. The company obtained a list of all certified consultants in the area from the International Board of Lactation Consultant Examiners, she said, but received only a handful of responses.

Among doctors and nurses who have the certification, many are in-network on Blue Cross plans, she said. She said the insurer covers claims filed by the in-network providers but requires a copay for those outside the network.

UnitedHealthcare said it covers lactation support and counseling when provided by an in-network physician, clinic or health care professional. The insurer said it does not cover lactation consultants because they are not licensed under state law to provide medical services.

Under the health law, insurers may require providers to be state-licensed or certified to receive reimbursement, but must still meet the requirement to cover preventive services without cost-sharing.

Laura Briscoe, a 30-year-old Chicago mother, said Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois rejected her claim for lactation consulting when she submitted it last fall. After some back-and-forth, the insurer paid $160 of the $200 bill. Briscoe said she gave up on trying to get the remaining $40 covered.

Briscoe said she was well-informed about the challenges of getting breast-feeding consulting paid for when she started trying. She fears women who have not studied the issue end up paying for something their insurers should be covering.

The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that women breast-feed babies exclusively until they are 6 months old and then continue to breast-feed for at least another six months while introducing other food. Breast-feeding reduces the risk of sudden infant death syndrome, various infections and diseases, and childhood obesity, according to the Institute of Medicine, a nonprofit that researches health issues.

While it may seem natural, breast-feeding can be difficult for women to do properly, said Pavlik, of Breastfeed Chicago. Holding a baby incorrectly can result in intense pain, she said. Other problems can arise when babies fall asleep while nursing and when their mouth structure makes it difficult to nurse.