President Barack Obama watches the flight of his ball while golfing at Farm Neck Golf Club, in Oak Bluffs, Mass., on the island of Martha's Vineyard, Friday, Aug. 15, 2014. President Obama is staying on Martha's Vineyard for what is expected to be a two-week summer vacation. (AP Photo/Steven Senne) (Photo: Steven Senne, AP)

Much has been made in some quarters of President Barack Obama's penchant for golf and taking vacations as the world continues to be in turmoil.

Let's stipulate that the time for some presidential vacations is better than others, from the standpoint of political optics (what looks good or bad) and as a matter of sensitivity. And I'm not talking about Obama specifically — it applied to our past presidents as well.

But let's see if we can't agree on this: at least since World War II, there really has been no such thing as a presidential vacation. Modern communications put an end to that.

What presidents have is an unimaginably high-pressure job that can be carried from place to place. Instead of a view of the White House Rose Garden out the Oval Office window, the scenery might be a Martha's Vineyard beach, a Texas ranch, a cabin in the Maryland woods, or the back of a fishing boat in the Florida Keys, but the work comes right along with the chief executive.

What Americans seldom see is the infrastructure that accompanies a president on any trip, including a vacation.

It's not just Air Force One and the presidential limousine and the Secret Service. Entire communications facilities — guarded and electronically secure — are constructed to ensure the most powerful leader in the world is able to reach out and talk to anyone 24/7, which past history shows is often.

And presidents have a ready reminder of their responsibilities in the person of an at-the-ready military aide charged with carrying the "nuclear football," a case containing the top-secret plans for a nuclear war.

The perception that Obama is "relaxing" (a) too much, (b) at the wrong times, or (c) undeservedly is fed, of course, partly by the animus of his political opponents, but also by the minute attention to every detail of a frenetic White House press corps with access to cameras, Twitter, Instagram, etc., contrasted with the unending stream of televised images of human tragedy.

Just to get it out of the way, consider this: Obama is well behind in "vacation" numbers put up by his predecessor, George W. Bush, at the same time in his presidency. This is according to a tally kept by CBS News White House reporter Mark Knoller, the acknowledged presidential statistics guru who has been tending a database on presidential activities since 1996.

Obama so far has taken 20 vacations for a total of part or all of 129 days, according to stats Knoller shared recently with Yahoo News. Bush at the same point had taken 58 trips to his ranch near Crawford, Texas, for a total of 381 days and seven trips to the Bush family compound in Kennebunkport, Me., for all or part of 26 days.

Knoller does not count visits to the presidential retreat at Camp David in Maryland's Catoctin Mountains actual vacation, but Obama has made 33 visits there for all or part of 84 days. Bush had made 108 visits for all or part of 341 days.

Needless to say, the restrictions on personal movement that come with the modern presidency are not fully appreciated by those of us who have never had to endure them. Gone are the days when visitors to the White House could simply wait outside the president's office to snag a meeting with Andrew Jackson or Abraham Lincoln or Theodore Roosevelt.

No president now can go anywhere alone. Not to a bookstore or a grocery store or the movies. Obama recently has shown evidence of impatience with his exquisite imprisonment by embarking on apparently impulsive walks, Secret Service agents in tow, to get coffee or sandwiches near the White House. "The bear is loose," the president jokes.

The strictures on freedom and free time go with the job —nobody forced a politician to run for president, you might argue. Fair enough.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share President Obama said he lacks information to green-light a promising drug to treat the deadly Ebola virus and that initial response should focus on containment. Rough Cut (no reporter narration).

However, we might also consider the human side of the equation. For all the perks and swell surroundings provided to every president, our chief executives are human beings who get tired, stressed, perhaps even anxious at times. So they need whatever break, in whatever limited form, that comes along.

And the Obamas — like the George W. Bushes, the Clintons, the George H.W. Bushes, the Reagans, the Carters, the Fords, the Nixons, the Johnsons, the Kennedys, the Eisenhowers, the Trumans and the Roosevelts — are a family that lives in a fish bowl but still needs time together. "Vacations" permit time for some reconnection over book reading, bicycling, swimming, board games, whatever.

Is there really a good time for a president to leave the White House for some alleged "time off"? Not often, it seems. Summer is as cursed as the rest of the year when it comes to crises.

So this year Obama is in Martha's Vineyard while dealing with fast-moving changes in Iraq, a public outcry over police response to protests over the shooting of a black man in Ferguson, Mo., a crumbling situation between Israel and Gaza, and on-going tensions in Ukraine.

George W. Bush similarly was confronted with crises. While he gave up golfing because he thought it was not appropriate while American troops were fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan, he still took "vacations" — and had them interrupted by unforeseen events.

Taking time off is a balancing act for every president, but the need to do it is hardly debatable.

Even in the throes of the Civil War, Lincoln retreated from the incessant demands of his office to a small cottage, three miles from the White House, where he could think, write (including a draft of the Emancipation Proclamation), and meet with Union troops being treated in a neighboring hospital.

There was no larger war than World War II, but Franklin D. Roosevelt still did go to his home in Hyde Park, N.Y., or his cottage in Warm Springs, Ga., or other places to recharge. And, of course, sometimes he would use his retreats to host world leaders, or as a setting for a national address.

Americans may think of FDR now as an almost mythic figure, but he certainly was fair game in the politics of his day.

Roosevelt was known for taking his beloved Scottish terrier, Fala, on official business as well as on presidential vacations.

In the 1944 presidential campaign, Republicans accused Roosevelt of sending a Navy warship back to the Aleutian Islands in Alaska to retrieve Fala, who supposedly was left behind after a presidential visit. The GOP accused FDR of wasting millions of dollars to get the dog back. The story was not true, but it set the stage for one of the funniest retorts to presidential critics ever uttered.

In a speech to the Teamsters' Union, Roosevelt raised the subject of the phantom Aleutian adventure.

"These Republican leaders have not been content with attacks on me, or my wife, or on my sons," the president intoned, his face dead-pan. "No, not content with that, they now include my little dog, Fala."

"Well, of course, I don't resent attacks, and my family doesn't resent attacks.

"But Fala does resent them."

Follow politics and government news on The Courier-Journal's politics blog and Facebook page at www.facebook.com/ cjpolitics. Follow James R. Carroll on Twitter @JRCarrollCJ. He can be reached at (703) 854-8945.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/VuCIUw