Planned Parenthood head Cecile Richards thanked Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump Wednesday for his "kind words" about the organization.

In an interview last week with CBN News, Trump said of Planned Parenthood: "As long as they do abortion, I am not for funding Planned Parenthood." He added, however, that the taxpayer-funded women's health operation does "some very good work."

"Planned Parenthood does a lot of good job — a really good job at a lot of different areas, but not on abortion," he said, naming "cervical cancer" as a women's health concern that the organization addresses and of which he approves.

"Well, this is one thing I agree with Donald Trump on, is that Planned Parenthood does amazing work for 2.5 million patients every single year," Richards told MSNBC's Andrea Mitchell.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

"I think the disturbing thing is that Donald Trump, as well as Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, have said if they were president, they would end women's access to family planning, to cancer screening, to basic affordable healthcare, as well as overturning the Affordable Care Act which is now covering family planning and other preventive care for for 55 million women," she added, pushing back against Republican efforts to defund Planned Parenthood.

Richards continued, "That's what's really at stake here. And so, I appreciate his kind words. We're very proud of our work, but I think women in this country and families and men are going to be very concerned about a president who wants to roll back access to affordable health care in America."

Trump's previous support for partial-birth abortion and an interview from the 1990s, where he described himself as "very pro-choice," have been a thorn in his side throughout the Republican presidential race. His leading critic on the issue has been fellow GOP hopeful Ted Cruz, whose campaign was targeting by Trump's attorney recently after releasing an ad that questioned the billionaire's opposition to abortion.

After waffling on the issue for months, the real estate mogul firmed up his support for ending Planned Parenthood's federal funding during his interview with CBN News last week.