By Carl M. Cannon - February 4, 2015

Good morning, it’s Wednesday, February 4, 2015. No history parable today, loyal readers, as I’m actually on a fishing trip, but I would mention that on this date in 1941, the USO was created.

I’d also be remiss if I didn’t point you to RealClearPolitics’ front page, which aggregates a host of compelling material this morning. Among them are pieces by S.E. Cupp (New York Daily News); Megan McArdle (Bloomberg); Harold Meyerson (American Prospect ); Ruth Marcus (Washington Post); and Thomas Edsall (New York Times).

We also offer, as we do each day, a nice complement of original material from RCP’s reporters and contributors, including the following:

* * *

Boehner’s Gift to Freshmen: Another Vote on Obamacare. RCP’s James Arkin has the latest on the GOP’s crusade to kill the health care law.

Obama’s Stance on Currency Manipulation -- in His Own Words. Scott Paul urges the president to heed his own observations regarding unfair trade.

Why One Consultant Became a Historian. Craig Shirley talks about his mid-career move in this installment of “Changing Lanes.”

RCP Original Video: Global Zero Protest. Taylor Schreiber and James Arkin created this report from an anti-nuclear demonstration outside the White House.

Are Swing States Disappearing? David Byler argues that reports of their demise may be exaggerated.

President Obama's New Infrastructure Plan: Right Idea, Wrong Play Call. In RealClearPolicy, Jacob Anbinder of the Century Foundation takes a look at the new proposal.

Why School Principals Should Be Trained Like MBAs. Arthur Levine makes his case in RealClearEducation.

Citizen Scientists: Supermen or Slackers? What sort of person decides to work on massive “crowdsourced" science projects for free? And how much time do they invest? Tom Hartsfield explains.

* * *

Today is the anniversary of the creation of the United Service Organizations, known always as the USO. The idea belonged to Franklin Roosevelt, and on February 4, 1941, it came into being. Six existing social service organizations (Jewish Welfare Board, National Catholic Community Service, Salvation Army, Travelers Aid Association of America, Young Men’s Christian Association [YMCA] and the Young Women’s Christian Organization) lent their expertise and leading officials to the cause of creating the entity.

Less than a year later, the U.S. was plunged into world war, and some 3,000 existing recreational clubs and organizations -- supplemented by 1 million civilian volunteers -- organized USO clubs and functions for the nation’s military personnel.

These events, notes the Library of Congress, facilitated lively social activity and quiet contemplation alike: “Some soldiers came to dance and watch movies, others to pursue traveler’s information or assistance, still others to write letters, lounge, eat, or seek religious counsel.”

The USO is most famous today for a subsidiary organization, Camp Shows Inc., created to produce performances with volunteers from the entertainment world. The stars who answered their country’s call included Katharine Hepburn, Edgar Bergen, Bette Davis, Marlene Dietrich, and of course, the great Bob Hope.

Carl M. Cannon

Washington Bureau chief, RealClearPolitics

@CarlCannon (Twitter)

ccannon@realclearpolitics.com