A large stained-glass window depicting Jesus is seen in the sanctuary at First Baptist Church in Longmont. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

The light is a little bit brighter in Longmont's First Baptist Church following the completion of nearly five-year, stained-glass restoration project.

Everything in the sanctuary, including members' faces, is illuminated by the restored windows, which have been collecting dirt and dust for nearly a century in the historic building on the corner of Longs Peak Avenue and Kimbark Street.

If you go What: Stained-glass window open house When: 2 to 4 p.m. today Where: First Baptist Church Longmont, 701 Kimbark St., Longmont More info: http://fbclongmont.com/event-seminars

The 38 stained-glass windows are original to the building that was erected by the church in 1921. And after 93 years, the glass was in need of some TLC.

Members already had begun discussing the need for a massive renovation project when the weathered glass in one of the windows began to droop and eventually broke, forcing them to start the project in 2009, said long-time member Ray Whisenhunt.

The green and yellow window in the room on the west side of the church where choir members rehearse was the first to be restored. One down, 37 to go.

Labor of Love

Members knew the project was an incredible undertaking so they called in a local expert.

Longmont resident Chuck Krausert is known around town as the "stained-glass guy."

Krausert has completed restoration projects and created original windows for Longmont's Howe Mortuary and Cremation Services, the Longmont Housing Authority, Pumphouse Brewery and St. Francis of Assisi. The arched, stained-glass ceiling in Boulder's Millennium Harvest House Hotel is also Krausert's work.

After being a corporate guy for most of his life, Krausert found his creative side in retirement. He sketched and eventually began designing and making his own stained-glass windows in 2008 and has been working with them ever since.

Stained-glass work is a labor of love for Krausert, with an emphasis on labor.

Krausert took apart every window in the First Baptist Church piece by piece, cleaning and polishing each fragment before placing it back into the window, matching the original design.

Despite frequent health challenges, including 14 heart stents, open heart surgery and a relentless brain tumor, Krausert pushed through.

Krausert is still fighting his health problems, and restoring and designing stained glass.

Longmont resident Chuck Krausert works on a large stained-glass piece for the Aurora Housing Authority on Tuesday at his home workshop. Krausert has completed stained-glass projects for businesses across the state, including First Baptist Church in Longmont. Go to timescall.com for more photos and a video. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

"There is nothing better for me than to pay it forward," Krausert said. "I did it for the building, the church, the congregation and there were a lot of folks pleased with it, and that's all that matters."

Continuing the tradition

The restoration, which was completed in August, ended up costing the 60-member congregation about $88,000. Church fundraisers, including selling a member's popular spiced pretzels, paid for most of the work. But donated materials from Longmont's Slade Glass Co. and hours of donated labor from Krausert saved the congregation thousands.

The four-foot-by-eight-foot windows above the choir pews in the sanctuary were the most time consuming.

Members estimate that the church's largest windows — one depicting Jesus knocking on a wooden door and the other of Jesus with sheep — weigh between 200 and 300 pounds each and are made up of about 350 pieces of glass. Each piece was individually cleaned and replaced.

About 20 percent of the glass throughout the church had to be replaced with new glass. Members said the new purple glass in one of the larger windows is much more vibrant than the faded color that was there before the restoration.

Members hope that the restoration honors the church founders and the congregation's history, said longtime member Gerry Forreider.

"We're honoring those who served before us," Forreider said. "We are continuing the tradition that our founders started when they erected the building."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter