SOUTHEASTERN N.C. -- When Betty Brown's 12-year-old granddaughter felt sick during school, she was able to walk behind West Pender Middle School and seek health care right there on site.

If it weren't for a new tele-health program, Brown would have had to leave work, pick up Octayveona Brown and drive her 30 miles to see her primary care doctor in Wilmington.

Instead, the seventh-grader simply brought home a prescription.

“I just took it to the pharmacy, and that was it,” Brown said. “It's really good that they're there.”

Octayveona's physician is in New Hanover because more choices exist there, Brown said.

Access to care continues to be one of the main health issues in Pender County, according to the most recent community health assessment.

In 2012, the county had 3.3 primary care physicians per 10,000 residents, according to data from the N.C. Department of Health and Human Services. That's about a third of New Hanover's ratio of 10.3 primary care physicians per 10,000 residents that same year. Brunswick fell between the two at 4.4.

Both Pender and Brunswick's primary care physician ratios are below the state's, which was 7.6 primary care physicians per 10,000 residents in 2012.

These numbers don't include other primary care providers such as the two nurse practitioners who work for the Pender County Health Department.

“We've recognized for a long time access to care was an issue,” said Carolyn Moser, Pender County's health and human services director.

Beginning in this past school year, the county partnered with Pender Alliance for Teen Health (PATH), to begin offering tele-medicine services at West Pender Middle School. PATH is a nonprofit organization that aims to improve access to health care for Pender youth.

The $25,000 tele-health cart, purchased by PATH, at West Pender allows students to use video chatting technology to be treated by a nurse practitioner located at Pender High School.

Andrew Voll, clinical care coordinator and registered nurse with PATH, said the overall goal is to see tele-medicine at all 16 schools in the county. The Pender County Health Department is the medical sponsor for PATH.

Access challenges

Getting more physicians in Pender County isn't simple.

Connecting residents to health care is a multifactorial issue for rural areas across the state, said Franklin Walker, director of Rural Health Initiatives for the N.C. Medical Society Foundation.

Recruitment and retention is difficult in rural areas, where the hours can be longer and the pay less, Walker said.

“The other thing I think you'll find is due to the Affordable Care Act enactment a few years ago, the pace of the hospital acquisitions of clinics has accelerated so that the number of rural clinics that used to be in rural North Carolina are just not there anymore,” Walker said.

Rural areas may also not have the schools, stores or lifestyle families are looking for.

He also pointed out a trend of medical students who are more interested in corporate medicine, “which doesn't lend itself to working in private practices and certainly doesn't lend itself to going out and working in rural, underserved North Carolina.”

Tele-health can be a great solution, but access to broadband and an IT department isn't always easy in rural areas, Walker said.

“If we don't have Internet, we don't have tele-health medicine,” Voll said, noting the good relationship he's developed with the school's IT director when problems arise.

So far, it's been working well for Pender. Other than a few initial glitches, everything's been operating smoothly.

Tele-health

In a small room in West Pender Middle School's health center, which was built in fall of 2013, Taylor Barnhill, 12, faced a computer to chat with Laura Shenkman, a family nurse practitioner with the health department stationed at the high school.

Voll, who's there twice a week to facilitate the tele-health exam, used a general exam camera to show Shenkman a mole on Barnhill's arm. Another tool gave Shenkman a view into Barnhill's ears and throat. Voll put on headphones and used a stethoscope tethered to the cart with a cord. Voll and Shenkman listened to the sixth grader's heart and lungs.

The images were displayed on the computer for both parties, giving patients a look inside their ears, throat and nose. Voll said this is a great help in explaining to kids why they need antibiotics as well as giving doctors images to compare change over time.

“Usually when you go to a doctor's office, it's just like they're sticking a bunch of stuff down your throat and in your ears,” said Barnhill, who stepped away from class to help Voll and Shenkman demonstrate the equipment. “It's just like, OK, well I wonder what's going on.”

Voll said PATH is working on another school-based health center in Rocky Point and hopes to open with behavioral health and outpatient therapy to start. It's a service he'd also like to see in other schools.

The one-time cost of purchasing the tele-health cart is much cheaper than hiring a provider and paying her or him year after year.

Shenkman said her assessments are only as good as the nurse working on the other end. In her case, Voll has “excellent” assessment skills.

“You are relying on somebody else's actual assessment of the situation at hand,” Shenkman said. “But as far as the tool itself, it has amazing capabilities of being able to give you a clear assessment of what's going on from head to toe, really.

Funding options

The primary care that Pender offers helps bring health care to more residents, many of whom call the health department their medical home. Brunswick County also offers primary care services.

With the abundance of primary care providers in New Hanover, the county health department doesn't offer primary care.

The 3.3 primary care physicians per 10,000 residents that Pender had in 2012 is an improvement from the 2.5 number the county saw in 2004.

Although the eastern side of Pender has seen some more offices in the past year or two, the western side remains stagnant, Moser said.

Walker said counties have three avenues -- federal, state and private -- for tapping into more health care funds.

He said the N.C. Medical Society has physicians in Brunswick, New Hanover and Onslow Counties through its Community Practitioner Program, which works to increase recruitment and retention of primary care providers in rural North Carolina. The program receives no state or federal funds.

The N.C. Department of Commerce designates Pender as a tier-three county. This has become a disadvantage in being able to access grants, because most go to tier-one or tier-two counties, Moser said.

“Tier-one counties are your poorest,” she said. “We're in the top twenty wealthiest counties in the state, but you go just ten miles down the road, and you can see what we have.”

A lot of coastal counties are among the wealthiest, Moser said. But still, Pender is designated as a health care provider shortage area for both dental and medical.

She hopes that the tele-health program offers a sense of relief and a little bit of security to families who know that their children – as well as the parents – have access to providers who recognize the needs that come along with serving a rural population.

“The kid can still stay there, ride the school bus home, the parent can still get off of work at the regular time and not miss work, not impacting their livelihood, and know that their child has been looked after I think in a very professional manner,” Moser said. “It gives you a lot of comfort to know that the provider you're going to is qualified and has a sincere concern for you and your family.”

Contact Lydia Coutré at 910-343-2223 or Lydia.Coutre@StarNewsOnline.com.