As many abortion supporters say, poor women would be without healthcare if it weren’t for Planned Parenthood. Right?

In the wake of Planned Parenthood’s latest scandal, they’d like us to believe that they are necessary and good for us. But here’s why America doesn’t need Planned Parenthood.

1. Their services are limited.

Why send people to a place like Planned Parenthood when they could go to a different, low-cost clinic that provides more comprehensive care?

2. Community Health Centers and Pregnancy Medical Clinics are equipped to provide for men and women’s reproductive health care needs.

Contrary to popular belief, Planned Parenthood is not the only provider of reproductive health care. There are over 8,000 Community Health Centers across the country, and over 2,000 pregnancy help centers compared to around 700 Planned Parenthood Facilities. Pregnancy Medical Clinics are a growing trend, providing for ongoing needs of clients throughout their childbearing years. If we’re talking about “access” to healthcare, why not support already existing clinics that provide a wide range of services?

3. We have better ways to spend half of a billion dollars.

$528.4 million in the last fiscal year, to be exact.

4. Abortion, contraception, and sterilization are not vital services to maintain a healthy lifestyle, so why are we supporting an organization promoting these?

Unless all elective medical services are covered by insurance and/or the government, we have no reason to cover a select few. We should be supporting organizations that provide more services with less of an agenda.

5. Sex ed can and should be taught by parents or trusted individuals instead of by an organization with an agenda.

Many outraged parents agree that minors don’t need the information Planned Parenthood is giving them.

6. Poor, uninsured women deserve better.

Destiny explains this as someone who’s been there.

7. Planned Parenthood has been accused of participating in illegal activity.

An organization suspected of engaging in illegal activity should not be supported or promoted by the government, individuals, or other organizations without a thorough investigation into the allegations made in recently released investigative videos.

8. Planned Parenthood’s priorities are not what they say they are.

When your number of pregnancy tests falls 89% but abortions rise 17%, the tagline “Care. No matter what,” couldn’t be further from the truth.

From 2008-2014, Planned Parenthood’s Mar Monte affiliate (largest in the U.S.) increased abortion by 17%, sterilizations by 27%, and contraceptive consultations & services by 1.5%. At the same time, prenatal care fell by 80%, pediatric care by 60%, pregnancy tests by 89%, adult primary care by 23%, and other services by 18%.

We don’t need Planned Parenthood because other clinics are able to provide care for women without dismembering babies and participating in illegal activity. As a human being, I think you deserve better. We all do.

If you or someone you know is looking for an alternative health care provider, you can look for a Community Health Center or a Pregnancy Help Center.

If you or someone you know is looking for hope and healing after abortion, please visit Rachel’s Vineyard, or Project Rachel. Men can look for a Project Joseph ministry in their area.

If you or someone you know works in the abortion industry and wants to get out, please visit AbortionWorker.com where you can receive confidential support through your transition.