By of the

Payments to hospitals from commercial health plans in southeastern Wisconsin increased on average at a rate that was less than 50% of the national rate from 2003 through 2014, according to a study released Tuesday.

The average payment from private insurers to hospitals in the region increased by approximately 45%, or 3.4% annually, from 2003 through 2014, compared with a 93% increase in the Hospital Component of the Consumer Price Index, according to the study by Milliman, a consulting firm.

The study was done for the Greater Milwaukee Business Foundation on Health and is the latest in a series of studies on health care costs in southeastern Wisconsin. It updates a previous study that looked at payments from 2003 through 2012.

That study also showed that payments to hospitals in southeastern Wisconsin from private health plans on average had increased at roughly half the national rate.

"The expense control of the hospitals has been very good," said Keith Kieffer, a management consultant with Milliman.

The hospital market also has become more competitive since 2008 as health systems opened hospitals in different parts of the Milwaukee metropolitan area. Aurora Health Care opened hospitals in Summit and Grafton, for instance, and Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare opened a hospital in Franklin.

Aurora also has sharply lowered the operating costs — the day-to-day expenses — of its hospitals.

In 2003, Aurora's hospitals had the highest average operating costs among health systems in southeastern Wisconsin, according to the study released Tuesday. Last year, the operating costs of its hospitals were 12% below the average for health systems in the area.

Aurora's operating costs were 4% lower last year than they were in 2003. In contrast, two national measures of hospital operating costs — both imperfect, Kieffer said — increased 52% and 39% from 2003 through 2014.

Aurora's success in controlling costs enabled it to hold the line on rate increases.

In 2003, commercial health plans' payments to Aurora hospitals were 23% above the average for southeastern Wisconsin. Last year, payments to Aurora were 3% below the average.

Payments to Wheaton Franciscan for hospital care were the lowest among the six health systems included in the study: 6% below the average for southeastern Wisconsin.

At the same time, overall hospital costs in southeastern Wisconsin were much higher than similar geographic areas 10 years ago, said Dave Osterndorf, a partner and chief actuary for Health Exchanges Resources in Glendale. Now they are more in line with similar markets.

The Milliman study did find that payments to hospitals in southeastern Wisconsin from private insurers increased 6.5% last year compared with a national average of 5%. It was the first time that the increase has outpaced the national average since 2005.

The increase in all likelihood stemmed from hospitals with higher rates providing more medical services than an increase in what hospitals bill health plans, Kieffer said.

Hospital care accounts for 30% to 40% of the costs of medical spending for commercial health insurance plans.

The slower increase in hospital payments has only partly checked the increase in insurance premiums.

Those typically have increased more than 4% a year after changes in plan design, such as higher deductibles, in recent years.

However, physician fees account for about 30% of medical spending — and physician fees for commercial health plans in southeastern Wisconsin were almost 50% higher on average than other Midwest markets, according to a Milliman study released last year.

In addition, prescription drug costs have increased significantly in recent years.

The Affordable Care Act also placed a tax on health plans. In addition, the aging of the workforce has contributed to the increase in premiums.

The study released Tuesday found that the total increase in commercial payments to health systems for health systems ranged from 18% to 80% from 2003 through 2014.

In that time period, payments for hospital care from private health insurers increased:

■ 18% for Aurora Health Care.

■48% for Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare.

■53% for Columbia St. Mary's.

■62% for United Hospital System.

■64% for Froedtert Health.

■80% for ProHealth Care.

In 2014, payments to ProHealth were 18% above market average for southeastern Wisconsin. In 2003, they were 6% below the average.