Early this month, the Congressional Budget Office concluded that the Affordable Care Act will, over ten years, cause 2 million workers to stop working or to work less, eroding the U.S. labor supply by the equivalent of 2 million jobs. These workers, getting free or low-cost health insurance, will by choice reduce their connection to work.

But this is preliminary thinking -- and a hypothesis not clearly based on previous evidence.

The worry that if you give people economic benefits they will become dependent is as old as poverty itself. In the 1870s, private social agencies responded to government poor laws with Charity Organization Societies. Local government relief was seen as indiscriminate, creating lifelong paupers. The Societies sent professional caseworkers (“friendly visitors”) to instill morality and self-sufficiency -- work -- in the poor in return for cash.

The Budget Office is working from traditional economic theory, which assumes that if you give people money or other resources, they will always work less. But to prove this, we need to look at empirical studies that have tested this thesis. Unfortunately, there haven’t been many.

This is partly because studying the effects of social programs on labor supply is difficult and the results uncertain. Programs do not have the same benefits, types of benefits or tax rates (points at which increases in income create ineligibility) Some are cash, some in-kind. You could study a specific population or everybody; or at one point in time or over a period of time.

So the research has had mixed results, some contradictory. However, most studies have found that social programs did not reduce work effort or reduced it only slightly.

Robert Moffitt, arguably the expert in this field, did two reviews of studies of existing social programs, in 2002 for the National Bureau of Economic Research and in 2010 for the Institute for Research on Poverty. All of the food stamp studies showed no decrease in work by those receiving them. The Earned Income Tax Credit, by contrast, produced a big positive effect on work -- especially for single mothers who worked more as a result. Studies of Medicaid showed mixed results, some saying the program increased work effort and earlier ones claiming the opposite.

In 1981 during the Reagan administration, Congress tightened welfare standards for single mothers. Families with working mothers had to earn less to be eligible for Aid to Families With Dependent Children (AFDC) and those still working and getting welfare would have their benefits reduced. The expectation was that these single mothers would cut back their hours of work in order to stay on welfare.

The results proved the opposite. Several studies were done to determine whether these single mothers actually decreased their work effort; they are summarized in another Institute for Research on Poverty paper. They had different geographic locations, different study populations and different methodologies. But they all came to the same conclusion: The tighter standards had no effect on welfare mothers’ work behavior.

Many forces are at play in determining how much people work -- economic conditions, the unemployment rate, the prevailing level of wages and the size of the social benefit itself. As they muddied policymakers’ foregone conclusions in the past, they will likely make it impossible to predict the effect the Affordable Care Act will have on Americans’ work effort.

And health insurance doesn’t lend itself to safe predictions either. It’s designated for one purpose. It cannot take the place of basic cash income for food and housing. The health insurance benefit is complementary to other (work) income, not a substitute for it. It can also be seen as optional to a certain degree. Some people will choose to pay the penalty and do without it -- as they do now.

Health insurance is also a universal benefit and doesn’t go only to poor people. This would dilute the total effect of any voluntary reduction in work effort. While previous studies dealt mainly with programs whose participants were single mothers, the health care law has a much larger and more diverse target population.

Many factors will have an effect on whether or not 2 million workers or any other number decide to reduce their work effort.

We now have 10 million people who want to work and for whom there are no jobs. This is a forced reduction in the labor force. If corporations continue to be highly productive with fewer workers, and if this is the way of the future, a small voluntary reduction in the labor force in ten years might prove to be a good thing -- to help to solve this structural problem.

Mildred Rein, who has a Ph.D. from the Heller School for Advanced Studies in Social Welfare at Brandeis University, has published two books on poverty, social services and social welfare.