Nico Muhly's 'Two Boys,' opening Monday at the Metropolitan Opera, explores how identities can be faked online. The same topic is at the heart of the MTV show 'Catfish.' The Wall Street Journal spoke to Mr. Muhly and Nev Schulman, the host and executive producer of 'Catfish,' about how their ideas intersect.

"Two Boys," opening Monday at the Metropolitan Opera, follows Detective Anne Strawson's investigation into a 14-year-old's killing, possibly by another teenage boy. As she digs deeper, she becomes immersed in a world of chat rooms and fake online identities that is alien to her.

The MTV series "Catfish" also explores themes related to digital anonymity, as its producer and host Nev Schulman (who previously appeared in a documentary by the same name) connects couples in online relationships who haven't met in person, often discovering deception along the way.

The Wall Street Journal spoke with Mr. Schulman and "Two Boys" composer Nico Muhly about how the dark side of the Internet inspired their work. Edited excerpts from the conversation:

With "Catfish" and "Two Boys," you're both working with this idea of fake identities and how easily people can pretend online. In "Catfish," you're often helping someone get to the bottom of it, whereas in "Two Boys," someone has to untangle something that's already happened. What intrigues both of you about these concepts?

Mr. Schulman: I had a personal experience in which my trust and naivete was taken advantage of. I see "Catfish" as an opportunity to go and help other people who had either had or are having a similar experience see it through, get some closure, get some answers.

A Preview of 'Two Boys'

A preview of "Two Boys," an opera by Nico Muhly that explores the dark side of the internet and opens Oct. 21 at the Metropolitan Opera.

Mr. Muhly: It's interesting that you say closure, because I'm always interested in the story when we're in the middle of it. The minute you know the answer, then it becomes a lot less exciting and a lot less sexy, I think. I mean, how excited were you when that Manti Te'o thing happened last year?

Mr. Schulman: It was one of many sort-of miracles that have happened over the course of the last few years with regards to my career—me getting "catfished" and having my brother, who's a filmmaker, capture it on film. And the fact that the word then got defined by that whole scandal.

Mr. Muhly: I remember in the late '90s, if something weird was happening to you, you'd look around and be like, am I being punked? People still allow themselves to get fooled online, which is so crazy.

Mr. Schulman: Well, you said something a minute ago, which was that you're much more intrigued by the mystery of what's happening and not knowing the answer. What I've found, and I think you're speaking to it also, is that mystery is in itself, at least when it comes to love, the greatest aphrodisiac.

Mr. Muhly: Right. Exactly.

Mr. Schulman: The less you know about something—

Mr. Muhly: The better.

Mr. Schulman: The more you want it, the more you crave it.

Mr. Muhly: Everyone says "How could you not know?" But a part of you does know, and you keep it going anyway.

Mr. Schulman: In many cases there's a preference of not knowing the truth. Even if it's accessible, even if one could easily do what I do on the show—which is do some real investigation and make those hard and uncomfortable phone calls—they don't want to, because it will likely result in them finding out that they've been betrayed and they'll be heartbroken. Or more importantly, that they'll no longer have this fantastic relationship with this person, who fills their need for affection and attention.

Mr. Muhly: They're getting told the thing that they wanted to hear.

Mr. Schulman: Right, they're waking up to those text messages and going to sleep on the phone with this person. That's basically what they want, and the actual relationship and the issues and the communication that's required to have a real physical relationship with someone is either unrealistic or just too tough for most of these people. So they turn to these easily compartmentalized, easy-to-manage digital romances.

In "Two Boys," you have this central character of the investigator. She basically doesn't know anything about this world, and part of the story is her getting access to it, learning about it, making mistakes along the way. For an opera, is it important to have a character like that?

ENLARGE 'Two Boys' composer Nico Muhly and 'Catfish' creator Nev Schulman at the Lincoln Center opera house. Adrian Fussell for The Wall Street Journal

Mr. Muhly: With an opera about something that generationally is still a little confusing for people, I think it's nice to have a tour guide through hell.

But also, one of the interesting things about online crime is that there's a way to think about it—that it's totally divorced from reality. That what happens online stays online. Then when people start killing themselves or other people, then all of a sudden it becomes a problem for the analog world.

Mr. Schulman: That is also the core of what I'm doing, trying to help teach or certainly illustrate that there is an effect in the real world. You need to be held accountable for your actions, even if they're digital.

Nico, I've heard you say that "Two Boys" is telling this traditional story about what people do in the face of loneliness. Is loneliness what's driving so much of this behavior online?

Mr. Schulman: Everybody, for the most part, has things about themselves that they want to change, whether it's your weight or your education or your job or simply where you live. People are always aspiring to be a better version of themselves, and for the most part, what I see is that access to that reality is very difficult. Whether it's healthy food, which there is very little of in this country, or simply the energy and effort it takes to get up and go work out every day. It's a lot easier to just click some things on your profile and upload a photo of the version you'd like to be than it is to actually achieve that. At the core of it, there really does seem to be some insecurities and issues, like loneliness and unhappiness.

Online, you create a personality, and then immediately you get the attention from real people that you want and wish you could get in real life. It almost replaces it.

Mr. Muhly: It almost replaces it, but then, it's addictive in a sense.

Mr. Schulman: Right. And the more connected you get online, the more elaborate your profile becomes, the more isolated you become.

Mr. Muhly: This is why I was so excited to make an opera on these themes. Because it's already happening in opera anyway—the whole history of opera is people misbehaving in costume and trying to get away with it. In so many operas, even ones that are relatively realistic, you're meant to suspend disbelief that you wouldn't recognize your fiancée with a drawn-on moustache, for instance. Or that men are women, or women are men, or the prince is the pauper, all that stuff. Whereas online, it just doesn't matter. It's that easy to do. So it's actually much more of a sort of verismo moment.

Write to Andrew LaVallee at andrew.lavallee@wsj.com