By Gerald Witt of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Editor’s note: Karen Carson says it was incorrect for this report to state that she "backs components of Common Core standards for educating public school students.” “I certainly do not.” she said. “In the past I supported Common Core for higher standards. That support helped spur the development process of Tennessee Standards, and that is what I support.”

Stances on health care and education are the primary differences between the two Republicans wanting the state’s 14th House District seat in West Knox County.

Karen Carson supports Insure Tennessee, Gov. Bill Haslam’s proposal to expand federal health care to the state’s uninsured, while Jason Zachary does not. Carson backs components of Common Core standards for educating public school students, Zachary does not.

Otherwise, as both acknowledged in Thursday’s debate at Farragut Town Hall, the two tend to agree on protecting gun rights, and being anti-abortion.

“Many issues, we are in agreement on,” Carson said.

Both are wary of increasing the state’s gasoline tax.

What little clashing occurred during the debate came on the discussions over health care and education in Tennessee.

Zachary, who works in a telecommunications brokerage business, linked Insure Tennessee to Medicaid, which he said he believes is an expansion of the federal government into the state’s affairs. He opposes the Affordable Care Act implemented by President Barack Obama’s administration. He admitted that health care for the uninsured is a problem, but didn’t outline any plan to assist the uninsured.

“We don’t want to make a bad situation worse by grossly expanding government,” Zachary said.

Carson, a pediatric nurse, drew on her medical experience in supporting Insure Tennessee. She said that the plan would cover up to 240,000 uninsured Tennesseans who opt in to the program.

“Gov. Haslam has worked to come up with a Tennessee plan, not an Obama plan,” she said. “I believe that this is a reasonable solution. … Our hospitals cannot continue to assume the costs of the uninsured.”

Carson, a member of the Knox County school board, also said that Common Core regulations have helped show where Tennessee students stand in their education level compared to the rest of the country. She added, however, that any policy does need to be reviewed after it is implemented.

Zachary primarily suggested that in matters of federal government and the state, the state and local school systems she be left to determine their own fate.

Then he suggested the state adopt a plan from Americans for Prosperity — a conservative political advocacy group founded by billionaire brothers David and Charles Koch.

Carson, in rebuttal, keyed in on the helpfulness from a national group.

“A national organization may have some good ideas, but that’s a national solution,” she said. “Tennessee needs a Tennessee solution.”

With one day of early voting left before Wednesday’s election, former Knoxville Mayor Victor Ashe compared the special election to speed-dating in what he predicted to be a low turnout race.

“Whoever has the best network of supporters will prevail,” he said.

With no Democrat seeking the House seat, Wednesday’s Republican primary will effectively decide who fulfills the final year of former state Rep. Ryan Haynes’ term. Haynes vacated the seat earlier this year to become chairman of the Tennessee Republican Party.