Veterans for a Strong America has announced the launch of a national summer bus tour to expose Hillary Clinton’s failed national security record. “The Difference it Makes” tour, the group explains, will result in a petition that will hopefully convince the FBI to make the former secretary of state accountable for her email scandal and her failure to keep Americans safe in Benghazi, Libya.

“Vets for a Strong America intends to spend the summer reminding people how Hillary Clinton’s record makes her a hypocrite,” said Joel Arends, U.S. Army Reserve Major and Chairman, Veterans for a Strong America. “We cannot have one standard of law for the elite political class and another for everyone else. We are a nation of laws and equal justice under the law. Therefore Mrs. Clinton must be held accountable for her actions.”

Arends isn’t the only prominent military figure along for the ride this summer. Also behind the wheel will be:

Retired Air Force Lt. Col. Wendy Rogers -- one of the first 100 women pilots in today's Air Force and recipient of the Defense Meritorious Service Medal; Retired Air Force Major General Bentley Rayburn, who led the 388th Fighter Wing in 1995; Retired Air Force Brigadier General Don Bacon, former commander of U.S. Strategic Command

Here’s how the tour will work:

Along the way, VSA will be gathering comments and petition signatures from Americans coast to coast. The petition will then be hand-delivered to FBI Director James Comey and Attorney General Loretta Lynch at the conclusion of the tour at the Justice Department in Washington, D.C. The petition will demand that Mrs. Clinton be held to the same standard that others who have intentionally mishandled classified documents, including information that has been deemed “top secret.”

Besides a bit of media scrutiny, Clinton has so far escaped any kind of consequence for her mishandling of classified information in the State Department. As for those 11 hours she spent in front of the Benghazi select committee last year, the appearance hardly makes up for her inept leadership on September 11, 2012 and her false rhetoric in the days that followed. While she told victims' family members that the raid on the Benghazi compound was the spontaneous result of a YouTube video, her email correspondence proves she knew it was a coordinated terror attack. If she had no problem lying about that, who knows what else she’s keeping from the American people.

That’s what these veterans are determined to find out, one pit stop at a time.