Today, I started connecting them.

First, I posted something on Facebook, unconfirmed but troubling, about a priest being tortured by ISIS and scheduled for a symbolic crucifixion on Good Friday. I asked my friends to pray for his soul. One (now former) Facebook friend suggested we Christians care only when our own are being killed, but have no problem with the Kurds or other oppressed groups. He also accused me of not being very smart, which might have offended me except for the fact that this young whippersnapper had obsessively emailed me during law school asking for help with writing projects. As we say in the profession, res ipsa chutzpah.

Then, I accompanied one of my asylum clients to a hearing in Lyndhurst, N.J., where we spent the better part of Thursday trying to convince an immigration officer that this young man from El Salvador qualified for refugee status. "Mario" fled his native country a week after his cousin, with whom he used to walk to Mass, was murdered by gang members. These criminals, who belonged to a group known as Mara Dieciocho, or the 18th Street gang, didn't like the influence the Catholic church exerted in El Salvador. They were hell-bent on recruiting young men to join their ranks, and the priests and nuns in Mario's hometown were equally intent on protecting these kids from a life of crime and certain death. It was a holy war, and the holy ones were losing.

As I reviewed Mario's paperwork before we went into the asylum interview, I noted the date "March 24, 2016" at the top of the file, and a chill ran down my spine. Thirty-six years ago to the day, another Salvadoran had waged a mighty battle against the secular forces in his country, channeling the power of God to oppose the brutality of man, Archbishop Oscar Romero, who was recently beatified by Pope Francis, the first important step toward becoming a saint. Romero was assassinated at the altar while saying Mass, after openly criticizing the government of El Salvador for persecuting the poor. Today, it is not the government, but rather criminals the government cannot control who are threatening young men whose only crime is going to church.

On the train ride home from Lyndhurst, I thought about the interview and how fortunate I was to live in a country where I could openly walk into my preferred place of worship, kneel in a pew and lift my prayers to the Lord. I didn't need to worry that, waiting for me in the entryway was a tattooed man with a gun, ordering me to choose between my faith or my life.

But the sense of well-being and pride in this pluralistic nation dissipated as soon as I opened the newspaper and read about oral arguments before the Supreme Court in a case titled Little Sisters of the Poor Home for the Aged v. Burwell. That case involves something more than only the narrow issue of whether the U.S. government, through bureaucratic rules, can force a religiously affiliated group to provide birth control to its employees in violation of fundamental religious principles.

The case is more like the line in the sand President Obama presumably drew in Syria when he said we would not allow Bashar al-Assad to use chemical weapons (which he did) and threatened to invade the country (which we didn't.) It is, in other words, the demarcation between the demands of an expanding secular state and the integrity of a religious institution that simply wants to be left alone to do its magnificent work.

I don't need to get into the details of the debate at the high court. It is too complicated to be untangled in 900 words, but suffice it to say that the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, a man who understood the importance of religion in society, has the plaintiff nuns nervous that their refusal to engage in any act that makes them complicit in providing abortion-causing drugs will not be honored under either the First Amendment or the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. And that is almost as scary as what happened to Mario, walking on that dirt road to church with his cousin.

Today is Good Friday, the most solemn day in the Christian calendar. I pray for my tortured brothers and sisters abroad. I pray for my client, that he be looked upon with compassion and given refuge in this country. And I pray for the Little Sisters of the Poor, who stand for all of us against an overreaching, overbearing government that values its version of "health care" over the fundamental rights of God's humble servants.

I connected the dots. The picture is frightening.

Christine Flowers is a lawyer.

cflowers1961@gmail.com

@flowerlady61