Buy Photo The Horizon building on Wyckoff Road in Wall. (Photo: Bob Bielk/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

Lawmakers want the state Attorney General to oversee Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey's new health insurance plan, one which critics say is unfairly leaving some hospitals and doctors out.

Sen. Nia Gill, D-Essex, and Sen. Joseph Vitale, D-Middlesex, said the state's biggest health insurer misrepresented its OMNIA health plan to lawmakers and the public by failing to disclose which doctors and hospitals were part of its network.

"With the introduction of this plan in New Jersey under an extremely flawed process, it is critical that we act," they said in a statement. "Failure to do so could compromise the quality of care patients receive and the health of hospitals throughout the state. Strong oversight and accountability of this program is vital to ensuring our residents are protected.”

The senators led a hearing on Monday about OMNIA, a plan Horizon has unveiled for 2016 that will include lower premiums, co-pays and deductibles for consumers – provided they get care from a network of 24,000 health care professionals and 36 hospitals, including Barnabas Health's and Meridian Health's eight hospitals in Monmouth and Ocean counties. Centrastate Healthcare System in Freehold Township was one of the hospitals left out.

The plan wouldn't affect consumers who are covered by Medicare or Medicaid.

Lawmakers at the hearing were unhappy that Horizon developed its network without disclosing how it decided which health care providers were included.

"They weren't even asked to the dance," Vitale said during the hearing. "It's not fair."

The New Jersey Attorney General's office declined to comment Tuesday morning.

The hearing on Monday could be a sign of things to come. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, is aimed not only at ensuring virtually all Americans have health insurance but also at slowing the escalating cost of care.

Horizon has 3.8 million members and a majority of both the individual and small employer market in New Jersey.

Horizon executives said OMNIA will do both by paying hospitals and doctors in the network not for the number of services they provide but for the value of the care they provide — a model it has slowly been introducing since 2010.

The health care providers will take discounts in their reimbursements. But Horizon expects 250,000 consumers to opt for the plan, giving health care providers who participate more customers.

Consumers who choose the OMNIA plan can expect premiums that are 15 percent less expensive than other Horizon plans, along with lower out-of-pocket expenses if they go to doctors in the network, Robert Marino, Horizon's president and chief executive officer, told the senators.

The full details haven't been released. Open enrollment for consumers who purchase insurance in the Obamacare exchange begins Nov. 1.

But the new plan should allow 40,000 New Jerseyans who don't have coverage to afford health insurance, Marino said at the hearing.

In response to the committees' call for more transparency, Horizon said in a statement that it provided "more transparency than any other insurer in the state about how it developed its tiered network plans. Horizon will be offering new lower cost health plan options for consumers who are paying some of the highest health care costs in the nation."

The OMNIA plan already was approved by the state Department of Banking and Insurance, and it wasn't clear what lawmakers who opposed it could do to halt it. Some of the lawmakers, however, were miffed that Horizon developed its plan in relative secrecy, given the huge impact that it could have on health care providers who were left out of the plan.

"I’m not saying it is (a monopoly), but we haven’t been given information," Gill said during the hearing. "This could and it has the earmarks of being a potential monopoly, as well as – and I’m not saying it is – as well as potential consumer protection issues.”

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Rshq1D