MARINA DEL REY, Calif., Dec. 28, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Heritage Provider Network (HPN), the nation's leading physicians' organization, is pleased to announce that seventeen organizations are now using its internally developed software suite of care coordination tools known as "QHMO." The organizations utilizing the suite of software products include leading hospital systems, a number of health plans, as well as a number of other physicians' organizations.

HPN has over 35 years of experience and success coordinating the care of individuals in a "full risk" environment, precisely the environment that has been created by the Affordable Care Act. "QHMO" was developed to mimic the workflow that is utilized by HPN's thousands of medical professionals, and to allow others to quickly embrace the specific care coordination techniques that HPN has found best promote improvement in the quality of care delivered to the patient, while at the same time lowering the cost of care for the system.

"We have used 'QHMO' for a number of years now, and I can conclusively say that no other software package allows a team of medical professionals to manage the care of the patient as successfully and comprehensively," said Dr. Marc Hoffing, Chief Medical Officer at Desert Oasis Healthcare in Palm Springs, California. "Without 'QHMO' it would not be possible to obtain the results we do."

"We looked at a number of different software applications when we decided to move to full risk. None were able to do what 'QHMO' could do," said Carol Sorrell, Chief Operating Officer of Bakersfield Family Medical Group, in Bakersfield, California. "The other applications were either far too cumbersome, or simply were unable to mimic the nurses' daily workflow. We found 'QHMO' on the other hand much easier to use, mimicked nurses' tasks, and really focused on coordinating the health care of the patient, not simply checking a bunch of boxes on computer forms."

"We noticed that many organizations have been loath to embrace the Affordable Care Act's move from payment for volume to payment for value," said Dr. Richard Merkin, President and CEO of HPN. "We are hopeful that 'QHMO' will help organizations more readily embrace a changing future. Too many are hopeful that nothing will change, or that even if things change any such change will be incremental, when what we need is a wholesale change in the way we think about the provision of healthcare in the United States. We need to move from a sick care system to a well care system. 'QHMO' can help accomplish just such a change and make the critical difference."

ABOUT HPN:

Heritage Provider Network, Inc. (HPN) is on the cutting edge of the accountable care model of healthcare delivery: coordinated, patient-doctor centric, integrated health care systems that represent the future of health care in the United States. HPN and its affiliates operate in California, New York and Arizona providing high quality, cost effective healthcare to close to one million individuals and are dedicated to quality, affordable health care, and putting patients' wellness first. (www.heritageprovidernetwork.com)

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20151228/318220

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20120418/LA89605LOGO-a

SOURCE Heritage Provider Network