President Barack Obama (Photo: Susan Walsh/AP)

It’s been five years since the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act — more widely known as Obamacare — was signed into law. Vermont is taking full advantage of the law and the number of people without health insurance is now at a record low. According to the U.S. Census Bureau only 31,000 Vermonters, about five percent of the state’s population, was not covered by some form of health insurance in 2014. That’s lower than any state except for Massachusetts, and it’s less than half the 11.7 percent of Americans who are uninsured.

But those numbers are somewhat misleading. Everyone over 65 is covered by Medicare, so rather than looking at the entire population, let’s focus only on the the health insurance status of the under 65 population. The accompanying graph shows that Obamacare has had a major impact in both the U.S. and Vermont. Vermont’s uninsured rate for under 65 year olds hovered around 11 percent from 2006 through 2011. It’s interesting that the severe recession of 2008-2009 is invisible — there wasn’t any increase in the number of Vermonters who were uninsured. That wasn’t true for the nation, but given that the Great Recession was the worst downturn since the Great Depression of the 1930s, it’s remarkable that there wasn’t a big spike up in the percentage of Americans who lost their health insurance. Since 2011, when Obamacare began to take effect, the percentage of uninsured for the under 65 year olds has fallen significantly and is now 5.9 percent in Vermont and 13.5 percent in the U.S.

Between 2006 and 2014 there has been a big increase in the number of Vermonters getting health insurance from Medicaid, which is paid for by both federal and state funds through a complicated formula. Vermont’s Medicaid rolls have increased dramatically, from 105,000 in 2006 to 145,000 in 2014. At the same time the number of Vermonters getting their health insurance in the private insurance market — through their employers or on their own — has fallen from 396,000 to 350,000. Those numbers tell me that there has been an almost one to one subsitution from privately provided health insurance to government provided insurance for the under 65 population.

The percentage of Vermonters without health insurance has declined, to be sure, but that change from 11 percent to 6 percent obscures the larger dynamic—the substitution of publicly funded health insurance for privately funded.

That switch has significant problems for the state budget. We’re already seeing the strains on the fiscal year 2017 budget, which hasn’t even been formally put forward (it will be when the legislature meets next January). Most of the budget pressures are coming from Medicaid. Given how expensive health care is, it’s not surprising that the state with the second lowest rate of uninsured is finding it expensive to provide that service to its citizens. The cost savings that were projected to come from efforts to reign in costs and provide preventative care have not materialized. I hope they do, but I fear they will be elusive.

The health-care budget pressures will only get worse. The sweetener, or subsidy, that Obamacare currently provides to states to encourage them to enroll uninsured people into Medicaid will gradually be reduced over the next few years. They won’t be eliminated, but any reduction in the federal government’s share of health care costs is bound to put more pressure on the state Medicaid budget, and the overall state budget.

As Vermont ages and people under the age of 65 cross that threshold into senior citizendom, they become eligible for Medicare which, unlike Medicaid, is paid for entirely by the federal government. In 2015, 8,000 Vermonters will turn 65 and that number will increase to 10,000 annually by 2020.

As Vermont’s under 65 population, and the number of people under 65 receiving Medicaid, shrinks, that will reduce health care cost pressures in the state budget. But that will lead to another budgetary pressure. Government does provide nursing home care for people over 65 who can’t afford it. But it’s paid for by Medicaid, not Medicare, which means the state will be on the hook for a significant portion of those costs. If you think that health care costs are expensive, take a look at the cost of extended nursing home stays. It’s enough to bust any state’s budget.

Art Woolf is associate professor of economics at the University of Vermont.

Read or Share this story: http://bfpne.ws/1NN7nFd