Federal taxpayers with a 2014 household income of $60,000 or less are eligible for free income tax preparation services offered by the United Way of Palm Beach County beginning Tuesday.

The non-profit agency has partnered with the IRS to provide the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance program.

This year, the free tax preparation program in Palm Beach County is offering three options:

Go to one of 14 VITA locations throughout the county and an IRS-certified VITA volunteer will prepare and e-file the tax return. Last fall, the United Way of Palm Beach County began training volunteers to help prepare federal tax returns.

Visit a specified VITA location to file returns online with support and guidance of a VITA volunteer.

File returns online from home at http://www.MyFreeTaxes.com. Filers with questions related to taxes or e-filing can call the toll-free VITA helpline 1-855-698-9435 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. Monday through Saturday to speak with a VITA volunteer.

The United Way of Broward County will offer a similar program beginning next month with a bus, dubbed the Mobile Resource Center, that will tour the county from February to April with volunteer tax preparers who can help residents find tax credits that may qualify them for refunds.

The Internal Revenue Service also has a free online service at IRS.gov/FreeFile, thanks to a partnership with Free File Alliance, a consortium of 14 leading tax software companies that make their branded products available for free. E-filed returns will be transmitted to the IRS beginning Tuesday when the tax filing season officially begins.

"You don't have to be an expert on taxes or the new health care law. Free File software can help walk you through the rules and help you get it right," said John A. Koskinen, IRS Commissioner, in a written statement.

The Palm Beach County tax preparation sites will also be able to help filers comply with new requirements of the Affordable Care Act. The law requires each member of a household to have health insurance unless they fall under an exemption. This tax-filing season, taxpayers will be charged a penalty for failing to have health insurance.

When visiting a Palm Beach County tax preparation site, filers should bring their 2013 tax return, Social Security cards and birthdates for all family members. They should also have W2 work forms for 2014 and Forms 1099 and 1098 (if required), a photo ID, and a voided check.

Visit http://www.TaxesFiledFree.org or call 2-1-1 to find a tax preparation site or to receive more information.

Last year, the United Way of Palm Beach County helped process more than 9,400 income tax returns for lower-income households resulting in upwards of $6 million in earned income tax credits and $15 million in tax refunds.

dgehrke@sunsentinel.com or Twitter @donnagehrke