For anyone curious about just how stressful this time of year can make the average American citizen, I’ve come up with an idea for a test.

Take a couple of Americans, a few Canadians and Brits, and toss in a few western Europeans and Australians for good measure. Wire them up with electrodes to measure their body’s response to external stimuli, and put headphones on them. Then transmit some variant of the following via those headphones, and measure their response: “It’s tax season; there are only 10 days left before your return is due.”

I can pretty much guarantee that you’ll be able to pick out the Americans, simply by the magnitude of the response, up to and including the dents in the ceiling.

The fact is that, as anyone who has ever moved to the US and started filing taxes here after doing so elsewhere can tell you, US tax season is a bona fide nightmare. I’m one of those individuals; having done what had been more complicated taxes in Canada quite easily on my own, I realized that doing even a simple US return on my own wasn’t possible. British friends who moved here marveled over their first Christmas at the way their new acquaintances swapped names of good accountants the way that they might share tips for a great holiday destination or a marvelous new restaurant … until they themselves encountered their first tax preparation season.

This tax season, heading into its final days, has been more nightmarish than most. Nor does it seem as if anyone out there is doing anything to assist beleaguered taxpayers who have to cope with it all, and still meet tax filing deadlines.

The handwriting was on the wall

The handwriting was on the wall early on. Congress slashed funding to the Internal Revenue Service to the lowest levels since 1998, on an inflation-adjusted basis. Even before that happened, more than a third of customer calls to the agency’s toll-free line went unanswered.

That happened in a year Congress and the IRS knew was going to be particularly complicated for both the agency and taxpayers when it came to preparing and processing tax returns, thanks to Obamacare.

For some taxpayers, it will be pretty straightforward: if they get healthcare through their employer, or they’re covered by Medicare, they just check a box. But if you buy your own healthcare, you set off on a little trip through tax preparation hell. There are new forms to fill out, new calculations and some convoluted math, especially if you received a tax credit to pay for that healthcare and then saw your income jump.

The icing on the cake? Delayed 1095-A forms from state health exchanges, combined with the need for the taxpayers and the IRS to match up and adjust actual and estimated incomes and tweak the subsidy accordingly, are causing delays in processing refunds. And for many Americans – and for the economy as a whole at this time of year – refunds are a critical source of income.

This all points to the real problem: the sheer complexity of the tax preparation process, and the impossibility of navigating it without assistance.

For those who can’t afford to hire an accountant and pay a few hundred dollars for even a simple return, there are alternatives. The IRS will help out by providing you with free software, if your income is less than $49,000, and its volunteer person-to-person tax preparation services, available if you make less than $53,000 or are over 60 (and all you need is a basic return).

The IRS’s stretched resources and the need for help to sort through the complexities of the tax filing system, however, mean US taxpayers are particularly vulnerable to a host of unscrupulous business practices employed by storefront tax preparers trying to win taxpayers’ business. True, costly (to taxpayers) refund anticipation loans have thankfully met their demise. But there is still plenty of room for individual tax preparers to take advantage of the confusion and desperation of people trying to make sense of their tax return, and charging them whatever the market will bear.

And right now, given what’s happening with the principal rival to those storefront preparers, TurboTax, it may seem to taxpayers that they are being asked to choose between the frying pan and the fire. In February, more than a dozen states identified thousands of cases of potentially fraudulent tax returns used Intuit’s best-selling tax-preparation software, prompting TurboTax to stop e-filing state income tax returns.

TurboTax fiasco

The problems were identified when taxpayers logged into their TurboTax accounts to prepare and file their returns – only to discover that someone had hacked into them and already done so, often steering the refunds to a prepaid debit card.

While this story has grabbed headlines, it’s not the only instance of TurboTax-related hacking. In mid-February, a woman living near Poughkeepsie, New York discovered that someone had hacked into her TurboTax file and changed the routing number and account number for her bank – her $8,000 federal income tax was diverted to an account that didn’t belong to her. In 2013, a Wisconsin businessman had his federal tax refund pilfered by hackers in precisely the same manner by which this year’s hackers have siphoned off state refunds, again using TurboTax. He posted on TurboTax’s Facebook page that it took him a year to sort out the mess, including filling out a new (handwritten) 1040 form.

“It would have been completely different if they would have worked with me, but they didn’t really at all,” he wrote about his experience with TurboTax and Intuit. “They pretty much said sorry.”

There are other, more minor problems that TurboTax consumers have griped about. One of the more recent ones was the need for anyone who owned even a single share of stock to pony up for the most expensive version of its software, in order to get access to capital gains calculations that a less costly variant of the product used to offer. TurboTax quickly offered those customers $25 refunds after the product was hit with nearly a thousand one-star reviews on Amazon.com – although self-employed customers still were stuck paying the full price.

The fact that it happened at all, however, reminds us that this is a business; taxpayers confronting ever more complex returns, who don’t have or can’t afford accountants, have few alternatives to using these products, regardless of their flaws.

Perhaps most jarring of all is the realization that it doesn’t have to be this way. The idea of return-free filing – in which the IRS itself prepares a return, as a voluntary alternative to paying for an accountant or using tax preparation software – has been on the table for decades, and is already up and running in other countries, such as Denmark and Sweden, as reported two years ago by ProPublica and National Public Radio. Believers in this methodology calculate it could save taxpayers $2bn a year in the cost of preparing tax returns – not to mention 225m hours of our time and a significant measure of stress and our sanity.

Of course, that $2bn would come out of someone’s pocket. Unsurprisingly, Intuit – one of the major beneficiaries of the current situation – stopped that from happening, lobbying ferociously. But the goals of Intuit and Turbo Tax aren’t necessarily in either consumers’ interests or the broader public interest, even though they try to portray it that way by presenting themselves as alternatives to accountants.

Intuit’s goal is to keep customers, not to maximize our deductions or even to make the tax preparation process smooth and pain free. (In fact, if they make it easy, we might not keep coming back year after year and upgrading our software; we might be encouraged to go it alone…)

But if the IRS can find a way to collect taxes more efficiently, and in the process save those taxpayers who opt to use this kind of system money and angst, well, why not?

Of course, the fact remains that given the way the IRS’s budget has been slashed to the bone, the odds that Intuit and TurboTax have anything real to fear on this score appear to be minimal. That’s unfortunate, on a number of fronts.

It means that there’s less incentive for the manufacturers of the dominant tax preparation software to feel the icy winds of a real competitive threat blowing, galvanizing the companies into delivering better and better value for consumers (and taking whatever steps are required to preserve their security). It also means that there is less incentive, all the way around, to make tax season less of a nightmare for all concerned.

But hang in there. It’s almost over for this year.