Buy Photo The Central Regional High School Marching Band at the 2014 Toms River Halloween Parade. (Photo: Thomas P. Costello/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

TOMS RIVER It's settled. Trick-or-treating in Toms River will be on Oct. 30 this year.

Mayor Thomas F. Kelaher announced Friday that the day before Halloween will be the official date that township children can go door-to-door seeking treats. The decision was made because the 77th annual Halloween Parade, sponsored by Toms River Fire Co. #1, has moved permanently back to Halloween night.

Citing declining attendance and fewer marchers, the fire company shifted the Halloween parade back to Oct. 31 this year after two years when the parade was held on the Saturday before the spooky holiday. After the fire company announced in August that the parade would be moving back to Halloween night, many residents asked when trick-or-treating would be.

For years, children in Toms River and nearby towns like Beachwood, Pine Beach and South Toms River sought treats on Oct. 30 so they could attend -- or march in -- the parade on Halloween. Now the township is suggesting that kids switch back to Oct. 30 again.

“Although the township does not sanction or promote trick- or- treating since this is an individual parental decision, for reasons of public safety, specifically in conjunction with our police department, we strongly urge all parents to monitor the activities of their children on Friday, October 30," Kelaher said in a prepared statement. "The main concern the day before Halloween is extra children and families walking around."

The decision was a joint one made by the township, Toms River's fire companies and the police department, the mayor said.

While there is no official start and end time for trick-or-treating, Toms River Police Chief Mitch Little suggested that those who choose to go out do so between the hours of 2 and 9 p.m.

“We moved trick-or-treating back to October 30 so that residents would be free to come downtown and enjoy the parade on Halloween night. We hope to see a large turnout this year,” Parade Chairman Carl Weingroff said.

For parade information, visit http://www.trfc1.org/halloween.html.

Jean Mikle: (732) 643-4050, jmikle@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1UMIPLV