AUSTIN — Texas has more doctors in its Legislature than any other state — six, all of them Republicans.

Among the states, Texas’ lawmaking body has the third-highest percentage of doctors, according to an analysis by The Dallas Morning News.

But a bigger contingent of physician lawmakers hasn’t kindled a bigger debate on health policy in the Legislature, especially on questions of access to care and coverage expansion, experts and some of the physician lawmakers say.

The reasons are simple, they say: Most doctors live in the suburbs, where they run as Republicans. To win GOP primaries, they have to bash government health care programs.

According to former Texas Medical Association executive Kim Ross, the physician lawmakers may sincerely hold such views, even though health care accounts for about one-third of state spending and government is a huge player in their economic sector.

“Most physicians are at best apolitical and tend to vote their ZIP code rather than their professional interests,” said Ross, the doctor group’s top lobbyist from 1986 to 2002. “They are not concentrated in the 5th Ward [in inner-city Houston] or a South Texas colonia.”

Former Sen. Bob Deuell of Greenville said that a few years ago, there was only “a little hope” the Republican-controlled Legislature would consider coverage-expansion proposals.

Although Texas leads the nation in the share of its population lacking coverage, such debates have died, he said.

“The newer people can’t really discuss the ins and outs of health care,” said Deuell, a family doctor. “They just say they’re against it.”

John Davidson, health care analyst for the conservative Texas Public Policy Foundation, said doctors have widely varying views on the merits of Obamacare’s proposed Medicaid expansion, which state GOP leaders have fiercely resisted.

Many are skeptical of the state’s Medicaid program and disillusioned with how the Affordable Care Act has spawned purchases of doctors’ practices by hospital chains and mergers of huge national health insurance companies, he said.

“Individual physicians are a lot more ambivalent about the [act] than, say, people who run managed-care companies or hospital system administrators, who generally tend to be for it because it benefits them and what they do,” he said.

Richmond GOP Rep. John Zerwas, is an anesthesiologist who has experience as a hospital administrator. Zerwas has advocated trying to negotiate a “Texas solution” that would allow the state to draw down scores of billions in federal Medicaid funds but make demands of the newly covered adults, who would have private coverage and health savings accounts.

“We ought to have a real vibrant conversation about that and consider what the pros and cons of doing it are,” he said.

Zerwas acknowledged, though, that he’s outnumbered — not just in the GOP caucus but the “white coat” caucus.

According to the newspaper’s review of a 2014 compilation by the American Medical Association, 17 states have no doctors in their legislatures.

Texas has two in the Senate, four in the House. The Texas Legislature ranks third in its percentage of doctor lawmakers – 3.3 percent. Only in Nevada and Utah did docs wield a bigger presence — 4.8 percent in each. However, Utah has only five doctor lawmakers; and Nevada, three. Their legislatures have 104 and 63 members, respectively, compared with 181 in Texas.

Follow Robert T. Garrett on Twitter at @roberttgarrett.