The Mary Rippon Outdoor Theatre looks almost surreal under a "supermoon" during a July performance of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" at the Colorado Shakespeare Festival. (Zachary Andrews /Courtesy photo )

If you go What: 2014 Colorado Shakespeare Festival season at a glance The schedule: "The Tempest," June 6 (preview), June 7-Aug. 10 "I Hate Hamlet," June 12 (preview), June 13-Aug. 9 "The Merry Wives of Windsor," June 27 (preview); June 28-Aug. 9 "Henry IV, Part 1," July 17 (preview); July 18-Aug. 10 "Henry IV, Part 2" (special event), July 27 and Aug. 3 Tickets: Beginning Monday, Nov. 4, season tickets may be purchased by phone at 303-492-8008 or in person at the University Club on the University of Colorado-Boulder campus, 10 a.m.-5 p.m. Online sales for season tickets will begin Nov. 11 at coloradoshakes.org. Individual-production tickets go on sale Dec. 9 online, by phone or in person. Individual tickets are $18-$59 for regular-season shows, $10-$30 for the special events

The Colorado Shakespeare Festival will launch its 57th season on June 7 with a little something for everyone.

Do you like history? There's "Henry IV Parts 1 and 2," full of political machinations and debauchery. Prefer your Bard in comic form? You'll get The "Merry Wives of Windsor" in a 1960s Catskills setting. And if you're a traditionalist -- a shipwreck, faeries and father-daughter strife -- there's the venerable island fantasy of "The Tempest."

Season tickets go on sale Monday, Nov. 4, for five CSF shows in 2014 that span the Shakespearean canon. CSF is the second-oldest Shakespeare festival in the country, and the process of assembling a season for a demanding audience -- more than 26,000 attended the festival last year -- falls to interim producing artistic director Tim Orr. It's a lot more complicated than simply drawing play names from a hat.

"We start by looking at how long it's been since we've done a certain title and then look for a balance between comedy, history and tragedy, and what play titles will work better on the outdoor stage and the indoor stage," says Orr. "The plays all go for huge subject matter, but sometimes it's a real joy to do Shakespeare in an intimate environment on an indoor stage. Then we try to put in one non-Shakespeare play, with the guiding motivation being that it's Shakespeare related."

Last year that "commentary" play was "Women of Will." In 2014, it will be "I Hate Hamlet," Paul Rudnick's satirical tale of an actor who gets advice from the ghost of John Barrymore.

Choosing plays is only the first part of the process. Devising new ways of staging them comes next.

"We're always doing new and fresh takes on these plays," Orr explains. "That includes new directors and designers who come to the table with bold ideas. A part of the selection process in hiring directors is my asking them 'What do you want to do?' and 'Why this play?' "

Occasionally that process includes an intersection between past and present. For instance, the 2014 season will feature two directors -- Geoffrey Kent and Caroline Howard -- who have either performed or helmed productions during past CSF seasons.

Then there's the expectation of the audience, whose opinions are surveyed each year.

"We have a core audience of Shakespeare lovers, real serious, and their suggestions are all over the map," Orr says, adding, "I think our core audience would not be happy with us just staging war horses. We would be bored and the plays would suffer."

Of course, the mandate of any theater festival -- especially one associated with a university -- is to reach new and younger audience. CSF routinely tours a show to elementary schools striving to plant the seed of Shakespearean passion in the next generation.

"(Shakespeare) was never meant to be read, it was meant to be watched," Orr says of reaching young people. "Maybe some of the more violent plays you wait until (the youngsters) are in high school. They are not just showing violence but the consequences when good people make poor decisions. It's wonderful to watch young people watch these plays and have a discussion afterward."