We WILL build two new garden cities to tackle the country's housing crisis, says Pickles

Eric Pickles has confirmed two 'garden cities' could be built in the south east

Settlements could be in Yalding, Kent and Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire

Communities Secretary said they won't be forced on unwilling communities

Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government Eric Pickles has confirmed that two 'garden cities' could be built in the south east

Eric Pickles has confirmed that two 'garden cities' could be built in the south east in a bid to tackle Britain's housing crisis.



The Communities Secretary insisted that they would not be forced on unwilling new communities, and said local councils had already come forward to express an interest.



He insisted his department had not been responsible for drawing up a document, which was reported last week as proposing new settlements at Yalding in Kent and Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire.



Speaking on Sky News's Murnaghan programme, he said no decisions had been made on location.



'Let me be absolutely clear: I have not seen, formally or informally... this report does not come from my department,' he said. 'We tend to be the experts in planning and housing so we would expect some degree of involvement.



'I don't rule out an ambitious civil servant from another department putting something together but both parties stood on a manifesto saying we would not force eco-towns or garden cities on the population.'



Mr Pickles said land was being released by the coalition through the local infrastructure plan for housing and that plots for 100,000 homes would be available before the next election.



And he added: 'It is important to set up settlements where there is going to be some infrastructure there, where there is going to be roads and the like. I think we could probably produce garden settlements, we could produce a garden city or two - provided it is in places where people want it and there are authorities expressing an interest.

Yalding: A draft proposal suggests new settlements in Yalding, Kent and Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire

'But it has to be on the basis of consent. After all, Labour promised five garden cities and produced none and when that failed to arrive they promised 10. All that happened with that policy was building resentment, not a single dwelling.'

Writing in the Daily Telegraph last week, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said: 'We cannot make the mistakes of past governments and sit on our hands while a whole generation of people are squeezed out of the housing market. It is our duty to change the story.



'We must bring decades of indecision and stagnant political will to an end.



'That is why I am a strong advocate of garden cities, where there is clear local support and private sector appetite. In 2011, our housing strategy committed us to publishing a prospectus for new garden cities and that is exactly what we'll do.'