Q: Should we stay out of the sun to avoid skin cancer, or soak up its rays for vitamin D?

A: For decades, our sun has been reviled and demonized.

As the American Cancer Society helpfully put it in one ad campaign: 'Fry Now. Pay Later.' The American Academy of Dermatology recommends never exposing bare skin to the sun, or even a cloudy sky, without sunscreen. The Food and Drug Administration calls ultraviolet radiation a carcinogen.

But just as we need to avoid cancer, we also need vitamin D, and the sun is the only reliable way to get it outside of a daily supplement. Australia's public campaign to curb skin cancer rates and encourage less sun exposure has been unfortunately effective: 31 percent of Australian adults are now vitamin D deficient, which is linked with a number of serious and deadly conditions, including several cancers.

Sunscreen dramatically affects the production of vitamin D during sun exposure — SPF 30 reduces it by 97 percent. Meanwhile, the risks associated with sensible sun exposure have been exaggerated by well-meaning health authorities. Contrary to the paranoia generated by years of messaging, the sun is not our enemy. It's safe to step back outside.

Vitamin D has a number of crucial functions. It's actually a hormone, and its active form is responsible for regulating the absorption of dietary calcium and phosphorus, essential for bone health and neuromuscular activity. Vitamin D also regulates cellular growth, helping to prevent cells from becoming malignant. A recent study found that healthy adults who increased their vitamin D intake during the winter enhanced 291 genes in their circulating immune cells. Of the 30 leading causes of deaths in the United States in 2010, 19 were linked to low vitamin D status.

We simply aren't getting enough vitamin D, and there are few dietary sources. Fortified foods including milk, orange juice, margarine and cereals have small amounts; oily fish, cod liver oil and sun-dried mushrooms have some, but you can't subsist on those. This means we must rely on the sun, just as our hunter-gatherer ancestors did.

So how do we get sun responsibly, balancing benefits against risks? It's complicated. I suggest to my patients that they go out in the sun between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. (very little if any vitamin D is produced outside those hours) for half the time it would take them to develop a mild sunburn — covering the face and hands with sunscreen but leaving other parts of the body exposed. After this exposure, I urge them to use sun protection to prevent burning.

Michael F. Holick, professor of medicine, physiology and biophysics at Boston University Medical Center, for The Washington Post