The Joint Finance Committee proposed $250 million in cuts to the University of Wisconsin System among other changes on Friday. Bascom Hall is pictured on the UW-Madison campus. Credit: Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

By of the

Madison— The University of Wisconsin System would see $250 million in cuts and the potential for sweeping changes in its future operations, under a proposal put forward by GOP lawmakers Friday that would be less dramatic than changes proposed by Gov. Scott Walker.

Lawmakers on the Legislature's budget committee approved reducing Walker's controversial proposed cuts to the UW System from $300 million to $250 million over two years. UW System leaders praised that move, but faculty members said it was not nearly enough. The extra $50 million would be distributed to campuses around the state that are judged by UW leaders to be hardest hit by the cuts.

The massive higher education package was approved 12-4 on party lines, with all Republicans for it and all Democrats against it.

The UW System would not be allowed to offset the cuts with across-the-board tuition increases, as generally has been an option in the past. The plan would continue for another two years the freeze on tuition for undergraduate state residents that was proposed by the governor and likely 2016 presidential candidate.

Faculty, staff and students may see the most sweeping changes. They would no longer have a direct say in how they are governed but would have an advisory role in how the universities are run.

Academic tenure for professors would no longer be part of state law. The UW Board of Regents could choose to retain tenure under its rules or decline to do so, which would allow it to lay off any faculty in cases of budget difficulties or changes to academic programs.

Currently, tenured faculty may only be terminated for just cause.

On the flip side, the UW System would gain authority to grant merit pay to keep the best and brightest.

Chancellors gain more direct control in many areas, including how student fees are spent.

"The fact that the chancellor has to approve (fees) sets a dangerous precedent that I think would be most likely at most campuses to prevent the chancellor from as actively engaging students as opposed to the previous system of governance," said UW-Eau Claire student body president Jacob Wrasse, a member of a task force appointed by UW System leaders to review shared governance.

As the committee met late Friday, Walker — who is planning a presidential run — attended political events in the early nominating state of New Hampshire.

GOP leaders had hoped to finish their work on the budget by this weekend but have pushed it off until at least next week. Once that happens, it will go to the Senate and Assembly — both controlled by Republicans — for final votes.

At times, demonstrators peacefully disrupted Friday's meeting by reading from statements calling for more UW funding.

UW campuses were abuzz as news of the long-awaited GOP plan spread from Madison. The move to drop tenure from state law, and leave it up to regents appointed by the governor, drew the most dire warnings.

"This is an extremely dangerous proposal which will paint Wisconsin as a flyover state for future faculty," said Noel Radomski, director and associate researcher for the Wisconsin Center of the Advancement of Postsecondary Education at UW-Madison.

Republicans pushed back at such talk.

"We are not eliminating tenure. We are moving it to the Board of Regents," said Sen. Sheila Harsdorf (R-River Falls).

UW System President Ray Cross and Board of Regents Vice President Regina Millner moved quickly to reassure faculty that they remain committed to tenure and shared governance, whether those tenets continue in state law or regents policy.

"We appreciate that the action proposed today by the Joint Finance Committee keeps shared governance language in state statute, and we are reviewing other proposed changes related to shared governance," the statement said. "As tenure was not retained in statute, we will move to incorporate it into board policies immediately."

The regents meet next Thursday and Friday in Milwaukee. A UW System task force to review the tenure issue will continue its work, the UW System leaders said.

Cross characterized the GOP motion to pull back $50 million from the governor's proposed $300 million cut to the UW System "a significant reduction."

Accountability, transparency and flexibilities also were on the table as lawmakers made decisions Friday.

The UW System's financial statements would now be subject to an outside independent audit to promote transparency under the committee's plan. That work in the past has been done by the Legislative Audit Bureau.

The system also would gain authority in purchasing and for overseeing building projects that are built entirely with private donations.

Walker proposed the $300 million cut over two years along with added flexibilities that have been long sought by UW System administrators. Republican lawmakers decided they would consider some but not all of that added flexibility.

Committee co-chairs Rep. John Nygren (R-Marinette) and Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills) said they were seeking to help students get the classes they need to graduate on time. They said they were establishing a new era of partnership with the UW System by providing more flexibility under state rules governing construction, purchasing and human resources.

"We think we're taking a step forward in reducing the impact on students," Nygren said.

Democrats blasted the changes, saying they would lead to Wisconsin losing its competitive advantage and falling further behind neighboring states in job creation — and prompt public outcry.

"If you want to hear a mama bear roar, just keep poking her cubs with a stick," said Rep. Chris Taylor (D-Madison).

Rep. Gordon Hintz (D-Oshkosh) said the state could reverse the UW System cuts if Republicans would expand the state's health programs for the needy and accept extra federal tax money through the Affordable Care Act.

"How does this decision help Wisconsin's economy?" Hintz asked. "The answer is it doesn't."

Republicans have said they don't believe the federal government can sustain that funding over the long term.

One Republican took a shot at a plan that Republicans are developing to have the public pay for half the cost of a new Bucks arena.

"We will take care of the billionaire owners of the Milwaukee Bucks, but the middle-class families of Wisconsin are once again left to be gashed by the UW System in the near future," Sen. Steve Nass (R-Whitewater) said in a statement about tuition increases that could occur after the freeze lifts in two years.

Sen. Luther Olsen (R-Ripon) focused more on the cuts.

"The university doesn't deserve this cut. It's just reality," Olsen said. "We are fools if we go around bashing one of the best things in the state of Wisconsin."

The sweeping motion the committee adopted included 70 provisions, including ones that would:

■ Give the UW System, Gateway Technical College and Waukesha County executive the power to authorize charter schools.

■End state funding for an energy research center at UW-Madison that helped land one of the school's biggest government grants.

■ Modify the state's open records law so the public couldn't get information about some of those who apply for UW jobs that it can now.

Wisconsin is one of only a half-dozen states that have approved or are considering cuts to higher education funding for the fiscal year starting July 1.

Wisconsin currently lags in higher education spending compared with the national average and the state's Midwestern neighbors, according to figures released by the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau.

With budgets squeezed by factors such as a lackluster economy, tax cuts and rising health care costs, state officials around the country often targeted public universities for cuts over the past decade because colleges have other sources of money.

In Wisconsin's case, state tax money makes up about 19% of the UW System's budget. Tuition, federal aid, grants, donations and other payments make up the rest, bringing the system's total annual funding to more than $6 billion.

Karen Herzog reported for this story in Milwaukee and Jason Stein and Patrick Marley reported from Madison. Andrew Hahn of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed in Madison.