When Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois canceled his family's health plan last year, Tony Schor could have gone online to Get Covered Illinois, the state's insurance shopping mall, to buy a new policy.

But Schor, a small-business owner who lives in Highland Park, turned to his insurance broker.

"There was not a chance in heck that I was going to navigate this by myself," said Schor. "I rely on a professional who is up to date about rules and regulations that are constantly changing in the insurance industry."

But such assistance to consumers like Schor who don't have employer-sponsored medical insurance may be in jeopardy. At least two health insurers in Illinois have either reduced or eliminated commissions this year to agents and brokers on new sales of exchange-based coverage. Blue Cross, the state's largest carrier, also recently announced it would ax payments to agents on individual and family plans that take effect April 1.

Agents are upset with insurance companies because selling policies has become less lucrative. But they are also warning that reducing commissions could harm consumers and the fledgling state insurance exchange created by the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Russell Dixon, a Wheaton insurance agent and president of the Illinois State Association of Health Underwriters, said consumers will have a hard time finding an agent to help them or face the possibility of paying a separate consulting fee, which will raise the cost of insurance.

The elimination of commissions also is a move that signals the carriers' retreat from Obamacare business, Dixon said.

"ISAHU feels that the decisions being made now by insurance carriers in Illinois will impact the structure and functionality of the insurance marketplace in Illinois in the year ahead," Dixon said.

The trade organization, which represents more than 39,000 agents and brokers in Illinois, has expressed its concerns to federal and state insurance regulators. The group said the Illinois Department of Insurance has the authority to demand that consumer services promised as part of approved rates not be reduced during the year. Those services include support offered by brokers and agents.

Health insurers typically pay agents a flat fee or a small percentage of the monthly premium. Commissions are included in the rates that all consumers pay, whether they use a broker or not.

Karen Woods, director of Get Covered Illinois, declined to be interviewed.

Anjali Julka, spokeswoman at the Department of Insurance, which oversees the state insurance exchange, said in a statement, "The DOI is reviewing the issue and determining next steps to take."

Eliminating commissions is a nationwide trend, as health insurers report financial losses in exchange-based plans. Carriers, which under the health law have to accept all applicants regardless of their health, have experienced higher-than-expected medical and drug costs. They also have not received the promised financial aid from a government program designed to reduce risk in the state exchanges.

In response, they raised premiums on 2016 policies and are cutting overhead expenses, such as marketing and administrative costs.

Broker commissions on exchange-based policies are now considered part of a company's overhead, after the Affordable Care Act required that insurers spend at least 80 cents of every premium dollar on medical care and activities that improve the quality of care. The rule is designed to protect against wasteful spending of consumers' premiums, but the change has resulted in carriers cutting commissions to reduce losses or boost profits.

Agents and brokers have played a big role in enrolling consumers in Obamacare plans. At Blue Cross, for instance, they generate about half of the individual policies sold on and off the exchange, said spokesman Michael Deering.

Blue Cross' decision to stop paying commissions in 2016 is a huge blow to agents and brokers because the insurer has about 80 percent of all the enrollees in the individual market in Illinois.

Deering said Blue Cross remains committed to the individual market but the nonprofit insurer hasn't decided whether to reinstate commissions next year.

"The carriers are turning their backs on the very people that make up the company," John Jaggi, who runs an insurance agency near Decatur, said in an email. "They know that the brokers are the main reason a customer selects a carrier, and they know that we will be the first people that they come to for help in understanding benefits and being an advocate to help them settle premium and claim disputes."

UnitedHealthcare, the nation's largest health insurer, was one of the first to stop paying commissions this year. Blue Cross and Aetna dropped commissions in Illinois for plans sold after the annual open enrollment ended Jan. 31, highlighting their concerns about people who signed up for insurance after the deadlines in the last two years.

The health law created "special enrollment" periods for people who experience life changes such as marriage, a birth or loss of employer coverage between open enrollments. Last year, nearly 950,000 people, including about 40,000 in Illinois, used special enrollment periods to get coverage from late February to the end of June, according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

Insurers say the special enrollment periods are being abused. They claim people are waiting until they are sick to enroll and then dropping coverage after their health problems are resolved. Insurers say special enrollment periods weaken insurance markets and drive up premiums.

CMS last month tightened eligibility for special enrollment periods, but the change may be too little too late to appease insurers.

By eliminating commissions during special enrollment periods, carriers seek to reduce their exposure. But shunning the sickest and costliest patients may destabilize the market because carriers can unfairly shift risk to other insurers, Dixon said.

As Illinois regulators review the issue, regulators in other states are taking more aggressive action. The Connecticut Insurance Department, for instance, blocked UnitedHealthcare from eliminating commissions because the company included them in its 2016 rate filing. The insurer agreed to a reduced commission.