Delaware Sen. Chris Coons introduced legislation Thursday that would increase the number of businesses that could reap the benefits of the small business tax credit under he Affordable Care Act.

Currently, the tax credit is only available to businesses who buy health insurance for their employees through the federal Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) portal on www.healthcare.gov. According to the Internal Revenue Service, an employer could receive a credit of up to 50 percent of the yearly cost of what he or she puts towards the employees' health care premiums.



Some of Coons' provisions would increase the maximum size of businesses eligible to receive the credit from 25 employees to 50, extend the credit to businesses who make about $80,000 in wages, increase the number of years a business could receive the credit to three consecutive years and eliminate the cap that limits eligible employer contributions to average premiums in the state.



Coons said in a release that the provisions would help small business owners who want to provide health insurance to their workers.

"The Affordable Care Act is already doing a lot of good for a lot of Americans, but where we can make it work better, we should," Coons said in a statement.

"I've spoken with small business owners in Delaware who want to offer their employees health insurance, but are struggling to afford it. The Affordable Care Act created a small business tax credit to help these businesses, but unfortunately too many are either ineligible or discouraged by its complex requirements. Congress should listen to these concerns, acknowledge that these small business owners are voluntarily trying to do right by their workers, and act to strengthen the Affordable Care Act. This bill would make a big difference for our small businesses and the millions of people employed by them."

Senators Jeff Merkley (D-Ore.), Al Franken (D-Minn.), Heidi Heitkamp (D-N.D.), Mazie Hirono (D-Hawaii.), Tim Kaine (D-Va.), Angus King (I-Maine), Joe Manchin (D-W.V.), and Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.), are original cosponsors of the measure.

Go to Coons website for the full text of the bill.

Jen Rini can be reached at (302)324-2386 or jrini@delawareonline.com. Follow @JenRini on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1DK5dy5