Obama Inc. was thinking of ObamaCare's website as Amazon, Kayak and iTunes. Aside from the notorious inability of Socialists to copy free market products (see Soviet Union, The) they didn't have a product that anyone wanted to buy.

Most of the sign-ups for ObamaCare are for Medicaid. Many of the non-Medicaidees who are paying their way are people who had their health insurance murdered by Obama's people in a regulatory massacre designed to force them out of their plans and into ObamaCare's high premium and high deductible substandard bad apple plans.

But the big tempting target, the young people, especially young men, who would be the lowest users of health insurance, are out of reach.

The majority are not interested. The left is blaming Republicans and the media. And while the Healthcare.con disaster certainly isn't encouraging anyone to get on board, especially younger users, the underlying problem is that they're not actually interested.

How do you sell health insurance to people who don't want it? Colorado's ad geniuses made fools of themselves trying. It didn't work.

It's hard to sell a product that people don't want to them, especially

1. If it's pricey and offers little of value to most people in that age group unless they're actually sick

2. It's a bad economy

3. They're already struggling to juggle student debt, low-paying jobs and casual spending that they don't budget too well

The left is betting on the Romneycare example to show that young people will eventually come on board. But there are two problems

1. Romneycare was 2006. The economy in 2006 was doing a lot better than it is now.

2. Average income in MA isn't too bad. It's 5th in the nation. Even the young people who don't have jobs, have parents with money.

ObamaCare extends coverage mandates that are geared for wealthy blue states across the entire country. That means they might look affordable in New York or Massachusetts because average plans there are already ridiculously expensive, but not in a lot of the country.

So how do you sell a bad overpriced product to people who don't want it in a bad economy? You don't. Not even with a mandate.