Participation in the federal government's health care exchange varies widely from region to region, according to an analysis this month by the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Using a mix of census data and enrollment statistics from the Department of Health and Human Services, the Kaiser analysis indicates that the percentage of eligible Alabamians who bought insurance though the healthcare.gov website after the end of the second open enrollment period ranges from a high of 52 percent in central and south Huntsville to a low of 26 percent in an area that includes Pickens and outer Tuscaloosa County.

Kaiser estimates that 32 percent of the 450,000 eligible people statewide bought health insurance by March 31. That ties the state with five others for 25th in the country.

"Enrollment has been ramping up slower than expected," said Cynthia Cox, the nonprofit's associate director of health reform and private insurance. "That being said, it really does depend on the area."

The federal government periodically reports how many people have purchased health insurance on the online exchange, but it has been a challenge to figure out the share of eligible people that represents from area to area.

Kaiser attempted to answer that question by using census data. The foundation took a census unit called a Public Use Microdata Area, which at about 100,000 residents is bigger than a ZIP code but smaller than a metropolitan area. Analysts then merged it with the health insurance data provided by the federal government at the ZIP code level.

The approach has the advantage of avoiding the high sampling error that results from using the percentage of uninsured people in small ZIPs.

Kaiser determined the eligible population as people who were uninsured or buying their own insurance before the Affordable Care Act and are ineligible for Medicaid or employer-sponsored insurance. Immigrants in the country illegally also were excluded from the pool.

There are 34 PUMAs in the state. Sometimes, it corresponds with county boundaries. Shelby and Baldwin, for instance, each make up separate PUMAs. Sometimes, a PUMA comprises part of a city. Mobile and Birmingham, for instance, are divided into east and west.

And sometimes a PUMA takes in several counties. For example, Elmore, Autauga, Lowndes and part of Montgomery County form one.

The enrollment data include everyone who signed up for insurance but makes no adjustments for the people who signed up on the exchange but failed to pay the first month's premium. That drop-off rate was about 15 percent in Alabama, but the government has not detailed that information at the ZIP code level.

Highest and lowest in Alabama

The five Alabama PUMAs with the highest sign-up rates, as estimated by Kaiser, were:

South and central Huntsville – 52 percent.

Etowah County – 50 percent.

West Birmingham – 48 percent.

East Mobile – 48 percent.

West Mobile and a region that takes in Dallas, Bibb, Marengo, Hale, Sumter, Perry and Greene counties – 47 percent each.

The five PUMAs in the state with the lowest sign-up rates were:

Russell, Pike, Barbour, Macon and Bullock counties – 30 percent.

DeKalb and Jackson counties – 29 percent.

The cities of Tuscaloosa and southeast Northport – 28 percent.

Marshall County and southeast Madison County, including part of Huntsville – 27 percent.

Outer Tuscaloosa County and Pickens County, including north and west Northport – 26 percent.

Cox said some areas have had particularly aggressive efforts to enroll people in the health care exchange.

"It seems like a lot of the difference is in targeted outreach efforts," she said.

State resistance cited

Henry Brewster, a Mobile lawyer who worked to sign people up for subsidized insurance plans, said he did not expect high participation rates in states where local leaders have resisted the health reform law.

"I wouldn't think so in Alabama. I wouldn't think so in in south Alabama, largely because it was done here by volunteers," he said. "Given the fact that the state was hostile to enrollment."

Cox said not all states that have resisted Obamacare have experienced low sign-up rates, and not all states that have embraced it have had high participation rates.

"In some cases, that's true," she said. "But in some of the states that started their own exchanges, they had a lot of website problems."

According to Kaiser's analysis, the places that tended to have the highest participation rates were densely populated urban areas, which the organization suggests are more conducive to outreach campaigns.

Brewster said enrollment volunteers had help this year from insurance companies. "Brokers were much more involved this year," he said.

Another factor in lagging participation rates could be the federal government's reluctance to wield the stick that was to be part of the effort to prod people to buy insurance. Cox said the government has been generous with granting exemptions to people who say they cannot afford insurance premiums even with financial assistance.

But Cox said it is not clear how many people even know about the potential penalties.

Brewster said a more aggressive stance on the mandate that people have insurance may have improved participation. But he said he is OK with a gradual decrease in the uninsured rate.

"I think it was the right move," he said. "There is no point in getting people ticked off."