Kansas lags behind the national average in educational indicators, such as preschool attendance, but does better than many states on equity of school district finance, an annual report said Thursday.

This year's Quality Counts report, an annual state-by-state study conducted by the research department of the publication Education Week, showed that Kansas K-12 schools made progress on such measures as graduation rates and reading scores, but lost ground on others, such as mathematics scores.

The study looks at student achievement, state funding and other factors, and produces report cards with three grades.

The “Chance for Success” grade comprises 13 indices meant to reflect the conditions children face in trying to succeed. That includes education conditions like kindergarten enrollment, but also household factors like parental income.

Kansas’ received a B-, a score of 81.9 percent, compared to 81.4 last year.

In the K-12 achievement category, the state got a D+, or 68.4 percent, down from 69.1.

That category consists of 18 academic indicators, ranging from math and reading scores on the federally administered National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) test, to graduation rates and achievement gaps between lower- and higher-income students.

For school finance, Kansas received a C, or 74.2 percent, down from 76.8.

The school finance score includes eight benchmarks that look at funding equity across districts and overall spending. On the latter point, the report awards higher marks for more spending, a controversial topic in Kansas, where state funding levels are the key dispute in a lawsuit pending at the Kansas Supreme Court.

On the matter of funding equity, Kansas saw an increase in disparity among districts, Education Week said. However, it remained one of just seven states that offer more funding to poorer districts than wealthier ones to even out local resources.

Kansas did better than average on economic benchmarks, such as the percentage of children with family incomes at least twice the poverty level (59 percent) and the percentage with at least one parent working full time (81 percent). It also was ahead on math and reading scores.

But the state lagged behind in preschool enrollment — with about 46 percent of preschool-aged children enrolled — and in closing the achievement gap for low-income students.

Kansas Education Commissioner Diane DeBacker, who sent a summary of the report to members of the Kansas State Board of Education this past week, said the report didn’t come as a surprise.

“We’re really pleased with the ‘Chance for Success’ ” score, she said.

She said school districts deserved credit for much of the state’s higher performance in that category, because many successful initiatives are decided at the local level.

Kansas is often described as a “local control” state that gives districts more leeway on deciding education matters than many other states do.

As an example, DeBacker said the state only funds half-day kindergarten and doesn’t require districts to offer more, yet most local school boards take the initiative to fund and offer full-day kindergarten anyway.

DeBacker said the governor’s proposal to fund full-day kindergarten would help districts with that initiative. Additionally, the Kansas State Board of Education has a policy goal of increasing access to preschool, she said.

Mark Tallman, a lobbyist at the Kansas Association of School Boards, said the Education Week report was both positive and negative.

“The good news is we still rank ahead of most states” on a number of measures, Tallman said. “The bad news is we don’t seem to be growing as fast.”

Kansas should be concerned that other states’ K-12 systems may overtake it in terms of quality, he said.

At the same time, Tallman questioned the report’s heavy reliance on NAEP scores.

Unlike state math and reading tests, which all students take annually in grades three through eight and once in high school, the NAEP is administered every other year at randomly selected schools to fourth- and eighth-graders.

Students and teachers don’t see the results, which the U.S. Department of Education uses to produce aggregate state scores.

Meanwhile, Erick Vaughn, executive director of the Kansas Head Start Association, said Kansas doesn’t offer adequate preschool options.

“There are not enough high-quality preschool slots available to meet the need,” Vaughn said.

Early education is an investment that pays off by boosting academic achievement and lowering dropout rates, he argued.