Gubernatorial candidates David Vitter and John Bel Edwards found one thing to agree on during a forum at Mount Pilgrim Baptist Church on Friday (Nov. 13): They said they'd listen to a diverse range of voices.

At a forum held by Together Louisiana, a group of church leaders from throughout Louisiana, speakers said they've felt left out of Gov. Bobby Jindal's administration over the past eight years. So they asked both men to sign a pledge written on huge boards supported by easels where they promised to meet with Together Louisiana leaders twice a year.

Both candidates signed, but that was one of the few places where they found common ground during the forum. On issues such as Medicaid expansion and minimum wage, the two were far apart.

The people in the crowd -- many of whom were African-American -- were decidedly in Edwards' camp on such issues. Vitter acknowledged as much when he took the microphone to explain why he doesn't agree that Louisiana should accept Medicaid expansion, which is part of the Affordable Care Act.

"I disagree with a great majority of folks in this room, and with John Bel Edwards," Vitter said. "I think on balance, Obamacare set us back and created more problems than it solved. Unfortunately, we're living with that right now."

Vitter told the crowd that if he's elected governor, he will only accept Medicaid expansion on Louisiana's terms, which would require a waiver that requires federal governmental approval that could take a year to complete.

Those terms would include a plan to pay for the 10 percent federal match that takes effect in 2020; he wants to reform the program that "stresses primary and preventative care;" and he wants "work requirements for people on Medicaid.

Edwards shot back that work requirements aren't necessary for Medicaid expansion because the people who would qualify for the program are working now, but don't earn enough money to afford health insurance. People that don't work already qualify for Medicaid, Edwards said.

He also said that Vitter's reform ideas are redundant because the state has already reformed the Medicaid program through Bayou Health, which provides Medicaid funding to managed care insurance providers rather than paying a fee for service directly to health care providers.

"We will bring back $1.6 billion a year, put it to work on behalf of the working poor in Louisiana, and make sure that our hospitals, doctors and clinics receive the reimbursement from our own tax dollars," Edwards said. "Preserving the status quo is not possible. We run our safety net hospitals on DSH dollars. The DSH dollars are going to be cut starting in 2017; up to 75 percent by 2020. If we haven't expanded the medicaid program on one hand and the DSH reductions happen on the other, hospitals are going to close."

DSH dollars refers to funding known as Disproportionate Share Hospitals, which is federal funding that is meant to provide aid to hospitals that care for uninsured patients. The federal government has been threatening to reduce DSH funding for several years because the states that depend on it the most are states that refuse to expand Medicaid.

On a per-capita basis, Louisiana depends on DSH funding more than any other state. The majority of the money is used to fund the former charity hospital system that the state privatized last year.

Together Louisiana leaders also raised concerns about the fact that wages for workers in Louisiana have only risen by 1 percent, even as productivity has increased sharply. Here again, Vitter stopped short of supporting more sweeping changes aimed at attacking poverty that have been advocated by his opponent.

"The list of good-paying jobs that are going unfilled is almost as long as the state unemployment list," Vitter said. "We need to bridge that gap, and that's why I'll focus hard on skills training and workforce development."

There has "been too much poverty in Louisiana for too long," Edwards said. "The earned income tax credit has to be preserved at all costs, and this past year I voted to double it. ... If you get up and go to work every day, you should not live in poverty."

Vitter also said he'd require all state agencies to direct poor families to workforce training that has the potential to "lift them out of poverty."

Edwards added that he would move to raise the minimum wage in Louisiana if Congress does not act; he supports equal pay for women; and would support free early childhood education.

"Our parents are spending up to 30 percent of their income sending their children to day care centers when we ought to be doing that in our public schools," Edwards said.