5th homeless person to die outdoors in Boulder since April

Boulder police investigate the scene of the death of a homeless man early today in the alley north of the 1400 block of the Pearl Street Mall. (Cliff Grassmick)

A homeless man estimated to be between 25 and 35 years old was found dead early Saturday a short distance from the Pearl Street Mall.

This marks the fifth homeless person to be found dead in Boulder since the beginning of April.

Boulder police Sgt. Fred Gerhardt said that the man, who is currently not identified, went to sleep Friday night behind 1425 Pearl St., in the north alley. When friends checked on him at about 6:45 a.m. today, he was unresponsive, and his friends called for medical assistance. He was dead at the time emergency personnel reached him.

"There was no fight here, there was no disturbances or anything like that," said Gerhardt. "From witnesses, there's no indication of anything out of the ordinary."

Boulder County Coroner's staff were on the scene this morning, directly behind the Pedestrian Shops, and detectives are investigating the circumstances of the man's death, Gerhardt said.

According to homeless advocate Isabel McDevitt, executive director of Boulder's Bridge House, the death of yet another homeless person is a reminder that a solution is needed to the city's current lack of year-round sheltering and affordable housing.

"I think it's shocking that in a community as progressive and with so many resources, that we literally have people dying on our streets," she said. "At a minimum, we need to have more options for people who are living on the street and vulnerable. The solution isn't just more shelter, though. I think we need to have a comprehensive, long-term strategy."

"I would propose a housing continuum," she added, "with many options for people outside of emergency shelter -- permanent affordable housing, mental health and substance abuse treatment. So we need to be thinking beyond shelters, but we certainly need that, too, because the reality is, building housing takes a while and is very difficult."

The string of homeless deaths in Boulder started April 4, with the discovery of the body of Janice Adams, 53, found at the underpass just south of Central Park near the Boulder Creek Path and the intersection of Arapahoe Avenue and Broadway. Boulder County Coroner Emma Hall determined she died of alcohol poisoning.

On April 5, 51-year-old Ralph DeVore, 51,was found near the intersection of College Avenue and Broadway. He died of blunt trauma injuries to the head and chest, and Hall's office ruled his manner of death "undetermined."

Hall also ruled the cause and manner of death for Thomas Cornell, a homeless man whose body was found April 15 in a drainage ditch behind the Boulder Target store at 2800 Pearl St., to be "undetermined."

The coroner's office has not yet released a cause and manner of death for Kathryn J. Fishman, 59, who was found dead at Scott Carpenter Park the morning of May 11.

McDevitt said spring is an especially difficult time to live outdoors in Boulder.

"There is definitely a pattern that I know I've seen," she said, "where when the weather's very unpredictable and there are less sheltering options, that's when we see people go to bed when it's relatively mild, and then the weather takes a turn. That certainly exacerbates a lot of people's vulnerability."

McDevitt said weather was probably not a factor in this latest death.

"It is a little bit more unexpected to hear about a death this time of year."