A real Cinderella story is playing out at Colorado Women’s College. It’s the part where Cinderella was once treated like a princess and then thrust into dire circumstances.

CWC is, in effect, the foster child of the University of Denver, acquired by DU in 1982 as one of the jewels in its crown. The eventual setting for that gem was the Merle S. Chambers Center for the Advancement of Women, which opened on DU’s campus in 2004.

I attended classes there until 2012. The education I received in four study areas was top-notch, the amenities were lavish, and the diversity among the nontraditional, women-only students was higher than the main campus.

Then, professors were let go or quit, and services lessened. Students didn’t know what was happening, resulting in a loss of trust, which is so necessary for a feeling of community. What was happening in our beautiful castle?

An alumnae group, Denver Sisters United (DSU), pushed administrators for answers. Finally, it was disclosed that the academic degree program at CWC would be discontinued after a teach-out of current students through 2016.

The austerity measures may have been put in place to stem revenue losses, but underfunded efforts to recruit new students and the cancellation of Sunday classes dimmed the light shining from this gem of a school, the only one of its kind in the region.

Rather than wait for a prince to save Cinderella, DSU has started gathering signatures to petition DU’s Board of Trustees to re-examine its decision. This effort will assert the value and importance of the CWC degree program beyond students, faculty and alumnae to the community at large. We see the loss of CWC as squandered potential for nontraditional female students in Colorado. A June 2014 study by the Women’s College Coalition shows retention and graduation rates are considerably higher for single-sex colleges than for online and community colleges.

DSU is asking for a streamlined college, focusing on the degree programs that have shown successful enrollment rates, and a return to the weekend format. This would allow students and professors who have full-time day jobs the opportunity to study and teach.

Help us persuade administrators to preserve the Colorado Women’s College academic program. Sign a petition here.



Show Cinderella that dreams still come true.

Rosanne Juergens is a member of Denver Sisters United, an alumnae group fighting to prevent changes to Colorado Women’s College of the University of Denver.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.