Shortfall is attributed to a number of factors

Jasen Wise, of Fred's Propane Service, connects the hose to a customer's propane tank, for a delivery in Sunshine Canyon on Friday. ( MARK LEFFINGWELL / Daily Camera )

Customers of Boulder-based Fred's Propane Service recently received a letter from the dealer regarding the unprecedented state of the industry, and urging conservation in the face of skyrocketing prices for the gaseous fuel.

The notice goes on to say that delivery drivers in the coming months will be filling tanks to the minimal amount possible to get customers through the next 30 days, and that delivery cannot be made to customers with outstanding balances given the propane supply situation nationally.

"We are asking you to conserve the best you can, as it is a possibility for all the local storages to be empty before the winter is over," the letter reads in part. "We need the cold temperatures, not just here, but all over the U.S., to break to hope for some relief. This is miserable paying so much for a commodity that was so affordable last winter."

Fred's is hardly the only distributor in the state looking at rationing in the face of shortage created by a frigidly cold winter, driving up heating bills and creating an energy emergency in many places across the country, particularly the Midwest.

Comfurt Gas Inc., in Buena Vista, and The Wallace Oil Co. in La Junta this week also noted they would be seeking to limit deliveries to their customers.

"It has been crazy," said Angela Wise, office manager at Fred's. "We are all trying to manage the impact."

Last winter, the retail price of propane — used for heating, cooking and grilling — was around $1.85 a gallon, Wise said. Earlier this winter it was priced at about $2.30. It then jumped to $4.60 and as of Wednesday was at $3.79.

"We have 70,000 gallons in storage, but we have to keep our customers warm, so we have to go into the market," Wise said.

In its letter, Fred's noted that it's profit margin in not increasing in the wake of the shortage, as it's three main suppliers have all significantly increased their prices this winter.

'Sort of living in my bedroom'

One Boulder County resident who received the troubling notice was Sunshine Canyon resident John Tredeaux. The retiree, who said he uses propane for everything from heating, to cooking to warming the water for his showers, estimated his average monthly bill last winter was near $400. Last month he paid $725.

He called the price jump, "to say the least, insane."

"I'm just shutting my house down and sort of living in my bedroom," he said of his attempts to limit his consumption, noting he doesn't blame Fred's for the situation. "They're doing what they can for people, but they are sort of under the gun too."

Tredeaux said he feels like one of the lucky ones, as he had flood insurance to help him absorb the cost of flood damage to his property caused by the historic September event, and savings to pay for his fuel. He knows not all of his neighbors are in that position.

In the Sugar Loaf area, resident Ruth Shannon said she and her husband are relying on five electric space heaters to help keep the temperatures inside their home in the low 60s. Theirs is one of the few homes in the area that does not have a wood-burning stove or fireplace.

She said the couple, customers of Hygiene Propane Services, at the beginning of January paid $2.25 a gallon for about 200 gallons of propane, after paying between $1.79 and $1.89 a gallon all of 2013.

Thanks in part to stingy use and a solar heating system that on sunny days keeps the living room warm, Shannon said she isn't overly concerned about running of out fuel this winter. Still, in reading through messages on an online Sugar Loaf-focused message board, Shannon noted that some of her neighbors in the foothills are paying as much as $5 per gallon.

"I guess the big worry is that it doesn't run out for anybody before winter is over," she said. "But we don't have any control over that."

Prices up 68 percent over one year ago

About 6 million households nationwide, including many in rural areas, use propane to heat their homes.

The average residential price last week was $2.96 per gallon nationally, 68 cents higher than a year ago and the highest since the U.S. Energy Information Administration began tracking prices in 1990.

Industry officials have attributed this winter's shortage to a confluence of events: a Midwest pipeline being shut down for maintenance, a high demand for propane last fall to dry a rain-soaked harvest of corn, competition for pipelines and rail cars caused by increased oil and natural gas production — and the extreme cold.

"It can be $700 more to fill your tank than it was yesterday — if they can get the propane," said Mark Wolfe of the National Energy Assistance Directors Association.

There is no telling when the bitter cold that has impacted so much of the continental U.S. will cease, but forecasts for Boulder County are calling for another snowy, cold week ahead.

The Denver Post contributed to this report.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328 or rubinoj@dailycamera.com