The day before President Barack Obama makes a visit to New Orleans, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal attacked him on four fronts, saying his stances on education, health care, energy and economic growth are hurting the American people.

"I think there is an opportunity for the President of the United States...for him not just to be the leader of his political party, but to be the leader of every American," Jindal said at a press conference held at the Governor's Mansion in Baton Rouge.

"I hope he will learn from what we're doing here in Louisiana. I hope he will take these policies back to Washington, D.C."

Jindal reiterated he "welcomes" the president's visit Friday (Nov. 8) to the Port of New Orleans, and confirmed he will tour the port along with Obama. The president is later slated to give a speech about the need to boost U.S. exports.

While the governor agreed Obama's target of doubling exports by 2015 is a worthy objective -- and one Louisiana is helping the president fulfill -- he said the administration's energy policies "are actually getting in the way" of this goal.

He called for the president to approve the controversial Keystone XL pipeline and also blasted the EPA's plans to block construction of new coal-fired power plants across the country.

On health care, Jindal again stood by his decision not to accept the option to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. While it would have extended health care coverage to up to 400,0000 uninsured Louisianians, Jindal said the decision was right for Louisiana's taxpayers.

"The reality is here in Louisiana we've cut taxes. We've done things like invest in workforce training. We've cut people's regulations. We've made this a business-friendly state. I think there's a lesson there for the president," Jindal said.

While the focus of Obama's visit will be the economy, Jindal said he hopes the president will also have time to discuss an ongoing legal battle between the U.S. Department of Justice and his administration over Louisiana's expanded school vouchers program.

The federal government filed suit in August, saying 2012-13 voucher assignments violated civil rights by worsening racial imbalances in 13 Louisiana school systems.



After the press conference Thursday, Jindal spokesman Kyle Plotkin said the White House has not responded to requests from the governor to visit one of the city's many vouchers schools.

Earlier on Thursday, Louisiana Association of Business and Industry President Stephen Wageuspack issued a column making many of the same asks of the president during his New Orleans trip.

However, Waguespack, a former Jindal aide who took over the powerful lobbying group this summer, also included flood insurance rate hikes as a top priority for possible discussion. During his remarks, Jindal didn't mention the controversial hikes, responding only during the Q&A portion that he supported bipartisan efforts in Congress to delay them.

U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La. will accompany the president during his flight to New Orleans. The senator, New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu and Jindal will all greet the president upon his arrival. Further details on the trip were unavailable.



. . . . . . .







Lauren McGaughy is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at lmcgaughy@nola.com or on Twitter at @lmcgaughy.