At least four of the 14 Republican presidential candidates have called for stronger checks on the federal judiciary. (Photo: Jacquelyn Martin, AP)

DES MOINES, Iowa — Not long after a divided U.S. Supreme Court halted the Florida recount vote in the 2000 presidential election between George W. Bush and Al Gore, calls began to mount for term limits for federal judges.

Much of the rhetoric came from the left.

Fifteen years later, the conversation continues, this time from the right.

Since early spring — and before last week's court rulings on the Affordable Care Act and same-sex marriage — at least four of the 14 Republican presidential candidates have called for stronger checks on the federal judiciary.

The candidates, as well as legal scholars from across the political spectrum, say some form of term limits is necessary because justices are serving longer on the court than they have in the past. The longer service means justices are likely to become unaccountable to the public, complacent and less productive, backers of the idea say.

RELATED: Liberal unity, conservative disarray led Supreme Court to the left

"The feeling is the court is quite old and we're not getting people who are still at their prime," said James Lindgren, a professor at Northwestern University Law School in Evanston, Ill., and an advocate of term limits who has written several papers on the issue. "When people age, they lose some of their vigor."

Paul D. Carrington, a retired law professor from Duke University in North Carolina and another expert on the issue, said in the past two decades, the justices' workloads have been cut to about 75 cases a year. Before that, they issued decisions in 250 or more cases a year.

The justices "are insulated from political accountability," Carrington said. "They are understandably full of themselves. It is something very much worthy of attention."

Others have differing ideas.

In 2014, Columbia Law School sponsored a debate on the issue between Lindgren and Thomas Merrill, a Columbia law professor. During the debate, Merrill said term limits could erode the public's view of the court's legitimacy by associating justices to the outcome of contested elections for the president, according to a Columbia media release about the debate.

Proponents say some form of term limits is necessary because Supreme Court justices are serving longer on the court than they have in the past. (Photo: Pablo Martinez Monsivais, AP)

The issue of term limits for justices comes up every few years, said Mark Kende, a constitutional law professor at Drake University in Des Moines. But while numerous constitutional experts support the idea, "it hasn't gotten a lot of political traction. It would likely take some sort of crisis for (the idea) to pick up steam."

On the campaign trail, Republicans Mike Huckabee, Rand Paul and Ben Carson have called for term limits for federal judges. Ted Cruz has proposed a constitutional amendment that would allow for judicial retention elections.

In 2011, during Rick Perry's first run for president, the then-governor of Texas said it was time to end lifetime appointments to the bench.

The idea is not new.

Even before the founding of the United States, some, including Thomas Jefferson, abhorred the thought of federal judges being appointed to life terms and instead suggested renewable terms of four to six years, Lindgren wrote in one of his papers.

The issue resonates with some Iowans.

"Absolutely," said Marilyn Brown of Des Moines, who attended the grand opening of Huckabee's Iowa office this week. "Why should the president be the only one with term limits?"

Said Robert Leners of Ayrshire: "The justices don't need to be in a position permanently. They become too insulated."

Aaron Sewell of West Des Moines said he doesn't support term limits for federal judges but understands why there is support for the idea. "A lot in the public see the judges as becoming too powerful," said Sewell, 26, who volunteers for the Polk County Republicans.

Iowa Sen. Chuck Grassley, a Republican, in a statement said that while "lifetime judicial appointments aren't perfect, the system is an important part of our constitutional design, which has thrived for more than 200 years. Any proposal to change it warrants the high degree of scrutiny required of amendments to our founding charter."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Ixf7IJ