'Mothballs in My Attic' clears cobwebs, makes room for cherished recollections while aiding memory impairment

The cover of the book “Mothballs in My Attic.” (Photo: ~Courtesy of Cindy O’Neill) Story Highlights O'Neill and her sister, Barbara Iderosa, published the book through their publishing company, MIMA

Participants at the JFK Adult Medical Day Program have benefited from "Mothballs in My Attic"

A sequel of "Mothballs" is in the works, with input from O'Neill's three children

"Mothballs in My Attic" book facilitates seniors' memories at JFK Adult Medical Day Program in Edison. Staff video by Kathy Johnson

Dig deep. Into the recesses of your memory. Do you remember the sights and smells of your grandmother's kitchen and the name of your best friend in elementary school? How about the music you listened to during long family car rides or how many years you were exiled at the "kiddie table" on the holidays?

"Mothballs in My Attic" (MIMA) by Metuchen resident Cindy O'Neill and her sister, Barbara Iderosa, helps readers of this unique fill-in-the-blank, spiral-bound, journal-style book conjure up some of their most cherished memories with just simple mention of a word or sentence.

The book, which has also been embraced by members of the medical community serving those with memory impairments, spans one's lifetime in 11 thoughtful chapters, asking questions from childhood to post age 30.

Thought-provoking sentences include "My mother always shopped at the _____ supermarket," "The tooth fairy usually took my tooth and left ___ under my pillow," "The first 45 RPM record I bought was ____ by ___," and finally reflections on what one would do if they could turn back the hands of time.

"I grew up in Metuchen and moved away to attend the University of Maryland and after four years there I returned to the Metuchen area and worked for Montgomery Ward in New York City for a bit. Then, I went back to Maryland and explored marketing, worked for a radio station and dressed mannequins. I got the bug to do marketing and came back to raise my family in Metuchen," said O'Neill, when asked about her own personal history.

"My sister, who is the co-author of the book," lives in Florida," she added. "She is a writer and does a lot of grant-writing, etcetera. She helped with the linguistics of the book."

O'Neill was working in marketing at the Menlo Park Mall in Edison when, during the holiday season, she would gather and read all of the letters given by small children to Santa Claus upon their visits to the mall.

"I read all of the precious memories and thought that we all possess these types of memories within us," she said, noting that sometimes it only takes one word to be transported back to one's childhood home, a friend's home or classroom.

"Your mind goes back and fills in the rest of the story with just a few sentences," she said.

After collaborating with her sister on the idea, O'Neill began sending out queries to publishing houses to have the book idea set in print. However, they wanted to change the book or needed a lot of money upfront.

Instead, O'Neill and Iderosa formed their own LLC — MIMA Publications — and connected with Yvonne Vermillion, a graphic artist from Arkansas who did all of the book's illustrations and helped them navigate the publishing process.

Buy Photo JFK Adult Medical Day Program activity coordinator Gloria Lopez leads a memory program at the Edison center. They were using the book “Mothballs in My Attic” to facilitate. (Photo: Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer)

"Originally, we designed the book for Baby Boomers, which was successful. We were featured in several magazines which promoted it, and then I got an inquiry from a rehab center's activity director to review the book and it became this niche in the medical community," said the author, when discussing her audience.

O'Neill would receive thank-you letters from several readers (even as notable as Maria Shriver and Leeza Gibbons) who were grateful to have a book that called forth such warm and fond bits of nostalgia. But, she was excited to learn how it was becoming a tool for professionals like Mary Buglio, who works at the JFK Adult Medical Day Program, a community-based, day-time health care alternative that is designed to promote well-being through social- and health-related services.

Many of the participants who attend the program suffer from Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease or impairments from a stroke, in addition to various participants who suffer from developmental disabilities.

"It is our belief that using various tools to encourage reminiscing through various discussion type of groups, for our participants suffering from dementia and mild cognitive impairments, will assist these individuals with improving their overall mental health," said Buglio.

"We at the JFK Adult Medical Day Program provide daily cognitive programs and problem solving activities designed to promote cognitive stimulation, and to help maintain or improve their coping skills when faced with at times the realization that their memory isn't what it used to be," she said. "We believe that 'Mothballs in My Attic,' is an excellent tool to use to jump-start the memory of those individuals who suffer from memory loss."

"The memories are in there, but they need a little prompting to get the memories unlocked. Once unlocked, the person can have a sense of positive esteem," added Buglio.

Buy Photo JFK Adult Medical Day Program activity coordinator Gloria Lopez leads a memory program at the Edison center. They were using the book “Mothballs in My Attic” to facilitate. (Photo: Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer)

"We have found tools such as 'Mothballs in My Attic' to be a great way of stimulating conversation," she said. "We use such tools to provide reminiscing therapy to promote cognitive stimulation through the process of recalling memories of oneself in the past. Once our participants begin retelling the stories from their past, they often can't stop talking and appear to experience great pleasure from recollecting these precious moments from their past lives."

Buglio believes that O'Neill and Iderosa's book helps readers recall some of life's major events, but also provides a jump-start to recalling the little moments of the past, offering a great deal of pleasure.

"We typically use 'Mothballs in My Attic' as one of the tools during a group setting format," she said, adding that the recreational therapist will select a chapter and state the fill-in-the-blank sentence to the participants.

"Each participant is asked to complete the sentence. We must often cue some of our more confused participants, but eventually a thought will come out, and then you never know where the next thought will go. It opens the door to all kinds of conversation. Often people who suffer from Alzheimer's disease or Dementia-related disorders can remember the past events more easily than the short -term memory events," said Buglio.

She said that when one suffers from Dementia, many life changes, feelings and frustrations are brought to the surface.

Buy Photo Alma Jackson participates in a memory program at the JFK Adult Medical Day Program in Edison. They were using the book “Mothballs in My Attic” to facilitate. (Photo: Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer)

"I personally like 'Mothballs in the Attic,' because it is an excellent tool which helps trigger a familiar thought, or even a smell, which may bring them back to Mom's homemade bread, for example. A moment of pure pleasure," added Buglio.

"Our participants begin to feel good about themselves," she concluded, "and they are able to remember many of the experiences from throughout their meaningful lives."

O'Neill believes "Mothballs in My Attic" is also a wonderful conversation starter, especially at the holidays, when sales of her book often increase.

"Sometimes, a person you can learn something new about someone you thought you knew best for 50 years. It's a fun bonding experience and opportunity for reflection. It's often hard to appreciate the good things and this brings out the nostalgia for the 'good old days,'" she said.

O'Neill hopes to pen a sequel to the book with same subject matter, perhaps getting some input from her children who are 23, 28 and 30 years old.

For more information about "Mothballs in My Attic" or to purchase copies, visit www.mimabook.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1SgVOtb