EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Ego fuels cornerbacks. They play on an island, left vulnerable to explosive passes in a game in which rules favor the offense. No confidence, no chance.

Just as important as mental toughness is selective amnesia.

The Broncos’ Aqib Talib delivered a streaky performance Sunday, but when it mattered most, the crowd alive with a final burst of optimism, he crushed its dreams with an interception of a pass by Geno Smith, returning it 22 yards for a touchdown with 15 seconds left.

“We were in a cover two. We knew he had to get the ball out of his hands quickly,” Talib said. “That’s why we called a play where we all had our eyes on the quarterback.”

Talib read Smith’s intentions, jumping the route on a pass intended for Jeremy Kerley. Talib didn’t require formal introductions from the end zone. This marked Talib’s fifth interception return for a touchdown since 2009, second most in the NFL during this stretch, one behind the Chicago Bears’ Charles Tillman.

“It just wasn’t a good enough ball,” said Smith, who finished 23-of-43 for 190 yards. He was forced to throw often as the Broncos held the Jets to 31 yards rushing.

“Obviously, they were playing sidelines,” said Smith. “I tried to get the ball there, and I didn’t give Jeremy a good enough ball.”

The Broncos focused on takeaways last week. They entered the game with three this season, creating chatter about punch-causing fumbles and securing errant passes. Talib’s interception represents a potential lit fuse.

“Turnovers, man, they come in bunches,” Talib said. “Hopefully that will be the spark that gets us going.”

Talib kept the ball. Sort of. He handed it to his fiancée in the stands.

PHOTOS: Denver Broncos vs. New York Jets

“I have the ones from my touchdowns, but I think my nephews throw them around in the yard,” Talib said. “But you gotta get them.”

Nothing came easily for Talib. He missed a chunk of the second half with cramping in his calves because of dehydration. He also surrendered a touchdown pass to erstwhile Bronco Eric Decker, who returned Sunday after he missed last week with a leg injury.