Transcript for Midterm Elections 2014: Breaking Down the Results

Republicans taking control of the senate in a midterm election rout. Let's bring in our table of experts. Let's start with you, Matt. How bad a night was this for democrats? It was really bad. I think it was, when you take a look at the election results in 2010 and this year, this was a wave, a republican wave that hit, and hit the democrats and the president hard. And every race that was broke at the end, broke in the republicans' favor. And I think this president, when you add up the Numbers will have suffered, for a two-term president, the worst midterm losses of any president in the last 50 years. Nicole, can this president work with this congress and this senate over the next two years? Is there any hope of anything getting achieved? We'll see. What happens after an election like this is both sides overread what the voters were trying to say. And I think one of the overwhelming messages that democrats and republicans were sending is that they're tired of business as usual. They're tired of the gridlock. It was a tired anti-senate sentiment and dissatisfaction with Washington. We're waiting for results in Virginia where ed Gillespie is the republican candidate there, and, you know, it's one of the few candidates who had an alternative to obamacare. Donna Brazil, is there any silver lining can you find? Well, in Washington, D.C., it was a tough night for democrats, it was a difficult map. Bad gee ography. But we get to fight in two more years. Is there any republican to emerges as a strong candidate or a stronger candidate in the 2016 race for the white house? I think most of the likely candidates could rationalize this night as they are a good person for the job. John kasich went along with obamacare in many respects. And Ted Cruz can say, hey, I shut down the government a year ago, wasn't that supposed to hurt republican hopes? That didn't work out so badly. And Chris Christie did a good job raising money for republican governors. I think you'll see them all in the next couple weeks and months saying that this shows they're the right person for the job in 2016. Will president Obama recalibrate in any way, and should he? I think I agree with Nicole, I think it was an anti-incumbent but clearly frustration with the democratic party. So I think you have to acknowledge those results and you're going to have to really reach out here and try and find ways, not for the political purposes here, but you've only got two years left. So you want to keep making progress on the economy, on fiscal issues on immigration. I think it would be good for the president to find some areas of compromise. I think it would be good for the republican party. So, you know, this may be a place where everyone's interests align. I don't want to be too optimistic about it, but I think there's a few months here where there's potential deal space on a few issues. Compromise, are the odds of that the same as me finding a unicorn in central park? The biggest thing that came out of this for me is the same number of democrats and republicans showed up, but wha4o',e decided this election is independent voters. And where they split is where the republicans won. I would look at those independent voters and say what can we do together to figure out a way to appeal to them. We thank you. So great to have your expertise and analysis on this big night in American politics.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.