Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

LOS ANGELES (AP) — It wouldn’t really be an MTV award show without a bit of booty, now would it?

Despite being peppered with accolades for the serious teen drama “The Fault in Our Stars” and its thoughtful star Shailene Woodley, the MTV Movie Awards still managed to provide several moments of silliness Sunday, including a rump-shaking Channing Tatum and a scantily clad Rebel Wilson. As always, the prizes were secondary to the irreverence.

Here’s the most memorable moments from the cable network’s 24th annual celebration of movies:

___

TWERKING TATUM

After the hunky cast of “Magic Mike XXL” presented Jennifer Lopez with a trophy for her “scared-as-(expletive)” performance in the thriller “The Boy Next Door,” the “American Idol” judge prodded the guys to show off their dance moves. Without missing a beat, Tatum turned his backside to the crowd and gyrated his gluteus maximus for Lopez. Unfortunately, his co-stars Joe Manganiello, Matt Bomer and Adam Rodriguez, nor Lopez, joined in. “Maybe next time,” she teased.

___

DOWENY’S THE MAN

Robert Downey Jr. was enthusiastically presented with the Generation Award, the show’s take on a lifetime achievement honor, by earth’s mightiest stars: his fellow cast mates from “The Avengers.” Downey’s poignant acceptance speech, in which he recalled his struggles with drug addiction, was perhaps overshadowed by his awesome entrance. The star of the “Iron Man” movies emerged on the cartoon-themed stage from inside what he called a “massive, trippy cat head.”

___

CAT’S MEOW

The unlikely trio of Charli XCX, Ty Dolla $ign and Tinashe managed to drag in the show’s most energetic routine with their fresh pop-rap collaboration “Drop That Kitty.” From behind an oversized inflatable guitar, Charli kicked off the performance backed by her all-girl band on “Famous” before she was joined for “Drop That Kitty” by Ty, Tinashe and a chorus line of female dancers clad in tight pink jumpsuits and cat-inspired ‘dos. The new ditty had the Nokia Theatre crowd purring.