Dr. Ben Carson signed copies of his book after his speech at The Family Leader's fundraising banquet in Des Moines on Saturday, Nov. 22, 2014. The book, which was co-written with his wife, Candy, is titled, "One Nation: What We Can Do to Save America's Future." (Photo: William Petroski, The Des Moines Register)

DES MOINES — Dr. Ben Carson, a prominent retired neurosurgeon widely mentioned as a prospective 2016 presidential candidate, got a warm and enthusiastic reception Saturday night from a key group of Iowa Christian conservatives.

Carson, 63, who grew up poor in Detroit with a mother who was determined he would succeed academically, received a long and sustained standing ovation after his speech to a packed crowd of about 900 people at The Family Leader's annual fundraising banquet in Des Moines.

Carson pulled no punches in his hour-long remarks, affirming his support for traditional marriage and opposition to abortion while criticizing the Affordable Care Act and President Obama's plans to allow up to 5 million undocumented immigrants to remain in the country.

"We need to understand that there are such things as American values. We do have firm beliefs and a belief system we should not give away," said Carson.

He called for a renewal of the principles of the founding fathers and support for the idea that the United States is a Judeo-Christian nation. He also insisted that efforts must be undertaken to improve the nation's education system, curb the federal deficit and reform the tax system.

“We need to understand that there are such things as American values. We do have firm beliefs and a belief system we should not give away.” Dr. Ben Carson, retired neurosurgeon and possible 2016 presidential candidate

"People don't go into business to support the government. They go into business to make money. A smart government creates an atmosphere that is conducive for the growth and development of that country that creates more money," Carson said.

Carson, a best-selling author and a former Fox News contributor, graduated from the University of Michigan Medical School and gained fame at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore for his surgeries to separate conjoined twins. He became the focus of an effort to draft him for a Republican presidential run after a speech last year at the National Prayer Breakfast in which he criticized political correctness and spoke bluntly about federal fiscal issues, education and health care.

Carson's supporters, who include Iowa state Rep. Rob Taylor, R-West Des Moines and his wife, Dr. Christi Taylor, have already organized a political operation aimed at the 2016 Iowa caucuses that includes chairs in all 99 Iowa counties. A Des Moines Register/Bloomberg Iowa Poll in October, which asked likely GOP caucus goers their favorites for the 2016 presidency, had Mitt Romney with 25% and Carson with 18%.

Steve Deace, an Iowa-based Christian conservative radio host who was the emcee at Saturday night's event, said he had lunch with Carson earlier in the day.

"I will tell you he is absolutely the real deal," he told the audience, which included many activists who oppose abortion and believe marriage should be only between a man and a woman.

Nonetheless, Deace urged Christian conservatives not to let Carson "off the hook" as they consider candidates for the 2016 Iowa caucuses. The country is at a tipping point because morality is being redefined in ways that are dangerous, and the selection of a presidential candidate is a decision that Iowans can't get wrong, Deace said.

Bob Vander Plaats, the president and chief executive of The Family Leader, said somewhat humorously that he hopes Carson develops some frequent flier miles and can return to Iowa often in advance of the 2016 Iowa caucuses.

But more seriously, Vander Plaats said of Carson, "I believe that he would be very good for this race and this future of this country and I am one who hopes he does run."

State Sen. Dennis Guth, R-Klemme, who also attended the dinner, said afterward that while he wasn't offering an immediate endorsement, he could support Carson's presidential candidacy.

"I have heard people say they would like (Sen.) Ted Cruz (of Texas) as president and Ben Carson as vice president. I think that would be super," Guth said.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1qUAn4p