CORRECTION: This story has been changed to correct a quote attributed to Kim Barnhill, the Florida Department of Health deputy secretary for county health systems.

As many as 31,000 lower-income residents in Southwest Florida, at risk of losing their only access to regular health care, will be able to keep visiting their doctors for one more year under a compromise announced by the state Friday.

Amid Gov. Rick Scott's policy to resist federal health care reform, state officials asked Sarasota County earlier this year to stop accepting funds tied to the Affordable Care Act. The request would shut down the county's 35-year primary care program, offered to indigent residents through the health department.

The mandate sent county commissioners across the region scrambling for solutions, prompted emergency meetings with caregivers and pleas for help to state lawmakers. It also was the topic of a joint meeting Friday between elected officials in Sarasota and Charlotte counties.

A representative from the Florida Department of Health told commissioners from both counties the government's transition from primary care would be seamless, with a private nonprofit almost assuredly ready to assume the functions now in jeopardy.

“The agency has, with our ever-decreasing resources, determined that it's in the best interests of the people of Florida to actually prioritize population health. That's what public health is. It's population health. It's prevention. So when you're doing primary care, you're curing the patient one on one. When you work in public health you're treating the entire community, and that's what public health departments do ...," said Kim Barnhill, the Florida Department of Health's deputy secretary for county health systems. "I hope it becomes more apparent that we care deeply about access to primary care. And there's no question that Sarasota County does it very well. But there are other ways. There are private entities that can step up to the plate and say, 'I'll take that million dollars, give it to me; I can make this work.' ”

But the commissioners said they don't buy it.

Touting the program as a model for success, commissioners berated Barnhill — and her boss — for pulling the plug on a long-standing program with no firm transition plans in place.

They cited waits of up eight weeks in similar communities where the health department's primary care has moved to the private sector, and even under the best-case scenario, many of the low-income families now receiving free health care would have to begin paying a fee.

An estimated 30,500 uninsured or underinsured Sarasota County residents — including 13,700 children and more than 1,000 pregnant women — rely on the county's health care service yearly.

Without it, those patients would instead be directed into emergency rooms — the most expensive entrance into the health care system — and taxpayers would be left to pick up the unpaid bills.

“This has a lot of people scared, and quite frankly, it has me scared,” Sarasota County Commissioner Christine Robinson said. “I don't understand why we would have to change the system when it is working so well . . . I do not like what I'm hearing from the Surgeon General's Office to make me feel like we will be in a better place.”

Facing the long panel of local officials, and sidestepping many of the questions they volleyed at her, Barnhill ultimately told them the state would accept their application to continue the program for one more year. That would keep it operational through 2017.

While officials will likely file the papers to do that, they plan to keep pushing for a more permanent solution for their primary care program to keep its doors open.

“This is just like a sledgehammer hit me right in the forehead,” Sarasota County Commissioner Alan Maio said. “This is not just a few hundred or a few thousand people. I just don't get it. It's not broken. It's an exemplary program. It's something everyone is proud of.”

Sarasota County is among a handful of counties in Florida offering primary care through its health department.

The services are available at a number of clinics across the county — from North Port to northern Sarasota — and are often used by patients who cannot get care in bordering communities.

The program operates on a $17 million annual budget, funded through $1.3 million from the county, $98,000 from the state and $1.9 million from the federal government. The balance is split between Medicaid, Medicare and other payments.

Without the $1.9 million federal allocation, the Sarasota County Health Department would lose its designation as a “Federally Qualified Health Center” — and the county would be forced to dismantle its primary care program amid growing need from residents, officials said.

Even if the program could recover the lost funds through other sources, without the federal designation, primary care would go away.

Charlotte County commissioners pointed to their community as an example of the pain created.

Charlotte was forced to dismantle its similar primary care program two years ago because of its own funding woes.

A voluntary clinic picked up much of the slack, but commissioners said the federally qualified health center in Lee County that was supposed to expand into Charlotte has been largely absent, with long waits and a lack of physician availability.

As a result, many Charlotte County residents now drive to North Port to rely upon Sarasota County's services.

Commissioners say they fear the same problems will surface in Sarasota County if the program is privatized.

There also are concerns that if the federal funding runs out, a nonprofit would just close its doors, while the government could turn to other tax options to keep the program afloat.

“We put a lot of pressure on North Port,” said Charlotte Commissioner Chris Constance, a physician. “I'm very concerned that if the North Port link goes away, what's going to happen for our residents?”