This artwork relates to the goal of strengthening girls’ math and computer skills. Credit: Donna Grethen

By

The old joke goes like this:

Question: What do you call the person who graduates dead last in Medical School?

Answer: Doctor

The public is rightly concerned about the credentials of people into whose hands they place their health, and the medical profession has long known that. Searching for a physician these days on the Internet will put one in contact with a dizzying array of useful professional information (internship site, board certifications) along with more intangible data ("married, three kids, loves cats"). Some of this is even presented in video format to ensure that the shopper makes the right connection.

There is no regulation that requires physicians to display their medical school diplomas and various advanced certifications on the wall, but nevertheless they all do. The medical profession understands that trust in the competence of one's healer is an essential element of healing.

Does the teaching profession understand that trust in the competence of one's teacher is an essential element of learning?

Randall Sprick, an education professor at the University of Oregon, tells of finding himself sitting on an airplane beside a young Japanese student from a tour group. Their friendly, albeit language-challenged conversation was going well until Sprick informed the boy that he was a teacher.

At that point, the student gasped, bowed quickly and discontinued the conversation. Ashamed he was, Sprick said, of his previous casual manner and believing himself unworthy of such conversation with someone so esteemed as a teacher.

Although this is surely not representative of all Japanese students, the point is made: The regard in which American educators are held by many other Americans could use a good shot in the arm. When parents trust in the competency of their child's teacher, they tend to behave in ways that reflect that trust — from overseeing homework to voting on bond issues — and that trust is subsequently communicated to their child. Selecting a particular teacher should be a no less serious decision than selecting a particular pediatrician.

Much has been written regarding how the status of public educators has come to be where it is today. Blame the unions, blame No Child Left Behind, blame the challenges of poverty ... Pick your villain, and choose your fix. I choose to join the argument that a workable solution to the problem of public education in America lies in improving the quality of teacher education.

Attracting talent

I taught in higher education for 21 years, and I observed teacher education and taught numerous aspiring teachers. I am expressing nothing new when I observe that, with notable exceptions, teacher education at any university hardly draws the best and the brightest; those undergraduate students are typically found in engineering, pre-med, pre-law and almost everywhere else but teacher education. That needs to change dramatically and soon.

Teacher education has no shortage of individuals who want to enter the major. The desire to teach burns hot in many young people, and, quite fortunately for them, very few aspirants for education degrees are ever turned away. Somewhere along the way the knowledge and skills necessary to be certified as a teacher became relaxed enough so that practically anyone accepted to college could acquire them. It is almost as though someone forgot that the actual teaching part that follows is exceedingly difficult to do well.

As a consequence, too many good-hearted and earnest new teachers find themselves in situations that require the kinds of cognitive problem-solving, creativity and depth of subject matter knowledge that were not required during their preparation. Their "easy major" did not serve them well at all, nor by extension, the children in their classes.

It is an extraordinarily arduous academic journey to become a physician because the knowledge and skills necessary for even baseline competence are extremely complex. I argue that the knowledge and skills necessary to stand in front of 30 students with varying degrees of learning, behavioral, emotional, social and/or familial problems and provide each with the single best learning experience possible are equally complex and deserving of greater academic respect than currently offered by the university.

In order to elevate itself to the necessary level, university teacher preparation must substantially increase its rigor to compete with the likes of medicine and law for the kinds of students who have the potential to truly change American education. Academically weak classes in curriculum and methods and meaningless weekend "masters' degrees" that give credit for little more than just showing up need to be jettisoned and repositioned as continuing education workshops.

Teachers whose university training did not afford them the opportunity to understand the subject matter in the Common Core Standards at a genuinely deep level cannot be expected to teach children to think critically about them.

The practitioner field in American schooling contains many truly outstanding educators who bring intelligence, wit, creativity and remarkable student outcomes to their daily professional lives, and many do it under terribly challenging circumstances. Some get well-deserved awards, and some just soldier on in anonymity while the rest of us are left wondering, "How did we get so lucky to have that person choose to be a teacher?" I argue that it is time to remove some of that luck from the equation.

A prescription for improvement

What follows is a possible direction forward. It is of necessity incomplete and destined to rankle many. Its purpose is only to encourage discussion and offer a possible scaffolding upon which to begin building the changes necessary.

■Over a defined period of time, eliminate the undergraduate education major. The comparatively contained field of information needed by all classroom teachers, such as school law, child development, diverse learners and instructional assessment strategies, should be moved to the graduate level and reflect graduate-level rigor. Curriculum and methods instruction should be field-based and integrated with the graduate practica and internship.

■For aspiring high school teachers, an undergraduate major in the area of intended instruction should be required. For example, prospective math teachers should pursue a math major, not a watered-down "math education" major. The same for English, history, biology and so on. Prospective elementary teachers also should obtain a true liberal arts major in fields such as child development, psychology, history or one of the hard sciences. Minors for all prospective teachers should be in an alternative liberal arts curricular area. The objective here is to add rigor, critical thinking and increase the students' fund of essential relevant information prior to enrolling in professional school.

■The focus on actual teaching knowledge and skills should begin in the graduate program. This should be a three-year program of at least 60 graduate credits leading to an Education Specialist (Ed.S.) degree (one degree above the master's degree). Entrance should be highly competitive, requiring an undergraduate grade-point average well above 3.00 (B), the results of the Graduate Record Exam, letters of recommendation and a personal interview.

■Along with essential classroom graduate coursework, multiple two- to four-week field practica should allow the students to observe and interact with carefully selected master teachers in a variety of school environments, urban and rural. The culminating yearlong internship should be obtained through a competitive application process to highly selective sites, and the internship supervisors trained and compensated. This internship should be designed in a fashion so as to provide the intern with successive degrees of intensely monitored classroom responsibility and feedback that challenges and, importantly, also assesses subject matter knowledge, cognitive problem-solving and creativity.

■At the conclusion of the internship, students should take the Praxis II examination in their intended teaching area and be held at or near the Recognition of Excellence standard for passing. This standard reflects the scores of the top 15% of students who took the test during an identified five-year period.

■Make no mistake: The most effective way to attract the best and the brightest into the teaching profession is a promise of high professional status, the potential for personal satisfaction and competitive pay. Why should a top-notch student go through a rigorous graduate program and end up with "teacher pay," when the same effort would get substantially more in areas such as engineering or accounting? The program described here must finally include that "pay they deserve" figure politicians are always mouthing, or such a change will be a non-starter.

■Finally, the professionals who meet the challenges of an arduous preparation program should be allowed the opportunity to exercise their minds and abilities in the interest of the children they teach. Great teachers need to be provided opportunities for greatness by administrators who will facilitate and encourage professional growth, innovation and creativity and demand high-level outcomes. Absent that, it will be boredom and not burnout that will lead to teacher attrition.

A sea change is needed

Such a sea change in how we think about the profession of teaching and who should enter it will take time, effort, discourse, disagreement and compromise. The current dropout rate, especially among minority students, and America's shameful academic standing on the international stage suggest that there is little time to be lost in dithering.

We want to get quickly to the day when a random education student is asked, "Why do you want to be a teacher?" and he or she does not say, "Because I really like kids!"

Rather, she says, "Because I'm smart, I want to teach and I'm up to the challenge. And I really like kids!"

Jim Larson of Milwaukee is professor emeritus in the psychology department at the University of Wisconsin-Whitewater.