Customized TV Listings are available here: www.latimes.com/tvtimes

Click here to download TV listings for the week of June 1 - 7, 2014 in PDF format

This week's TV Movies

SERIES

No Limits In the first of two new episode wrestler Showtime Eric Young in Arizona, sand boarding in the desert and racing an ostrich-powered chariot. In a second episode he's in Mexico, where he attempts to catch a large striped marlin while in a small kayak. 8 and 8:30 p.m. Animal Planet

Crossbones Tom Lowe (Richard Coyle) realizes he's become an unwilling pawn in Blackbeard's (John Malkovich) game when popular pirate captain comes to Santa Compana forcing Blackbeard to consider a life-or-death decision. Yasmine Al Massri and Chris Perfetti also star in this new episode. 10 p.m. NBC

Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives In this new episode Guy Fieri visits Los Angeles, where he tries the Fat Jerry sandwich, then heads up the coast to Monterey, for some abalone sliders. 10 p.m. Food

SPECIALS

70th Anniversary of D-Day Ed Henry will be traveling with President Obama for coverage of the U.S. commemoration of D-Day, at Omaha Beach in Normandy, France. Throughout the day, Fox News

Brian Williams Reporting: Journey to Normandy Four World War II veterans return to Normandy and share their stories about D-Day. 8 p.m. NBC

D-Day in HD This new special show rare footage from the allied invasion. 9 p.m. History

MOVIES

Ender's Game A youngster (Asa Butterfield) could be the last hope for humanity against an alien race in director-screenwriter Gavin Hood's 2013 adaptation of the Orson Scott Card science fiction novel. Harrison Ford, Ben Kingsley, Viola Davis, Abigail Breslin and Hailee Steinfeld also star. 8 p.m. Cinemax

Aliens Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) and a dwindling number of Marines battle a nest of monstrous predators in this 1986 sequel to "Alien." 8 p.m. IFC

12 O'Clock Boys This 2013 documentary tells the story of a 13-year-old boy who lives in a rough Baltimore neighborhood and dreams of joining a gang. 8 p.m. Showtime

TALK SHOWS

CBS This Morning Hugh Jackman; author Douglas Brinkley. (N) 7 a.m. KCBS

Today Taye Diggs; Sara Bareilles; Sam Trammell; Roma Downey. (N) 7 a.m. KNBC

Good Morning America Demi Lovato performs; Maria Menounos. (N) 7 a.m. KABC

Good Day L.A. Olympic Beach Volleyball player Kerry Walsh Jennings. (N) 7 a.m. KTTV

Live With Kelly and Michael Ice Cube ("22 Jump Street"); Fran Drescher; chef Guy Fieri. (N) 9 a.m. KABC

The View Star Jones; Miranda Lambert performs; Maria Menounos. (N) 10 a.m. KABC

The Doctors The Affordable Care Act. 11 a.m. KCAL

The Talk Million Dollar Baby Shower; Alyssa Milano. (N) 1 p.m. KCBS

The Queen Latifah Show Emmy Rossum ("Shameless"). 2 p.m. KCBS; 7 p.m. KCAL

The Dr. Oz Show Superfoods for super skin; the immune system; safflower oil; undesirable things in fish; the tongue. (N) 2 p.m. KABC

Dr. Phil A woman says her mother tricked her into giving her custody of her 4-year-old daughter. 3 p.m. KCBS

Steve Harvey Entrepreneur Lisa Nichols. (N) 3 p.m. KNBC

Katie Women on the front lines of homicide investigations; Anika Noni Rose; damaging diet mistakes. (N) 3 p.m. KABC