3963804

On Wednesday’s broadcast of FNC’s “The O’Reilly Factor,” comedian and radio talk show host Dennis Miller reacted to the pitfalls President Barack Obama has faced in recent days due to his 2010 health care reform act, riffing off of Obama’s broken “if you like your health insurance, you can keep it” promise.

Miller said in his view, he hoped Obama had been misleading Americans in the push for Obamacare because otherwise it would indicate a degree of ineptness.

“The only wealthy guy I talk politics with is you,” Miller said. “So you would have to tell me. I will say this. This thing has got so crazy that the Rev. [Jeremiah] Wright lost his health care today and blamed the Jews. Listen, I don’t talk about politics with my friends because, you know what? Obama — Barack Obamas are a dime a dozen — debonair grifters, man. The good friends — they’re hard to come by. I will say this about Obamacare — I hope at this point Barack Obama is simply a liar because, if he is this inept, you and I are Gary Lockwood and Keir Dullea way out past Jupiter with a defective Hal 9000 unit, my friend. We are screwed, and I would like to get home, all right?”

Host Bill O’Reilly tried to get Miller to explain why a lot of Obama’s traditional allies have abandoned him on Obamacare, with the lone exception of Hollywood. Miller warned some of the president’s “devotees” might take it to an ugly place over Obama’s failings.

“Billy, you have got your own thing with Hollywood,” Miller replied. “A lot of my best friends — a lot of my dearest people in the world to me are from Hollywood. So that’s your fight to fight… I will say, this as far as the press goes and as far as Obama goes, I’m kind of watching what I’m saying right now because I find when zealots, pet notions crater, they get nasty about it. It’s my raccoons at the recycling bin at two in the morning. This is not the time to come in and tell all these people how stupid it is. History will show how stupid it’s been. I would just say this to the president in the nicest terms I can. Mr. President, if you liked your apology, you can keep it, all right? How’s that? All I know is I finally started reading some of Obamacare last night to find out what it’s about. I got to page 1297 — preexisting conditions and is says everything is covered except, quote: ‘Whatever in God’s name Biden has,’ end quote.”

Miller pointed out that the president was being abandoned by his most ardent supporters.

“Listen, man, everybody is cabbing off from this guy,” he added. “The Clintons disengaged. She can’t have the Hester Prynne stink on her. All the devotees are now Judas goating out of the scene. And I tell you what — I think Obamacare is an unfair name for this thing. I don’t think it’s fair to the guy. I think this has to be Barack Obamacare and laid down in history. This was his genius notion and I hope he travels through time with it.”

Follow Jeff on Twitter