Halfpipe, freeskiing are new Olympic events

Boulder's Lyman Currier goes upside down during the men's halfpipe on Jan. 24 in Aspen. ( Mahala Gaylord / The Denver Post )

On a chilly Saturday night in Park City, Utah, two weeks ago, Lyman Currier took it upon himself to fire up the crowd.

It was the fifth and final qualifying event for the U.S. Olympic freeskiing team and Currier, a 19-year-old Boulder native, dazzled the crowd with a high-flying routine in the halfpipe competition.

Currier's sensational run netted him a competition-best 92.6 points, sending him to the Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia.

"I'm on Cloud 9," said Currier, who currently lives in Frisco. "I can't even believe it's happened. I'm beyond stoked to be able to represent my country and my sport on the world stage."

Men's and women's halfpipe and slopestyle freeskiing are new to the Olympics this year, giving Currier the opportunity to make history.

"It's so exciting," said Currier, who leaves for Sochi on Tuesday. "I can't wait to go over there and really be almost a pioneer for our sport in putting it on the world stage."

Born and raised in Boulder, Currier is following in the footsteps of his father, David, who competed in the 1972 Olympics in Sapporo, Japan. The elder Currier was on the U.S. ski team, finishing 17th in the men's downhill and also competing in the giant slalom in 1972.

David got his son on skis very early.

"I was 18 months old, actually," Lyman said. "I grew up just following my dad around and never really competed in racing or moguls or anything like that. I just loved skiing around the mountain."

Advertisement

Although he is very good at alpine skiing, Lyman gravitated toward the relatively new sport of freeskiing, which was inspired by snowboarding halfpipe and slopestyle competitions.

"I started skiing the terrain park and started to throw tricks because we always had a trampoline in our backyard, so it kind of just matched up naturally, and I fell in love with it," Lyman said.

"It is more fun, I think. Going fast is fun, too, but going fast backwards with the jumps and doing tricks, I think its way more exhilarating and definitely a huge, huge adrenaline rush."

It became apparent at a young age that Lyman was pretty good at it, too.

He attended Boulder High School during his freshman and sophomore years, but actually became truant because he missed so much school to attend skiing events. Lyman finished high school online and moved to Winter Park, so he could practice.

In March of 2013, Currier won the slopestyle competition at a World Cup event in Sierra Nevada, Spain.

Leading up to the Olympics, there were five qualifying events, he said. He finished third in the halfpipe at the first event, but a concussion and poor weather led to disappointing results in the next two. He went to Park City two weeks ago needing some big-time results. Park City hosted the final two qualifiers in back-to-back nights, Jan. 17-18.

"I ended up learning a new trick to put in my run the night before the first competition," he said. "I put that in my run and ended up third. Then, the very next night ... I put down a run that was the exact same, but a lot higher and I grabbed my skis better and the judges liked it more. I ended up winning that one. That's what secured my spot on the Olympic team."

With that, Lyman rewarded his father's faith. David bought tickets to Sochi well in advance and will have an opportunity to attend the Olympics for the first time since he competed in 1972. Lyman's mother, Cecily Wilson, who lives in Boulder, will not be able to attend, but will surely be rooting for her son from home.

Lyman is hoping his mom can get to the Olympics in the future, though. He'll be just 23 and 27 years old when the next two Olympics roll around.

"It's completely possible for me to actually go to three Olympics, which would be sweet," he said.

For now, though, he is focused on Sochi. He has competed against the world's top competition and landed on the podium (top three) several times, so he goes into Sochi believing he can bring home a medal.

"Being on the podium at three out of the five Olympic qualifiers definitely gave me a lot of confidence going into the Olympics," he said. "I'm hoping I can throw a new trick and bring one home for Boulder."

Contact BuffZone.com Writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/brianhowell33.

Watch the run that clinched an Olympic spot for Boulder native Lyman Currier: www.youtube.com/watch?v=sJZoTge0De4

Watch a promotional video for Boulder native and Olympic qualifier Lyman Currier: www.youtube.com/watch?v=cBoAwAMB2aA