Ben Carson has lived a remarkable life, emerging from the mean streets of Detroit to become a nationally known pediatric neurologist at Johns Hopkins.

Now he is transforming his life story into a potential run for the presidency.

There is no doubt that everyone can benefit from his life lessons. In his second book, “One Nation: What We Can Do To Save America’s Future,” Carson reveals just how close he came to the school-to-prison pipeline.

It’s hard to believe now, but Carson had an anger problem as an adolescent. In one angry moment, he struck out and plunged a knife into the abdomen of another teen.

The knife struck a belt buckle and did no damage, but Carson writes he shocked himself.

If such an incident had happened in Jacksonville, Carson could have been thrown into adult court and had a police record follow him for the rest of his life.

However, no one was hurt. Carson was free to take his academic and intellectual skills to the top.

Carson gives most of the credit to his mother, who apparently could not read well herself. She forced her children to read a book a week and write a book report for her. Carson discovered he was good at school and enjoyed that success.

Carson spends much space in his new book criticizing political correctness while praising the ability to compromise. He proposes something he calls “cordial disagreement.”

“As individuals, we can educate ourselves and our children, cultivate the art of compromise, pray for wisdom and hold our representatives accountable,” he writes.

However, Carson also sees a role for government. He supports affordable child care to allow single mothers to further their schooling.

“Many on the right exhibit bigotry by assuming that those who believe in the sacredness of big government have socialistic tendencies,” he writes.

“This is of course not true and many people who have grown up with significant government assistance simply don’t know any other way of life and are patriotic American citizens.”

A ROLE FOR GOVERNMENT

Carson believes in fair taxation along the lines of tithing, the biblical idea of contributing 10 percent.

Regarding the Second Amendment, Carson proposes ways to ensure safety for the largest number of people while preserving the constitutional right.

The key to successful politics as in most things in life is timing. When do you step forward? When do you step back? When does compromise look like giving up? Which principles can never be compromised?

Another example of compromise was the welfare reform of the 1990s when President Bill Clinton and House Speaker Newt Gingrich worked together.

“These kinds of cooperative efforts actually led to a budgetary surplus for the first time in many years,” Carson wrote.

On taxes, Carson supports lowering rates and eliminating loopholes, which already has bipartisan support but can’t seem to get passed in Congress.

He supports the proposals of the Simpson-Bowles commission as “a reasoned approach to getting our deficit under control and growing the economy.” However, the Simpson-Bowles recommendations fell victim to the toxic Potomac partisanship; there was something for just about everyone to oppose in its mix of revenue increases and benefit cuts.

On same-sex marriage, Carson proposes full civil unions for any two consenting adults without altering the traditional definition of marriage. That idea was struck down in California, however, where courts ruled that California’s expansive civil union law was not enough.

In his new book, Carson outlines a radical way to replace Obamacare by transferring government funding of health insurance to health savings accounts that build from birth. The plan clearly needs to be fleshed out.

CARSON’S FUTURE

A great life story, however, doesn’t necessarily translate into political acumen or political success.

Frankly, Carson is a medical specialist but a political novice. People who overlook this fact have only the executive inexperience of our president to consider.

Carson looks most inexperienced when he starts writing about public policy matters. In his first book, he outlined a way to socialize the education of physicians. Government would fund their education. That’s an interesting idea for the ivory tower but not likely to go anywhere politically.

The best training for a president generally is in one of America’s statehouses as governor.

The executive lessons learned in a statehouse translate better to the White House than being in the Senate or even in private industry. If Carson doesn’t want to run for governor, he could run for Senate.

He also would seem to be an ideal vice presidential candidate on a Republican ticket.

Or Carson could take the route of Colin Powell and get involved in the nonprofit world and continue his speaking tour as a national role model.

Americans should never tire of Carson’s all-American success story based on hard work and education.

It helps to have a little luck along the way, but mostly Carson made his own luck.