Today's Marco Rubio news: There's little new or novel coverage of Marco Rubio today, but what's missing in volume is outweighed by substance in a single story:

Marco Rubio has quietly, and maybe effectively, undermined Obamacare.

From the New York Times' Robert Pear:

"A little-noticed health care provision that Senator Marco Rubio of Florida slipped into a giant spending law last year has tangled up the Obama administration, sent tremors through health insurance markets and rattled confidence in the durability of President Obama's signature health law.

"So for all the Republican talk about dismantling the Affordable Care Act, one Republican presidential hopeful has actually done something toward achieving that goal."

Rubio, it seems, is effectively employing some "quiet legislative sabotage."

Through a legislative provision in late 2013, Rubio limited how much money the federal government could give health insurers to protect against their losses when they priced their policies too low. No government "bailouts," Rubio said.

Many insurers were expecting healthier people to enroll and set premiums with that in mind. But for several reasons, including President Barack Obama's decision allowing people to keep old policies longer, fewer healthy people enrolled in some new plans -- and the premiums collected from sicker patients were inadequate to cover all their healthcare costs.

The Affordable Care Act of 2010, kicking into full gear in 2014, anticipated that even absent this delay, it could take a few years for insurers to find the right premiums-versus-costs balance. So the act, a.k.a. Obamacare, offered a form of protection, called a risk corridor. Insurers that collected excessive premiums (relative to their costs) would pay into this system, and insurers that collected too little could reach into the system to compensate for their losses.

But there wasn't enough money in the risk corridor system to do that the first year, thanks in part to the sick-versus-healthy patient enrollment issue mentioned above.

No problem, said the Obama administration. It would get the money elsewhere for now and this would all balance out in the coming years.

Enter Rubio.

His legislative provision in a late 2013 spending bill, covering fiscal year 2014, disallowed tapping other government funds for such a "bailout."

Not to worry, said the Obama administration (again) to insurers. The government might not have all the risk-corridor money it needs to make insurers whole right now -- it can only pay 13 percent of what insurers were expecting this year, says the Times -- but it will make it up later though risk-corridor money collected in 2015 and 2016.

Except there are some doubts as to whether that can happen, and Rubio is creating new legal hurdles. A new report from the credit ratings agency Standard & Poor's says that money will not be there. And Rubio says taxpayers should not be "on the hook for Washington's mistakes."

If he succeeds, he could leave insurers with permanent losses -- which could seriously disrupt the financial underpinnings of Obamacare. A number of insurers would have to raise their premiums sharply or get out of the market.

Rubio this week "is pressing forward, demanding a provision in the final spending bill now under negotiation that continues the current risk corridor restrictions, or even eliminates the program altogether," writes Pear. "That enormous spending bill is being worked out as Congress slides toward a deadline of Friday, when much of the federal government's funding runs out.

"'If you want to be involved in the exchanges and you lose money, the American taxpayer should not have to bail you out,'" Mr. Rubio said on the Senate floor on Thursday: New York Times.