One insurance company has backed out of plans to participate in Louisiana’s online health-care marketplace less than two weeks before enrollment begins Oct. 1.

Coventry Health Care has withdrawn from the program, an official with the state Department of Insurance said Thursday (Sept. 19). In an interview with New Orleans City Business, a spokesperson cited competition as well as Coventry's recent acquisition by Aetna as reasons for the decision.

No one with Coventry responded to NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune's requests to talk about the matter.

Another company, Humana, plans to offer individual coverage only to those in Jefferson Parish, Department of Insurance spokeswoman Ileana Ledet said.

A spokesman for Humana wouldn't confirm that plan Thursday.

“We’re still in the process of finalizing agreements with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services concerning our Qualified Health Plans for uninsured individuals in Louisiana,” said Mitch Lubitz, Humana’s media contact for Louisiana.

Depending on what is finalized, the decision could leave only two companies offering coverage to all Louisianians: Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana and the new Louisiana Health Cooperative, designed to be a nonprofit, member-governed health care organization.

A third, Vantage Health, plans to market its products to all but 10 Louisiana parishes.

John Maginnis, a spokesman for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana, said the company has spent three years getting ready for the exchanges. It has hired more than 200 people and spent about $60 million in preparation.

Maginnis said other companies’ decisions will not affect the type of coverage Blue Cross will be able to offer.

“We will certainly be ready,” he said.

Unless the opening of the exchanges is delayed, Oct. 1 will mark the first time people will be able to go online and shop for health insurance under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, best known as Obamacare, signed into law in 2010.

Thousands of Louisianians who are uninsured, who pay for their own insurance and who don’t qualify for government health care through Medicare, Medicaid or another government insurance plan will be able to sign up in the new health insurance marketplace through March 2014.

Such individuals are required by law to have insurance beginning in Jan. 1, 2014, or else face the possibility of being fined.

The government will provide premium subsidies to those who live in households where the annual income is between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level.

Correction: An earlier version of this story incorrectly described the area Vantage Health Care plans to serve. This post has been updated to reflect the company's plan to market its products to residents in all but 10 Louisiana parishes.