Noting the significant progress made by hospitals in improving outcomes and patient safety across the country, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) recognized the New York State Partnership for Patients (NYSPFP) program in a May 7 report.

Through NYSPFP, 152 participating hospital organizations at 170 hospital sites across New York State have achieved significant improvements in ten project areas, including:

Early Elective Deliveries: 78.2% decrease in rate of scheduled deliveries less than 39 weeks;

Central Line-Associated Bloodstream Infection (CLABSI): 48.0% decrease in CLABSI standardized infection ratio for intensive care units;

Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infection (CAUTI) Population Rate: 36.1% decrease in CAUTIs per 10,000 patient days; and

Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia (VAP): 30.4% decrease in possible ventilator-associated pneumonia.

NYSPFP—a joint partnership of HANYS and Greater New York Hospital Association (GNYHA)—works with participating hospitals to enhance their quality improvement efforts and adopt evidence-based practices to improve outcomes. Ultimately, the national goal is to reduce hospital-acquired conditions by 40% and readmissions by 20%.

In a joint statement, HANYS President Dennis Whalen and GNYHA President Kenneth Raske said, “By focusing on improving hospital culture and better engaging patients in their care, NYSPFP is enabling hospitals to achieve HHS’ Triple Aim to improve the health of our communities and the patient care experience, while reducing health care costs. In pointing to NYSPFP’s efforts, HHS recognizes the tremendous commitment, hard work, and accomplishments our hospitals have achieved through this collaboration to improve patient care.”

Partnership for Patients is a national patient safety initiative launched by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) under the Affordable Care Act. Selected in December 2011 by CMS to jointly lead this initiative in New York State, HANYS and GNYHA work with hospitals to focus on improving outcomes in key clinical areas, such as preventing infections and injuries from falls. Through its collaborative approach, NYSPFP provides member hospitals with technical assistance, training, education, and mechanisms to measure and evaluate their progress. Contact: Kathy Ciccone