Federation an agency leaders in D.C. on the annual advocacy mission.

Seventeen Jewish Federation executive staff members, agency professionals and volunteer leaders participated in the annual agency advocacy mission to Washington D.C. from March 2-3. During the two-day fly-in, community leaders discussed pressing domestic policy issues of importance to the Jewish Federation, its affiliated agencies and the people they serve.

This year, participants attended briefings by policy experts and met with the entire Illinois congressional delegation to stress the importance of protecting federal funding for health and human services programs that serve children, families and seniors. They also advocated for legislation to address Medicare coverage and employment opportunities for people with disabilities, as well as for increased funding for the Nonprofit Security Grant Program and the Holocaust Survivors Assistance Program, both of which have benefited Chicagoans.

Participants represented CJE SeniorLife, Jewish Child and Family Services, Sinai Health System, Keshet and HIAS Chicago.

David Golder, chair of JUF's Government Affairs Committee, said, "Our agency professionals continue to present a compelling narrative about the strength of our network of services and the effectiveness of how we leverage the combination of public and private philanthropic dollars.

"Our regular presence in Washington D.C. enables us to strengthen relationships with elected and appointed officials, and provides us with the opportunity to reinforce how vital federal dollars are to our affiliated agencies' ability to provide services to vulnerable children, families, and seniors," he said.

On the first day of the mission, the group met with members of the Illinois House Delegation and their staff to discuss important legislation including the Improving Access to Medicare Coverage Act, the Older Americans Act Reauthorization, and the Transition to Independence Act. Mission participants also advocated for 2017 Appropriations funding for the Holocaust Survivors Assistance Program and the Nonprofit Security Grant Program

"I always enjoy meeting with JUF community leaders and hearing about the important work they do," said Rep. Bob Dold. "I was especially grateful to learn more about the services JUF provides to Holocaust survivors through funding from the Older Americans Act and the Holocaust Survivors Assistance Program."

After the meetings, the group attended a JUF-hosted reception for the Illinois delegation. Many congressional staff and national Jewish organizational leadership attended, including Reps. Mike Bost and Bill Foster.

"It is extremely refreshing and inspiring to see people coming to advocate not based solely on their own self-interest but on issues important to those most in need within their community," Foster said.

On the second day of the fly-in, participants met with White House staff from the Office of Public Engagement to discuss the Administration's efforts on issues such as the Affordable Care Act, disability rights and refugee resettlement.

Roberta Rakove, senior vice president of government affairs at Sinai Health System, said, "One of the great advantages of being part of the Jewish Federation mission is that we have an opportunity to meet with policymakers in Congress and White House officials, which would be difficult to do on our own."

Participants then met with Sen. Richard Durbin as well as Kirk's staff to advocate for the legislative priorities of the Federation and the broader community.

"Although we don't yet know how much the needle moved on the issues we presented during our mission, our presence was certainly noted," said Laura Prohov, vice president of community services at CJE SeniorLife. "The mission provided an opportunity to keep the lines of communication open with our Illinois delegation and to keep our issues on the forefront."

Some progress has already been made. Shortly after the mission, Reps. Danny Davis, Robin Kelly, Jan Schakowsky and Dold signed on to a letter to the House Appropriations Committee calling for an increase in funding for the NSGP. Additionally, Reps. Dan Lipinski, Kelly and Schakowsky have signed on to a letter calling for an increase in funding for the Holocaust Survivors Assistance Program.

The mission concluded with a visit to the Israeli Embassy, where participants met with Ilan Sztulman, head of public diplomacy, to discuss issues of importance to Israel and the American Jewish community.

David Goldenberg, federal vice chair of the Government Affairs Committee, said, "After spending the majority of the mission focused on domestic policy issues, our visit to the Israeli Embassy allowed for an important dialogue about the great work being done in Chicago to continue strengthening ties between Israel and the American Jewish community.