Yoshikazu Tsuno/AFP/Getty Images

Murata Manufacturing Co., a Japanese maker of parts for smartphones and other electronics, has introduced what it describes as the world’s first cheerleading robots.

The robots, which Murata showed off Thursday, balance on balls to move around and wave plastic pompons in the air. Gyro sensors inside the robots allow them to stay upright while moving. At a demonstration in Tokyo, a troupe of 10 of the robots moved around in unison to form circles, squares and heart formations, to the bouncy accompaniment of J-pop music.

The robots act as a showcase of technologies with applications in devices ranging from digital cameras and cars to energy and health care, said Yuichi Kojima, Murata senior vice president, in an interview.

“They are small girls, but they show what electronics can do,” he said.

Technology that prevents the cheerleaders from careening into each other on stage could be used in automotive collision-avoidance systems and other autonomous driving controls, Murata said. Other sensors could be used in so-called wearable technology like the smart watches that mobile phone makers and other technology companies are introducing.

The robots use ultrasonic microphones and infrared sensors to share their positions. A central control system issues directions based on the signal from the robots, allowing them to dance in unison. Murata, which supplies parts to Apple and other smartphone makers, cooperated with researchers from Kyoto University, in the city where Murata is based, to develop the synchronization technology.

The balancing technology builds on Murata’s earlier robots: the bicycle-riding Murata Boy, introduced in two versions in 1991 and 2005, and the unicyclist Murata Girl, first showcased in 2008.

Murata Manufacturing Senior Vice President Yuichi Kojima with the Murata Cheerleader. Eric Pfanner/The Wall Street Journal

By combining a number of different sensor functions in one robot, Mr. Kojima said, the company aims to demonstrate that it is more than just a maker of discrete parts like capacitors–tiny devices that store electronic charges in smartphones and other gadgets. Instead, the company wants to be known as a provider of “solutions” that can package different parts into modules that perform tasks like providing wireless connections in phones.

The Murata cheerleaders, which are about 36 centimeters, or 14 inches, tall, are not the only new robots on the scene here. Softbank Corp., the Japanese telecommunications giant, plans to make a humanoid robot called Pepper available in stores next year.

But Murata said it had no plans to sell robots, saying it remained focused on its core business in electrical components.

Though the cheerleaders are intended to show customers the capabilities of the company’s technology, Mr. Kojima said Apple has yet to get a demonstration.

While the robots are made of metal and plastic, with hair fashioned from a sponge-like material, the group does have some characteristics that resemble real-life cheerleading squads. There are two backup members, for example.

“If one gets sick, we can substitute her,” said Koichi Yoshikawa, a spokesman for Murata.