Patrick and Robin Slawson stand in front of their sign at the new office of Ca単on Health Insurance Associates at 831 Royal Gorge Blvd., Ste. 429. ( Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record )

They've been working out of their basement for awhile. Now that the Affordable Healthcare Act has gone into affect, Robin and Patrick Slawson recently opened Ca単on Health Insurance Associates, LLC at 831 Royal Gorge Blvd., Ste. 429.

He has his license since 2000 while Robin has had hers since 2004.

"We decided to venture out on our own in the health insurance field, especially with the new Obamacare," Patrick said. "We specialize in individual coverage through the Affordable Care Act, as well as direct from the carriers. We also do small and large."

Originally scheduled to open Oct. 1, the office opened a month later.

"We're not just health insurance," Patrick said. "We (offer) full blown benefits for small groups and large groups."

Ca単on Health also offers dental to both small and large groups as well as individuals and supplemental insurance with Aflac, such as cancer, accident, disability and life insurance.

"We work with all the major carriers in Colorado," Patrick said. "I specialize in the supplemental end of things. Robin specializes in major medical health insurance."

To prepare for the new healthcare law, Robin attended 20 classes to become certified with Connect for Health Colorado, which is Colorado's market place for the new healthcare law.

"Even if they go through the government site, once they go through their state, it automatically directs them to the Connect for Health Colorado website, which has a lot of information," Robin said. "It can be a little overwhelming to navigate when you're not used to it. That's what we're here for. They don't have to pay anymore premium for our services. The carrier takes care of that. If they have a question, that's what we're here for."

If they need help enrolling, the couple also provides that service and will meet with people at their homes, as well.

"We've got two computers to get on and go through the enrollment with the customers if they want to come in," Patrick said.

Ca単on Health Insurance Associates, LLC is open from 9 a.m.-3 p.m. Monday through Friday. For more information, call 285-8350 or check the website at canonhealthinsurance.com.