State Rep. Mia Jones will lead a new campaign to help enroll the more than 25,000 uninsured Duval County children in Medicaid or Florida Healthy Kids.

The Jacksonville Democrat, who is also a special assistant to Mayor Alvin Brown, will be named the city’s first health commissioner at a Wednesday news conference.

Health care-related issues are a focus of Jones’ work in the Legislature and focusing on “matters of health” are among her duties as a mayoral aide, she said Tuesday.

“I already had that job. This is just putting a title to it,” she said. “My vision is that as we are talking around the city about our uninsured population, we start to focus a little more on ways to get the working poor insured. We will do it starting with children.”

The emotional and financial cost of an ill child can “weigh on anyone,” particularly poor, uninsured families, she said.

In the House, Jones serves as the Democratic ranking member of the Health and Human Services Committee and the Select Committee on Health Care Workforce Innovation and is a member of the Health Innovation Subcommittee and the Select Committee on the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Her new city duties will not increase her $91,200 mayoral assistant salary.

As health commissioner, Jones will lead Cover Jacksonville, a campaign she helped develop with Brown, Schools Superintendent Nikolai Vitti, Children’s Commission CEO Jon Heymann and other community leaders.

The goal is to reduce the number of local uninsured children by 20 percent by December 2015, with a $260,000 grant from the National League of Cities funding the effort.

According to the League, the Cover Jacksonville campaign will build capacity by training community stakeholders to become “enrollment assisters” and raise public awareness through phone banks and outreach. The campaign will create enrollment services at 25 new sites throughout Duval County and establish a single point of access — the United Way of Northeast Florida’s 2-1-1 hot line — for enrollment information and assistance.

Also, they will identify uninsured children through a partnership with Duval County Public Schools.

A pilot program will be established at Bartram Springs Elementary, Twin Lakes Middle School and Atlantic Coast High School to identify uninsured children through school enrollment questionnaires. Also, trained school officials will work to get those children coverage, according to the commission.

Beth Reese Cravey: (904) 359-4109

COVER JACKSONVILLE

For more information contact Cheryl Townsend at the Jacksonville Children’s Commission at cherylt@coj.net or (904) 630-6405.