With Mark Cuban’s texting app startup Cyber Dust, text messages disappear 24 seconds after they are sent and cannot be restored by sender or receiver. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Intentional or not, you leave behind a cybershadow, or digital footprint, when using the Internet to send and receive information. These footprints create an online identity that includes information about your age, gender, sexual orientation, race, religious and political views, buying habits and much more.

In 2015, we can look forward to enhanced software technologies that will help limit the creation of our cybershadows.

Your information, encrypted

Stop and think about it. Anything you search for, send or receive through a Web browser, text, email or the cloud can be hacked and read verbatim unless it’s encrypted. This frequently overlooked villain lurking around and reading anything you type could compromise information you want and thought to be private.

Clearly, it’s crucial that we understand how our information is encrypted. One way to do this is to password protect your documents.

Last August, Google announced a movement for HTTPs everywhere to reiterate Web safety. When entering any kind of information over the Internet, be sure the web address begins with https. The “s” denotes a Secure Socket Layer (SSL). Additionally, most browsers also display a small padlock icon to represent a secure site.

It’s important to note that encrypting information does not prevent a message from being intercepted during transit but does keep the intercepting party from reading the message.

Be aware of your overshare

As I’ve mentioned, every digitally written word, video or picture is recorded in some form. Beware of the amount and type of information you share.

Oversharing and bashtags were so pervasive in our culture last year that they were chosen as words of the year by Chambers and Collins dictionaries for 2014. What term did Oxford Dictionary choose for 2014? Vape, but I digress.

Chambers dictionary defines oversharing as being “unacceptably forthcoming with information about one’s personal life.” Collins dictionary defines a bashtag as “a hashtag used for critical or abusive comments.”

You may recall from my recent column “The year of the hack” that even if you’ve deleted your messages, they are still saved on the hard drive of your computer, tablet and/or smartphone. That’s the problem with “anonymous” social apps like Snapchat and Swipe.

Enter Mark Cuban, prominent entrepreneur, judge on “Shark Tank” and owner of the Dallas Mavericks. His new texting app startup Cyber Dust protects the privacy of the individual sending the message and prevents either party from embedding the message onto a hard drive. Using Random Access Memory (RAM) to send messages, Cyber Dust text messages disappear 24 seconds after they are sent and cannot be restored by sender or receiver. This is an important differentiation as to what components of technology are used for Cyber Dust versus Snapchat, as an example.

Cuban hasn’t revealed his future plans for Cyber Dust, but here’s hoping the next phase allows users to eliminate their digital thumbprints across the entire Web.

For 2015, join me in resolving to be aware of your amount of overshare. Encrypt documents with passwords and take advantage of new software tools like SSL and Cyber Dust that allow you to eliminate your cybershadow from lurking in the depths of the Internet.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1IaAfjD