Children are served lunch in a Silver Spring, Maryland, elementary school. Many schools are pushing back against recent school lunch guidelines. Matt McClain/The Washington Post/Getty Images

The days of mystery meat and soda-dispensing vending machines may be gone, but that doesn't mean that the new era of school meals and snacks hasn't come without its own challenges.

Nutrition guidelines for schools, which have gradually gone into effect since Congress passed the Michelle Obama-backed Healthy Hunger-Free Kids Act in 2010, can be logistically and financially difficult for already strapped district budgets.

[READ: Burger King Pulls Soda From Kids Meal Menu]

In response, earlier this month 1,000 members of the School Nutrition Association, which represents school cafeteria workers and companies that supply food and equipment to districts, lobbied Congress for more funding and flexibility when it comes to school meals.

Critics have called out the group for attempting to roll back quality nutrition standards, but the members maintain they are asking for a more realistic approach.

All stakeholders agree that providing better-quality food, including whole grains, fruits and vegetables, and lower sodium, fat and calorie content will make children healthier and will help them learn better, but some school administrators grumble that the government guidelines have gone too far. Providing fresh fruits and vegetables is expensive – particularly when students are forced to put them on their trays. No one can make the students eat the healthier food, and much of it can end up in the trash.

Flexibility on Meal Regulations



Laura Metzger, director of food and nutrition services for Westonka Public Schools in Minnetrista, Minnesota, says the department works hard to provide fresh fruits and vegetables that are appealing to students – fresh apples, crisp oranges and lots of colorful produce.

She says the law has improved school lunches, but she doesn't think students should be forced to take items they don't want.

Photos: School Lunches Around the World EXPAND GALLERY Photo Gallery x of x Full Screen An omelette, vegetable soup, banana yogurt and water are served at school lunch at the Chiquitin kindergarten on Tuesday, May 6, 2014, in Madrid. Many countries put a premium on feeding school children a healthy meal at lunchtime, and U.S. first lady Michelle Obama is on a mission to make American school lunches healthier, too. Daniel Ochoa de Olza/AP x of x Full Screen Baani, 5, eats lunch prepared by her mother, consisting of flatbread, a turnip dish and mangoes, at a school in Jammu, India, on Tuesday. Channi Anand/AP x of x Full Screen Cream of vegetable soup, pan-fried breast of veal with salad, a piece of bread, a banana and water are served for lunch at El Caminet del Besos kindergarten in Barcelona. Manu Fernandez/AP x of x Full Screen Two lunch trays are served at a primary school in London. The right tray holds pasta with broccoli and slices of bread, seasonal fresh fruit and milk. At left, vegetable chili with rice and broccoli, sponge cake with custard, a banana and water. Sang Tan/AP x of x Full Screen Palestinian students hold up their homemade sandwiches of pita bread stuffed with olive oil and zaatar, a mixture of herbs and spices, during their midday recess in Nablus, West Bank. Majdi Mohammed/AP x of x Full Screen Milagro Ramos, a student at the Angela Landa elementary school, eats from her lunch tray containing rice, chicken croquette, a piece of taro root and yellow pea soup in Old Havana, Cuba. Milagro also brought fried plantains, lower left corner of her tray, and an orange drink from home. Franklin Reyes/AP x of x Full Screen Children stand in line for a free midday meal of sweetened rice at a government school on the outskirts of Jammu, India, on Tuesday. The Mid Day Meal Scheme program serves millions of children in primary schools across India. Channi Anand/AP x of x Full Screen A student's lunch consisting of ham, cheese, tomato and lettuce sandwich, a boxed oatmeal drink, and an apple, all brought from home, sits on a table at an elementary school in Quito, Ecuador. Dolores Ochoa/AP x of x Full Screen A plate containing an empanada of meat, milanesa (meat covered with egg and bread), and potato sits on a table where children ages 2 to 5 years old have lunch at a school in Buenos Aires. Natacha Pisarenko/AP x of x Full Screen Sri, a house maid, shows a lunch box containing rice, meatball soup, tofu and vegetables, which she prepared for her employer's child at an elementary school in Jakarta, Indonesia. Achmad Ibrahim/AP x of x Full Screen A school lunch consisting of rice, salmon, ratatouille, a slice of bread, a salad with celery and carrots, an orange and a donut is laid out on a tray at the Anne Franck school in Lambersart, France. Michel Spingler/AP x of x Full Screen French chef Xavier Lebeau poses with a plate of pike fish with green beans and mushrooms at the Saint Pierre de Chaillot school in Paris. Francois Mori/AP x of x Full Screen Mamadou Diagana shows his fried donuts as he makes his way to school in Bamako, Mali. In Mali's capital, most students go home midday to eat lunch with their families before returning to class. Baba Ahmed/AP x of x Full Screen Bowls of salad are ready to be served at a kindergarten and child care center in Singapore. Wong Maye-E/AP x of x Full Screen A schoolgirl buys a pancake for lunch on the street for about one U.S. cent in Jakarta, Indonesia. Achmad Ibrahim/AP x of x Photo Gallery x of x An omelette, vegetable soup, banana yogurt and water are served at school lunch at the Chiquitin kindergarten on Tuesday, May 6, 2014, in Madrid. Many countries put a premium on feeding school children a healthy meal at lunchtime, and U.S. first lady Michelle Obama is on a mission to make American school lunches healthier, too. Daniel Ochoa de Olza/AP x of x Baani, 5, eats lunch prepared by her mother, consisting of flatbread, a turnip dish and mangoes, at a school in Jammu, India, on Tuesday. Channi Anand/AP x of x Cream of vegetable soup, pan-fried breast of veal with salad, a piece of bread, a banana and water are served for lunch at El Caminet del Besos kindergarten in Barcelona. Manu Fernandez/AP x of x Two lunch trays are served at a primary school in London. The right tray holds pasta with broccoli and slices of bread, seasonal fresh fruit and milk. At left, vegetable chili with rice and broccoli, sponge cake with custard, a banana and water. Sang Tan/AP x of x Palestinian students hold up their homemade sandwiches of pita bread stuffed with olive oil and zaatar, a mixture of herbs and spices, during their midday recess in Nablus, West Bank. Majdi Mohammed/AP x of x Milagro Ramos, a student at the Angela Landa elementary school, eats from her lunch tray containing rice, chicken croquette, a piece of taro root and yellow pea soup in Old Havana, Cuba. Milagro also brought fried plantains, lower left corner of her tray, and an orange drink from home. Franklin Reyes/AP x of x Children stand in line for a free midday meal of sweetened rice at a government school on the outskirts of Jammu, India, on Tuesday. The Mid Day Meal Scheme program serves millions of children in primary schools across India. Channi Anand/AP x of x A student's lunch consisting of ham, cheese, tomato and lettuce sandwich, a boxed oatmeal drink, and an apple, all brought from home, sits on a table at an elementary school in Quito, Ecuador. Dolores Ochoa/AP x of x A plate containing an empanada of meat, milanesa (meat covered with egg and bread), and potato sits on a table where children ages 2 to 5 years old have lunch at a school in Buenos Aires. Natacha Pisarenko/AP x of x Sri, a house maid, shows a lunch box containing rice, meatball soup, tofu and vegetables, which she prepared for her employer's child at an elementary school in Jakarta, Indonesia. Achmad Ibrahim/AP x of x A school lunch consisting of rice, salmon, ratatouille, a slice of bread, a salad with celery and carrots, an orange and a donut is laid out on a tray at the Anne Franck school in Lambersart, France. Michel Spingler/AP x of x French chef Xavier Lebeau poses with a plate of pike fish with green beans and mushrooms at the Saint Pierre de Chaillot school in Paris. Francois Mori/AP x of x Mamadou Diagana shows his fried donuts as he makes his way to school in Bamako, Mali. In Mali's capital, most students go home midday to eat lunch with their families before returning to class. Baba Ahmed/AP x of x Bowls of salad are ready to be served at a kindergarten and child care center in Singapore. Wong Maye-E/AP x of x A schoolgirl buys a pancake for lunch on the street for about one U.S. cent in Jakarta, Indonesia. Achmad Ibrahim/AP x of x ×

"If they don’t want [a piece of fruit] for the day, then we need to improve our nutrition education and tell them why they should have it," she says. "We should not force them to have it on their tray and then throw it out."

Under the guidelines created by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, students are required to take half a cup of fruits and vegetables but are allowed to take up to 2 cups. Calories in meals are now limited at 550 to 650 for elementary school students, 600 to 700 for middle school students, and 750 to 850 for high school students. The guidelines say that grain foods must be “whole-grain rich” – meaning that each serving has 8 grams of whole grain or more – and during the next few years schools also will be required to increasingly limit sodium content.



The breakfast and lunch guidelines were implemented in 2012, and b eginning last fall anything sold while school is in session has to meet the similarly strict nutritional guidelines. Gone were the ice cream sandwiches, chocolate chip cookies and potato chips; and in were pretzels, yogurt and carrot sticks.

Response has occurred at the federal level. Early in March, Sen. John Hoeven, R-N.D., announced the Healthy School Meals Flexibility Act, which would restore USDA requirements from 2012 that at least half of grains offered with school meals be whole grains. These loosened regulations would allow schools to serve items like biscuits, tortillas and pasta students will eat, Hoeven said in a statement.

The School Nutrition Association wants the law to remove the federal requirement that students take fruits and vegetables...take fruits and vegetables and keep USDA from further reducing sodium reductions below the current level. If they go to their projected levels, Hoeven said, schools would be unable to serve choices like low-fat, whole grain cheese pizza, many Asian dishes and deli sandwiches.

Metzger says a lunch that fits the current sodium level would yield the following: Milk, a turkey wrap, fruit and vegetables. But when the next USDA sodium requirements go into effect in 2017, that meal could not be served.

"Deli meat is high in sodium, but it's also a pretty standard lunch," she says. "In many dietitians eyes it would be considered a healthy lunch for an average student. It's getting too restrictive." Beginning in 2022, sodium level requirements are slated to be even lower.

Metzger says she also would prefer more flexibility on the whole grain requirement. Whole grain pasta, for instance, has a tendency to break down faster, she says. It doesn't cook as well and hold up as well as regular pasta.

The School Nutrition Association backs Hoeven's bill.

“Minor adjustments to the most extreme restrictions under the new rules will help struggling schools bring students back to the cafeteria,” Julia Bauscher, president of the School Nutrition Association, said in a statement. “Too many students have swapped school lunch for unhealthy alternatives, which defeats the goal of the standards and reduces revenue to invest in healthy, appealing menus.”



[ALSO: Coming to a School Lunch Tray Near You]

Are the Standards Even Working?

Some research has suggested that the changes may be producing desired results.

A study conducted by the Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity at the University of Connecticut published earlier this month in "Childhood Obesity" showed that children in schools are eating more fruit, and that they are throwing away less of their lunch. The study showed the percent of students choosing fruit with lunch increased from 54 percent to 66 percent. Students also are eating 84 percent of their healthier entrees, up from 71 percent in 2012.

But the study was limited to 12 schools in one district. Anecdotally, many education professionals say they still see a lot of waste. Students have held boycotts against cafeterias, and often post photos of their lunches on Twitter and Instagram using the hashtag #ThanksMichelleObama. Some depict healthy, tasty-looking meals. Others are sarcastic.

"It's only good nutrition if you're eating it," points out Carol Weekly, director of child nutrition for Queen Creek Unified School District in Arizona. Some students are forgoing the program in favor of bringing their own Lunchable, she says.

@leonardkl @usnews Photo of student lunch today (actual student tray) in RSU #14 in Maine. #SchoolLunch pic.twitter.com/VzXfud766r — Jeanne Reilly (@Lunch4KidsRSU14) March 12, 2015



Linette Dodson, director of school nutrition at Carrollton City Schools in Georgia, doesn’t take issue with the government standards but says she would like to see more research on the impact of sodium before lowering its content in food.

Financial Troubles in Meeting Guidelines

Weekly says her district had been providing mostly whole grains for years. When the standards came in place, however, students turned their nose at the whole-grain burrito – what was once a best-seller. In that region, she says, people simply eat light tortillas, not brown ones. She also noticed pizza sales have dwindled.

"I don't know how much more I can afford," says Weekly, whose children eat the school lunch every day, too. "It's too rigid and too expensive. I can't charge $4 for lunch.

"I have to figure out where to cut costs. I don't want to cut the quality of the food, but I'm at the point where I might have to." If Congress were to allot more funding, she would be fine with the guidelines, she says.

The School Nutrition Association is pushing for Congress to increase the per meal reimbursement for school breakfast and lunch by 35 cents – up from 6 cents per lunch the USDA offers for schools currently meeting the new standards.

@SchoolMealsRock at Burris Laboratory School!! #SchoolLunch #ThanksMichelleObama pic.twitter.com/vcJQX48K37 — Amanda Kruse RD CD (@Amanda_Kruse) March 11, 2015

Across the U.S., any school that accepts federal funding for the National School Lunch Program must follow the guidelines, unless its state approves exemptions. USDA pays schools back about $2.98 per lunch served to a child eligible for free meals. The breakfast and lunch programs reimburse schools for the meals they serve and provides food at a reduced cost to feed students who are low-income.

USDA projected that the new rules would cost schools $1.2 billion in food and work expenses this year.

The majority of the nation's public and non-profit schools – roughly 95 percent, or 100,000 – participate in the School Lunch Program, but about 500 schools dropped out because of the new meal standards. They cited factors such as increasing costs, resource constraints and plate waste. Data show many of the schools were small, affluent, private or charter schools, or Residential Child Care Institutions.

[ALSO: Barbara Bush Wants to Help Improve Nutrition Worldwide]

The UDSA appears to understand that meeting the requirements can be challenging and will take time. On Monday, the agency announced its Team Up for Success program to help individual schools with menu planning, financial management and food waste.

Dodson says getting over an overall negative perception of the regulations has been one of her district's goals. They have held taste tests and organized social media and community campaigns. She has observed schools that started the standards early tend to be the most successful. "Obviously additional funding is always beneficial," she says.

Push also is happening at the state level. The Minnesota School Nutrition Association, for instance, is asking state legislators for increased funding to help offset rising costs of food associated with requirements of the law.

Smart Snack Regulations



Other changes occurring at the state level are through the Smart Snacks program, which applies to foods sold during the school day in vending machines, à la carte lines and school stores – specifically on school grounds.

Aligning guidelines for snacks with meals helps with consistent messaging, says Lainie Morgan, senior program coordinator for nutrition and wellness at the Health Information Network, a non-profit created by the National Education Association that responds to health-related needs for members and their students.

Ate this meal at Burke county schools in Georgia #ThanksMichelleObama #schoollunch #actuallydelicious pic.twitter.com/rgNeHAaZwV — Elodie Bouchard (@BouchardElodie) March 12, 2015



“If you’re being taught in your classroom to eat fruits and vegetables and whole grains, and drink low-fat milk, and then you get into the hallways and they’re selling doughnuts and candy bars, it’s hard to keep that message going,” she says.

Children can bring what they want to school for a snack, and events like birthday parties or holidays are not affected. But sales of snacks are often a means of funding school field trips and student clubs. Under the law, states can allow bake sales and fundraisers during the school day with foods that don’t meet healthy standards if they choose. If they do not make exemptions, states default to the federal guidelines.

“Lots of schools are being creative with fundraising,” Morgan says. They are selling food that satisfies the nutrition requirements, or they are finding other, non food-related ways to make money – selling wrapping papers, having costume days, or even through physical activity challenges like dance nights and races.

The District of Columbia, Connecticut, Mississippi and Oregon already have policies that set standards for fundraisers, according to the National Association of State Boards of Education. Twenty-five states have not created exemptions, and therefore have to meet the federal standards.

The Virginia General Assembly is considering a bill that would grant exemptions. Other states limit the number of fundraisers allowed. Indiana, for instance, allows two fundraisers per year per building. Missouri allows five, and North Dakota allows three. Fundraising opportunities help many schools fill gaps lost from state or district budgets. In areas struggling economically, it can be particularly challenging.

"It’s a good program," Weekly says. "We serve kids. It is healthy. There just needs to be the practical and realistic versus what looks good on paper."

Corrected on March 13, 2015: This article has been updated with information from the Pew Charitable Trusts, and to correct the percentage of healthy entrees eaten in 2012 and the amount of money the USDA pays schools back per lunch.