Masterful: Andrea Pirlo. Photo: La Presse

1. Andrea Pirlo

For football purists, the little maestro is as close as you can get to the perfect ball-playing midfielder. It seems strange then that he spends hours each day perfecting his art by playing FIFA on PlayStation. In what he cites as the best invention since the wheel, consoles are how the creative linchpin further studies the game. He has an uncanny ability to drift between lines and possesses an understanding of the game that makes opponents look like computer bots. Perhaps the greatest pleasure for those attending the game will be watching Pirlo on the screen, erm, ball.

2. Carlos Tevez

It took nine years, five clubs in three countries but Tevez is finally in an environment that feels close to home. Ever since leaving Boca Juniors and Buenos Aires in 2004, the striker has struggled to adapt to his surroundings away from the pitch but has rekindled his career-best form at Juventus in Turin. The end result is deadly for opponents as Tevez became the club’s top scorer last season with 19 goals.

Advertisement

3. Claudio Marchisio

With Arturo Vidal out, Italian international Marchisio will assume the box-to-box role in the heart of Juve’s midfield. Excitement will follow his every touch as he is one of the fan favourites and genuine sons of the club. Born in Turin, a product of the youth system and, apart from a loan spell with Empoli as a youth, has never played for another club. He has restored the club’s faith to become part of its dynamic midfield and his physicality will make for an enticing clash.

4. Paul Pogba

If Juventus do sell him, he will likely go down as one of the most profitable investments in world football. Signed for free from Manchester United and carved into a winner of the best young player in the world award, the 21-year-old has already attracted interest from Liverpool, Chelsea and oddly enough, Manchester United. He has committed to Juve for now and his knack of scoring long-range stunners should continue.

5. Sebastian Giovinco

The nimble forward is the most naturally gifted of his generation but he will almost certainly never reach his potential. The 164cm tall, creative striker burst on to the scene at the Beijing Olympics where his flair, precision and pace captured the eyes of all, but has been inconsistent for his club since. Nevertheless, he will torment the All Stars’ defenders with his pace.