A senior Bank of England official Thursday said raising interest rates should be among the last lines of defense for central banks faced with the threat of financial instability.



Jon Cunliffe, the BOE’s deputy governor for financial stability told an audience in Liverpool, England, that although tighter monetary policy is an effective way of stemming risks from financial-sector excesses it isn’t without costs to the wider economy.

“It is a very blunt instrument that affects the economy as a whole. So although it is an effective line of defense, it should be seen as one of the last lines of defense,” Mr. Cunliffe said, according to a text of his speech.

His remarks come amid concern that low interest rates and other stimulus policies pursued by central banks since 2008 are stoking asset prices and inflating dangerous bubbles in financial markets.

Critics of central-bank policy argue very low interest rates risk fomenting a new crisis that could threaten economic recovery. The Bank for International Settlements, a forum for central bankers based in Switzerland and one such critic, on Sunday urged its members to raise interest rates to preserve financial stability.

But officials such as Mr. Cunliffe and his BOE colleague Andrew Haldane contend that higher rates risk aborting still-fragile economies and that new “macroprudential” tools designed to safeguard financial stability–such as higher bank capital requirements and controls on lending–should be deployed first instead.



Federal Reserve Chairwoman Janet Yellen, in a speech Wednesday, agreed, saying she favors relying first on regulation and supervision to make the financial system more resilient to occasional bouts of turbulence. She and other central bankers stress they are not ruling out applying the monetary brakes if those tools fail.

U.K. central bankers June 26 made use of their new powers to curb risky lending in Britain’s housing market, which Mr. Cunliffe described Thursday as “a very major risk” to the U.K. economy.

The BOE told banks they mustn’t give more than 15% of new loans to home buyers borrowing more than four-and-a-half times their income and must impose stricter tests on borrowers to ensure they can repay their loans at higher interest rates.

Mr. Cunliffe said the new rules should be thought of as insurance against the risk that rising house prices aren’t matched by a pickup in Britons’ incomes, which could lead home buyers to take on bigger debts than they can afford.