LOGAN, Utah — Colorado State’s 2014 season involved a lot of things going right at crucial times, plus a talent-laden roster that included a pair of high NFL draft choices, quarterback Garrett Grayson and tackle Ty Sambrailo; a sophomore consensus All-America wide receiver, Rashard Higgins; a transfer running back from Alabama, Dee Hart; and key veteran linebackers Aaron Davis and Max Morgan, who cleaned up behind a three-man front.

Of that group, only Higgins is back.

So perhaps this shouldn’t be shocking: After dropping their Mountain West Conference opener to Utah State 33-18 at Maverik Stadium on Saturday night, the Rams (2-3) already have lost as many games in 2015 as they did all of last season.

A year ago, the Rams also lost their first conference game, to Boise State on the road, but then went on a nine-game winning streak that got them to 10-1 before losing to Air Force and then to Utah in the Las Vegas Bowl.

After the loss Saturday, first-year CSU coach Mike Bobo mentioned that he had “the sense we’re all playing like freshmen,” adding that the accountability also made it to the first-year coaching staff shepherding the transition after Jim McElwain’s departure to Florida.

Bobo brought up the Rams’ tendency to be penalized both too much (12 times for 110 yards against the Aggies) and at inopportune times, as well as CSU’s two lost fumbles.

“We got penalties and turnovers, and that puts you behind the 8-ball,” Bobo said. “We have to be more consistent on offense, and we have to find better ways to move the football. … When you make that many mistakes, you’re not going to have a chance to win the ballgame. I thought we came out in the second half and played with more energy and effort, but we weren’t playing with enough energy there in the first half. The second half, we did.”

Frequently running the read option, Aggies quarterback Kent Myers — the backup taking over for the injured Chuckie Keeton — rushed for 191 yards on 16 carries, and that included a 26-yard TD run that broke a 10-10 tie with 56 seconds left in the first half.

“You’ve got to give Utah State credit,” Bobo said. “They did a nice job coming off the bye week, doing some different things offensively, getting their quarterback free. He played an outstanding game for them.”

Said CSU linebacker Kiel Robinson: “We should have been able to stop them. We had a few missed assignments and that was it. …We have to have our communication down much better and know our assignments; we can’t just lose contain. We have to know who has the quarterback, who has the pitch man, who has the zone read, all that stuff.”

Pending a review of video, Bobo defended his quarterback, Nick Stevens, who was harried much of the night and finished 21-of-46 for 252 yards and one touchdown.

“I don’t know how many sacks we gave up, but there’s too much pressure on the quarterback,” Bobo said. “We had open guys several times (and) we couldn’t get our feet set to throw a good ball. It’s disappointing, I’m not real happy about the performance, but at the end of the day, we have to go back to work on Monday because we have one of the top teams in the country coming into town. … We have to go back to the drawing board and figure out a better way to protect him.”

The Rams face No. 25 Boise State (4-1) on Saturday, then Air Force Oct. 17, both at home. So CSU will have chances to avenge its only conference losses of a year ago, and Stevens said the Rams’ confidence hasn’t been shaken.

“This is a new season and we can’t think about we did last year,” he said. “We’re 0-1 in conference, and half the teams are going to be 0-1 in conference after this week, so I think we should focus on the rest of the season and not lose hope, and I think we’re going to be all right.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei

Eye on …The Broncos

Boise State at Colorado State, 5 p.m. Saturday, CBSSN

For the record: No. 25 Boise State is 4-1 and Colorado State is 2-3.

Streaking: The Broncos have won three straight, averaging 54 points against Idaho State, Virginia and Hawaii. And they shut out ISU and Hawaii.

Who’s hot: BSU quarterback Brett Rypien has thrown for 592 yards in his two starts since Ryan Finley was injured.

Who’s not: The Rams have never beaten the Broncos, losing all four annual meetings since 2011.

Key stat: Rypien has completed 73.9 percent of his passes.

FYI: Yes, Rypien is the nephew of former Washington State and NFL quarterback Mark Rypien.

Terry Frei, The Denver Post