How does bondholders’ use of the Trust Indenture Act affect companies’ ability to complete out-of-court restructurings?

Against the backdrop of the economic hardship caused by the Great Depression, among the legislative efforts seeking to rationalize the financial markets was the Trust Indenture Act of 1939. The TIA attempted to remedy a number of deficiencies present in bond indentures, including the failure to require adequate financial information and related disclosures as well as obstacles to collective bondholder action. To address the latter, section 316(b) contained what at the time was a basic protection, namely: “the right of any holder of a note to receive payment of principal, premium…and interest on the note…or to bring suit for the enforcement of such payment…shall not be impaired or affected without the consent of such holder.”

A recent decision from the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York has led many to question whether it has reawakened the TIA and will curtail the ability of companies and their bondholders to effectuate restructurings without the coercive provisions of the U.S. bankruptcy code. For the decision in Marblegate Asset Management LLC v. Education Management makes clear that the TIA limits out-of-court restructurings that seek to substantially modify the economics of the bondholder’s investment.

Before concluding that complex financial restructurings must evolve through the costly and at times uncertain world of chapter 11, a word or two about the unique facts presented in the Marblegate case is critical. Marblegate involved an issuer, Education Management Corp., which relied upon access to student-loan programs. For that reason, EDMC could not rely upon chapter 11 to restructure roughly $1.5 billion in debt. Accordingly, EDMC launched a coercive exchange offer and consent solicitation under which the bondholders’ treatment varied widely, depending upon their acceptance of the offer. If the offer achieved 100% bondholder acceptance, then the bonds would be converted into equity convertible into common stock of the issuer’s parent-guarantor. But if less than 100% of the bondholders consented, then EDMC would implement an alternative restructuring under which its assets would be transferred to another subsidiary via a foreclosure sale by the senior lenders, and the parent guaranty would be released. Under this alternative, the nonconsenting bondholders would be left with recourse only against an empty issuer. As described by Judge Katherine Polk Failla, “the restructuring gave dissenting bondholders a Hobson’s choice: Take the common stock, or take nothing. In effect, Marblegate bought a $14 million bond that the majority now attempts to turn into $5 million of stock, with consent procured only by threat of total deprivation.”

In finding the proposed restructuring to violate the TIA, Judge Failla noted that the TIA was enacted “to prevent precisely the nonconsensual majoritarian debt restructuring that occurred here, even if the Act’s authors did not anticipate precisely the mechanisms through which such a restructuring might occur.”

This decision should not be surprising, nor should it cause a rush to the doors of our bankruptcy courts. First, unlike the stark transaction proposed in the EDMC restructuring, the majority of out-of-court restructurings involve far less dramatic amendments that do not materially reallocate value—nothing in Marblegate should change this landscape. Second, the economic realities of Marblegate made clear that were the cudgel of chapter 11 available to EDMC, it likely would have been able to effectuate a wholly consensual restructuring.

I do not suggest that Marblegate is a wholly aberrational decision. In fact, it confirms that the TIA will not permit substantial economic dilution to non-consenting bondholders in an out-of-court restructuring. Thus, issuers will need to ensure that they have their “in-court” strategy well in hand when approaching bondholders in restructuring negotiations.

Moreover, the implications of Marblegate go beyond SEC-registered bonds that are subject to the TIA, because many bonds issued without registration rights in “144A for life” transactions customarily contain indenture language similar to that of section 316(b). These bonds may, however, seek to sidestep the issues raised in Marblegate by modifying consent thresholds. Bondholders need to be wary of such changes and ensure they are adequately compensated for any increased risk.

Nonetheless, all restructurings continue to be a function of the alternatives available to each stakeholder. Although the recent decision in Marblegate does not change that structure, it does substantially clarify what alternatives may be available.

Rick Chesley is the co-chair of DLA Piper’s restructuring practice, focusing on bankruptcy transactions both in the United States and internationally. He is based in Chicago.