Q: Can you get Lyme disease in Florida?

A: Yes.

Floridians are among the hundreds of thousands of Americans struggling to overcome a disease that has both baffled and divided the medical community.

Lyme disease, which is transmitted via the bite of a tick infected with the spirochetes bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi, is often called “the great imitator” because so many of its initial symptoms — headaches, fatigue, fever, rashes — can be mistaken for other ailments.

The Centers for Disease Control estimate there are some 300,000 new infections annually — with tens of thousands going mis- or undiagnosed.

The most widely known early symptom — the so-called “bull's-eye rash” — is considered a telltale sign that a patient has Lyme disease. When patients have this kind of rash, public health officials have long instructed doctors to prescribe a regimen of antibiotics — and to have the patients undergo a battery of blood tests to determine the presence of certain antibodies.

Not all doctors do this.

And even when they do, inaccurate diagnoses abound.

As New Yorker magazine reported in 2013, “It takes weeks, and sometimes longer, for blood tests to detect antibodies; a test taken too soon will produce negative results. Even then, many people who become infected will test negative in error, while others who aren't infected will test positive.”

Oh, and to further confound doctors and patients: Researchers have found evidence that suggests even when patients are aggressively treated and test bacteria-free, they still may experience illnesses and pain related to the original infection.

Among the late-stage symptoms of Lyme disease that can be present months or even years after the initial transmission: Confusion/disorientation, numbness, painful joints/ arthritis, dizziness/vertigo, tremors/ shakes, heart palpitations and intermittent amnesia. And lest you think only those in the Northeast are at risk for Lyme disease, think again.

Not only does the CDC rank Florida in the top 20 states reporting cases of Lyme disease, but the Florida Lyme Disease Association notes, “People are at risk for Lyme disease in Florida year-round.”

So, what can you do to decrease your vulnerability?

The CDC recommends the following:

Use repellents containing 20 percent or more DEET on your exposed skin and clothing.

Shower within two hours of being outdoors.

Check daily for ticks on your body — and on pets.

Remove any ticks immediately with tweezers; ticks need more than 24 hours to transmit Lyme disease and related infections.

Of course, no matter how vigilant you are, the fact remains that, as tick-borne disease specialist Dr. Erica Lehman told People magazine, “Lyme disease is the fastest-growing epidemic in the world.”

— Steve Dorfman, The Palm Beach Post