Topics: 19 kids and counting, discovery communications, duggars, josh duggar, TLC, TV, Entertainment News

This story has been corrected since it was originally published.

TLC, the network that airs Jim Bob and Michelle Duggar’s “19 Kids and Counting,” is a corporate holding of Discovery Communications, the self-described “#1 pay-TV programmer in the world.” In addition to TLC and the Discovery Channel, Discovery Communications owns Animal Planet, Science, Investigation Discovery, a controlling interest in EuroSport, and the Oprah Winfrey Network, as well as dozens more channels, both here and across the world. The company boasts 2.9 billion cumulative worldwide subscribers. TLC, however, was originally a product of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and NASA, which in 1972 jointly founded “The Learning Channel.” In 1991, Discovery acquired the channel, and in 1998, rebranded it to the shorter and snappier “TLC.” The network’s tag line became “Life: Unscripted.”

But at this point, TLC is not a network that seems particularly concerned about putting some good out into the world. It is now a source of frequently commented-upon irony that the network used to be called “The Learning Channel,” and with a track record that includes the openly condescending “Here Comes Honey Boo Boo” and a particularly exploitative special called “The Man With the 132-Lb. Scrotum,” it would not be that surprising if our expectations for the network were not terribly high. And yet here we are, in 2015, surprised that a TLC show about an incredibly conservative family with 19 home-schooled kids and Puritan ideas of sexual impurity might have had some dysfunction lurking under the surface.

Now, in the wake of a report from InTouch and a confession from eldest son Josh Duggar, audiences have to contend with the fact that “19 Kids and Counting,” an unscripted show about a very large family of Christian fundamentalists, has been employing a sex offender for 15 seasons of the show since its inception in 2008. Given that all the children were home-schooled—and that the police reports obtained by InTouch indicate the abuse took place inside the Duggar house—Josh’s victims were almost certainly his younger sisters. The Duggar family eventually found out the abuse, as did the local authorities, but it was buried until an anonymous tip was sent to Oprah Winfrey’s Harpo studios. Josh Duggar has since owned up to the abuse, saying that he came clean to his family and turned himself over to God’s grace. He now has three children of his own with his wife, Anna.

Little to nothing has been said about the multiple Duggar sisters who were victimized by Josh; as is the custom with sensitive cases, their names are left out of the police reports. But because the Duggars’ lives have been lived so publicly, it is not difficult to name who the victims probably are. Here is the math: When Josh Duggar was 14 years old, his sister Jana was 12; Jill, 11; Jessa, 10; Jinger, 9; Joy-Anna, 5. The rest of his sisters were not yet born. According to Extra, depending on the age of the apparent victims, they may have grounds for a civil suit, even if the statue of limitations on the criminal suit has expired.

In the past several days, enormous pressure has been put on TLC to cancel “19 Kids and Counting.” The network posted a brief statement on its website saying that it would be pulling reruns of the show from the schedule, pending a more permanent decision. That decision is still forthcoming. Meanwhile, People has an anonymous source reporting that TLC is considering spinning off another series to focus on now-married Duggar daughters Jill and Jessa, moving away from patriarch and matriarch Jim Bob and Michelle.