Aqib Talib leaves practice drenched in sweat. On a leather sofa nestled in the back of the Broncos’ locker room at Dove Valley, he eats vegetables and watches the upcoming opponent on a big-screen TV. After three games this season, Talib and the Broncos remain in good position but have accomplished nothing.

They are 2-1, undefeated in their division, and yet work awaits when they return to practice Monday. The Broncos are maddeningly inconsistent, mirroring their secondary, which embraces the challenge of becoming more reliable, more of a force.

“It’s getting there, man. We still have a long way to go. Once the offense picks up its tempo, we are still fumbling a little bit,” Talib said. “We still got a ways to go before we get to that level we are seeking.”

Repetitions represent the answer, minutes together on the field. The defense’s addition of strong safety T.J. Ward and Talib has featured glimpses of the blueprint sketched in April of a dominant back line. Ward had a sack against the Seattle Seahawks. Talib has graded out as one of the NFL’s top cornerbacks this season. Cornerback Chris Harris continues to show encouraging progress after knee surgery, and safety Rahim Moore leads the Broncos with two interceptions.

The breakdowns are fewer, the communication better. Still, occasionally something doesn’t click and the opposition converts a third down. Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson converted two on the final overtime drive last week. Denver’s defense ranks 26th in the 32-team league in third-down percentage but ninth in red-zone touchdowns allowed.

The picture painted of the secondary, like the team, is accurate: good but uneven.

“They are improving, moving in the right direction,” coach John Fox said. “The goal is to be more consistent.”

The defensive backs remain confident. They view any grade, any impression, as incomplete. Their view is not without merit. Denver improved its talent in the secondary in free agency. The Broncos moved quickly, signing Ward, coveted for his high football IQ and known toughness; and Talib, the best cornerback Peyton Manning said he faced last season. But the starting secondary in the opener against the Indianapolis Colts didn’t play a single snap together during the preseason, a concession to Harris’ recovery.

Only now is the puzzle starting to resemble a picture, not scattered pieces.

“It’s the NFL. It’s not a fantasy league. This is our life. I feel like this is the best secondary I have ever played with,” Moore said. “It’s getting to the point where you don’t watch over a player or lean one way because a guy might be a little iffy in coverage. Man, all these guys make plays. The NFL is the best of the best. And I feel like we have the best. We will be great.”

Talent fosters bravado. Chemistry and familiarity will create the results this group seeks. Part of the issue is finding comfort in the scheme. Ward, like Moore a game film junkie, calls out signals, makes adjustments. It’s easy to forget this is his first year in coordinator Jack Del Rio’s defense. The secondary is leaving plays on the field.

“There are so many fine points within the scheme of the defense. Some things don’t come up until you make a mistake,” said Ward, who played his best game as a Bronco last Sunday but lamented two missed tackles. “It’s about getting to where I am doing things where it’s just second nature.”

Denver continues to find a balance between zone and man coverage. The Broncos have played better in zone but possess the talent to press off the line of scrimmage with Talib and Harris.

“We can play man all day,” Harris said.

Coverage connects to pressure, and the secondary saw gains last week as the defensive ends applied consistent heat on Wilson inside the pocket. Von Miller and DeMarcus Ware netted sacks, and the defense had a total of 21 quarterback hurries. The secondary shut down Seattle in the third and fourth quarters, holding Wilson to 74 yards on 15 pass attempts.

“We made adjustments at halftime. We played all right. We could have played better,” Talib said. “We couldn’t get stops when we needed them right before half and of course in overtime. That’s when we really needed them. I feel like all of us are comfortable. We have guys who can play man and zone. Either way, we are going to be all right.”

Three games represent a chapter, not a conclusion. The secondary has not reached its potential. The only thing standing between the goal is rolled-up sleeves.

“There are some things we need to fix, to challenge more throws, to eliminate explosives, and to keep having fun. All that will come,” Moore said. “It’s going to take a lot of film study, a lot of sacrifice, a lot of hunger. But we are going to get this rolling, and we will be good. We will be special.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck

On secondary thought

The Broncos remade their secondary during the offseason, adding strong safety T.J. Ward and cornerback Aqib Talib. A look at the statistics, while noting not all passes are caught against defensive backs: