Yale Nursing student Helena Turner, left, gets some instruction on bloodwork from Ashley Okada at the Haven Clinic in New Haven. (Melanie Stengel — New Haven Register)

Editor’s note: This story is one in a New Haven Register series called The Kindness Project, an occasional series featuring the many examples of making the world a better place through altruistic actions.

NEW HAVEN >> The path to a doctorate of medicine often leads through a free clinic where skills are honed and the reality of health care for the uninsured or underinsured is reinforced.

The Haven Free Clinic operates on Saturday mornings at 384 Grand Ave., in the Fair Haven Community Health Center’s space. What goes on there is much the same as what happens during the week, but the providers and the clientele are not the same.

At Haven, students from Yale Medical School and its other professional schools, including Public Health and Law, as well as undergraduates, offer their services, and the patients are those who would not show up during the week. Many of them are undocumented. Few speak English.

Advertisement

“I think a lot of what our work is about (is) an issue of fairness and inequity,” said Ian McConnell, a second-year Yale medical student. “These are kind of normal, hardworking people in the … Fair Haven community,” many of whom are uninsurable under Obamacare. “We’re where they come back to, to chart a path for them.”

It can be difficult in the urban community, in a clinic where “(we) never feel like what we’re doing is enough,” said Isha Di Bartolo, who is in her research year at the medical school and is one of the co-directors of Haven.

She gave an example of how the commitment is not limited to Saturdays: “It was over the course of nine months,” Di Bartolo recalled. “Two patients … would come to me with other medical (issues) that I wasn’t necessarily qualified to answer. They would call me on their phone. We become the point persons whether we want to or not.”

Di Bartolo spoke of a patient who she ended up forming a relationship with, because they met again at a different setting. “I was part of their clinical team at the Haven Free Clinic overseeing their medication and the side effects of their medication,” Di Bartolo said. “And after they were discharged, many months later, I was also part of a clinical team that oversaw a flare-up of his illness, and it was amazing to be part of that patient’s team and be an advocate for their care.”

Laura Skrip, a second-year doctoral student in public health, said, “I think, because the patients do come back, you do develop relationships with patients … My face is familiar to them.” They give her hugs; the promise to improve their lifestyle.

Skrip is involved with a an educational program called Advancing Nutrition and Dietary Outcomes. An overweight patient was referred to the program.

“When he first started, he had a lot of goals,” Skrip said. “He definitely wanted to lose weight but was unaware of the things he would need to do to accomplish that. But over the course of five visits, he made many changes to what he was eating, He no longer eats fast food (or orders) soda daily.

“He also started exercising three to four times a week and as a result he’s lost 30 pounds. He completed the program but now wants to lose 10 more on his own.”

The program does not rely totally on students. There are physicians who come regularly, translators and other providers who supplement the work of the students. “We have some primary care doctors,” said Nicole Krenitsky, a second-year medical student. “We have a number of physicians who are certified in internal medicine,” as well as advanced-practice nurses.

Haven Free Clinic reinforces the idea that health care is not one-way. By giving, the students receive benefits to carry with them through their careers.

“For all of us, the reason why we go to clinic on Saturday is we get something, too,” said Bobby Rosen, a second-year medical student. “That’s why I think relationship is really the right word. … You also benefit from forming a meaningful bond with someone in the community.

“Being a student for four years in a classroom can be removed from the impact that you really want to have as a health care provider,” Rosen said. “And I think going to clinic on Saturdays is what gives my life meaning in this moment and I’m so grateful to have that opportunity to do that.”

We’d like to hear about your ideas for stories about kindness: email them to Ed Stannard at estannard@nhregister.com or mail them to Ed Stannard, Kindness Project, New Haven Register, 40 Sargent Drive, New Haven, CT 06511.