Rates of obesity may be rising in the United States, but that doesn’t mean discrimination against overweight people has lessened much. In fact, a new appellate court case says it is perfectly okay to fire an employee for putting on weight.

21 cocktail waitresses employed at the Borgata casino in Atlantic City, N.J., sued their bosses for holding them to difficult weight standards. The casino maintained that all individuals applying for a server position are informed that they cannot increase their body weight by more than 7 percent from the time they are hired. Three judges agreed that the casino did not break any laws by holding their employees to these standards. The court believes that the rules on employee appearance are fair game since the scantily clad servers, known as “Borgata Babes,” are considered part of the casino’s brand.

The casino maintains that it has only actually fired two employees for breaking policy – one for gaining too much weight, and another for losing too much. According to the women who brought the lawsuit, however, many other servers were suspended without pay until they lost the weight and were forced to participate in frequent weigh-ins.

The prosecution hoped they might be able to make a case that the strict weight rules were gender discrimination in disguise. However, the judges disagreed since approximately one out of 20 “Borgata Babes” at the casino are men. Since the men are held to the same weight standards as the women, it’s harder to prove that the women are being discriminated against.

The case is not entirely settled, though. The court gave 11 of the women the go-ahead to pursue harassment claims against their employers for shaming them about their weight beyond reasonable disciplinary grounds. Allegedly, women who were pregnant or gained weight from a medical ailment were also harassed by management for their weight.

Regardless of the court’s decision, Borgata would be wise not to put so much pressure on its employees to drop pounds. Studies show that shaming people into losing weight most often results in those people gaining more weight.

Though all states have civil rights laws protecting Americans on the basis of their gender or race, only one state explicitly declares that employers cannot discriminate on the basis of weight: Michigan. If cases like this one coming out of Atlantic City continue, however, we might see more states consider making weight a protected class.

Certainly, there is evidence that overweight people are discriminated against in the workplace. Last year, a study showed that skinny women earn a lot more money for equal work than overweight women. While men are subject to some of this discrimination as well, it’s not nearly as significant as it is for women, confirming that we expect women to conform to certain standards of beauty, while overweight men get by better in the workplace.

As it stands, we’re still trying to convince many states of the importance of making laws that protect people from getting fired/not hired on the basis of their sexual orientations. Since fat shaming is perhaps even more acceptable in society than homophobia, my guess is we have a long way to go before biases against obese people are forbidden by law.

Photo credit: Thinkstock