Photo

LANDER, Wyo. — An insurrection is brewing here at Wyoming Catholic College, a tiny redoubt of cowboy-style Catholicism where students learn about horseback riding and Thomas Aquinas, and take grueling mountain hikes conducted entirely in Latin.

Citing concerns about federal rules on birth control and same-sex marriage, the school decided this winter to join a handful of other religious colleges in refusing to participate in the federal student-aid programs that help about two-thirds of students afford college. For students here, the decision means no federal loans, work-study money or grants to finance their annual $28,000 tuition, which includes housing in gender-segregated dorms and three meals in the school’s lone dining hall.

To the college’s leaders, rejecting government-backed aid was an expensive effort to defend against what they called growing government threats to religious freedoms. If you do not take the money, leaders argue, the government cannot tell you what to do.

“It allows us to practice our Catholic faith without qualifying it,” said Kevin Roberts, the college’s president, a Louisiana transplant who now wears a black cowboy hat to work in this town of 7,500. “It’s clear that this administration does not care about Catholic teaching.”

The young college, whose first students enrolled in 2007, has not yet been accredited, so its students do not qualify for federal loans and have been using private loans. But late last year the school reached a milestone toward becoming accredited, which could have led to access to funding from federal loan programs worth close to 20 percent of its $5 million budget. The vote by the school’s board was unanimous.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The move adds to a national debate over the boundaries between religious liberty and discrimination. Across the country, courts are judging faith-based objections to requirements that health insurance provide birth control and debating whether cake bakers and photographers have a right to refuse to cater to same-sex weddings.

While a few private colleges also decline federal dollars — examples include Christendom College in Virginia, Hillsdale College in Michigan and New St. Andrews College in Idaho — more than two dozen religious schools and universities are among the businesses and religious groups that have filed a fusillade of lawsuits challenging the birth-control coverage required under the Affordable Care Act.

Photo

Some have been encouraged by the Supreme Court’s decision last year to let Hobby Lobby, a private company, refuse to cover contraceptives under its health insurance for religious reasons. Others say they would like to stop taking federal student aid, but they balk at the cost and question whether it would provide any additional protections not already offered by the Constitution’s guarantees to freedom of religion.