After weeks of grueling training, 43 new Denver police officers are ready to patrol the city’s streets.

Their graduation ceremony Friday at the Denver Police Academy was a time to celebrate with friends and family before they begin breaking up fights and rescuing crime victims.

For David Abeyta Jr., a goal had been met.

As the son of a Denver police officer, Abeyta said he had wanted to follow in his father’s footsteps for “as long as I can remember.

“It’s been a goal for so long. I’m excited.”

When new Officer Ashley Botello strode across the stage to get her diploma, her fiancé Dat Truong shouted, “We love you, Ashley!”

Botello said she became a cop because she always wanted to serve the community where she grew up.

“I’m excited, but there also are just a little bit of nerves about going out on the streets,” she said.

Before the new officers were issued diplomas and took their oaths, they were reminded of the seriousness and importance of their jobs.

Denver Mayor Michael Hancock told the class they had been given something sacred — the public’s trust.

“Remind yourself every day of the trust people have placed in you,” Hancock said. “That badge means something to every one of us.”

Chief Robert White used his speech to instill his policing philosophy.

“The number one priority of a Denver police officer is to focus on the prevention of crime,” White said. “You will learn if the community knows you and trusts you, they will become your greatest asset in preventing crime.”

The new officers are needed in a department that has been stretched thin during the recession. It is just the third class in five years, so police commanders have been eager to bolster the ranks.

In 2008, the department had 1,540 officers; this year, it has about 1,326, according to a Denver auditor’s report released earlier this month. The fewer officers led to longer response times, the auditor said.

In 2013, Denver voters passed a tax increase that would, in part, fund more officers.

Noelle Phillips: 303-954-1661, nphillips@denverpost.com or twitter.com/Noelle_Phillips