The session in Raleigh has come to an end, and there is much positive news to report on.

Both Sen. Tom Apodaca and Rep. Chuck McGrady served as final budget negotiators for their respective chambers, and Henderson County should know the details of their work.

But before I get in to the specific issues, I want to point to the annual spectator sport of the press and the opposition party complaining about how long a legislative session is running. I say opposition party without naming the Democrats because the truth is that my party railed on them for sessions that ran long as well.

This year, the Republicans in Raleigh again controlled the House, Senate and governorship. The attack line says that with one-party rule all budgetary matters should be wrapped up on time with no continuing resolutions needed.

That, of course, ignores some obvious realities. The first, of course, is that even within one party there are often large disagreements over policy and priorities. One of the prices of democracy is messiness. All three elected branches in Raleigh are there to dig in for their priorities and then get the best deal possible.

The second perspective left out in this year’s press coverage and press releases from the N.C. Democratic Party was one of recent history. The fact is that this session did not run as late as numerous others in the past 20 years under all-Democratic control, including the modern era record year of 2001.

I remember the NCGOP hammering the Democrats for that in ’01. But I wasn’t terribly impressed by it as a line of attack then, and I’m still not now with the shoe on the other foot.

On to the issues:

• Medicaid overhaul: North Carolina has now joined a handful of other reform-minded states in moving Medicaid to a system based on patient health outcomes and not one based on how many visits a patient logs in.

It caps the amount of administrative costs the network administrators can bill for at an even lower level than Obamacare, which means that more Medicaid money will go to patient care.

Patients will now also have much more choice (as opposed to no choices!) in their provider. They will be able to choose to have their Medicaid run through one of the approved managed care groups or one of the hospital group provider networks.

The pushback from Raleigh Democrats on this was that letting managed care groups profit from managing Medicaid would harm patient care. This, of course, ignores the fact that payments will be tied to patient outcome.

It also ignores the fact that the current system has resulted in cost overruns and deficits for North Carolina’s Medicaid program for years. That is what costs people decent health care.

• School choice: This budget increases the number of low-income families who will be able to benefit from our Opportunity Scholarship Program by 500 percent. This is major progress as over 12,000 families applied to escape the schools that were failing their children just this past year. This is major, steady growth in a program that the poorest, mostly minority, families in our state strongly support.

This budget also reduced the red tape hurdles for disabled students to continue receiving vouchers to attend the school best suited for their special needs.

• Education funding: The budget increases overall K-12 funding by $410 million, increases starting teacher salaries from $33,000 to $35,000 (a commitment made by the governor last year), and gives a $750 bonus to every state employee.

It preserves classroom teacher assistants and continues North Carolina’s steady growth in overall education spending every year since Republican control began.

There is no graph that the N.C. Democratic Party can come up with anymore to pretend that we are not funding schools better than we were before the Bev Perdue days, but it’s amusing to watch them keep trying.

• Rainy day fund: This year saw a $400 million budget surplus thanks to several years of smart pro-growth tax policy and responsible spending. That is a $400 million hard-won surplus just a few years after Republicans had to go in after Perdue left our state broke, requiring draconian cuts in education, public safety and roads.

Democratic policy never saw a surplus it didn’t spend. To Democrats, a surplus was simply a policy tool to use to cover for their annual plundering of the Highway Trust Fund and other “saving accounts” so they could get headlines for increasing spending on popular programs.

When the ’08 recession hit, the voters saw that out state’s credit card was maxed out and there was no Plan B.

Republicans vowed to rebuild our rainy day fund, and to their credit they put the entire $400 million into that fund.

• Rural county sales tax distribution: North Carolina has long had a sales tax formula that unfairly benefited more populous counties over more rural ones. This budget fixes that.

Until now, sales taxes were given back to counties not based on population but rather on where the sale occurred. This has meant that 20 counties where lots of large malls exist (such as Buncombe) have received more in revenue than the other 80 counties where the people spending that money lived.

For Henderson County, this should mean $485,000 in added revenue next year that local leaders can use on the priorities of Henderson County’s voters.

Robert Danos is a Hendersonville resident and former spokesman for the 11th District NCGOP. Reach him at robertdanos@outlook.com.