Alto saxophonist and band leader Maceo Parker, best known for his association with the late James Brown, always promises his concerts will be “2 percent jazz, 98 percent funk.”

He not only delivered the groove on Friday at the Byham Theater but also threw in more jazz than might be expected as well as a couple of other surprises. While he and his five-piece band, not including two backup singers, continually laid it down, following his own mantra — “Make it funky!” — the show also downshifted with more than its share of more tender musical moments. Mr. Parker didn’t announce many of the titles of the songs, so I can only approximate some of them.

Mr. Parker played his horn with a clipped-note phrasing — very little, if anything, smooth — that befits the driving but controlled and well-paced R&B that he has always done. But he did more singing than playing. He had said that he learned a lot from working with Mr. Brown, and it was easy to see that.

At the end of many numbers, Mr. Parker said, “How about the band?” while sweeping toward the members. Keyboardist William Boulware, an absolute monster, did a lot of synthesized organ that recalled Tower of Power (Mr. Brown being one of that band’s influences). Bassist Rodney “Skeet” Curtis slapped his way through “Off the Hook” and added some double-stops in the process. Trombonist Greg Boyer regularly stretched into trumpet range, especially on “Just Gimme Some More,” though not always cleanly.

Probably the highlight of the show was background vocalist and Mr. Parker’s cousin Darlene Parker’s spirited rendition of Ben E. King’s “Stand by Me,” during which Mr. Parker also played some flute; they did a back-and-forth out of the same mike. Not far behind was a semi-instrumental version of “Let’s Get It On,” intended as a tribute to Marvin Gaye. Former SOS Band guitarist Bruno Speights added the flute/guitar lines to “Breezin.’ ” Trouble was that Mr. Speights’ lead line was inaudible, so you might not have recognized it right away.

I did mention jazz, did I not? Mr. Parker, generally accompanied by Mr. Boulware on “piano,” came up with a sped-up swing rendition of “Satin Doll” and, later, “Someone to Watch Over Me.” It might be worth his while to play an entire concert or album of just jazz. I think he can pull it off.

The show closed with the Brown classic “Pass the Peas,” which finally got everyone up, a line from Parliament’s “Flash Light” working its way in. But he made sure he got this phrase in throughout the evening: “We love you.”

Rick Nowlin: rnowlin@post-gazette.com or 412-263-3871.