Health news (Photo: Stock art)

Oregon is working on improving the rates of colorectal screening for people who are 50 and older (45 for African Americans), and lawmakers are looking to remove barriers to being screened.

In 2010, colorectal cancer was the third-most-common cancer diagnosed in Oregon and 645 people died from it.

But colorectal cancer can be prevented with good screening compliance. Screening can allow for removal of pre-cancerous polyps or early detection. At Stage 1, colorectal cancer has a 93 percent survival rate. The problem is that almost one-third of adults who are age-eligible are not up to date on their recommended screenings.

Frankly, colonoscopies are not fun. Because of the low screening rate, more than half of all colorectal cancers in Oregon are found at late stages. At Stage IV the survival rate is only 8 percent.

Another concern is that the screening rates are much lower in minority and immigrant populations. Among people who are uninsured, the screening rate is about 21 percent.

In the Oregon Public Health Division, a campaign has launched to encourage people to get screened.

Called “The Cancer You Can Prevent” campaign, Oregonians from across the state are sharing their stories in an effort to start a conversation about something few people want to talk about.

The campaign’s website features information about the cancer, screening options and insurance information.

Meanwhile in the Oregon Legislature on Monday, the Senate health care committee voted to approve a bill that would require health insurance companies to fully cover colonoscopies as a follow-up to a positive fecal test result.

Fecal tests, wherein patients mail in a small sample of their stool as a preliminary test, is an effective screening tool that is inexpensive and improves compliance rates, said Gloria Coronado, a senior investigator with Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research.

Coronado testified for the bill at the committee hearing Monday.

The fecal tests can rule out people who aren’t at risk for colon cancer, and can recommend colonoscopies to those who get abnormal fecal test results. Patients are much more likely to comply with follow-up colonoscopies based on the heightened risk to their health, Coronado said.

However, while insurance companies fully cover colonoscopies under the Affordable Care Act, when they are used as a follow-up to a fecal test, insurers don’t have to cover it as a preventive service. The bill, whose chief sponsor is Rep. Mitch Greenlick, D-Portland, would mandate Oregon insurers to do so.

Greenlick said the rule would actually save money for insurers, since more patients getting the fecal test would mean fewer colonscopies, which are more expensive.

House Bill 2560, which the House passed in March, now moves to the Senate floor.

syoo@StatesmanJournal.com, (503) 399-6673 or follow at Twitter.com/syoo.

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/1bMoLcJ