He has put students first. He deserves our support.

Buy Photo Superintendent Attila Weninger may be moving on, but some School Board members’ idea to go without a superintendent is a bad idea. (Photo: Stevens Point Journal Media file photo )Buy Photo

I am speaking as a member of the community but want to be transparent when addressing the public. I was just re-elected to the Stevens Point School Board, my 13th year. I am in no way speaking on behalf of the board but have considerable knowledge and experience and feel obligated to share some of it.

In the past 15 years I have worked with five superintendents as a community and School Board member. I have been part of the boards who hired four of them. As an elected official I took an oath of office to do my duty. I take that oath seriously and am as passionate about the oath as I am about serving our community. I believe I am obligated to help provide our students with every educational opportunity our community will support.

The School Board is about to undertake the task of looking for a new superintendent. Ask yourself this question: Why do superintendents keep leaving our district?

Christina Scott (Photo: Contributed)

We are blessed with many great things: our entire school district, schools, staff, parents, community and businesses. And this is a wonderful place to live. You need to think about this. After living the history of the school district, I believe we are losing one of the best Superintendents we have had, someone who has always put students first. I believe our students are excelling, our finances are in good shape and we finally have a systemic review of the district. Check the district website for our Consolidated Task Force. We are truly moving forward into a great future with many initiatives that will bring us much success in a number of ways. Many of the things our district now has came after our current superintendent was hired. And all of this through the turbulent times of Act 10.

At the last School Board meeting there was an unprecedented attendance of community and business leaders. For me, their undeniable support of our school district and the strides we have made in the last few years is beyond amazing. Along with that came a loud and thundering request for the Board to do whatever possible to retain the great leadership we currently have.

Story:Business leaders want Weninger to stay

Story:School Board considers going topless

Please ask to get copies of all the letters written to the Board on Superintendent Attila Weninger's behalf. I believe their support for Weninger and what he is doing to support our children and the community should be acknowledged.

Please look at the Board and district goals and objectives since 2010. The body of work attributed to him, our staff and the great leadership we have is truly inspirational. I cannot say thank you enough to these great people for their leadership in this community and for doing what was asked of them: showing up. They put themselves out there under the possibility of great scrutiny to show the board what great leaders look like.

As a community that cares greatly for all of our children, I am asking that you please get involved in the serious business of educating yourselves and your children. Get the facts. Their future depends on it.

Thanks to all who contributed to that meeting. Please stay connected for the success of our schools and community.

Christina Scott is a member of the Stevens Point School Board.

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1tGxfXm