SHARE Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin.

By of the

U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson said Friday that he made an "honest mistake" when he erroneously called South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley an "immigrant" during a radio interview.

"I just misspoke," Johnson said.

During a Wednesday interview with WLS radio in Chicago, Johnson praised Haley's response to President Barack Obama's State of the Union address.

When asked by the program host if Haley might receive some angry tweets from presidential candidate Donald Trump, Johnson said, "Let's face it: No two people agree on everything. And Governor Haley is an immigrant. She has powerful stories of being an immigrant and experiencing discrimination herself. And so she's obviously gonna react different to somebody who's never experienced that. I tend to align myself more with Governor Haley's comments on the issue."

Haley was born in South Carolina. Her parents are immigrants from India. Johnson's comments were first reported by BuzzFeed.

Johnson was in Milwaukee on Friday to discuss health care during a meeting with members of the Metropolitan Milwaukee Assocation of Commerce. Johnson favors the repeal of the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, in favor of a health care system that injects more "free-market discipline."

"I'm not saying every word of Obamacare is awful," Johnson said.

Johnson is running for re-election in a rematch race against former U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold. The first time they faced each other in 2010, Johnson announced his candidacy about eight months before the general election. The current contest has already been underway for months.

A November Marquette University Law School Poll of 803 registered voters showed Feingold with 49% support and Johnson with 38%. More than a third of voters surveyed were unable to rate Johnson on whether they held a favorable or unfavorable view of him.

"Why does a pretty good chunk of Wisconsin not know enough about me to have an opinion? I view it as an opportunity but it's also easily explainable," Johnson said. He indicated voters have paid intense attention to other political figures, including Gov. Scott Walker, who won a recall election and then re-election to a second term, and House Speaker Paul Ryan, the Janesville congressman who was the GOP vice presidential candidate in 2012.

Johnson said he has worked hard to get around the state to talk with constituents and explain his positions.

"I've put myself out there," he said. "I've certainly honored the two promises I've made: always tell you the truth: never vote with my re-election in mind."