COEUR D’ALENE, Idaho (AP) - Law enforcement officials in northern Idaho are worried local vape shops may be violating the state’s strict anti-marijuana laws by selling oil derived from cannabis plants.

The oil is a non-psychotropic extract, meaning users are unable to get high using the product, the Coeur d’Alene Press reported (http://bit.ly/1gQk4BT ).

Robert Gamble, co-owner of Best Ave. Vapor Store in Coeur d’Alene, said he uses the oil to help relax his back muscles, while other customers use it to prevent seizures and reduce nausea.

“Through word of mouth,” he said, “it has caught on pretty quickly.”

Post Falls Police Chief Scott Haug said the oil is illegal under Idaho law, however, because it comes from a marijuana plant. But Haug added that law enforcement agencies tend to focus on large-scale drug busts rather than possible cannabis oil use.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration hasn’t approved cannabis oil for medical use, meaning vape shops are selling an unregulated product that could end up harming a customer, said Rusty Payne, a spokesman for the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration.

Gov. C. L. “Butch” Otter vetoed legislation earlier this year that would have decriminalized cannabis extract oil without loosening Idaho’s marijuana laws.

The veto was a blow to advocates pushing legalization, particularly for families who argue the oil can be used to reduce the amount and duration of seizures in children with epilepsy.

After vetoing the bill, Otter issued an executive order directing the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare to study and possibly implement an expanded access program that would help children with treatment-resistant epilepsy.

Twelve states have legalized the oil while they still ban medical marijuana.

___

This story has been corrected to show that the governor did issue an executive order regarding a possible expanded access program for treatment-resistant epilepsy.

___

Information from: Coeur d’Alene Press, http://www.cdapress.com