ARLINGTON, Texas — Blake Shelton may be going into the Academy of Country Music Awards as a host, performer and two-time nominee, but he has another priority: being a cheerleader.

Shelton's wife, fiery country star Miranda Lambert, is the top contender with eight nominations, including the coveted entertainer of the year — an award she has yet to win.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

"It needs to happen. It's imperative that it happens. Girls having the tough time that they're having right now at radio, it's not good for any of us. Especially somebody like Miranda — I think she deserves entertainer of the year," he said in an interview Friday after rehearsing at the AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas.

"Not only will that be important for the industry, it's just freakin' right. It's just the right call," he added.

Lambert's nominations include album of the year for "Platinum" and song and single record of the year for her hit, "Automatic." She won the Grammy for best country album in February and she cleaned house at the Country Music Association Awards in November, winning four awards.

"I'm just thankful because I couldn't have dreamed this in a million years," Lambert said in an interview. "You dream of singing music that moves people and you hope that they love it, and then you get to a place like this."

Lambert said she would love to take home entertainer of the year — though she already feels victorious.

"Obviously entertainer of the year is a huge deal, but I feel like I won by being in the category already," she said.

Lambert is the sole female nominated for the top prize Sunday — a trend repeated in other categories. Co-host Luke Bryan, Garth Brooks, Jason Aldean and Florida Georgia Line are also up for the fan-voted entertainer of the year.

Lambert, still, is expected to go home with a few wins: She will likely take home her sixth consecutive win for female vocalist of the year, and she's one of seven recipients of the 50th Anniversary Milestone Award. Others include Brooks, George Strait, Reba McEntire, Kenny Chesney, Brooks & Dunn and Taylor Swift — helping the ACMs celebrate its 50th year in a big way.

Swift won't be the only pop star in the building: Christina Aguilera will perform with Rascal Flatts, Nick Jonas will join Dan + Shay onstage and Kelly Clarkson will present an award.

The awards show, held in Las Vegas for over a decade, has transformed the Dallas Cowboys' six-year-old stadium to mark its anniversary. The show will feature 23 performances across two stages, and presenters include Troy Aikman, Tony Romo, Reese Witherspoon, Sofia Vergara and Steven Tyler, who is recording a country album.

"I literally grew up 80 miles east from here, so I feel like Texas is a great place to bring this many people for this reason because we are very welcoming and all about hospitality," Lambert said.

Lambert is among the performers, which also include Brooks, Bryan, Aldean, McEntire, Strait, Lady Antebellum, Eric Church, Keith Urban, Florida Georgia Line and Sam Hunt, the new artist of the year nominee with the current No. 1 song on the country charts with "Take Your Time."

Dierks Bentley, who follows Lambert with seven nominations, will also perform. Bentley was left out of entertainer of the year, but his nominations include album of the year for "Riser," song of the year for "I Hold On," single record of the year for "Drunk On a Plane" and male vocalist of the year, where he will compete Shelton and Bryan.

The comedic duo of Shelton and Bryan are returning as hosts for a third year. "The Voice" coach said he won't get nervous until minutes before the show begins.

"I can roll my eyes thinking about it right now, but Sunday night when it gets to be that 2-minute warning, I know I will be like ... 'I really got to do this,'" he said.