Cook County Obamacare enrollees this year were largely white, younger than 45 and favored so-called silver plans, which are tied to government aid to help buy health insurance.

The snapshot is part of county-level data the federal government released today that sheds new light on enrollees who chose plans on HealthCare.gov. The information covers the second year of open enrollment and a special enrollment period, spanning Nov. 15 to Feb. 22. It also only contains health plans sold to consumers in 37 states, including Illinois, at HealthCare.gov.

The new data for the first time break down by county the age, racial makeup and types of plans consumers bought, among other facts. Still missing are which health plans consumers picked, such as one by Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois or one by relative newcomer Chicago-based Land of Lincoln Health. That would offer a glimpse into how well they performed.

There's a strong public interest in knowing which carriers are doing well and which ones are struggling, said Sabrina Corlette, an expert on health care reform at the Center on Health Insurance Reforms in Washington, D.C. Their performance also could have an impact on pricing.

“Consumers and policymakers have an interest in having a robust, competitive marketplace,” she said. “If you have a carrier with 98 percent of the market, that's not a robust competitive market and it would be good to know that and think about what could we do to encourage more competition.”

Some Illinois health plans have been forthcoming about their enrollment figures. Land of Lincoln, which launched in 2013 with federal loans under the Affordable Care Act, has said its enrollment this year surpassed 50,000. That far exceeds its first-year performance, when Land of Lincoln captured just 2 percent of the exchange.

Chicago-based Blue Cross captured 92 percent of the market in Illinois last year. The company is not releasing enrollment figures for 2015 because the enrollment season was different from last year, Blue Cross spokeswoman Lauren Perlstein said in an email.

“As always, our main goal is to provide access to health care to as many people as possible and we are honored so many people across all of our states chose to enroll in our plans,” she said in the email.

A spokeswoman for the federal Centers for Health and Human Services did not provide comment. A spokesman for Get Covered Illinois, the state exchange, did not return a message to comment.

In Illinois, 349,467 enrollees signed up for plans at HealthCare.gov during the second year of the exchange. Of those, about half are new to the exchange, 21 percent renewed their plans and the remaining 29 percent were automatically re-enrolled, according to a Crain's analysis of the new federal data.

In Cook County, the largest county by population in the state, so-called “young invincibles” ages 18 to 34 made up 31 percent of the Illinois exchange. This group is considered key to balancing out the older, sicker exchange enrollees. Enrollees up to 44 years old made up 54 percent of the marketplace.

The largest age group of enrollees in Cook County, where 157,223 plans were sold this year, were ages 55 to 64, representing a quarter of the exchange.

Racially, 41 percent of Cook County enrollees are white and about 10 percent each are black, Latino or Asian. The race of about 29 percent of enrollees is unknown.

Of the plans sold, the most popular were silver plans, which represented 59 percent of the total, followed by bronze (27 percent); gold (11 percent); platinum (2 percent); and catastrophic (1 percent).