LITTLE ROCK — Democrat Dianne Curry of Little Rock announced Wednesday she will run for the 2nd District congressional seat currently held by first-term Republican Rep. French Hill of Little Rock.

A Malvern native, Curry was elected to the Little Rock School Board in 2006 and served three terms. She retired from state government after 27 years of service in education and the public audit of banks.

She was appointed to the Arkansas Division of Volunteerism by former Gov. Mike Huckabee and reappointed by Gov. Mike Beebe.

The 61-year-old Curry now works with small-business owners and families as a tax consultant.

In 2013, she announced plans to run for lieutenant governor, but she later said she would not seek the office so Democrats could unite behind John Burkhalter, who won the nomination and went on to lose in the November 2014 election to Republican Tim Griffin.

After deciding not to run for lieutenant governor, Curry considered running as a 2014 candidate for the 2nd District congressional seat but ultimately chose not to.

Curry said in an interview Wednesday, “A lot of the constituency and people that I know that have been supportive of me over the last 10 years, almost, said that, ‘We’d like to see you continue to be an advocate for the people in our community.’”

She said her campaign issues will include ensuring that all have access to quality educational opportunities, “whether they’re public or charter”; preserving Social Security; creating economic stability and jobs; and keeping the Affordable Care Act in place.

“The Affordable Care Act has been a good thing, I feel, for our nation and our state,” she said. “People that never had access to health care have been now able to have health care. A more healthy America and a more healthy Arkansas is definitely a plus for us.”

Hill supports repealing the law.

Curry said she will work hard to energize voters.

“I know it’s going to need a lot of mobilization to get people back to the polls to vote. A lot of people didn’t vote in the last election,” she said.

No other Democrats have announced for the 2nd District seat.