Sioux Falls, SD

One of the biggest issues with this recent bust is that Jennifer Darger was licensed by the city and state, even though she has a criminal record. In 2006 she pleaded guilty to drug charges.

In February of last year Jennifer Darger started her in-home day care. Following city ordinance, she had a pre-opening inspection and a random inspection in May. She passed both.

"From the time she started until now she has had no citations or anything," said Todd Rhinehart, Environmental Health Specialist/Code Enforcement.

But that clean record doesn't go back terribly far. Eight years ago, Darger pleaded guilty to felony drug charges, but that didn't stop her from being licensed to run an in-home day care.

"City and state ordinances only require us to check back five years. So if it's prior to that we would have no record of it," said Rhinehart.

"The law delineates the types of criminal convictions that would prohibit a person from working or residing in a regulated child care program," said Carroll Forsch, Assistant Director of Child Care Services, S.D. Dept. Of Social Services.

The city and state only checks for felonies in the last five years, not misdemeanors.

So what does it take to be licensed with Sioux Falls?

"They comply with all the regulations with kids. They have to keep it under 12, stay within ratios for kids under 4. In order to get checked they have to complete a background check. An abuse and neglect check. We do a sex offender check and then they have to have First Aid and CPR," said Rhinehart.

If Darger is found guilty, she may not be allowed to open another day care again.

Decisions at the state and city levels are made with a child's safety in mind.

"If the provider was substantially out of compliance with the regulations, situations are reviewed on a case by case basis," said Forsch.

"We look at everyone that comes in and if there's any question we do discuss it amongst the peers and make decisions at that point," said Rhinehart.

The Sioux Falls Health Department has revoked Darger's license, pending the ongoing investigation.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.