In New York City, noncitizens are four times more likely than citizens to lack health insurance — but not enough immigrants are signing up for the state’s exchange under Obamacare, advocates worry.

“We know that there are cultural and linguistic barriers, and also there’s a lot of apprehension among immigrants about accessing health insurance,” said Jackie Vimo of the New York Immigration Coalition.

“New York didn’t even translate their website into Spanish.”

Rebecca Jackson, a staffer at the state’s health care marketplace, NY State of Health, said a translation is in the works but the agency doesn’t have a roll-out date yet.

More than half a million people had enrolled in New York’s exchange as of March 4, but the state hasn’t released a breakdown of ethnic or racial characteristics. The last day of open enrollment for individuals under the Affordable Care Act is March 31.

Vimo estimates that 83% of the city’s immigrants are eligible to sign up for the state exchange.

“We know anecdotally from the calls we are getting that the message hasn’t gotten out there,” Vimo said. “This is not just an immigration issue, this is a bottom line issue … What makes an exchange work is having as many people participate as possible.”

Many immigrants without citizenship or green cards are eligible for Affordable Care Act plans and could face IRS fines if they remain uninsured. (Win McNamee/Getty Images)

Palestinian immigrant Maha Attieh, a health program manager at Brooklyn’s Arab-American Family Support Center, has been working for months as an Obamacare “navigator” or in-person counselor.

One of the fellow immigrants she helped sign up was her husband — who had gone two years without insurance, Attieh said.

“I tell people that health insurance, you need it. It’s the law now,” she said. “They are learning about it by word of mouth.”

Navigating the exchange can be confusing — even if English is a person’s first language.

Affordable Care Act plans are not limited to U.S. citizens or green card holders. Many immigrants who have temporary permission to be here — such as protected status after a natural disaster in their homeland or U visas after being the victim of a crime — also can qualify and face fines from the IRS if they remain uninsured.

While undocumented immigrants are not eligible, their U.S.-born kids are — and Immigration and Customs Enforcement released a special memo last October explaining it will not use any information people provide to the government to determine whether they or family members can get coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

Vimo says it's vital to maximize numbers signing up to the state's exchange, so immigrants must be brought up to speed. (Ken Murray/NEW YORK DAILY NEWS)

Young immigrants who got work permits and Social Security cards through the Obama administration’s special deferred-action-for-childhood-arrivals program are specifically barred from participating. In New York State, however, they may be eligible for Medicaid, depending on income, Vimo said.

Even if the state is able to boost the number of eligible immigrants signing up to its exchange, the relatively high number of undocumented New Yorkers who can’t sign up will have a big impact on local public hospitals — which are facing cuts in federal Medicaid charity-care reimbursements.

The cuts were set up because Obamacare aims to sharply reduce the number of uninsured, making public hospitals less likely to get stuck paying for those without insurance. That reasoning falls short in cities like New York, where there are an estimated 625,000 undocumented immigrants.

Delaida Garcia, 37, an undocumented Mexican immigrant, attended a Brooklyn town hall meeting about health reform earlier this month — hoping to find an option for herself and her husband.

“I wasn’t sure where to look or if I could apply for something. It’s still really important to look for information and help,” said Garcia. “We would really like to get insurance, so I’m hoping in the future that the opportunity will be there.”

epearson@nydailynews.com