<p>Darrin Phegley / Courier & Press The Right to Life of Southwest Indiana's spring banquet at Old National Events Plaza Tuesday night, April 7, 2015.</p>

By Zach Evans

Famed neurosurgeon Ben Carson told an audience of 2,600 Tuesday night in Downtown Evansville about a mother who was 33 weeks pregnant and considering an abortion at the advice of her doctor.

The fetus had hydrocephalus, or water on the brain. Carson, now retired at 63, said he explained to the woman the alternatives to abortion.

“The baby was born,” he said during Right to Life of Southwest Indiana’s spring banquet at the Old National Events Plaza. “At 33 weeks, the baby could’ve been born then and been OK,” he said.

But some in the country would have the baby aborted, he said.

“That’s the kind of mentality that exists in the country,” he said. “How can anybody claim that’s a meaningless mass of cells?”

Carson was the keynote speaker for the annual event, which serves a fundraiser for the anti-abortion organization. According to the group, it’s the largest Right to Life gathering in the nation.

Carson said education is key in battling abortion.

“They tell them (young women) their lives are ruined and that abortion is their only option. There are alternatives that are positive,” he said.

“The more we begin to educate people the more people will understand pro-life,” he said.

But Carson, who wrote a popular op-ed piece for the Washington Times voicing his stance against abortion, focused little on abortion issues during his 45-minute speech Tuesday.

Carson, who was the first surgeon to successfully separate conjoined twins at the head while still in the womb, talked mostly of his life story — tales of growing up in poverty and facing adversity.

Considered to be a prospective presidential candidate for the Republican Party, Carson’s speech included references to ISIS, the Founding Fathers, Indiana’s religious freedom law and his opposition to the Affordable Care Act.

Carson told the audience it was up to the people to change the course of the country.

“Courage is what we really need in our nation at this juncture. We’re at a precipice in terms of what kind of nation we’re going to be,” he said.

Leading up to his speech, Right to Life officials toted supposed successes within the last year, including the shuttering of three Planned Parenthoods in Indiana and the reduction in open hours at the Evansville location.

Mary Ellen Van Dyke, the executive director of the local organization, said 80 percent of money raised by Right to Life goes toward education.

According to the group’s most recent nonprofit tax filing, it raised $290,000 in 2013.