Urgent:

Do You Support Chris Christie for the GOP Nomination? Vote Here Now

Urgent:

Who Should the GOP Nominate in 2016? Vote Here Now

Vote Now:

Which Potential GOP Candidate Would You Support in 2016?

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz is a Tea Party candidate who has a good shot at being a 2016 presidential contender, coming from a strong conservative position that allies him with key GOP players.Cruz, for instance, is tied strongly to Iowa Rep. Steve King, who chairs the Conservative Opportunity Society, a group that has met for decades to push a conservative platform. King’s support will be key in 2016, and the National Journal said Cruz has the “inside track” to get it. The American Conservative tagged Cruz as the frontrunner for the GOP in 2016, calling him a “performative marvel” when it comes to speechmaking. “He manages to strike some sort of preternatural balance between fiery Southern Baptist sermon and stand-up comedy routine, invariably bringing crowds to their feet,” the group wrote. “In the era of the tweet-sized soundbite, Ted Cruz’s mastery of the one-liner and the pun are not trivial; they are integral to his success.”Well-spoken or not, charismatic or not, a presidential contender must stand on the issues. Here are six key political positions that are likely to be part of Cruz’s platform:1. Healthcare – Cruz talked for 21 hours and 19 minutes against Obamacare in 2013, reading from “Green Eggs and Ham” and speaking like Darth Vader. It wasn’t really a filibuster because he wasn’t really blocking anything — and he ended up voting to pass the spending bill — but it was a tactic that received support from many conservatives pushing to stop funding of the Affordable Care Act. A year later, Cruz was leading the group that wanted to repeal Obamacare, although conservative support is waning with disagreement on how that can be done.2. Global warming/climate change – In February 2014, Cruz told CNN he’s not sure global warming is real . He made the comment right before introducing an energy plan, which included GOP-supported ideas that include additional oil drilling and repeal of numerous EPA regulations. In October, Cruz told USA Today the Top 10 issues facing Republicans , and in the No. 1 spot he put "pro-jobs, growth agenda" that included embracing an energy Renaissance.3. Secure the border, halt amnesty – Cruz has “shaped the Republican view of immigration reform,” The Hill said , and is leading the charge to oppose immigration reform bills. But in December 2014, Cruz’s aggressive stance on immigration reform was frustrating some conservative Republicans, who while still agreeing with the concept believe Cruz’s approach is counter-productive. "Congress should stand up and use the power of the purse to say: we will fund the government, we will fund the operation of the federal government, but we will not allocate taxpayer dollars to lawless and illegal amnesty,” Cruz said earlier in the month.4. Rein in government spending, stop the government from overstepping its bounds – Cruz has been an outspoken advocate of stopping the Internal Revenue Service from targeting conservative groups for audits. He continues to push for more investigation into the issue and is also fighting proposed IRS rules that he said would limit free speech of such groups. In his top issue choices for USA Today, Cruz highlighted several that fall in this category: pass a balanced budget, rein in judicial activism, stop a corruption culture of crony capitalists, and pass tax reform to make “taxes flatter, simpler, and fairer.”5. Cruz called school choice, meaning the expansion of charter schools, the “most compelling civil rights issue of the 21st century,” CNN reported . "When it comes to civil rights, I think there is no civil right more important than the right of every child to access a quality education," Cruz said. "And in my view, the most compelling civil rights issue of the 21st century is the the need to expand school choice and educational options so that every child, regardless of race ... has a fair opportunity to receive an excellent education."6. Pro-Israel stance: In September 2014, Cruz was booed off the stage as keynote speaker for the In Defense of Christianity conference when he espoused pro-Israel and pro-Jewish views. Cruz will be honored in 2015 by the Zionist Organization of America for his pro-Israel stance.