Bad weather is dangerous for men and women slopestyle skiers and snowboarders. But the lighter women, who fight to maintain essential speed to clear big jumps, are especially at risk on courses with only one take-off jump. Those single lips are big, designed mostly to hurl speedy men into the sky so they can spin as many as four times while flipping two or three times.

Copper Mountain’s slopestyle course offered both large and smaller take-offs, unlike Breckenridge’s Dew Tour slopestyle course or the X Games slopestyle course at Aspen’s Buttermilk ski area.

And on Saturday’s snowy contest at Copper Mountain’s Grand Prix, the skiing men struggled to make the transition of the final hit on the last jump of the course, while the women easily cleared the knuckle from the smaller take-off.

“Every course should have a big and a little side for anytime weather like this happens. We should always have the option for hitting a jump you can actually clear,” said slopestyle veteran Grete Eliassen, who took third in the women’s slopestyle course behind Canadian winner Dara Howell and fellow U.S. Freeskiing teammate Darian Stevens.

A separate slopestyle course for women is a hot topic. Many female skiers and snowboarders feel a small course reduces their legitimacy. The topic broils every season, especially after contests riddled with injured female athletes. But many agree that separate take-offs – closer to the landing – are a happy medium.

“It’s not the size of the jump, it’s how it’s built. Guys are doing doubles and triples but we don’t need that much pop, we need to go farther versus higher. So if you want to build a different course, build a different lip. We don’t need that much air,” said Ashley Battersby last month as she trained for her comeback from a knee injury she sustained during slopestyle competition at the Aspen X Games in January.

The Sochi Olympic slopestyle course features both big and smaller take-off lips, which are good for both men and women when fresh snow slows skis and snowboards or low visibility hinders airtime or high winds alter trajectories.

“You saw the boys today, they were struggling off the big jumps and us girls said let’s just hit the right side and we could hit all the tricks we wanted to,” said Eliassen. “It’s just safe. No girls got hurt today because we had that option.”