The Oregon Firearms Federation -- which bills itself as "Oregon's only no compromise gun lobby" -- has endorsed state Republican Jason Conger in the U.S. Senate race.

The endorsement gives Conger, a state representative from Bend, additional inroads with pro-gun activists while also raising an issue that his chief Republican rival -- Portland pediatrician Monica Wehby -- has sought to dismiss.

Kevin Starrett, director of the firearms federation, and the Conger campaign both sought to tie Wehby to pro-gun control positions taken by the American Medical Association. Wehby served on the board from 2011 to 2013 and was in the group's House of Delegates for several years before that.

"She says she was there to be a change agent and I didn't see any change" with the AMA, said Starrett, calling the group "hard-core anti-gun."





"The suggestion that Dr. Monica Wehby is somehow anti-gun because she sat on the board at the AMA is laughable. Dr. Wehby was elected as a conservative change agent in opposition to the AMA's support of Obamacare. She was universally known as someone who always fought for her conservative beliefs even if the more liberal members of that organization opposed her. Furthermore, her experience at the AMA has been focused on matters of health policy, in which she is an expert, not on gun control. Dr. Wehby is a strong supporter of the 2nd Amendment. Any accusation to the contrary is like claiming that Mitch McConnell is a supporter of Obamacare because he sits in a chamber that at one time voted for it."

Charlie Pearce, Wehby's campaign manager, responded with a statement arguing that it was unfair to tie her to the association's stand on guns.The medical association has long supported a variety of measures calling for tougher restrictions on guns. In 2013, the association joined several other medical societies in writing President Barack Obama to say that renewing and strengthening "the assault weapons ban, including banning high-capacity magazines, would be a step in the right direction."

The association's chief executive also said in a letter to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., that the organization also supported expanding background checks for gun purchasers.

-- Jeff Mapes