Nine-year-old Chrissy loves her little sister, Amanda. They used to play with building blocks in their grandparents’ living room in Justin before disease took away Chrissy’s use of her legs.

Amanda, who is 4, looks like a younger version of Chrissy. She has the same short, extremely curly brown hair and golden-brown eyes.

But like most sisters, they’re also quite different. Amanda is a little more headstrong and a “real fighter,” her grandfather Steve Grube says, but Chrissy is a good big sister and keeps her out of trouble. They play well together, and often say “I love you” or hug each other.

Chrissy’s favorite thing to do is play with her Shopkins — tiny toy food items with personalities — and her Disney princess and Monster High dolls. She likes to pretend her dolls are out shopping and when they return home, their food begins to talk to them.

Amanda likes to look at bugs, play with dolls and act silly. She’ll often get things her older sister can’t reach and bring them to her, and she encourages Chrissy when she’s accomplished something physical.

They love each other like only sisters can.

And they both suffer from giant axonal neuropathy, or GAN, a rare, terminal genetic disorder that takes away the ability to walk, grab, eat and, eventually, breathe. It usually results in an early death.

Although the sisters share the same genetic mutation, every person is different, and every personality is different. Amanda doesn’t limp like her sister once did — the first symptom Chrissy exhibited — but she does fall more often than expected. When Amanda runs, her toes drag and eventually she’ll trip, said her grandfather, a retired Ponder police chief.

At 4 years old, Amanda can still climb, and she can still jump. She’s trying to learn how to ride a tricycle, which her older sister couldn’t do because her legs were too weak to push the pedals.

But by December 2011 — about two years after Chrissy’s diagnosis — Amanda had lost reflexes in her legs just like Chrissy.

Diagnosis

It took five months to get Amanda’s diagnosis. Doctors sent her bloodwork for gene mapping at a lab in Germany, where scientists discovered markers similar to what had been found in her older sister’s blood.

Both girls tested positive for the disease. First Chrissy, and then Amanda.

“My genes had helped kill my reasons for living,” said the girls’ father, Steven Grube. “I fell to my knees and cried for God to take me instead. I still wake crying after dreams where I’m standing over their graves.”

Chrissy knows her little sister suffers from the same disease that afflicts her. She grieves about what could happen down the road for her if no treatment is found.

She asks her daddy, “Do I need to tell Amanda? Do I need to warn her?” He’ll respond, “Well, would it help her? Would she feel any better?”

But they haven’t really talked to Amanda about it. She’s just too young to understand.

“Amanda does express frustration when she gets tired or trips and falls,” said her mother, Katherine. “She’s starting to realize that something is wrong with her.”

“Right now, all you can do is treat the symptoms with physical therapy, try to keep their muscles strong,” said Steve.

“[The disease] is going pretty fast,” said Patsy Grube, the girls’ grandmother. “You’ll think she’s kind of stable for a while, and you’ll go, ‘OK, we can deal with this.’ And then it will …” She trailed off without finishing the sentence.

Last December, Chrissy could still hold onto her walker in her leg braces and walk. But she can’t do that now. She’s not even using her braces anymore. Her family used to be able to help her stand up, and she could hold on and stand there while being undressed or going to the bathroom, but now her legs are too weak.

“I found pictures of her when she was Amanda’s age,” said her mother, “and she was in dance and still in the early stages. It was before we knew that [the disease] would take her away from us. I still have hope for her, but just the last year, she could still stand. But now it takes two people to move her out of her [wheelchair].”

Amanda and Chrissy’s parents are divorced. Steven, a pediatrician, is remarried and works for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Maryland. The couple bought a house next door to Chrissy’s best friend. Katherine lives with her boyfriend in Maryland and alternates weekly care of the children with their father.

Every other week, Steve and Patsy travel 1,400 miles from Denton County to Maryland to help care for Chrissy and Amanda while their parents work.

The family often hosts cookouts in the backyard with Chrissy’s best friend. They roast marshmallows and hot dogs.

“Our goal, and I think our son’s goal, is for every day be a happy day,” Patsy said. “So we’re always upbeat and cheerful. It’s kind of hard because sometimes kids will stare or are kind of afraid.

“But mentally, she’s in the fourth grade,” Patsy said of Chrissy. “She reads like crazy. She’s smart. She knows things. It’s sad to see her cry because she can’t run and play.”

In the mornings, Chrissy gets up and takes a breathing treatment. She must now use a wheelchair, and she wears a body brace to keep her spine from curving. She can still sit up by herself, but she’s lost her fine motor skills.

“It just went like that,” said Patsy, shaking her head.

“If only [God] would let me trade places with them and take their suffering onto myself,” said their father, Steven. “Of course, he’s not answered my prayers, and daily I watch the sweetest children ever placed on this earth struggle just to live the best lives they can.

“You can’t imagine the feeling as a parent that your genes caused the pain your children are forced to endure, and you are powerless to ease their suffering except in the most superficial ways.”

Finding hope

Not long after their diagnoses, Steven took the girls to Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore because he realized it is equipped to help them. One of the world’s leading experts on giant axonal neuropathy, Dr. Thomas Crawford, works at the hospital.

It was also close to the National Institutes of Health, which will run a clinical trial for a new gene delivery drug as soon as researchers get final approval to move forward with human testing. They hope the treatment can halt the disease’s progression.

“The only hope my girls have for life are experimental genetic therapies whose true safety and effectiveness we will never know until it’s inside their body,” said Steven. “It’s the only hope there is, and yet it terrifies me that the very thing that could cure them could also kill them.”

Through the charity Hannah’s Hope Fund, the family also learned about another researcher, Dr. Steven Gray of the University of North Carolina, who is developing a new gene-delivery treatment at the National Institutes of Health.

Katherine found Hannah’s Hope online when the family was still waiting on Chrissy’s test results. In 2011, Steve and Patsy flew to New York after their granddaughter’s diagnosis to meet charity founders Lori and Matt Sames. They wanted to learn more about GAN and what they could do to help Chrissy and Amanda, as well as other children suffering from the disease, by starting a nonprofit to raise money and awareness.

The Sameses founded Hannah’s Hope after their youngest daughter, Hannah, was diagnosed with GAN. The nonprofit’s mission is to raise funds for treatment and eventual cure of the deadly disease.

At the time of their daughter’s diagnosis, Lori had found only one scientist in the world, Dr. Pascale Bomont in France, actively studying GAN. But then parents of other children who suffered from GAN began to contact her and Matt.

Steve and Patsy met Matt Sames at a restaurant. When he got out of the car, they embraced and wept. They spent several hours discussing Hannah, GAN and the research Gray was conducting.

The next morning, Steve and Patsy went to Matt and Lori’s home. They were taken to the basement — referred to as the “war room” — where a huge wall poster mapped out their grassroots plan to contact people about GAN and listed events they could hold like fun runs, bike races and pancake breakfasts to raise funds for Gray’s research.

Steve and Patsy also met Hannah, who is about the same age as Chrissy. She was not as extroverted as Chrissy, who is very talkative, even with strangers, often telling other children with disabilities that she feels for them.

Hannah had tight, curly brown hair — extremely kinky hair is a characteristic of GAN — and golden-brown eyes like Chrissy. But she could still walk and move her toes. She felt comfortable around the strangers from Texas and even crawled into Steve’s lap while they visited.

“It was like looking at Chrissy in the mirror,” Steve said.

Matt and Lori suggested they organize their own charity so that donated money would be tax-deductible. They agreed. They created Fight for Chrissy and gained approval from the IRS as a nonprofit organization in about six weeks.

“That was a miracle,” said Steve.

Some of the money Steve and Patsy raise goes to Hannah’s Hope to help with research for a cure. Some goes to kids who suffer from GAN and might need things such as walkers, wheelchairs and ramps. They also need a van with a wheelchair ramp for Chrissy.

Matt and Lori also told the Grubes about the Hope and Love Ball that Hannah’s Hope holds each February, raising more than $100,000 each year for research. More funding will allow doctors to make any new treatment available to all children suffering from GAN.

In 2012, Steve, Patsy and Steven took Chrissy and Amanda to the ball, where the girls met Hannah for the first time.

“It was amazing for these kids to be able to relate to each other,” said Steve. “Seeing someone with the same disease seemed to help them both.”

A possible cure

Today, scientists at the Gene Therapy Center at the University of North Carolina are working with Hannah’s Hope to create a investigational new drug to treat GAN, and they’re hoping to begin Phase 1 of the trial later this year.

They hope the gene-delivery treatment rescues the nerves by delivering a healthy copy of the GAN gene, according to the Hannah’s Hope website. The “viral vector delivery truck” that scientists are using is adeno-associated virus serotype 9. It’s a one-time injection, and they’re currently researching longevity studies to assess whether a subsequent injection is needed.

On Jan. 26, 2012, Gray and his scientists held a pre-investigational new drug meeting with the Food and Drug Administration, which guided them toward their clinical trials.

“Steve [Gray] brings the human component to the research,” said Lori Sames when introducing him at the Hannah’s Hope ball in 2011.

Gray said that when the Sameses first approached him in 2009, they asked for something that no one else had done: to treat the entire spinal cord and replace a gene.

“People had been trying to treat ALS with millions and millions of dollars invested,” he told attendees at the ball. GAN is sometimes referred to as the children’s version of ALS, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

But in a short time, with the resources that Hannah’s Hope was able to provide, researchers now have what they think is a therapy for GAN.

“This has been the most inspiring work I’ve ever done,” Gray said. “This gives me the drive and a passion that I haven’t felt before.”

But gaining approval from the FDA has been a long, hard road.

“Time is definitely critical,” said Lori. “The regulatory process, it’s inflated. There’s no urgency.”

In October 2013, Gray and his team were ready to move forward with the gene delivery. They just needed final approval, and then came the federal government shutdown because of a funding gap created when Congress failed to agree to an appropriations continuing resolution because lawmakers were battling over the Affordable Care Act.

Chrissy and Amanda’s family was beyond frustration.

“We were so close,” said Katherine, who continues to watch her daughters progressively get worse with each passing month. “Some of this loss could have been reverted if they hadn’t shut down. But I can’t focus on that. I still have hope they will have a full life ahead and, more importantly, they can have a life.”

On Oct. 9 Gray and his team held a conference call with regulators, and they’re hoping to get the go-ahead in the next couple of weeks.

Chrissy and Amanda’s father, Steven, had the opportunity to spend a lot of time with Gray and learn more about the science behind the research and the gene therapy treatment, which involves a three-year trial. He realized they don’t have a lot of candidates in the appropriate age range for the gene delivery. Gray wants to use the oldest children suffering from GAN because they need to be aware of what’s happening.

But the older they are, the sicker they are, which makes it hard to track down patients who fit the criteria of the clinical trial. One young woman they had hoped could be part of the clinical trial died of pneumonia in early 2013. She was 21 years old.

Steven has been taking his daughters to the National Institutes of Health and introducing them to the medical teams there. He hopes it will make them more comfortable if the time ever comes for them to receive the gene delivery.

“Chrissy knows that the outcomes of these tests and the trials that follow determine whether or not she lives,” he said. “Most people get their heroes from books or movies. My heroes are my children. I can only hope to one day be worthy of the love they show me.”

In February 2013, Gray gave a speech about his team’s research at the Hannah’s Hope ball. During his speech, Chrissy spoke out loudly, “Thank you, Dr. Gray.”

The room went silent.

CHRISTIAN McPHATE can be reached at 940-566-6878 and on Twitter at @writerontheedge.

ON THE WEB

For more information about giant axonal neuropathy or to make a donation, visit http://fightforchrissy.com or www.hannahshopefund.org.