BOCA RATON, Fla., Jan. 13, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Regional Manager and Partner at Healthcare Solutions Team Frank Saltzburg has joined a select group of entrepreneurs from around the world, along with international best-selling author and keynote speaker Mark Victor Hansen (Chicken Soup for the Soul), and co-wrote the recent book titled, Boom!: The World's Leading Entrepreneurs and Professionals Reveal Their Secrets to Improving Your Health, Wealth and Lifestyle Through Their Explosive Techniques. The book was published by CelebrityPress® and released on May 21, 2015.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160112/321596

On the day of release, Boom reached best-seller status in two Amazon.com categories - reaching as high as #3 in the category "Direct Marketing," as well as #13 in "Marketing for Small Business." Frank Saltzburg contributed a chapter titled "What Is Your Best Strategy Now In 2015 For Health Care Coverage."

After such a successful release, Frank Saltzburg was recognized at a red-carpet event in Hollywood, CA by The National Academy of Best-Selling Authors™, an organization that honors authors from many of the leading independent best-seller lists.

Click HERE to order a copy of Boom!: The World's Leading Entrepreneurs and Professionals Reveal Their Secrets to Improving Your Health, Wealth and Lifestyle Through Their Explosive Techniques.

A portion of the royalties earned from Boom! will be given to Entrepreneur's International Foundation, a not for profit organization dedicated to creating unique launch campaigns to raise money and awareness for charitable causes.

About Frank Saltzburg:

Frank Saltzburg is a Regional Manager and Partner at Healthcare Solutions Team whose corporate offices are located in Lombard, IL. He currently resides in Boca Raton, Florida. He holds the designation of a Certified Healthcare Reform Specialist (CHRS) and is a graduate of Rutgers University.

With over 20 years financial services, health care plan design, health care reform expertise, and management experience, Frank helps his clients obtain the health care coverage that best solves their needs. His expertise includes custom-designing affordable health care plans for individuals, families, and small business owners (under 100 employees). He holds licenses in Arizona, Florida, Pennsylvania, Ohio, California, Georgia, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, Texas, Alabama, North Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, and Idaho.

Frank has access to both the Private and Public Insurance Exchanges. He will determine if you are able to qualify for a tax credit/subsidy and receive your approval within 15 minutes meeting the ACA (Affordable Care Act) guidelines during open enrollment period. Additionally, Frank works closely on the Private Exchanges all year long and is well-known for designing the most comprehensive health care coverage plans based upon your needs, your family's, or your business needs.

Frank is also a keynote speaker on the current Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare) and its impact on America's families and small businesses. He is the "GO-TO" person to make sure you are aware of all your options and strategies under the Affordable Care Act.

Media Contact:

Kasey Kalchert Dicks and Nanton, Celebrity Branding Agency®

800-980-1626

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/frank-saltzburg-hit-amazon-best-seller-list-with-boom-300203562.html

SOURCE CelebrityPress