With only three incumbents running for four seats on the Hatboro-Horsham School Board, at least one new director is certain to be sworn in next January.

Thomas J. Hagan, whose seat is up for re-election, is not on the ballot.

Four Democrats and four Republicans have been endorsed for Tuesday’s primary, though each candidate has cross-filed and will be on the ballot for both parties.

Incumbents Robert Gockley, Marge Lotter and Mark Opalisky are joined by Joseph Wade on the GOP side. Theresa E. Brown, Judy Fry, Charles R. Horner III and Susan Shinton are the Democrats seeking the four-year seats.

Brown and Shinton each sought a place on the board two years ago but fell short.

“I’ve devoted my entire life to education,” said Brown, who’s been a day care director, worked in preschools and was a counselor in the Palisades School District. “I feel that through my background I know schools and would work for the best interest of the total system, which includes the community at large.”

As a board member, Brown said she would demonstrate to school employees that she cared for them and would encourage their growth. “You have to create a vision for them to believe in and guide them to that vision,” she said.

Shinton said she’d advocate for videotaping school board meetings and posting them on the district website. “I don’t believe there’s a whole lot of communication between the board and the public,” she said.

While Hatboro-Horsham students receive a good education, Shinton expressed a desire for “new faces, new ideas” on the board. “It has been an all-Republican board for more than a decade,” she said. “Like any other organization, you get better ideas, a stronger board in general, if people come from different backgrounds.”

The newspaper was unable to reach Democrats Fry and Horner for comment.

Opalisky, seeking his third term, has been president and vice president of the board. He’s been a leader in pushing to increase technology based learning and the district’s technical department.

“It’s so critical to the future of our students,” he said.

Opalisky said he’s “conscientious following-up” when residents reach out to him and believes that “over the years I have contributed a lot to the district and its growth. I know the system very well, the budget process and the curriculum.”

Lotter, chairwoman of the Policy Committee and liaison to the Hatboro-Horsham Education Foundation, said her goal is to “make sure we maintain our excellent reputation as a top-notch school in a fiscally responsible nature.”

She said politics has no place in the board room. “We are neither Republicans nor Democrats,” she said. “That is not part of the equation. We are for everybody.”

“I enjoy being a school board director because I feel that I am contributing to the betterment of the students and the Hatboro and Horsham communities.”

Gockley, a Bristol Township School District counselor, was appointed to the board in January as a replacement for Barbara LaSorsa. He developed Bristol Township’s alternative education program.

“I want to keep Hatboro-Horsham the stellar school district that it is,” he said.

With a background in business and construction, Gockley maintains his experience aids the board when discussing building projects. “I think I’ve been very helpful in a relatively short time and want to help Hatboro-Horsham meet its present and future challenges.”

Wade, retired following a successful career in the insurance industry, said he is running as a way to “pay back to my community.”

“I’ve had six children go through Hatboro-Horsham, and thank God they’ve all been very successful,” he said. “We love Horsham. We love Hatboro. This is payback for all the blessings given me. I have nothing but praise for the district.”

A former federal investigator for the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Wade contends his management and financial skills would be an asset to the district.

“I’ve been impressed with way Hatboro-Horsham has handled things financially,” he said. “I’ll look at everything through an objective point of view with the focus on maintaining this excellent quality of education for generations to come.”