California has been at the forefront of forward-thinking rules that integrate millions of undocumented immigrants into civic life instead of demonizing them. It’s the Golden State’s version of immigration reform.

The latest proposal in this effort — a bill allowing residents to buy health care on the state exchange, regardless of their immigration status — should become law.

This is a sensible move, along with one that would extend subsidies to low-income children who are in the country illegally. That’s why this editorial board supports Senate Bill 4 by Ricardo Lara, D-Long Beach.

Already passed in the Senate, a modified version of the bill awaiting Assembly approval would allow the state to request a federal waiver that permits undocumented immigrants to buy insurance through Covered California, the state’s answer to Obamacare.

It’s an important and smart political shift in a state that is home to the nation’s largest undocumented immigrant population — about 2.5 million.

Why not allow immigrants who can afford it to buy health insurance through Covered California? Already they can buy such insurance on the private market, just as many purchased car insurance before they could legally get a license.

So often, California officials are forced to make a choice between bringing these residents into the fold of civic and economic life or allowing them to linger in a parallel system that is alienating and in the long run costly to the state.

That seems to be the solution favored by Congress, which has been ineffective in passing immigration reform.

Lara’s bill would not extend federal subsidies to adults — as first proposed — but it would subsidize coverage for undocumented immigrants under the age of 19 beginning next May.

That makes sense.

The state’s most vulnerable kids, most all of whom had little choice in their current living situation, would be covered.

Gov. Jerry Brown has already set aside $40 million in his budget, but it’s estimated that full implementation of the bill’s provisions will cost $132 million annually.

It’s unclear how that gap will be bridged and Lara has some explaining to do when it comes to paying for this.

But it is the right move and it’s one that brings California in line with its reality.

Advertisement

It’s estimated that 13 percent of state’s school children are here illegally. Waiting until the poorest among them get sick and seek emergency care could be a lot costlier than treating them from the beginning.

Moreover, the two-prong fixes address another phenomenon of this immigrant-rich state: what demographers call mixed families: According to a USC study, 74 percent of undocumented immigrant-headed households in California have at least one citizen in the house.

Those figures make clear how intertwined the lives of undocumented immigrants are with citizens. In California, you often can’t separate the two, as much as some would like to try.

But given the high-pitched fear mongering on immigration rippling through the country (thanks, Mr. Trump), brace for the national shriek that the sky will fall if undocumented immigrants touch our health care system. It won’t.

Just as it hasn’t now that an estimated 400,000 undocumented immigrants have California driver’s licenses and they can obtain a law license.