Bob Kalkman, an employee of Longmont's Dot Hill, shares a laugh with stylist Jessica Jude, left, while Hair On Wheels owner and stylist Vickie Nolting cuts his hair. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

At the beginning of every year, I plan my vacations, I block out important holidays such as Halloween and the day before Halloween and the day after Halloween, and I plan my hair appointments.

My hair is a big enough project that it's only ethical to apologize to my hairdresser when I arrive and leave, and I have to switch stylists once a year to prevent anyone from getting depressed.

Imagine if you gave a horse a weave of more horse hair and then gave that a bad spiral perm (redundant), and then back-combed that into that dreadlocks. That's me if you dunk my head into a sink. Detangler? No, I need hedge-clippers and a torch.

Between the driving, the amount of time it takes to simply penetrate my head with water to eventually moisten my scalp, the commitment to color and cut it, and then the challenge to dry it, both my stylist and I must block out a full day.

Every six weeks, I find myself working nights and weekends and conducting phone interviews on the hydraulic barber chair to offset my impractical beauty regimen ("I'm sorry, could you speak up? The stylist next to me is blow-drying.")

If dreadlocks didn't smell That One Special Way that you can actually taste through your nostrils, I swear I would wave my white do-rag in surrender and go free-range hippie.

I am constantly seeking a better solution; I would rather use my vacation time for, you know, vacation.

When I saw the white Hair On Wheels van roll up to my daughter's preschool, I had to ask:

Do you cut hair in there?

No.

Do you go to people's houses and do their hair?

No.

Darn.

But I learned this Longmont-based business did have a unique solution to the beauty salon problem. Hair On Wheels started in 1999 in response to customers' complaints about how inconvenient it was to get a haircut, says founder Vickie Nolting.

Hair On Wheels stylist Jessica Jude cuts David Miller's hair on-site at Dot Hill in Longmont. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

"I tried to think of a way that would make getting a haircut a lot simpler for somebody," she says.

She decided to bring it to their office.

Today, Hair On Wheels consists of six stylists who serve more than 35 companies throughout Boulder and Broomfield counties and, recently, the Denver metro area.

They visit the different companies (typically large ones such as Ball Aerospace, Google, DigitalGlobe) on specific days of the week and cut hair on-site. Nolting designed mobile equipment, which uses a "loader" to haul the entire station to an office. They roll out carpeting, clip away and clean up when they leave.

It turns out to be cheaper for the customers and the stylists, Nolting says.

"We have vans and a website, but we don't have to pay to be on Pearl Street," she says. "There's no booth rent."

Customers may book a slot online in advance or hope for a walk-in spot, although Nolting says stylists keep solidly busy from about 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.

She says most companies set aside a conference room for the pop-up salon a few times a week.

No, they won't come cut your hair at your desk while you work.

No, they won't bring their loader thingy to my home office.

No, they haven't heard a request from the Daily Camera.

Yet.

Hey, boss.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay