See, Michael Bloomberg was a schmoe because he wanted to restrict the size of our sodas, and that would be wrong because...freedom. Even Princess Dumbass Of The Northwoods got up at CPAC brandishing a Big Gulp, which is a large drink, and not what the nation does every time it realizes that she was one of four people in 2008 with the best chance of ever handling the nuclear codes. However, when it comes to poor people, well, that's a Slurpee of a different color.

"Already, states like Wisconsin and South Carolina have shown interest in improving the healthfulness of choices in their SNAP programs," he said. "By giving SNAP recipients more nutritious choices, we can take a meaningful step towards ending hunger in America." Under Roe's bill, food purchased under SNAP would have to meet the same guidelines that food purchased under the Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program already have to meet. The WIC guidelines are strict, and are made up of several different standards for products like breakfast cereal, milk, vegetables, peanut butter and other foods.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Yes, my head goes whipping around 180 degrees, too, when I read about somebody advocating social programs for which the current governments of Wisconsin and South Carolina have "shown interest." But what Roe's concern for the health of poor people is, of course, a dodge. Here's Doctor Phil, lying about the Affordable Care Act, which he has voted to repeal, because he is a Republican and that's the only thing any of them do. and Here's Doctor Phil, defending the ol' status quo.

I prefer a system with private health insurers, who ultimately do a better job of putting decision-making authority in doctors' and patients' hands.

Most Popular

That's certainly been my experience, and the experience of most poor people I know. No private health insurer ever has exercised decision-making authority in a medical situation. And I am the Tsar of all the Russias. What Doctor Phil is up to here is reinforcing the conservative narrative about greedy poor Them wasting Your money on, say, Skittles and Mountain Dew. What Doctor Phil is doing here is running for re-election.