Topics: 12 years a slave, American Hustle, Beasts of the Southern Wild, Editor's Picks, Fruitvale Station, Gravity, Movie Awards Season, Movies, Oscars, sundance 2014, Sundance Film Festival, Upstream Color, Entertainment News

Anybody who tries to tell you that the theatrical moviegoing experience is dead — and I seem to have those conversations on a weekly basis — needs to figure out what they’re talking about, first of all. Perhaps they should try that line on the producers of “Iron Man 3” and “Fast Furious 6,” which have earned more than 2 billion American dollars from paying customers in movie theaters around the world.

Do the doomsayers mean that moviegoing isn’t what it used to be, as a central ritual of culture, and that all too often (as with going to see the movies mentioned above) it involves the charm, ambiance and quality control of dining at Burger King? Inarguably true. But the old model of buying a ticket and sitting in the dark among strangers has proven remarkably robust, even in what’s been called a “post-cinematic” age. Of course many people will end up seeing this year’s three leading Oscar contenders — “American Hustle,” “Gravity” and “12 Years a Slave” — on TVs and computer monitors and mobile devices. But all three of those invigorating and remarkably different movies are fundamentally big-screen adventures, belonging to a tradition that stretches from D.W. Griffith to Hitchcock to Kubrick to Scorsese, and they will most reward those who actually leave the house to go see them.

When it comes to lower-budget independent film, the specialty of the Sundance Film Festival — which kicked off on Thursday in the Utah mountains, with founder Robert Redford fending off questions about his Oscar snub — the “death of cinema” pronouncements have a more complicated resonance. This year’s opening-night premieres included Damien Chazelle’s feature “Whiplash,” with Miles Teller of “The Spectacular Now” as a tormented young jazz drummer, and the documentary “Dinosaur 13,” about the complicated turf battles that followed the historic discovery of an intact T-rex skeleton in South Dakota. Those may be absolutely terrific films (I haven’t seen either yet), but they’re exactly the kind of movie that will play briefly in a few dozen to a few hundred theaters (at best) and that people are likeliest to catch on VOD or iTunes or Netflix.

But does that mean that Sundance, and the entire indie-film ecology it represents, has become irrelevant, a second-rate stepcousin to all the hot cable dramas people actually watch and care about? Not at all. Without question, Sundance has retrenched since its years of maximum cultural hotness (from the mid-‘90s through the mid-‘00s), when the place was packed wall-to-snowbank with random celebrities — I once ran into Tom Brady, Paris Hilton and David Bowie during the course of a single afternoon — and product-launch parties. Redford and his festival director, John Cooper, have shifted the focus back to actual movies — and the actual movies have gotten a hell of a lot better.

Redford has genuinely never thought of Sundance as a launching pad for movies that would make a ton of money, but I think both he and former head honcho Geoff Gilmore got a bit distracted by the glitz and glamour of the festival’s trendiest years. Now Sundance has returned to being an artistic incubator for young or unorthodox or innovative talent of the sort that defies ordinary storytelling conventions and isn’t likely to get a three-season dramatic miniseries deal with HBO or Showtime. Try to imagine pitching a cable network or a mainstream Hollywood producer on the premise behind “Beasts of the Southern Wild.” (“Well, so the main character is this little girl who speaks only in voice-over. Her dad is played by a guy we met in a bakery, and her mom works in a floating brothel. I think. And then there are these giant boars, or tusked hamsters, or something. I’m not really sure what they are, or if they’re real.”)

You could say pretty much the same about “Upstream Color” or “Fruitvale Station” or “Ain’t Them Bodies Saints,” to mention just three of the premieres in last year’s memorable Sundance lineup. That 2013 festival, likely one of the best ever, also included “Before Midnight,” “Concussion,” “Don Jon,” “In a World …,” “Kill Your Darlings,” “Mother of George” and “The Way, Way Back,” along with three of this year’s five Oscar-nominated documentaries (“Cutie and the Boxer,” “Dirty Wars” and “20 Feet From Stardom”) and at least two others that should have been (“After Tiller” and “Blackfish”). That’s the kind of cultural mojo I can get behind, post-cinematic age or not.

Sometimes those movies will connect with mainstream audiences and academy voters and so forth — although no one in their right mind would have predicted such a fate for Benh Zeitlin’s “Beasts,” the big hit of Sundance 2012. But more often they won’t, or won’t quite. Some of those directors will be making the Hollywood thrillers and Showtime dramas of the future, following after Steve McQueen and David O. Russell and Vince Gilligan and David Chase. Others will remain on the cultural margins, on purpose or by happenstance, pushing at the boundaries of artistic possibility and reminding us that the three-act structure, the boy-and-girl-kept-apart and the pseudo-unexpected character kill-off at the end of Season 3 are not the only means of seduction.

Are the movies dead? Well, they long ago lost their high-minded claim on cultural primacy and supremacy, and it was about time too. A lot of movies are terrible-looking junk made for bad reasons, definitely not worth spending 13 bucks on so that some kid can spill a Mountain Dew on your loafers and the couple next to you can text their dinner plans during the sex scene. I’ve heard it all before. But there were always terrible movies in abundance; more good ones are made around the world today than ever before, and American independent cinema is in the middle of a barely noticed boomlet. If that’s the death of movies. I’ll take it.