Columbia Central outside hitter Maya Horner was named the “Player of the Week” for the State ofTennessee by the American Coaches Association, CBS Sports and Max Preps for her performance in volleyball matches Aug. 22-Sept. 1.

Horner, a senior captain for the Lady Lions, led her team to a perfect 4-0 record in wins over Summitt, Loretto, Coffee County and Franklin County.

In the four wins, the 5-foot-9 Horner delivered 53 kills with precision and power. Normally opponents wince when Horner winds up as they prepare for an incoming cannon blast.

Hornr also had three blocks and two assists at the net. Via Max Prep statistics, Horner is number one in the state at both hitting percentage (.571) and kills per set average (5.9).

On defense, Horner has 31 digs and 19 receptions on serve-receive in week one.

Horner surpassed two very career distinctive milestones last week, scoring her 750th point serving, a feat that has only been obtained by a handful of players in Maury County’s 39 year history of playing volleyball. Hornr also took over the school record for number of digs in a career with 861.

With each game she lays, Horner adds to her school record for kills. She currently has 1,720 and is fifth best in state history.

Horner’s personal goal when she started at Central was to hit 2,000 kills. If Horner continues on her present pace, she cold approach state records.

Thweatt is new career leader: Hampshire’s sweep of Santa Fe enabled their coach Enoch Thweatt to reach a new career high in victories for the school in volleyball wins.

Hampshire defeated visiting Santa Fe 25-17, 25-14 and 25-13 on Thursday to boost their record to 3-2.

Now in his sixth season at the helm, Thweatt now has 26 wins as he surpassed the 25 achieved by James Hardison, who was the first coach.

Hardison coached the team in their first four seasons (1977-80) as the school is the second oldest in Maury County. Hampshire started the year after Columbia Central began volleyball. Lady Lions coach Joanne Ramsey played a role in starting Hampshire’s program and some others in the area.