Fern Valley Hotel (Photo: Jefferson County PVA)

Metro Louisville health officials have found the Fern Valley Hotel and Conference Center with numerous violations of health regulations and ordered the business to close no later than Monday evening.

The hotel, a former Holiday Inn, is located at 2715 Fern Valley Road just east of Interstate 65 and has just over 400 rooms and 22,000 square feet of conference rooms.

Dave Langdon, spokesman for the Louisville Metro Department of Public Health and Wellness, said the hotel failed a health inspection Thursday, getting a score of 66, when an 85 is needed to pass. The next day inspectors issued a cease and desist order, directing the hotel to close within 72 hours, or by Monday evening, Langdon said.

Problems found by inspectors included "fire safety issues, electrical and plumbing violations, and general sanitation and plumbing violations," Langdon said. The report also cited an unclean ice machine, an open dumpster door, inadequate hallway lighting, and unclean bedding and drapes,

Langdon said the hotel, which is owned by Fern Valley Holdings LLC, of Glen Cove, N.Y., can appeal the closing order to the state commissioner of the Kentucky Department of Public Health, or it could seek a Jefferson Circuit Court order staying or overturning the local health department order.

The hotel also could begin taking steps to correct the violations and later seek a new inspection to try to come into compliance.

Langdon said local health officials have been monitoring the Fern Valley property since some hotel guests registered complaints in May while visiting for the Kentucky Derby. He said a state hearing officer held an administrative hearing in May on a series of health-related issues at the business, after which the hotel was given 90 days to come into compliance.

That 90-day period lapsed on Aug. 26, with health inspectors then checking the premises on Thursday and finding a host of violations, Langdon said.

Langdon said he doesn't believe the hotel has many guests on extended stays. He said the hotel, as of Friday, is not supposed to book any new overnight guests and that any guests are expected to vacate the property by Monday evening.

A woman who answered the phone at the hotel Saturday afternoon said she couldn't comment on the health department order. She then hung up, when asked if the hotel was still booking guests.

According to Jefferson County property valuation records, the hotel dates to 1963 and the 4.5-acre site has an assessed valuation of $1.3 million. Fern Valley Hotel Holdings bought the site for $2.3 million in 2011, the records show.

Louisville Metro Councilman Steve Magre, D-10th District, issued a statement Friday expressing support for the closing order issued against the Fern Valley Hotel. "It is good to see the (health) department getting serious about this issue and holding the owners accountable for following the law. This should put the owners of the Economy Inn on red alert, that they need to take their problems seriously and make the needed changes, or suffer a similar fate."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1F7eQXO