MONTGOMERY, Alabama --- Kevin Bass of Fayette, a business owner and former professional baseball player, has announced he will run for governor as a Democrat.

Bass, 34, is the Democratic Party's first announced candidate for governor.

He said his priorities would include attracting jobs to the state and protecting funding for education.

"This is my motto: Who are you to complain unless you're willing to do something about it yourself?" Bass said.

Bass becomes the third candidate overall in the race for the state's highest office. Republican Gov. Robert Bentley is running for re-election. Bentley has one announced opponent on the GOP side, Stacy Lee George of Morgan County. The primaries are June 3.

Bass and his wife, Leah Newton Bass, own two companies that sell baseball gloves and bats over the Internet. Bass said he designs bats, most of which are manufactured overseas.

Bass will be making his second run for public office. He ran unsuccessfully for mayor of Fayette last year.

The Chicago Cubs drafted Bass out of Fayette High School in the third round of the 1998 draft. Bass, a third baseman and outfielder, played about five and a half years in the Cubs organization, all in the minor leagues.

Bass said the experience taught him valuable lessons and was humbling for a player who had been a high draft pick.

“What I sort of learned is that how hard you worked to get there, you’ve got to work 10 times as hard once you’re there,” Bass said. “Getting there is the easy part. Staying there is the hard part.”

Bass attended college for a few years after his career with the Cubs ended in 2002, then got back into professional ball and spent a short time in the Chicago White Sox organization. His career ended in 2007 after an injury.



Bass started his business, Bass Gloves, that same year, initially selling batting and fielding gloves and expanding into other equipment. He later started a second company, Bass Bats.



As for politics, Bass said he was still learning about some of the issues he expects to be asked about on the campaign trail. For example, he’s not sure whether he supports expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, something many of his fellow Democrats support. Bentley opposes expanding Medicaid.

“There’s a lot of unforeseen questions that I’ll be asked that, I’ll just shoot you straight, I’m probably not going to have a knowledgeable answer to tell you right at the time,” Bass said. “But let me go back and talk and speak with some people that are very knowledgeable on the situation, and I can give you a pretty straightforward answer. It’s like sports to me. Your state government is only as good as the team you surround yourself with.”

Bass said he thought his business experience would give him some knowledge not shared by what he called career politicians.

“None of them have ever had to make a dollar, turn it into two, turn two into a thousand,” Bass said. … “So they don’t know the value of a dollar.”

Asked why he was running as a Democrat, Bass said his family has always leaned to that party. He said his goal was to try to show leadership and give people hope.

“People have lost hope,” Bass said. “It’s like they’ve just been beat down. The opportunity is not there anymore. That’s my main reason for running, is to be the one to lead, show people, 'You know what, if you grew up in the housing authority, you can get out. You’ve got to set yourself and make a goal. And you’re going to do whatever you have to do to get that goal.' ”