Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share How much does each level of winning Powerball pay out? Here are the exact amounts and the odds each winner faced. USA TODAY

A sign is unable to advertise the total jackpot for the Powerball lottery in downtown Dallas, Wednesday, Jan. 13, 2016. (Photo: AP)

John and Lisa Robinson brought their dog and daughter to the Tennessee Lottery headquarters on Friday. They were the first of three winning ticket owners to claim their share of last week’s $1.58 billion Powerball jackpot, opting for a lump sum payment of about $328 million. You can imagine the excitement in their hometown of Munford, population 6,000. Heck, the excitement leading up to the largest jackpot in U.S. history had infected the entire country. More than 635 million tickets were sold.

For now, the Powerball fever is over. The jackpot was immediately reset to the starting minimum of a relatively modest $40 million. Instead of daydreaming about buying a six-acre island in the Bahamas, players will have to settle for fantasies about simply buying a mansion there.

But it certainly won’t be long before everyone is worked into another ticket-buying frenzy over a billion-dollar jackpot. The Multi-State Lottery Association has made sure of that.

It is harder than ever to win the game’s grand prize. Perhaps now is a good time for the public to question the changes the association made to guarantee fewer winners and questionably enormous jackpots. At what point does winning become so unlikely that people turn to other lottery games with their two bucks?

When the first Powerball drawing was held in 1992, players had a 1 in 55 million chance of buying a winning ticket. That almost sounds like a sure thing compared with today. Over the years, tweaks to the game increased the odds, first to 1 in 80 million, then 120 million and then eventually 175 million. The association wasn’t satisfied.

Last year it added 10 white balls in one drum, bringing the total to 69. It reduced the number of red “Powerball” balls in another drum to 26. The odds of matching the single Powerball number and winning a $4 or $7 prize improved. Whoopee. But the odds of winning the big jackpot are now an inconceivable 1 in 292 million.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Have you bought in to the powerball frenzy? If so, you may want to reconsider that ticket because your odds of winning aren't very good.

Forbes compiled a list of events more likely to happen to an individual than winning this particular lottery. It puts in perspective just how ridiculous the odds are. A person has a better chance of taking home an Olympic medal, winning an Oscar, being injured by a chainsaw or toilet, and being killed by food poisoning, scalding water, a dog bite, a tornado or fireworks. (Hear that, Iowa lawmakers?) There is a better chance of being attacked by a shark or struck by lightning than winning the jackpot. The good news: The odds of dating a millionaire are only 1 in 215.

Of course no matter who holds the winning ticket, Uncle Sam is always victorious. This jackpot will yield the government millions of dollars. The president and CEO of the Tennessee lottery noted the one historic jackpot raises nearly $29 million for schools in the state.

So some of us can feel good about that. Or we might focus our energies on a more attainable goal, like becoming president of the United States. The odds of that happening are a mere 1 in 10 million. And that win will also land you a nice, big house.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1RxmrJq