Thousands in South Carolina cannot afford health care (Image 1)

Last night, in her state-of-the-state address, South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley called the Affordable Care Act “disastrous.”

It certainly didn't start all that well, when back in October, the website created to help people sign up for healthcare consistently crashed. The Obama Administration says it was able to fix that problem, and things worked more smoothly.

Still, though, the number of those who signed up was below what was anticipated.

More than 50,000 people in Horry County have no insurance. That's about a quarter of all residents there. Many of them fall in what's called a coverage gap: they don't earn enough to qualify for a subsidy under the health law, and they can't get medicaid because South Carolina is among several other states chose not to expand the program.

“I can't get healthy because of a dollar,” says Joyce Messinger, who is uninsured. She is one of thousands of people who fall into that coverage gap in SC. Health insurance through the Affordable Care Act's online marketplace is too expensive for her. “They want $750 a month!” she says. Joyce doesn't qualify for medicare, partly because Governor Nikki Haley chose not to extend it under the ACA. “I could have gotten help for hospital purposes, but I can't do it now, because she doesn't think everybody needs it,” Joyce says. “Governor Haley doesn't need it. She doesn't know what it is to go to the hospital and not have money.”

Diane Thomas helps people register on the Marketplace. She says the health care act wasn't designed to help everybody, although, she says the state could be doing more.

“Hopefully, Medicaid would expand here. We're all hoping,” Thomas says. For people who can't afford insurance, there are some places that offer sliding fees based on income, like Health Care Partners in Conway. But hospitals are still eating up costs from uninsured patients who may go into ERs for treatment. “Premiums for plans under the Affordable Care Act in many or even most cases are still not affordable,” says Grand Strand Regional Hospital CFP Robert Grace. As for Joyce, she says without any other options, she'll says continue paying out of pocket. “I can't get sick,” she says.