Q&A: Bellin Health CEO George Kerwin on Lowering Healthcare Costs

"If we are going to lower spending in healthcare, we're going to have less revenue coming into our organizations. And, that should happen," says George Kerwin.

"We're in a crisis," says George Kerwin, FACHE, president and CEO of Bellin Health, an acute care, 167-bed hospital in Green Bay, WI. He is not speaking specifically about Bellin Health, but about the healthcare industry in general.



George Kerwin, FACHE

President and CEO,

Bellin Health

Kerwin is a member of the IHI Leadership Alliance, a group of health care organizations and policy makers that is urging industry executives to play a bigger role in redesigning the healthcare delivery system. Noting that the federal government had been driving change through the Patient Protection Affordable Care Act, the group's manifesto – which was published in JAMA in March—calls for "change from the inside out."

The alliance was organized by the Cambridge, MA- based Institute for Healthcare Improvement and led by IHI president emeritus and former Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services head Donald Berwick MD, the group is "partnering with their patients, their communities, and one another to deliver on the promise of the Triple Aim at levels not yet achieved and not even hinted at by the ACA."

Health Leaders Media recently spoke with Kerwin. The transcript of the interview has been edited for clarity and brevity.

HealthLeaders: Leadership groups have been involved in healthcare reform for years. What is new about this effort?

Kerwin: It is a continuation of thinking what we've had in the past. That is the nature of healthcare: It evolves over time. Twenty years ago, we were very fragmented. We didn't have great technology or IT systems. We are beginning to develop very good improvement capabilities. We've got great technology, and we've got really good information systems that the federal government has helped us put in.

What's new is that we're in a crisis. And there are lots of changes that have been initiated by the Affordable Care Act. That combination of evolution, crisis, and action—kicked off by the federal government with Meaningful Use legislation and the ACA—is what has created the alliance and what I would say what is new.

We're at a very critical point. The provider industry has much better capabilities and we feel strongly that we can manage health rather than insure health.