As often as “The Tempest” is performed, it still comes as a surprise how truly strange a work it can be.

With its comedic turns and nasty political dealings entwined, one is tempted to call the tale of the exiled Duke Prospero and his home-schooled daughter, Miranda, “a beast with two backs.” Only that designation belongs to another Shakespeare play — one more decidedly tragic.

This thought arose while considering the Colorado Shakespeare Festival’s production, running through Aug. 10 at the University of Colorado-Boulder’s outdoor Mary Rippon Theatre.

Instead, “The Tempest” is a late romance. Which, lovers might agree, explains the tension between the not-quite tragic and blossoming love.

Prospero, portrayed with a sonorous authority by Peter Simon Hilton, was robbed of his title by younger brother Antonio (Scott Bellot). Twelve years later, he exacts revenge with honed conjuring skills and the help of the spirit Ariel.

The titular storm Prospero calls forth wrecks the ship carrying his brother/ betrayer as well as Alonso, King of Naples (Chris Kendall), Alonso’s son Ferdinand (Benjamin Bonenfant) and others.

Three groups of survivors are scattered and presume the demise of their fellow travelers. Antonio proves to be up to his old tricks as he tries to persuade Sebastian (David Bolus) to off Alonso, who is grieving after the presumed death of his son, Ferdinand. Far from drowned, Ferdinand is sunk, having fallen hard for Miranda (Kyra Lindsey). The feeling is mutual.

On another part of the island, court jester Trinculo (Rodney Lizcano) and the king’s butler, Stephano (Sammie Joe Kinnett), meet the strange creature Caliban, who recounts the cause of his contempt for Prospero. The play’s most ridiculous charms comes from the bender the trio goes on.

What kind of “Tempest” audiences will be treated to is often signaled by which character — Caliban (Joshua Archer), amalgam of man and amphibian, or Ariel (Vanessa Morosco) — the production emphasizes. Ariel wins out here.

This should come as welcome news to those made uncomfortable — or who downright despise — interpretations that place “The Tempest” in the midst of arguments about colonialism.

Ariel enters the play gripping white trapeze straps. Opening night, some of Morosco’s performance was lost to her athletic labors. But the commitment to amaze speaks to director Geoffrey Kent’s embrace of Shakespeare as lively entertainment.

Still, for all the spectacle, Hilton’s Prospero remains the draw. Prospero is hardly a warm or even easy- to- understand protagonist. (Sorely, the power-obsessed, Macbeth makes more emotional sense). What a world we occupy when forgiveness is the truest of mysteries.

Hilton leads with his voice and delivers the crests and troughs of Shakepeare’s language.

This “Tempest” revels in the magic and ultimately the mercy of Shakespeare’s play — the last he wrote alone. It embraces the wit and the unfolding of Prospero’s wisdom.

Lisa Kennedy: 303-954-1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bylisakennedy

“THE TEMPEST.” Written by William Shakespeare. Directed by Geoffrey Kent. Featuring Peter Simon Hilton, Kyra Lindsey, Vanessa Morosco, Joshua Archer, Rodney Lizcano and Sammie Joe Kinnet. Through Aug. 10. 2 hours, 30 minutes. At the Colorado Shakespeare Festival’s outdoor Mary Rippon Theatre on the University of Colorado-Boulder campus. Tickets $18-$59 via coloradoshakes.org or 303-492-8008