Super, Super, Super, Super, Super, Super, Super Bowl.

Super Bowl VII for Denver.

Super Bowl III for Peyton Manning, John Fox and Wes Welker. Super Bowl VI for Pat Bowlen and John Elway. Super Bowl I for Champ Bailey.

As Winston Churchill would have declared, the Broncos “had their finest hour” Sunday.

Get ready, New York and New Jersey. Here come the Broncos. It’s high time to ride again.

Two down, one to go. Two world championships, a chance at a third.

New England bowed deeply to the flawless Broncos on a magnificent Sunday afternoon with a landscape of orange, a sky of blue and a backdrop of snow-capped mountains in a scene that could have been painted by Monet … or maybe the master artist Manning.

Afterward, Patriots quarterback Tom Brady said the Broncos possess “probably the best offense in NFL history.” In restricting the Patriots to 16 points and two measly touchdowns, the Broncos unleashed a defense to match.

The Broncos’ mantra this season is “Finish.” To do so, they must defeat the Seattle Seahawks in the Super Bowl.

But first, “we will savor this moment,” Manning said.

He shared his triumph with brothers Eli and Cooper, and dad Archie. It was one of the few times the First Family of Quarterbacks has gathered for a reunion at a locker after a game. As Peyton dressed, the three brothers traded barbs.

Oldest brother Cooper, whose career ended prematurely because of spinal stenosis before he began his freshman season at Ole Miss, walked over and said to me: “It’s like we’re being kids again. I gave Peyton only one piece of advice. Play like you’re 10 years old, and we’re playing in the front yard.”

Cooper said Peyton disregarded his counsel.

“But he has ignored me on a consistent basis, and he’s turned out OK.” (And yet Cooper was the one person Peyton turned to when he was choosing to play in Denver.)

Eli has won two Super Bowls as the quarterback with the Giants against, of all people, Tom Brady and the Patriots. Peyton has played in two, won one.

“It’s funny that the last time Eli won, it was at my home stadium (in Indianapolis), and now I’m going to play at his stadium (in East Rutherford, N.J.),” Peyton Manning said. “It’s great that the family was here for me today. It was so hectic in Indianapolis after the Super Bowl, we weren’t together.”

The Broncos will be returning for the first outdoor Super Bowl in a northeastern metropolis. Early forecasts are for temperatures considerably colder than the 63 degrees at kickoff Sunday. Let it snow.

The Pressure on Peyton to win had been the primary topic before the latest “Fight of The Century” vs. Brady. Manning wasn’t pressured, and barely touched, by the Patriots.

Manning threw for 400 yards and two touchdowns. He was in control. He has won his past two AFC championship games against the Double B’s — Brady and Belichick. Coach Bill called Manning “a good quarterback.”

You think?

Stay classy, Bill.

Manning completely baffled the Patriots’ defense, and the Broncos’ defense bewildered Brady. So much for the presumptuous belief in New England that the Patriots would overrun the Broncos and overpower Manning. The Patriots rushed for 64 yards. Manning connected with eight receivers, and the Broncos gained 507 yards.

Adam Gase, soon to be an NFL head coach, called a brilliant game, while his Patriots counterpart, former head coach Josh somebody, was bewildered.

Overall, the Broncos were super, and the Patriots were in a stupor. So the Broncos tied the Patriots for Super Bowl appearances (seven) and can tie the Patriots with a third victory.

It’s Super (times seven) to be Manning and the Broncos.