Selective color-blindness

Brooklyn: In his article on the McDonald’s violence, Mike Lupica wrote that Eric Garner was a “black man put down by a white cop,” and also notes that Michael Brown was shot by a white cop (“This is not the world we want,” column, March 14). But Lupica did not identify the race of other people in his article: Aniah Ferguson (black), Kitty Genovese (white) and Winston Moseley (black). And there was no mention of the victim of the McDonald’s beating: Arian Taylor (black). Did Lupica run out of space, or did some of the racial facts not fit his perspective? Sam Mazza



Black-on-black racism

Brooklyn: Being a black man does not exclude Voicer Robert Foster from being racist against blacks. His comments are both racist and cruel. Only an animal would suggest troubled children be locked in a cage with the key thrown away. Lisa Bryan



Bad guys and bad cops

East Stroudsburg, Pa : I totally agree with Harry Siegel (“Black lives and hard facts,” column, March 19). As long as most whites feel threatened, the numbers will never change. I am hopeful that the graying of America will help somewhat. When white mothers begin to feel the pain of losing children, then there might be reform. We have to agree that there are bad cops, as there are bad people. Both need to go. Still, I am unsure what can be done to save the poorest of our neighborhoods. Babies having babies, addiction, a dysfunctional political system and a lack of personal pride all need to be addressed. But how? It’s a very sad situation. I am the father of three black men, who are all doing well. Why am I frightened when they stay out late? Bad guys or bad police, they both frighten me. The funny thing about it is that of the two, one dresses up and looks like he is supposed to protect me. Yet running toward him may get me killed. Dennis Castillo

What’s in a name

Mableton, Ga.: I read NYDailyNews.com every day. Please take a look at whether or not you often use words with very negative connotations to describe minorities. It seems like The News mostly uses “thug,” “brute,” “monster,” etc. to describe black and Hispanic subjects of your articles, not white subjects — though I’m sure they commit the same types of crimes. I could be wrong, but reading your titles and stories your word choice seems very biased. Please go through your archives, and let me know if I am wrong. Micheal Sullivan

What’s different here?

Richmond, Calif.: I was wondering why the vicious fighting at the St. Patrick’s Day Parade — captured on video — didn’t make the front page. Doesn’t The News cover white savages fighting in the streets like wild animals? Deborah Jones

Knights’ morals

Alexandria, Va.: I am appalled, but not surprised, that the Knights of Columbus did not march in the St. Patrick’s Day Parade in protestof the decision to let one openly gay group do so. I guess the only same-sex sexual relations the Knights find morally acceptable are those between priests and altar boys. George Constantinidis

Intolerance

New Hyde Park, L.I.: Elton John sounded like a bully in urging a boycott of Dolce and Gabbana. Because of the views the designers expressed in favor of traditional marriage and natural conception, he considers them “out of step with the times.” How sad that these business owners must pay a heavy price for revealing their convictions. Who is intolerant here? Joan Hauprich

Fuzzy numbers

South Ozone Park: If Bill Hammond’s statistical evidence comes from the same source as the unemployment number, I have a bridge to sell him (“Breaking news: Obamacare works,” column, March 17). Since the inception of the Affordable Care Act, I have dealt with four different insurance companies. Oxford just dropped me, Emblem didn’t cover my medications and my doctor of 35 years wasn’t participating in the Atlantis plan. I’m guessing the government counts that as four enrollments. If Hammond’s numbers are right at all, I’m guessing they are for people who are not paying for their health insurance. As for me, my premiums have gone up 70% since the inception of this travesty of a law — which has been a complete political boondoggle for millions of Americans. Kenneth Kucinskas

Too broad a brush

Manhattan: David Kramer argues that if 421-a is working anywhere in the city, it makes sense as a city-wide policy (“Why builders need 421-a badly,” Op-ed, March 16). But the Municipal Art Society pulled together data from three city agencies to create an interactive map showing the actual cost/benefit of every 421-a project in the city for the first time. In some outer borough neighborhoods, 421-a is an effective way to promote residential development, a priority in a city where vacancy rates hover below 5%. But in certain areas of Manhattan, we are subsidizing luxury condos at a rate of millions per year, in exchange for as few as six affordable units per building. In the decades since 421-a was created, it has been amended several times to keep pace with rapidly changing real estate realities. The time has come for another revision. Luxury neighborhoods should not be cashing in at the expense of New York City taxpayers. Margaret Newman

Executive Director, Municipal Art Society of New York

Back in the day

Brooklyn: I have fond memories of my mother taking me and my three siblings to Yankees games when we were younger (“Hal says just win, Yankees!” March 19). Good seats, too. It would be impossible to do the same today unless one had almost a thousand bucks to spend. Hal Steinbrenner says he wants “fannies in the seats”? Well, he should lower his prices so real fans can come to the stadium again and actually see the game from the seats they’re sitting in. Sean Quinn

Too damn high

Islelin, N.J.: I drove into the city to catch a matinee performance and couldn’t believe what it cost to park the car for a couple of hours. Are you ready? $50! Does anyone regulate the pricing of these garages or is it a free-for-all? Before someone suggests we should have taken a bus, it was freezing cold and windy, and my knee is about to fall apart, so we drove. Audrey Roman

Words of wisdom

Flushing: I had to laugh at Voicer Larry Wolfson’s idea that “the city’s 1,800 schools should hire inspirational speakers” to deliver a daily message to schoolchildren every day. When I grew up, my mother’s reaction to test scores and report cards was inspiration enough: encouragement and rewards for excellent grades, loss of privileges and strictly enforced study times if my grades were lacking. (Then again, her own father insisted that “anything less than an ‘A’ was failing.”) I do like the idea of inspirational messages, though, which could be executed by having teachers write an age-appropriate quote on the board each morning, then taking five or 10 minutes to discuss it with their students. Quotes from Dr. Seuss up to Dr. Maya Angelou can be readily found on the Internet — for free. Karen Hoppe

Down the hate hole

Farmingdale, L.I.: Why doesn’t the Daily News just cut to the chase already and run the headline “We Hate Teachers”? Day in and day out, I am bombarded with articles in your paper that belittle and degrade my profession. Everyone outside of the classroom always thinks they can do a better job, including the writers of the Daily News. Your editorial page says education in New York needs to improve? It will never improve if this newspaper and the general public have so little respect for what we do. You are certainly not part of the solution. You are definitely part of the problem. Melissa Rinaldi

Call outs

Monroe Township, N.J.: When I fail to agree with President Obama, I am called a racist. When Obama fails to promptly congratulate Bibi Netanyahu, can I call him anti-Semitic? Nate Goldstein

Children are the future

Orange, Conn.: Voicer Mike Sawyer’s touching and realistic commentary on the lack of awareness in society today, even in the school environment, goes to the heart of the subject. It should be read to every child, and every adult as a wake-up call to be kinder and more observant. I read it to my granddaughter when I picked her up from middle school today. It speaks of the need for kindness and sensitivity towards our children in the world. And all the children are our children and we must watch over them always. They are the hope of our future. Teach our children well. Fred Portoff