Even Obamacare losses are bigger in Texas. So who’s to blame — Washington or ourselves?

About 10 million Americans, including 1 million in Texas, get health insurance through the exchanges created by the Affordable Care Act. Those customers, along with the expansion of Medicaid in most states, added $86 billion in annual revenue for insurers nationwide.

Unfortunately for them, most of the business has been a money-loser. And Texas’ largest insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, has been hit hard — over twice as hard, in fact.

The Texas unit lost almost $400 million on exchange business in 2014, the ACA’s first full year. That comes to a loss of about $360 per member, based on rate filings with regulators. That compares with an average loss of $163 per member for insurers nationwide, according to an estimate by McKinsey & Co.

Listen to Mitch Schnurman’s interview with Texas Standard on why health care companies are losing money in Texas.

Almost two-thirds of insurers lost money on the exchange in 2014 and their financial struggles are continuing. A Goldman Sachs analyst, who evaluated the Blues in 30 states, projects an aggregate loss for the not-for-profit plans in 2015. It would be their first loss since the 1980s, and exchange claims are the key driver, wrote Matthew Borsch.

Results were so bad that Blue Cross Texas dropped its PPO for the individual market. Then it raised rates almost 19 percent for its exchange HMOs in 2016, and adjusted the prescription formulary and co-pays.

Scott & White Health Plan, which entered the Dallas market last year, underestimated claims, too. It raised 2016 premiums by 32 to 34 percent.

For years, Texas’ uninsured rate has led the nation. As more residents get coverage for the first time, they’re incurring big bills, said Dr. Dan McCoy, chief medical officer for Blue Cross Texas.

He cited high obesity rates, which contribute to diabetes and other chronic conditions. Prescription spending has grown sharply. In addition, Texas has had a wave of consolidation among hospitals and doctors, giving providers more clout in payment negotiations. Texas also had a big increase in free standing emergency rooms and urgent care centers, which are more expensive than care from primary doctors.

“Every one of these issues adds to the total costs,” McCoy said.

Blue Cross Texas also was more ambitious than most insurers, offering exchange coverage in every Texas county. And its PPO – serving about 367,000 statewide — had many more health providers, including teaching hospitals such as UT Southwestern Medical Center.

That access led to a rush in organ transplants and other high-dollar procedures, such as knee replacements, cancer treatment and dialysis. Next year, Blue Cross will offer only HMOs on the exchange, and most have no out-of-network benefits.

That’s the trend around the country, as insurers narrow their exchange networks in an effort to rein in costs.

Texas has been singled out in the past for high health spending. In 2009, Atul Gawande reported that McAllen was one of the nation’s most expensive health care markets, with Medicare spending per capita running twice the U.S. average.

Why? “Just look around,” one person said. “People are not healthy here.”

McAllen had sharply higher rates of poverty, drinking and obesity, Gawande wrote in The New Yorker. But other public health statistics didn’t support the explanation. Rates of cardiovascular disease were lower than average, as were rates of asthma, H.I.V., infant mortality, cancer and injury.

Gawande quoted one unnamed surgeon: “There is overutilization here, pure and simple,” he said. Patients in McAllen got more diagnostic tests, hospital treatment, surgery and home care.

Health economist John Goodman had a different take. He said providers shifted costs to government payers because so many residents were uninsured. While Texas ranked near the top for per-capita spending on Medicare, it ranked near the bottom on private health spending, he co-wrote in a Health Affairs blog in 2013.

One reason for big losses on the exchange, he said on Monday, is that more people are gaming the system. The health law has many exceptions for penalties and enrollment, allowing folks to sign up only if they get sick.

“In Massachusetts, they used to call ‘em jumpers and dumpers,” Goodman said, referring to the state health plan that was the model for the ACA.

Indeed, Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina cited the exit of healthy members in its rate review. “We are seeing customers who use fewer and less expensive services cancel their plans and stop paying premiums,” the company wrote.

That’s not the main problem, though. The insurer expected a jump in claims from pent-up demand as people got insurance, but “that demand has not leveled off as expected,” it wrote.

Spending on diabetes care, for instance, increased by a third in the first half of 2015. Initially, the North Carolina unit requested a premium increase of almost 18 percent. It was granted an increase of 32.5 percent.