It usually occurred the first couple of days of each month, when people lined up outside the Union County welfare offices for much-needed assistance to get by.

"Now we have lines out there every day," said Charles Gillon, county director of social services. "We've gone to making appointments for people. The volume is unbelievable."

The lines reflect the growing numbers of people facing desperate financial conditions.

According to a report released last week, more than a quarter of Union County's residents were living below the poverty level based on survey statistics from 2011.

The study from Legal Services of New Jersey showed that 144,119 county residents, or 27 percent, were below the poverty level. That's a 2.3 percent increase over 2010.

Legal Services defines the poverty level as a family of three making less than $37,000 annually, which is twice the federal poverty rate, and adjusted because New Jersey's cost of living is among the highest in the nation.

Gillon called the 27 percent estimate fairly accurate, but noted that the Legal Services report identified seven other counties with a higher percentage of people below the poverty level.

Statewide, 24.7 percent or 2.1 million, were living below the poverty level in 2011, an increase of more than 80,000 people from the previous year.

Gillon also said that in the past two years, there has been a 40 percent jump in the number of people applying for Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) - formally known as Food Stamps - and an equal increase in residents seeking Medicaid.

"Beside cash assistance, there is a larger increase from people seeking medical assistance," Gillon said. "The Affordable Care Act couldn't come along at a better time," he said, referring to the federal health care insurance program.

So far this year, Union County received 9,808 applications for the Family Care Program, which covers medical costs. The same program had 6,296 applications in 2012 and 4,681 in 2011, according to county figures.

The program offers states the chance to expand their Medicaid programs with financial support from the federal government. New Jersey is one of 21 states that accepted the offer.

In terms of housing for those living in poverty, Elizabeth and Plainfield have high numbers of multi-family homes, the only housing available to people living on incomes at or below the poverty level, said James Horne, president and CEO of the United Way of Greater Union County.

"These people work one or two or three part-time jobs. They don't have health care insurance or a way to improve the family's conditions," Horne said.

Other communities in Union County also struggle with poverty, according to a study that Rutgers University completed for the United Way and released last April. They include Hillside, Linden, Rahway, Roselle, Union and a pocket of Summit, one of the county's most affluent towns.

The study, an assessment of community needs, looked at unemployment rates, high school proficiency and graduation, median incomes and access to prenatal care and child care.

Horne said the Legal Service study supports the results identified in the Rutgers survey.