Art and Design

Kate, the younger sister of bushranger Ned, was a feisty beauty who met a tragic end. Her life is the subject of a new exhibition by artist Gria Shead.

Kate Kelly was one of the younger sisters of Australia's most notorious bushranger, Ned Kelly. Born into a family with an ex-convict as a father, and growing up struggling in rural poverty, it was always going to be a tough life for Kate. But on April 15, 1878, a most unwelcome visitor, Constable Alexander Fitzpatrick of the Victorian Police, arrived on the Kelly's doorstep at Eleven Mile Creek in the Greta district of Victoria to arrest Dan Kelly, her brother, on a somewhat vague charge of horse stealing.

Debate over what actually happened that evening persists but there is little doubt that Fitzpatrick, a known drunk and reprobate (he was later dismissed for misconduct in an unrelated matter) made some form of sexual advance towards 14-year-old Kate, who was known as something of a beauty in the district.

Kate, a brilliant horse- and bushwoman who shared Ned's feisty temperament, didn't take the unwanted advance well. The ensuing fight, including an alleged gunshot wound to the constable's hand, would result in the imprisonment of her mother, Ellen, for three years, and spark a rampage of retribution throughout the colony by her outlaw brothers. Ned's belief that he was defending Kate's chastity knew no bounds, except those imposed by the gallows two years later. Kate was a vocal supporter of Ned during his trial and became an advocate for the abolition of the death sentence while still in her teens. Her supreme skills in wild west shows, which helped her survive, caused some to believe she was the fifth member of the gang.

After moving to Forbes, NSW - some say to escape the turmoil of her past - Kate married a blacksmith and horse-breaker called William "Brickie" Foster in 1888, and was known locally as Ada Foster. It was here that her life began to unravel, with the loss of three of her six children, a growing struggle with alcohol and continuing abuse from a violent husband.

Advertisement

In May 1898, police were called to a fracas at the Foster residence and Brickie was charged for using indecent language. It was not long afterwards that Kate's decomposed body was found floating in Lake Forbes. She was just 36. Many believe she took her own life, but others are convinced of a more sinister ending at the hands of her abusive husband.

This story of high drama and loss has inspired Sydney artist Gria Shead to portray Kate Kelly's life on canvas, in the tradition of Sidney Nolan's iconic Kelly series, painted in 1946-47. Shead's body of work, entitled Flash Kate, begins with Kate as an innocent young girl, continues through the years of the Kelly Gang to her later life as a wife and mother in Forbes.

There are hints of a love affair between a young Kate and Ned's best friend, the handsome Joe Byrne, whose taste for women, opium and poetry would have made him a perfect fit in the beat generation 100 years later.

As displayed in Shead's paintings, Kate Kelly was a woman of passion, but one who found herself invariably isolated in the heart of the Australian bush.

Flash Kate is showing at Art Equity, Level One, 66 King Street, Sydney, from July 10-25.