In a six-month time span, Walton County sheriff’s deputies reported as many as 90 accidents on busy roads. Saturday morning alone they pulled over at least 12 people for speeding.

That’s why, June through August, deputies have stepped up their efforts, as part of Operation Safe Travels, to crack down on speeding drivers.

They’re patrolling the busy roads to and from the beaches to make all vacationers, like best friends Carolyn and Laine, more aware of their speed.

"We’re from Cleveland, Missouri,” Carolyn said. “Which is south of Kansas City about 40 miles."

Carolyn, her mother and her best friend, Laine, stopped on County Road 331. Like many vacationers ahead and behind of them, they stopped for a picture with the “Welcome to Florida” sign greeting them at the Alabama-Florida border.

"We have a group of about a little over 20 people going down to a beach house on Panama City Beach,” Laine said. “And we're really excited about it!"

They are just a few of the thousands of people who make their way to the beaches every summer and take 331 to get there.

According to the sheriff’s department, busy roads leading to the beach, like 331 and Highway 98, see three times as many accidents as other roads in the county.

According to Lieutenant Dewey Adams, the department hopes Operation Safe Travels makes people, especially tourists, check their speed.

Adams said they have seen a growth in the number of visitors to Walton County in the last few years and don’t expect that to slow down any time soon.

Although Carolyn and Laine are ready for summer fun, they said they have been taking it easy on the road.

"We actually have a surf board on top of our car,” Laine said. “So we're kind of having to maintain our slower speed so it doesn't go flying off."

Lt. Adams said deputies will do a similar operation when schools starts. Named for the Blue Bird yellow school buses, Operation Blue Bird will provide concentrated enforcement to make sure people are driving safely near school zones and bus stops.