The Murrieta protest strongly reminded me of what the Tea Party used to do when it came to ObamaCare. A small number of ordinary people used social media to get the word out and organize protests.

The media denounced them. The politicians denounced them. But in the end they helped turned the tide of public opinion.

In the Murrieta protest, much of the organizing seems to have come from Patrice Lynes, a nurse, using Twitter and Facebook.

After speaking with friends, Lynes and others decided to stage demonstrations against the drops in Murrieta and in support of Border Patrol agents who were not being permitted to do their job and enforce the laws. Beginning with only a couple dozen people – mostly moms – and consulting with staffers from the office of Rep. Kevin Calvert, R-Calif., Lynes raised her army of “minutemen” to oppose dumping of illegal aliens in her community. Lynes’ group targets the federal government’s airline flights as well as its busses. “Flights arrive every 72 hours” Lynes told WND in an exclusive interview. “We will be there.” Lynes said she is not confining her protests to her own county only, but is reaching out to other targets of the illegal drops to help others organize the same way citizens did in Murrieta. She described what she did: “I just called two friends, we got out on the street to warn all the citizens what was happening … then we started to show up at our Border Patrol station to support the Border Patrol, to say we understand that your hands are tied, we know you’re not allowed to enforce the laws, but we want the illegals repatriated to their home countries.” “I am willing to help whomever wants to do this,” she said. “I’m inspired because I love America!”

That's how real populist grass roots action works.

The patriots are pitted against an army of special interests. NBC has been deliberately astroturfing pro-amnesty protesters, right down to pushing a Twitter hashtag. The Republican Party's top people are pushing amnesty and lying about it.

The situation is similar to, but also worse than ObamaCare, because there is no establishment opposition at all. The only real opposition is coming from ordinary people who are fed up.

Lynes has reminded us again that ordinary people can make a difference by standing up and fighting back. She may only have a handful of Twitter followers and a sparsely visited Facebook page, but it was enough to bring out a critical mass of people and then to attract others.

Protester Roger Cotton, 49, drove up from San Diego to wave a flag outside of the Murrieta Border Patrol Station. Cotton arrived shortly after the bus was blocked and turned around. He said he decided to come to Murrieta on his own accord and was surprised to find other protesters there. Another crowd member said she missed the protests on Tuesday but asked, “Is there another bus coming and where can I be when it does?”

This is how a few people working together can build a movement.

I'm not saying that the Tea Party is done or that it needs to be replaced, but this is a reminder of how it got started. Ordinary people standing up to the government over their political grievances.