Statistical analysis shows CU won't reach 80 percent six-year grad rate until 2044

University of Colorado professor Marcus Farr holds one of the building design models made by Environmental Design students using the laser cutter at the Center for Innovation and Creativity. Among other efforts, CU is involving administrators, faculty, staff and students campus-wide to improve already successful programs, add new mentoring opportunities, institute pre-testing requirements in math and bolster support for students at risk of leaving CU in an attempt to raise its overall graduation rate. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Chancellor Phil DiStefano wants to improve the University of Colorado's six-year graduation rate to 80 percent by 2020, but unless the campus makes big changes, it's unlikely to reach that mark for decades.

That's the finding of a new data analysis from CU's Office for Performance Improvement, which was formed last year to help enhance campus units using data.

The six-year graduation rate is a federal standard often used to compare colleges and universities across the country.

"The probability of hitting 80 percent in 2020 was 5 percent less than the Buffs winning the Pac-12 championship in football this year," Jeff Luftig told a group of faculty recently, comparing CU's chance of reaching the chancellor's goal to its underperforming football team.

"... the first cohort that will hit the 80 percent graduation rate will start school here in 2038 and finish in 2044," Luftig said. "Math tells us that 2044 minus 2020 is decades away, which I think we can all agree is somewhat of a gap."

Luftig, who heads the performance improvement office, analyzed an array of data sets to show CU administrators why reaching that goal in 2020 is so unlikely, and what factors might be holding the campus back.

CU has been making strides in recent years. The campus' six-year graduation rate rose from 68 percent in 2012 to 70 percent in 2013. A significant number of students — 44.3 percent — finish their degree within four years.

Advertisement

The Boulder campus led the state among four-year, public institutions in Colorado with its 68 percent six-year graduation rate in 2012, according to data compiled by the Colorado Department of Higher Education.

But, according to Luftig's calculations, CU is not doing enough.

Campus leaders say they're using his research as a road map for what to do next to help more CU students succeed.

Kyle Heinrich holds one of the model pieces Environmental Design students made using a laser cutter at CU's Center for Innovation and Creativity. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"Jeff's research confirms what we had already suspected: If we don't fundamentally change the way we are engaging students, we will not reach an 80 percent graduation rate by 2020," DiStefano said in a statement. "... we must do better and take stronger actions to support students — especially those who are struggling academically — throughout their endeavors here."

Factors

A school's six-year graduation rate is calculated by tracking students in a particular cohort — how many students who start in a certain year finish at the same school within six years? It does not take into account transfer students, only those students who enter as freshmen and graduate as seniors.

One of the biggest challenges to improving that rate is getting first-year students to come back for a second year, Luftig said.

According to Luftig's data, approximately 17 percent of CU arts and sciences freshmen were on academic probation in the fall of 2013 for a too-low grade point average. There's a 42.5 percent chance that a student on probation in his or her first semester will be dismissed in the second semester, Luftig said.

"Most of the students we lose, we lose in the first year," he said. "Probation in the fall is a leading indicator for dismissal in the spring of the first year. On average, we lose 16 percent of all of our cohort in the first year."

The university loses another 7 percent in the cohort's second year, plus another 2.2 percent in the third year.

"You can kiss 80 percent goodbye," he said.

There are other reasons why students don't come back for a second year, Provost Russ Moore wrote in a campus newsletter this month.

Some perceive that the campus doesn't care about them personally or feel that a degree isn't worth it when compared to a job. Others leave because they feel they get treated poorly by campus offices. Some say they can't get into the classes they need, Moore wrote.

Certain demographic markers also make it more likely that students will leave, Luftig said. Their high school grade point average, whether they need financial aid, whether other members of their family have gone to college, ethnicity and even when they completed their housing application all play a role in predicting student success, he said.

It's a combination, not one factor alone, that leads a student to leave the university, he said. That makes keeping students in school all the more challenging for faculty, staff and administrators.

"It's never one thing," Luftig said. "If it was one thing, we would've fixed it a long time ago."

Efforts

Luftig also offered some suggestions for helping students stay at the university and complete their degrees.

To help more first-year students return for a second year, Luftig suggested working to lower the academic probation rate. One way, Luftig said, is to ensure that first-year students are taking a math course that fits with their skill level.

Beyond that, faculty could look at teaching practices, Luftig suggested.

"We also have to ask ourselves why we have multiple sections with multiple faculty teaching the same class, and we have failure rates between 16 and 38 percent," he said. "Those are real numbers."

The campus has been working for the last year on a number of programs and projects to help retain students and get them to graduate in six years.

CU has shaken up traditional advising practices so that students can see an adviser in the evenings and without an appointment. Their hope is that students will work with an adviser early if they feel they're in the wrong major or struggling in a class. Talking to an adviser about degree progress also should help them stay on track to graduate in six years or less.

Additionally, CU leaders are implementing a new campus-wide advising software to provide a "cohesive network of information and support" for students across departments, according to the provost. The new system is expected to be especially useful for students who transfer to a new college or school at CU.

The campus also instituted a new pre-testing requirement for students entering math-based classes to give them a better chance at success, and created a faculty-student mentoring program.

Luftig said he's working on an "early-warning algorithm" that will plug in all of a student's information and let an adviser know if he or she is at risk for leaving the university.

He said he's also urging CU's administration to "stop nibbling around the edges" and make significant changes if the campus is serious about meeting the chancellor's goal.

As fall semester finals draw closer, the provost implored students to meet with an academic advisor, talk to their professors and examine their time-management skills. He urged them to speak to someone soon if they're struggling with depression, alcohol or drug use or not adapting well to college life.

"The need to graduate more students in a more timely fashion has never been greater," Moore said. "It is a moral imperative for us . . . when we graduate more students, the quality of our students will go up, the quality of our institution will rise accordingly, our rankings among our peers will improve and our resources will be better utilized. In the long term, it will provide more financial stability for the institution."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta