Berton Ring is a landlord's son who grew up to be an attorney Chicago landlords hate.

One of the most prominent tenants' rights attorneys in Chicago, he has sued them over security deposits, mold problems, evictions, even sexual assault. Ring estimates he has won at least 90 percent of his cases that have gone to trial.

But to many of the city's apartment owners, Ring and other tenant lawyers are extortionists who file class-action suits over trivial violations, such as not handing tenants a copy of the city's porch safety ordinance when they sign a lease. Some cases have resulted in six-figure judgments, with much of the money going to the attorneys—a big reason landlords say the city's landlord-tenant ordinance needs to be rewritten.

“Bert Ring and similar ilk look for ways to exploit it for fees, and it has zero to do with protecting the victim and everything to do with stuffing their pockets,” says Lee Kiser, an apartment investor and principal at Kiser Group, a Chicago-based brokerage.

Ring shrugs off the harsh words and says the ordinance is working the way it's supposed to. “We try to do a good job. We try to be fair,” he says. “I would think that they hate me because everybody wants to win.”

For years, passions have run hot over the ordinance, which Mayor Harold Washington signed into law in 1986. Landlords get the most worked up over provisions regarding security deposits, porch-safety dislosures and a requirement that they provide every tenant with a summary of the law. The penalties for innocent mistakes by landlords are excessive, they say. Property owners also criticize the city's rules on evictions, saying they make it gratuitously difficult to kick out deadbeat tenants.

Exhibit A in their case for change is North Side apartment landlord Horizon Group Management, which filed for bankruptcy protection last fall, saying it didn't have money to pay the attorneys who represented its tenants in a class-action suit.

The lead tenant in the case had accused Horizon of shortchanging her $1.40 in interest on a security deposit and not providing required porch safety disclosures. The company settled by agreeing to pay the tenants $45,000. But after four years of litigation, the judge also ordered it to pay $833,455 in attorney fees, prompting the Chapter 11 filing. Ring did not work on the case.

Landlords say they shouldn't be forced to pay such big fees for minor transgressions.

“It's like going 66 (mph) in a 65,” Kiser says. “It's a felony conviction and 90 days hard labor. I'm not saying you shouldn't have to pay a fine for doing 66 in a 65, but the punishment's got to fit the crime.”

The Chicago ordinance includes some of the strongest tenant protections in the county, but it creates the right incentives, tenant attorney Mark Silverman says. Eliminate the prospect for a big payout and most attorneys won't be interested in representing tenants with valid claims, he says. “If you take that away, it's abusive the other way in favor of the landlord,” he says.

While acknowledging that the ordinance is “draconian,” Ring doesn't have much pity for landlords that don't comply with it. Many of them employ “scorched earth tactics” to fight legitimate suits when they could save a lot of money by settling their cases earlier, he says.

SIMPLE MISTAKES?

Tenant attorneys also don't buy the argument made by some landlords that managing security deposits and performing the other administrative tasks required by the code are easy to get wrong. Kiser says the job can be harder than one might think, especially when a landlord has thousands of apartments, multiple bookkeepers and a different move-in day for every tenant.

“Just because you're a good landlord doesn't mean you don't make a mistake,” he says.

Ring, a 56-year-old Glencoe resident, leads a four-attorney firm based in the Loop. But being a tenant lawyer wasn't his first choice.

Raised in Wilmette, Ring started working at age 10 for his father's local construction business and property company, which owned about 200 apartments. He whacked weeds, managed laundry rooms and even delivered eviction notices. He later handled bookkeeping—he graduated with an accounting degree from Indiana University—working for his father through law school at DePaul University.

Ring tried to get work representing landlords early in his legal career but had a hard time. Representing tenants proved to be a path of less resistance. He earned his first fee by suing the owner of a North Side apartment building that the city had ordered vacated because it had no heat and “was not habitable for human beings,” he says.

“I thought, OK, that's a good way to make a living and help people out and get the quality of housing to a better way,” Ring says.

Since then, he's gone on to build a reputation in the city's rental housing industry.

“He's notorious in the business—notorious for being very aggressive and, many people say, very mean,” says Stuart Handler, CEO of TLC Management, which owns about 3,200 apartments in the area. “I will spend whatever it takes to fight these people so I don't become their piggybank. You don't want them coming back. If we're in the right, we will fight them.”

Ring responds: “Not giving up, that's my reputation. We really don't give up and we go all the way, though the landlords are hoping we give up early on.”

Many of Ring's cases are settled out of court. Last year, he negotiated a $200,000 settlement in a class-action suit accusing the owner of a Lincoln Park apartment building of not paying tenants interest on their security deposits, he says. He also is working on a lawsuit filed in 2013 that accuses the owner of a 1,115-unit apartment complex near O'Hare International Airport of concealing the presence of mold and asbestos from its tenants.

The Illinois Appellate Court ruled against Ring in a key case last year, saying landlords wary of violating the city ordinance can charge move-in fees instead of collecting security deposits in some cases. Ring argued the fee was a “disguised security deposit.”

About five years ago, the city also relaxed the ordinance to give landlords more time to fix mistakes on security deposits or interest, a change that Ring admits led to a decline in business for him. But he says he is picking up more work these days consulting for landlords who need help complying with the ordinance or representing them when they get sued.