Michigan Rep. Todd Courser is heard on audio recordings trying to concoct a cover-up for his affair with Rep. Cindy Gamrat.

The Michigan lawmaker who allegedly tried faking a homosexual affair — to cover up an actual affair he was having with a colleague — now says he wanted to “expose” blackmailers who were onto his cheating.

“It was not my finest moment,” state Rep. Todd Courser (R-Lansing) said in a half-hour recorded statement he released Monday responding to the tryst twist.

“It was the only option that I felt would be unpredicted by the blackmailer.”

Courser accuses his former aide Ben Graham of working with the blackmailers to leak info about the affair with Rep. Cindy Gamrat.

Reps. Cindy Gamrat and Todd Courser in the House of Representative in Lansing earlier this year. (Dale G. Young/AP)

Courser said he and his wife had been working through the sordid affair for months and it was “unfortunate” the information became public.

He also says he refuses to resign, as doing so would be “submitting to the authority of the establishment machine.”

State House officials have seized computers and records from Courser and Gamrat’s offices for an investigation of whether they used taxpayer resources during their affair, the Detroit News reported.

Rep. Todd Courser allegedly wrote an email falsely outing himself for an imaginary encounter with a male prostitute. The email was an attempt to divert attention from his actual affair.

“If we discover anything illegal, that will certainly be turned over for review by the Attorney General’s Office,” Speaker Kevin Cotter said.

Cotter also slammed Courser’s statement, telling the Detroit Free Press it is “another in a long series of deflections.”

Courser’s convoluted cover-up emerged last week in audio recordings released to the Detroit News. In the recordings, Courser is heard trying to convince Graham to release an email Courser wrote himself, falsely accusing himself of being caught in a nightclub with a male prostitute. The email called him a “Godless addiction monster” and “bi-sexual porn addicted sex deviant.”

Graham refused, and then was fired last month.

The emails were an attempt to turn attention from Courser’s ongoing affair with Gamrat, and destroy his reputation in hopes of preserving hers.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE.