Country singer Kenny Chesney got a show just hours before he was scheduled to perform at Sports Authority Field at Mile High on Saturday.

Standing on the sideline for Day 8 of Broncos training camp, Chesney got a front-row view of 39-year-old Peyton Manning’s oft-scrutinized mobility.

The highlight came early in team drills, when Manning rolled out and ran to the right sideline, mere feet from his longtime friend Chesney, for a first down.

The Broncos’ quarterback followed with a rollout and over-the-shoulder pass to tight end Owen Daniels for a touchdown.

“(Offensive coordinator Rick Dennison) had him on the move like a young man today,” coach Gary Kubiak said with a smile. “We tried to work him good today.”

Manning, who was set to hop on a flight to Canton, Ohio, for Bill Polian’s induction into the Pro Football Hall of Fame, wasn’t the only one putting on a show Saturday.

The defense had arguably its finest day yet in camp, with cornerback Aqib Talib leading the way. His pick-six, in which he stepped right in front of Andre Caldwell for the catch, was called back because of an offsides penalty on Bradley Roby. But for camp, it counted.

“They made more plays on the ball today than they’ve been making,” Kubiak said of the defense. “The thing we have to eliminate defensively is we were having some penalties — some penalties that extended some drives for the offense today.”

Talib’s performance though was just a continuation of the strong showing he’s had throughout camp.

“The difference in this league between a good corner and a great corner are guys who have ball skills,” Kubiak said. “A lot of guys can cover, but when the ball is there, can you make the play on the ball? Can you make the pick? Can you take it the other way? As an offensive guy, attacking corners that you know don’t have ball skills, you’re not afraid. That’s what separates him.”

The Broncos strapped on the pads Saturday, but a handful of veterans only observed from the sideline.

Receiver Emmanuel Sanders, cornerback Chris Harris and safety David Bruton are all dealing with minor leg soreness and did not participate. They were joined on the sideline by inside linebacker Steve Johnson (sprained knee), outside linebacker Lerentee McCray (groin), defensive tackle Marvin Austin (groin), offensive tackle Michael Schofield (back), safety Ross Madison (groin) and cornerback Curtis Marsh (quadriceps).

Defensive lineman Derek Wolfe, who is in the protocol after suffering a concussion in Thursday’s practice, watched from the sideline.

The Broncos opened practice with walk-throughs for the offensive lines. Ty Sambrailo, Louis Vasquez, Matt Paradis, Max Garcia and Ryan Harris again took reps with the first unit.

The team returns Sunday for both a morning workout open to fans (9:30 a.m.-11:30 a.m.) and an afternoon walk-though. Manning will be back from Canton in time for the afternoon walk-through, but Kubiak said he plans to rest him a number of veterans.

Footnotes: Kubiak said C.J. Anderson “got a little shoulder nick” and, at Kubiak’s request, stopped early. … Linebacker Danny Trevathan took team reps, continuing his slow return back to full strength following knee surgery in January. … Kayvon Webster participated early but has been bothered by rib soreness on his right side, so coaches had him stop.

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickijhabvala

T.D.’s take. Broncos Ring of Famer and all-time leading rusher Terrell Davis attended practice Saturday as an analyst with the NFL Network. He spoke to general manager John Elway, his former quarterback. He spoke to wide receiver Demaryius Thomas. And he watched practice alongside the players and coaches as Manning showed off his mobility in Kubiak’s offense.

Afterward, Davis gave his thoughts on the new-look Broncos, and whether he thinks Kubiak’s system will work.

“There are a lot of questions about whether Peyton Manning can run this offense,” Davis said. “I’m like, he’s Peyton Manning — why wouldn’t he be able to run this offense? What you’re going to do is just take what he does best. Those plays, you’re going to put them into the game plan. The ones he doesn’t do well, you take them out.”

Davis believes Manning may play a role similar to Elway’s in the late 1990s, when Kubiak was his offensive coordinator. Although the Broncos had a more balanced attack then, it did not mean a lesser role for the QB.

“I don’t think John took a lesser role when he was our quarterback here,” Davis said. “It’s a different role. You’re just not asked to do what you did in the past, and that is to throw it 45, 50 times a game.

“(Manning is) still capable of throwing it 50, 40 times a game. I don’t think they’re going to ask him to do it, but I don’t see it like him taking a lesser role.”