Since the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act — known as Obamacare — took effect, businesses throughout the nation have been grappling with how to manage employee benefits.

Some businesses did not understand the regulations; others simply could afford to provide benefits; and others still are trying to figure out how to the handle the change.

Fortunately, there are professionals to assist businesses and provide insight and guidance to make the transition as smooth as possible.

Here to answer this week's “Behind the List” questions and shed light on health care reform and employee benefits is Gabe Lisicky of Advantis Benefits Group in South Whitehall Township.

Lehigh Valley Business: How long has Advantis Benefits Group been operating in the region and what are its primary services?

Gabe Lisicky: Since 2008, we are a full service employee benefits agency. Our target market is to service groups of sizes ranging from two to 400 employees. We offer group health, life, disability, dental and vision, among other ancillary products.

We negotiate with insurance carriers on behalf of our clients and act as an extension of their human resources department. We advise on everything from billing problems, claims processing to health care reform and compliance.

LVB: What have been some of the biggest challenges that Advantis Benefits Group has encountered since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act? What opportunities has it presented?

Lisicky: The biggest challenge is the uncertainty in the marketplace. Brokers and third-party administrators have given clients inaccurate information, and this has opened up a huge opportunity for us to solve problems that others cannot.

The reason is we have an actuary to do studies for our larger clients and coordinate their findings with our legal department so that they can have peace of mind when dealing with us. This ensures the client is not overpaying for their health care premiums backed by their own claims data.

Also, the employer and individual mandates have forced most to take a look at their own personal situations. We are seeing higher deductibles and out-of-pocket maximums that each individual must pay before the insurance kicks in.

Thus, one must fully understand what they are buying in the marketplace. Our job has turned into “Health Care 101” with many of our individual clients.

LVB: Does Advantis Benefits Group work solely in the Greater Lehigh Valley, or does it expand into other markets?

Lisicky: Advantis Benefits Group is able to service clients in all counties in Pennsylvania and all of New Jersey. Our main focus is the Greater Lehigh Valley and surrounding counties.

LVB: How does Advantis Benefits Group directly stimulate the local economy?

Lisicky: Advantis Benefits group stimulates the economy by saving employers and employees on their medical insurance premium dollars. Employers have more money to reinvest in their business and to hire new employees, while employees have more money to spend on consumer goods and services for their families.

We also are proud of our commitment to numerous charities, including Coaches vs. Cancer and Leukemia & Lymphoma Society of the Lehigh Valley.

LVB: What does the future look like for Advantis Benefits Group? Does it have plans for growth?

Lisicky: Yes. The inability of politicians to do what is best for Americans regarding health insurance continues to make the health insurance industry look murky, at best. The next presidential election will determine if the health care law remains intact or if it gets repealed.

We are exceptionally well-poised to continue to clarify the haze created by the Affordable Care Act because of our integrity and experience. Our staff prides itself on keeping our clients up to speed on the constant changes in the law.