Christian Wells thought he had the perfect tool for the rollout of Obamacare: a website enabling health insurance shoppers to compare prices and coverage based on their own health conditions. He hadn't counted on the program's stutter-step start, however.

Mr. Wells, a former Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois analyst, launched PlanMatcher Inc. in January. The fourth federally licensed health care exchange in Chicago and the 36th nationally, it offered policies from Aetna Inc., Coventry Health Care Inc., Humana Insurance Co. and Blue Cross. When open enrollment ended on April 15, the site had logged just 10,000 unique visitors and signed up 62 people. Revenue for 2014, he projects, will total $15,000 from commissions on monthly insurance premiums.

Wait till next year, the 38-year-old CEO says today. If PlanMatcher can drum up $850,000 in funding, Mr. Wells says it could offer personalized comparisons and sell policies in 10 states including Texas, Florida and Pennsylvania.

Notwithstanding its humble beginning, PlanMatcher's portal has features that larger exchanges lack. It offers a single-page application and doesn't require a logon, like River North-based GoHealth LLC, or answering a “parade of other questions” before it quotes premiums, Mr. Wells says. It also shows expected expenses based on age and whether the person has diabetes, say, or is a smoker. PlanMatcher is targeted to the uninsured who are computer-competent.

“Being upfront with pricing is key,” Mr. Wells says. “If a person is buying health insurance, shouldn't the website ask them about their health?”

DEPAUL CONNECTION

Harold Welsch, entrepreneurship program director at DePaul University, praises the site: “I was impressed with it the minute I saw it.”

Mr. Wells, who lives in Oak Park, spent eight years at IBM Corp. after earning a bachelor's degree in computer science in 1999 from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He then worked for five years at Health Care Service Corp.'s Blue Cross subsidiary, where he hatched his business plan.

He has invested $61,000 in the venture so far, while another DePaul professor — Mr. Wells is working toward his MBA at the university — chipped in $10,000. In May, PlanMatcher won $5,000 in a student competition sponsored by the Coleman Center. (Mr. Welsch recused himself from the contest.) Mr. Wells' co-founders — Vinson Garcia, formerly lead engineer at Orbitz Worldwide Inc., and Ron Lump, previously a Bloomberg LP software engineer — have contributed sweat equity.

Jeff Schick, vice president of collaborations at IBM in New York, has known Mr. Wells for more than a decade and serves as a technical adviser. He says scaling the business will be a challenge but that Mr. Wells is up to the job. “He's simplified the process (of buying insurance) and made it easy and intuitive. His approach represents innovation at the heart of this thinking.”

Editor's note: Harold Welsch's title has been corrected.