Share This Story 165 Tweet Share Email

Jimmie Jenkins, 49, was in the St. Clair County Jail when he received news that changed his life.

In December 2014, he was told to come to the front of the jail — he had a phone call.

He rarely received phone calls. Or visits. Or mail.

“It was my daughter,” Jenkins said. “I could tell by the Indiana area code. I picked up the phone and she said, ‘Dad, I lost my baby … she’s dead.’”

His granddaughter, Jiniha Jenkins, would be 6 years old this year.

That was the moment he knew he had to change. Eight months later, he left the jail — with no home, no car, no job, no friends, no family and no money.

Jenkins has children, four of them in their late teens and early 20s, and two grandchildren. But it has been nine years since he lived with them and three years since he last saw their faces.

Since jail, he's been sleeping in a homeless shelter — but he is working toward a way out.

Food and shelter are the top priorities for the Blue Water Rescue Mission and other agencies that help the homeless. But food and shelter isn't enough for someone like Jenkins trying to escape cycles of chronic homelessness.

Missing are continued support services that can include job placement assistance, financial management assistance, continued counseling, mental health services and the basic life-skills training that the homeless need to succeed under their own roofs.

National Hunger and Homeless Awareness Week is Nov.14 to 22. It's a week to focus on the challenges and needs of the community. The Port Huron area has multiple emergency housing shelters along with permanent housing assistance programs.

Jimmie Jenkins checks up on his kids on Facebook at Port of Hopes Thursday afternoon.



(Photo: NICOLE HAYDEN, TIMES HERALD)

A place to call home Jobs and housing are vital, but it’s not enough.’

The Blue Water Rescue Mission, Blue Water Safe Horizons and the Harbor for Youth all offer emergency temporary shelter. Each caters to a different demographic and need.

The shelters open in the evening and close in the early mornings, sending the homeless to find someplace else to go.

Kathy Swantek, Blue Water Developmental Housing executive director, said there is not enough funding to keep homeless shelters open 24 hours a day.

The Blue Water Rescue Mission, which services only men, plans to become a 24-hour shelter on Jan. 1 — however, more funding is needed.

In order to keep the doors open all day, an additional resident adviser needs to be hired. And his salary needs to be paid.

The rescue mission will offer various programs throughout the day, such as a job skills class.

During the day, many without homes search for jobs, head to local libraries, check in with their counselors or frequent the Port of Hopes, a day center that offers access to computers, televisions and a kitchen — basically a warm, dry place to stay until the shelters open in the evening hours.

At 7 a.m., Jenkins is out the door of the rescue mission. He works on checking items off of his to-do list — finding a job, meeting with his counselor and finding housing. He also spends much of his time at the Port of Hopes watching television and lifting weights.

Some of the shelters offer breakfast and dinner. Mid-City Nutrition in Port Huron fills the lunch and dinner gap for those who are hungry.

Jenkins has frequented Mid-City for lunch, and sometimes dinner, for the past nine years.

The soup kitchen operates every day of the week and there are food pantries in nearly every city of the county. In the past fiscal year, Mid-City Nutrition served more than 57,000 meals to 1,661 individuals.

Alice Rieves, Mid-City Nutrition director, said there are enough resources to feed people in the community. She said the need for her clients comes with tackling drug addictions and finding permanent housing.

The motto for many service organizations is “housing first,” Swantek said.

Blue Water Safe Horizons is the county’s designated Housing Assessment Resource Agency. The agency screens clients and assists in placing people in permanent housing.

Housing choice vouchers, formally known as Section 8, allows those who qualify to obtain a rental home of their choice at a lower cost. Those with vouchers will continue to receive monthly rental assistance but may have to pay a portion of the rent up to 40 percent. The vouchers are funded through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Swantek said in St. Clair County there is a long wait list to receive a housing voucher.

On Tuesday, Jenkins met with a housing counselor at Blue Water Safe Horizons to apply for housing assistance. He hopes to get help with rental payments and a security deposit. He was told to check back every week for an update on the status of his application. He said he heard it could take 60 to 90 days to be placed in a house.

Supported housing programs, which differ from vouchers, are designed to place low- to moderate-income individuals in permanent housing with continued services.

The housing developments partner with local organizations, such as St. Clair County Community Mental Health, to provide continued support and counseling to those clients.

“Supported housing is the type of housing that we are finding extremely successful in helping people maintain housing,” said Eric Hufnagel, Michigan Coalition of Homelessness executive director. “Supported housing helps people deal with or address those issues that may otherwise put them at risk of losing housing again.”

However, funding for those supportive services is minimal.

Blue Water Safe Horizons manages 120 supported housing placements in the Blue Water Area. Of those, 15 are new placements within the past year.

Case managers are appointed to follow up with the households and offer support services when needed.

“We have three case managers for those 120 households,” said Erica Grant, Blue Water Safe Horizons HARA manager. “Trying to see each household individually is pretty hard. Sometimes we can’t be there monthly or can only do phone calls instead of home visits. Because we act as their advocate it can be detrimental when we are not there.”

Grant said Blue Water Safe Horizons does not have enough funding to hire more case managers. The salary for each of the three case managers is less than $20,000 a year, she said.

Grant said while the federal and state dollars are allocated specifically for housing, there are no funds set aside for case management and support services.

“Jobs and housing are vital, but it’s not enough,” Koontz said. “There are so many other needs to meet.”

Bunks inside of Blue Water Rescue Mission.



(Photo: NICOLE HAYDEN, TIMES HERALD)

The space between ’They fall into this homeless abyss.’

There are many causes of homelessness, so a one-size-fits-all solution won’t solve the issue. Mental illness, substance abuse, domestic violence and economic struggles are just a few root causes.

Some who experience homelessness only need one-time assistance, perhaps to find a new job or to get help with a security deposit for a new apartment.

But many that have experienced chronic homelessness need long-term support in order to stay independent in their own home.

A major cause of chronic homelessness is a mental health diagnosis, which includes substance abuse.

Jenkins said he was diagnosed as bi-polar and schizophrenic. He said the mental challenges make it difficult to perform well at jobs and it makes him extremely uncomfortable around most people. He often has mood changes, as well.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Jimmie Jenkins, of Port Huron, shares his story of homelessness Nicole Hayden

“People need services available to them to help them deal with the issues that caused their homelessness,” Hufnagel said. “What are the odds of being successful at maintaining housing if grappling with the issue that led them to be homeless in the first place?”

Koontz said in the past year, 70 percent of the men that stayed at the rescue mission had a mental health diagnosis.

Michael Tawney, McLaren Port Huron chief medical officer, said mental health-related homelessness is becoming a chronic problem since there is no safety net of facilities or adequate services for those individuals.

“They fall into this homeless abyss,” Tawney said. “In the past there were more mental health facilities and places to go. Now those facilities are non-existent and there is no funding. The state used to have mental health hospitals and facilities. The service level for those with a mental health diagnosis was greater in the past.”

Swantek said support services such as continued budgeting and financial advising and counseling for domestic violence victims are also needed.

Ideally, HARA case managers are the advocates for that vulnerable population, but without additional funding only so much assistance can be provided.

St. Clair County Community Mental Health partners with many shelters and support housing programs to provide counseling services to clients as well. It provides services that range from mental health counseling to free bus tickets. But again, limited funding can only extend services so far.

Jenkins meets with a CMH counselor each week. The counselor has coached him through each step that brings him closer to overcoming his homelessness. He said his CMH counselor is the one who told him about the Blue Water Rescue Mission and about the services that DHHS offers, such as food stamps.

“I would like to see housing that still allows people to receive that assistance from (The Department of Health and Human Services) and (Community Mental Health),” Koontz said. “We need to be able to continue to provide those services as people transition into being independent. Instant independence tends to result in relapse and falling back into a lifestyle that caused the homelessness in the first place.”

Jimmie Jenkins signs in to Blue Water Rescue Mission Thursday night.

(Photo: NICOLE HAYDEN, TIMES HERALD)

Local organizations have also noted an increase in a growing number of large families and senior citizens in the Port Huron area who are experiencing homelessness. Many of the senior citizens have declining health on top of little income.

A person with a chronic disease, such as diabetes or high blood pressure, may need daily medication at specific times. That can be challenging with no stable housing, Tawney said.

“When people come into the ER who have been living on the streets we often find that their blood pressure or blood sugar is out of whack. They often don’t have a nutritious diet and that adds to the problem. Many are dehydrated and malnourished.”

While soup kitchens can provide calories, they don’t have the resources to tailor specific diets that someone with diabetes, for example, requires.

Additionally, Swantek would like to see a day-time community center that not only offers a warm shelter but engaging activities throughout the day.

“There is not really any place for individuals to go once the shelters close during the day,” Swantek said. “Maybe they go to the mall or walk around outside.”

A community center that provides free counseling, support services and educational classes, such as computer literacy or resume writing, would be ideal, Koontz said. But again, there is no funding for that.

Jenkins said the most difficult part about being homeless for him is meeting his hygiene needs, such as consistent showers. He is also hoping to find access to a free computer literacy class.

Blue Water Rescue Mission residents wait outside of the shelter Thursday evening until the doors open for the night.



(Photo: NICOLE HAYDEN, TIMES HERALD)

Got any spare change? ’It can get lonely, really lonely most days.’

In the past year, of the 1,000 individuals who Blue Water Safe Horizons screened for housing assistance, 800 were homeless.

Grant said that number represents a range of people, some who had been homeless a single day and other who are chronically homeless. On any given day, she estimates that there are about 100 people walking the streets of St. Clair County with no permanent home to retire to that night.

The 2014 Annual Homeless Assessment Report conducted by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban development reported that on a single night in 2014, 12,227 people were homeless in Michigan. In the United States, that number was 578,424.

Blue Water Safe Horizons has a $634,651 budget for its supportive housing programs. The majority of that funding comes from federal grants while just under $20,000 comes from fundraising. An additional $33,000 is budgeted each year for administrative costs related to the supportive housing programs.

Swantek said it is less costly to provide people with supportive housing than with just temporary assistance.

“In the long run getting people into a home is not only better for the individual, but for the community, too,” Swantek said. “If the person is out on the street, their health declines and they end up in the ER. Someone has to pay that hospital bill. Maybe they end up in the jail system; we are the ones paying for that.”

In 2014, McLaren Port Huron had a total of $13,805,047 in uncompensated care. That total does not just include costs connected to the homeless population, but all uncompensated care.

Tawney said many people use the emergency room as their family doctor — there are no co-pays, no appointments need to be made and no one is turned away, regardless of ability to pay.

“Even with the Affordable Care Act we have a demographic of people who just aren’t going to sign up for health care because they just can’t afford it,” Tawney said. “And if someone is homeless and they come into the ER, we don’t discharge them until we know they have a destination. So that can mean they stay in the ER until they have someplace to go.”

Blue Water Supportive Housing conducted a survey in 2010 to compare the cost of individual in supportive housing versus an individual without supportive housing.

The survey found that the individuals in St. Clair County in supportive housing combined cost the community $457,868. Before the individuals were in supportive housing they cost the community near $1.37 million collectively. The costs were based off of the numbers of times the individuals frequented hospitals and jails before they were in a supportive housing program versus the number of visits after they were placed in a supportive housing program, Swantek said.

Supported housing reduces the number of visits to emergency shelters, correctional facilities and emergency rooms.

The “housing first” initiative that local organization implement cite the most effective way to remedy homelessness is to provide housing first then treat the root cause of the homelessness.

A 2002 study conducted by Dennis Culhane, a University of Pennsylvania researcher, found that homeless people with mental illness who remained on the street, frequenting shelters, jails and hospitals, cost the city and state near $40,000 a year. The study found that homeless people with mental illness who were placed in supportive housing cost near $17,000 to house.

However, Grant said funding that was once allocated for those continued support services was cut a few years ago. The supportive housing programs now lack much of the supportive services that made the programs successful. Now organizations must figure out how to provide the same level of support without the available funding.

Swantek said finding enough funding to tackle the upfront costs of supportive housing for all of the people in need is the challenge.

As for Jenkins, he is doing his best to prevent himself for relapsing back into his previous lifestyle.

“It can get lonely, really lonely most days,” he said. “But I don’t know any positive people in this area. I don’t want to go back to the friends I had before I was in jail. I don’t want to go back to that negative lifestyle. I need to get myself together before I can be in my kids’ lives again.”

Contact Nicole Hayden at (810) 989-6279 or nhayden@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter @NicoleHayden_TH.

How to help

Blue Water Safe Horizons: In addition to financial donations, the shelter needs hygiene and living products such towels, linens, blankets and shampoo. The shelter also needs volunteers to assist with the Blue Water Safe Horizons pet project, maintaining its garden, working in the shelter and cleaning. Donations can be mailed to 228 Sixth St., Port Huron.

Blue Water Rescue Mission: The rescue mission needs financial donations to fund a full-time resident adviser in order to be able to remain open for 24-hours a day. Donations can be mailed or dropped off at 1920 24th St., Port Huron.

Mid-City Nutrition needs volunteers to sit with people and share conversation as they share a meal with the soup kitchen's visitors. The soup kitchen is located at 805 Chestnut St., Port Huron. For more information call (810) 982-9261.

Community discussion

The Times Herald is screening the documentary "Easy Street" at 7 p.m. Nov. 23 at The Raven Cafe, 932 Military St., Port Huron. After the screening a panel will discuss the challenges and needs in the Port Huron area relating to homelessness. Representatives from Mid-City Nutrition, Blue Water Safe Horizons, Blue Water Rescue Mission and Blue Water Developmental Housing will make up the panel. The event is free.