Senator Ted Cruz (R-TX) was on TV this morning to make political hay out of your Ebola fears and, to the surprise of no one, blame Obama for any and everything. Yep. The man who shut down the government in an effort to stop funding to Obamacare/access to affordable healthcare is now concern trolling the government over Ebola.

On CNN’s “State of the Union” Sunday, Cruz criticized the President over his fictional lack of leadership on Ebola, only proving that Ted Cruz must actively avoid facts because the President answered his questions days ago. Watch here:

Let’s count the things Ted Cruz doesn’t know anything about and doesn’t like (often one and the same):

Ted Cruz feels that only a doctor can best organize all the various government agencies to be in charge of Ebola, because we all know that doctors spend years in medical school learning to coordinate and emphasizing administrative and people skills. So, naturally President Obama’s appointment of an Ebola Czar to do the job that a Surgeon General would in part be doing had Ted Cruz’s party not put a hold on his nomination is no good.

Cruz doesn’t like Ron Klain for Ebola Czar because “Mr. Klain is not a doctor, he’s not a health care professional, he doesn’t have background in these issues.” Nope, Mr. Klain has management experience, both in the private and public sector. So he is a proven manager. Which is what this job is about, because it involves massive coordination among local and federal and global resources.

But when medical experts say a travel ban won’t work, including the Director of the CDC Dr. Tom Frieden — a doctor — Ted Cruz knows more than the doctor. Candy Crowley looked perplexed after she rolled the tape of Dr. Frieden trying to explain to people who pretend to make laws that scientists and doctors know special things.

Cruz does not understand why we can’t have a travel ban to West Africa, also, because this is “common sense.” He just doesn’t understand why the President won’t do this, even though the President has explained it repeatedly. Poor Mr. Cruz, he’s not much for gathering facts.

It is common sense, and that is why it is wrong. Expert sense says otherwise. The President explained days ago:

Finally, we can’t just cut ourselves off from West Africa, where this disease is raging. Our medical experts tell us that the best way to stop this disease is to stop it at its source-before it spreads even wider and becomes even more difficult to contain. Trying to seal off an entire region of the world-if that were even possible-could actually make the situation worse. It would make it harder to move health workers and supplies back and forth. Experience shows that it could also cause people in the affected region to change their travel, to evade screening, and make the disease even harder to track. So the United States will continue to help lead the global response in West Africa. Because if we want to protect Americans from Ebola here at home, we have to end it over there. And as our civilian and military personnel serve in the region, their safety and health will remain a top priority.

Cruz thinks only doctors can coordinate government because expertise! But don’t listen to “medical experts” when they explain that a travel ban would not work, because common sense takes precedence over the knowledge of elitist experts when a life threatening virus hits our shores.

See, the problem according to Cruz isn’t Ebola. The problem is that President Obama is politicizing things by trying to have someone in charge. “We don’t need a White House political operative, which is what Mr. Klain has been. What we need is presidential leadership… “The person who needs to be on top of this is the president of the United States.”

Good thing the President is on top of it.

Ted Cruz really doesn’t like it when healthcare is politicized, which is why he is on CNN politicizing FEARS over healthcare instead of healthcare. DUH.

So Cruz believes that it’s Obama who is politicizing Ebola, even though Republicans are clearly trying to run on Ebola now that Americans like their Obamacare. Trust Republicans, America! If they were in charge, things would be going so much better so long as they weren’t shutting down the government, defunding everything recklessly and bragging about their sequester get on Fox News, or looking the other way day after day while people who needed to be rescued died. See their Katrina response for a refresher.

Republicans don’t believe government should exist at all, unless they can blame Obama for government not being perfect in spite of their efforts to strangle and starve it. The only good thing government has ever done besides socialize the losses of big companies is give Republicans something with which to beat up the President.

Showing that he knows nothing about being a President and needing to calm Ebola hysteria, Cruz climbed atop his Shutdown Perch to smug-lecture, “We should be less concerned about giving the public the feeling that the government is on top of this and more concerned about the government actually being on top of it.”

Thanks for the help, Ted.

We can always count on Ted Cruz to be irrational and full of hate for the President, so much so that he forced his party to shutdown the government entirely last year, and has been making noises about it again after the election. But now that Ebola is here, Ted Cruz is all about Big Government and can’t understand why it’s not working perfectly. Concern troll is in the house.