Movies

It's the characters' lived-in quality that prevents this bloody and intense film from being more than just another B-movie.

Replay Video Icon Trailer: A Walk Among the Tombstones Private investigator Matthew Scudder is hired by a drug kingpin to find out who kidnapped and murdered his wife. PT2M17S http://www.smh.com.au/action/externalEmbeddedPlayer?id=d-3g6z6 620 349 September 20, 2014

Reviewer rating: Rating: 3.5 out of 5 stars Reader rating: Rating: 2 out of 5 stars (10 votes)

Liam Neeson is quite possibly the sturdiest 62-year-old in the movies. He looks as imposing as ever in A Walk Among the Tombstones – his shoulders are broad, his stride is purposeful and his gaze takes in everything, including, you soon realise, the flaws of his own character, former New York police detective turned private investigator Matt Scudder.

In recent years the leading man from Northern Ireland who starred in Schindler's List has carved out a profitable niche as a skilled slayer of faceless bad guys in the Taken movies, chopping, cutting and shooting adversaries with video-game regularity. But while A Walk Among the Tombstones shares some of those same B-movie roots, it's an unusually well-observed and gripping variant, one where murder is more than a matter of choreography.

It's like this: Liam Neesan, left, in a scene with Brian Bradley who plays a homeless teenager.

That marker is placed from the opening scene, where in 1991, Scudder starts his day in a deserted bar with coffee and two shots of whiskey. When a group of standover men kill the owner, Scudder pursues them, gunning down the first two and chasing after the third in what is a lean, effective set-piece. His bravado makes him jaunty when he closes in on the final perpetrator, and it's sickening instead of being triumphant.

Advertisement

The violence in the picture is sporadic, but bloody and intense. It also comes with ramifications, beginning with Scudder's ill-fated pursuit, and carrying over into his 1999 life, where he attends AA meetings and works as an unlicensed private detective who does "favours" for the kind of "gifts" that generally come in wads of cash. His apartment is bare, and so is his life.

When a wavering AA member, Pete Kristo (Boyd Holbrook), asks him to meet his brother, the gumshoe finds himself in the house of a narcotics trafficker who has quietly paid the ransom for his kidnapped wife. Scudder turns down the seething Kenny Kristo (a convincing Dan Stevens, a long way from Downton Abbey) at first, but takes the case when he hears a tape the kidnappers deliberately left behind.

Scudder's compassion and urge to make amends are real, but it never turns into cathartic retribution. It's noticeable there is barely a female character of any note In A Walk Among the Tombstones, and that appears to be deliberate. Like Andrew Dominik's Killing Them Softly, this is a film set in a masculine world turned malignant, with misogynistic violence as the monstrous outcome.

The film was adapted from Lawrence Block's novel by director Scott Frank, a successful Hollywood screenwriter whose credits include Out of Sight, Minority Report, and Marley & Me. His first feature behind the camera, 2007's The Lookout, was a minor crime thriller, but this time his judicious dialogue is matched by a suitably economic visual aesthetic marshalled by cinematographer Mihai Malaimare jnr (The Master).

The plotting gets flighty during the middle of the film, but there's a lived-in quality to the characters, especially Scudder, whose wariness at just where the need to act can lead you is captured by Neeson. The fallen cop has neither the confidence nor the otherworldly spy skills of Taken's Bryan Mills (who returns to cinemas for a third instalment in January) and his uncertainty adds to the urgency Frank crafts.

Frank cuts and pastes elements from Block's many Matt Scudder novels, including T.J. (Brian Bradley), a smart, homeless African-American teenager hiding out in a library who starts to shadow the detective, a decision that should set off alarm bells in the audience. But Scudder lies when he tells the kid he's just like Dashiell Hammett's famous fictional P.I. Sam Spade, with what follows revealing the grim reality.

Unlike the Tom Cruise vehicle Jack Reacher, Frank's film stays true to the hard-nosed milieu built around pre-gentrification neighbourhoods and difficult decisions. "They're not human", a suspect says of the cruel antagonists. But by revealing them from early on, Frank says they are, which makes their crimes all the more horrific.

Some may find A Walk Among the Tombstones an ugly film, but it keeps coming back to the humanity, however distorted, of these characters, and the idea of how people can go astray when they're trying to hold on to it. A key shoot-out keeps pausing in free-frames, not for stylish effect but to make you consider what's really happening. There's no easy pleasure to succumb to, but the movie is genuinely satisfying.