Tech firm moving 50 jobs CSC, which lost Medicaid contract, sends positions South

Rensselaer

An information technology company that is losing its contract to run the state Medicaid program is moving jobs from its data center in Rensselaer to a new hub outside Shreveport, La.

Computer Sciences Corp. will move about 50 of 800 jobs from the Rensselaer center, but the move is not related to the coming loss of the Medicaid billing contract, which ends in February 2016, said Richard Adamonis, CSC director of media relations, on Tuesday. The new center is located in Bossier City, La.

Adamonis said the Rensselaer center will remain open with "the potential of adding more positions." He said the changes were not connected to coming loss of the Medicaid contract, which CSC had held since 1998.

More Information

He said the Rensselaer center will continue to support the state Medicaid and the federal Affordable Care Act programs, as well as other client programs across the nation such as the North Carolina Medicaid program.

Types of jobs being moved to Louisiana in the coming months include enterprise monitoring, cybersecurity, mainframe and midrange platform administration, network management, project management and storage management. Workers in Rensselaer whose positions will be transferred will be offered the same position in Louisiana and relocation assistance, said Adamonis.

CSC is to be a major tenant at the new 800-job technology center announced in February by Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal.

Currently, the company employs about 1,000 workers in 18 locations across New York state.

In June, both CSC and information company Hewlett Packard challenged the state's decision to award a new $550 million contract for Medicaid billing to rival Xerox Corp. That challenge remains pending. The Xerox contract has not yet been finalized.

CSC had declined to bid on that contract, claiming that an 18-month time frame to create a new program was insufficient.

The tentative contract with Xerox still must be provided to state Comptroller Tom DiNapoli for his review and approval. State Attorney General Eric Schneiderman also has approval authority over the contract.

bnearing@timesunion.com • 518-454-5094 • @Bnearing10