Buy Photo Former U.S. Rep. John Dingell (Photo: Ryan Garza, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo Story Highlights Dingell, the longest-serving member in Congress' history, joined the House in 1955

Dingell's wife, Debbie, was elected to replace him next year

Members from both sides of the political aisle spoke for him

With U.S. Rep. John Dingell's record-setting tenure in Congress winding down, his colleagues — nearly two dozen of them — took to the House floor today to pay tribute to a legislator whose signature accomplishments are equal to his longevity.

"I just want to say we are truly losing one of the giants of the Congress," said U.S. Rep. Joe Barton, R-Texas, who has been a fellow member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee with Dingell for years. "I have difficulty imaging a Congress that John Dingell is not a member of."

For more than an hour, House members lined up to give witness to Dingell's accomplishments — helping to create Medicare and the Affordable Care Act, the Clean Water Act, the Endangered Species Act and more — during a career that spans six decades.

Unfortunately Dingell had to watch from the doctor's office, he tweeted just before 7 p.m. "Took a spill ... bruised my hip and my ego, but heading home & back to work in the morning."

"I learned everything I knew as a member of the (Energy and Commerce) committee .. from John Dingell," said Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif., who has been in the House since 1975 and is also retiring this year. "He's a member's member, and he's going to go down in the history books."

The fact that Waxman — who notably sparred with Dingell over the years and beat him in a caucus vote for chairmanship of the committee in 2008 — took time out to praise Dingell, D-Dearborn, was no surprise, however, considering Dingell's place in the history of Congress.

No member has ever served longer, and, as many of the speakers pointed out, his list of legislative achievements is second-to-none. For years, he sat atop the Oversight subcommittee, corraling bureaucrats and industrialists, and Energy and Commerce, vastly expanding that committee's reach. And, as Rep. Lois Capps, D-Calif., noted, he "helped construct nearly every major advance in social policy this country has known" in the last 60 years.

"Every now and then you hear the expression someone is a 'living legend,'" said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., who has also had her run-ins with Dingell, even campaigning for his Democratic opponent in 2002. "That doesn't begin to describe John Dingell."

Turns out these old Polish bones of mine are stronger than ever & I didn't break anything. Thanks to my colleagues for all their kind words! — John Dingell (@john_dingell) December 9, 2014

She described him as "a cherished colleague and friend."

Dingell, 88, was first elected to Congress in 1955 to replace his father, John Sr., who died in office. Earlier this year, Dingell announced his impending retirement. His wife, Debbie, won election to replace him last month — a fact many of the speakers seized on as a way of keeping their colleague near even as she charts her own course in Congress.

Dingell will officially step down with the swearing in of the new Congress early next year.

Many of the most heartfelt comments came from fellow members of the Michigan delegation, including the new "dean" of the House, U.S. Rep. John Conyers, D-Detroit, who worked for Dingell before being elected in his own right in 1964. He now becomes the longest-serving active member of either chamber.

Calling Dingell "a true statesman in every sense of the word," Conyers said the two have, "over these last six decades ... fought successfully for Medicare, for clean air and water, for workers rights and, most importantly, for civil rights."

"Mr. Chairman is what we still call him," said U.S. Rep. Fred Upton, R-St. Joseph, and the current chairman of Dingell's beloved Energy and Commerce Committee. "We're the best of friends, we really are. ... You look back at his life and he has served his country from the first day to today."

Throughout the speeches, Dingell was praised for his contributions to civil rights and conservation as well as a willingness to make friends on both sides of the political aisle.

"If the test of a career is whether you made a difference," said U.S. Rep. Sander Levin, D-Royal Oak, "I think John's career has been a huge success."

Contact Todd Spangler at 703-854-8947 or at tspangler@freepress.com. Follow him on twitter at @tsspangler

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1AcrNxi