The U.S. has reached the middle of a severe flu season that has killed 26 children, sent thousands of seniors to the hospital and spread to 46 states. In response, government health officials are urging doctors to prescribe more antiviral medication – such as Tamiflu, Rapivab or Relenza – so patients can heal faster.

These medications are underused and are not being used as recommended, Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a press call Friday. This occurs because doctors are hesitant to use them, may not realize how effective they are, or because they wait until after they get test results to write a prescription. The drugs are typically most effective when they are taken during the initial day symptoms appear. Frieden says doctors should prescribe the medication during early symptoms, including headache and fever.



[READ: Industry Ties Influence Flu Medication Findings]

"Getting medicines early could keep you out of the hospital, keep you from going to the intensive care unit or save your life," he says.

This flu season is particularly difficult for public health officials because the most common strain of flu that has swept the nation is H3N2, which has shown up in two-thirds of tests and which is not the strain the current flu vaccine protects against. This means someone who has been vaccinated is unprotected from this strain. Every year, health officials make projections about the strains they expect, with varying degrees of success. The manufacturers use the information to create the vaccines, this year making as many as 156 million doses.

In an average year, the death rates and severity of flu can vary significantly. Deaths from the flu can range from 5,000 to 50,000, though it is unknown exactly how many people die of flu each year because states do not have to report individual cases or deaths for people over the age of 18. Also, flu-related complications or co-occurring illnesses often are listed as causes of death rather than the flu itself.

Cases of infection range anywhere from 5 to 15 percent of the population, according to the CDC. Still, Frieden encourages all patients over the age of 5 to get vaccinated to protect themselves from other strains of the flu. Typically about half of the population gets vaccinated.



[MORE: Health Officials Tell Seniors to Get Flu, Pneumococcal Vaccines]

The flu vaccine is less effective than officials would like it to be, typically hovering around 60 percent. Most vaccines have a 90 percent effectiveness rate, Frieden says. Last year, about 109 children died from the flu. The year before claimed the lives of 171 children.

A typical year caries 52 hospitalizations per 100,00 people, but this year's rate has risen to 92 per 100,000 people. "We often see the situation of crowded doctor's offices and hospitals," Dr. Joseph Bresee​, chief of the epidemiology and prevention branch in CDC' influenza division, said in the call with reporters.