CONCORD, N.H. — In a fight to remain relevant in the crowded field of Republican presidential primary candidates, Jeb Bush finds himself neck-and-neck in most polls with Ohio Governor John Kasich.

“We need a leader with a servant’s heart,” Bush has said multiple times. “Somebody who has a proven record.”

Both candidates fulfill that criteria. Bush is a former two-term governor of Florida, and Kasich is serving his second term as Ohio’s governor. Kasich is 63, while Bush’s 63rd birthday is on Thursday.

The two share similar views on several issues, including repealing the Affordable Care Act while maintaining select policies within it, and being in the minority of Republican candidates in acknowledging climate change and humans having some role in it. The two even seemed to be friendly during Saturday night’s debate while other candidates attacked each other.

The two are considered more moderate compared with the other contenders in the Republican race, and are the alternatives to the more radical front-runners. And, both have spent most of their time campaigning in New Hampshire, pinning their hopes on a strong finish at the polls when voting takes place here on Tuesday after lackluster finishes in Iowa.

However, in the town hall setting, the two show markedly different styles. Kasich, who as of Sunday night has held 102 town hall meetings, is more relaxed, often weaving in personal stories before addressing a question and reflecting on the world as a whole. Meanwhile, Bush focuses on the issues and the politics of the race.

His answers are often dry and full of policy details, with the occasional personal story to bolster his point, with varying degrees of success.

“For whatever reason this year, policy doesn’t have the same consequence as it should,” Bush said Sunday morning at a town hall in Salem, New Hampshire. “But we have laid out the most detailed plans across the spectrum of policy because I believe ideas have consequences and policy matters.”

Bush often repeats the words “backbone,” and “leadership” in addressing his audience, emphasizing that he’ll be a problem solver as opposed to all talk. In addition, he tends to use dry language. Bush has used phrases like “I’m a 10th amendment guy” multiple times, and refers to how many line item vetoes he recorded as Florida governor.

Kasich, meanwhile, takes his time before getting into policy. At his event here on Sunday, the Ohio governor didn’t give a typical stump speech, but instead paced around the floor of the high school cafeteria and spoke about how humans are all connected and should want to work together for a common good. He talked about his parents and when he learned they had died in a car crash. Only the last five minutes of his 15-minute speech mentioned his qualifications and accomplishments.

He took questions from the audience about Social Security and national security. In both responses, Kasich briefly mentioned details about how he’d address each issue, but focused more on a general message of politicians working together to get things done. In addition, he’d share personal stories before getting into his answer, asking questions of the audience and impersonating Arnold Schwarzenegger and Henry Kissinger at various times on Sunday.

The candidate gave more specifics on a question about illegal immigration, where he and Bush agree on giving those here illegally a path to legalization that involves paying fines and getting a job.

However, there’s another key difference between the two, one that has become Kasich’s calling card: The Ohio governor has refused to attack his opponents in the way that almost every other candidate has.

One woman, before asking her question, thanked Kasich for his positivity and focusing on his issues rather than other candidates.

“Before you get to your question, I just want to say, look… why doesn’t everybody take down their negative ads and tell people what we’re for, for the last 24 hours?” Kasih said.

In his speech that he gives at every event, Bush calls out Donald Trump and Senators Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz by name, saying they’re gifted speakers but unfit to lead.

On Sunday, he called Donald Trump a loser, earning a standing ovation at his town hall in Nashua, New Hampshire. Kasich’s name was even mentioned on Sunday at a Bush town hall.

“John Kasich is good man who doesn’t understand the world we’re in,” said South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham while introducing Bush, adding that Kasich is a good friend, but that he disagrees with the Ohio governor’s stance on closing military bases.

Both candidates seem to have gained momentum heading into Tuesday’s vote. Bush has drawn a few hundred voters to each of his town hall events since his mother, former First Lady Barbara Bush, joined him in Derry, New Hampshire, on Thursday night. Kasich’s long-term effort has given voters plenty of chances to hear him speak, and both benefitted from stronger-than-usual performances in Saturday’s debate.

Bush will make a final push with voters during a luncheon on Monday afternoon and a final town hall in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, on Monday night.