World War II began with Hitler's invasion of Poland but the real war – Germany against France and Britain – was suspended for months while the belligerents exchanged hostile rhetoric but not much serious ordnance.

It was branded the "phony war." It's a little like that today in the presidential skirmishing among Democrats and Republicans.



The real contenders and most likely general election opponents, Democrat Hillary Clinton (almost surely) and Republican Jeb Bush (probably) have stayed mostly in the wings. The stage at the moment belongs to the pretenders, Democratic Sen. Bernie Sanders and Rick Santorum, Chris Christie and Donald Whatzisname among the Republicans.



The stage is cable television. With its omnivorous need for 24-hour material – the more sensational the better – cable can't get enough of the fact-free outrage an American political campaign can deliver, which in this "phony war" season means Whatzisname and Christie.

Democrats have their own pretender in Sanders but he talks only issues – non-stop. And you can't have that on cable; it's box office poison. Accordingly, Sanders is a bigger deal in print than on the boob tube.



So, should we take this "phony war" seriously? As a measure of who'll win the nomination ... probably not. As a measure of what turns on the base vote of each party ... you bet.



The sorry fact is that each party's base vote includes far-out fringe factions. What they preach to appease the base – both sides – is politely labeled "populism," a semi-idealistic appeal to the hard-pressed common man.

Sounds good in the abstract. Many ordinary Americans are indeed hard-pressed. But actually this kind politics is pure pandering to the blind rage that afflicts an often ill-informed and alienated public. We deserve better.

The fashion of the moment is to lay the extremist charge primarily on the GOP – and, in truth, the Republican version of extremism is more an incitement to violence. In Texas these whackos, with an assist from the Republican governor, have even spread the idea that Washington is planning to invade. They're talking up the need for armed resistance.

But Democrats have their outliers, too, and the seemingly benevolent Bernie Sanders is one of them.

Sanders is mad as hell and not going to take anything less than an honest-to-God, left wing government in Washington that doesn't pussy-foot around the need for radical reform. He's Elizabeth Warren on testosterone.

Take the big banks. He'd break 'em up. Health care? He's for a single-payer system, presumably along Canadian or European models, no half-way measure like ObamaCare. Social Security? He'd increase it. And taxes? He'd raise 'em, especially on Wall Street and the rich.

Admittedly, it rankles that none of Wall Street's six-for-five guys (street term for loan sharks when I was a kid) who brought us the Great Recession of 2008 have ever spent a day in the slammer. Even when paying penny-ante financial penalties they escaped admitting guilt.

But breaking them up the Wall Street bank would compound the problem.

Big banks are needed if U.S. business is to remain competitive in an increasingly globalized economy. Sure, they get a keep-our-of-jail card in the bargain and that's a bummer, but look at it as a cost of doing business in a globalized economy.

The rest of Bernie's program is no better. A single payer health program, higher social security payments and big tax increases – however meritorious someday – would sky-rocket government costs today and hamstring our current recovery. (Besides, isn't that how the Greek saga started?)



Republicans have than their own share of zanies. Rand Paul wants to back away from foreign entanglements and obligations, admittedly a popular theme. But that brings new risks, including diminished clout with allies we need and a form of American isolation.

But no Republican idea is as nutty as Ted Cruz's U.S. Supreme Court proposal. He'd end life tenure for justices and choose them by election rather than presidential appointment. It's an unparalleled recipe for chaos.

Picture would-be justices mooching campaign cash from big law firms and corporations with pending court cases. And you think election campaigns are corrupt now.

Can any of these loonies win? Probably not the nomination but perhaps one of two of the early states, notably odd-ball Iowa, where right-wing evangelical Christians dominate GOP caucuses and lefty liberals the Democratic ones.



But the nomination struggle is a long one and the serious contenders tend to prevail. The current "phony war" campaign phase won't last. Bet on it.

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @StarLedger and find us on Facebook.