Heidi Enninga

Updated: 05/15/2016 11:06 PM

Created: 05/15/2016 5:42 PM

As time runs out at the state capitol, the stakes are high for northeastern Minnesota.

State lawmakers now have just seven days left to pass a bonding bill, which means that by 11:59 p.m. next Sunday, funding decisions for about ten major regional projects will have had to be made.

So far, the Senate's $1.5 billion bonding proposal failed and a House version doesn't exist. Rep. Jennifer Schultz said leadership in the Republican-controlled House is focusing first on two other big ticket items: transportation and tax bills.

"They are going to hold that bill hostage until they see a transportation and a tax bill," Schultz said. "We really don't have that many days left to bring forward some of the big bills"

In legislative time, Senator Roger Reinert (DFL, Duluth) said seven days in an eternity, and he'd love to see all three bills get passed. However, at this point, he's far from optimistic.

"What concerns me is I hear people on both sides talking about how a do nothing session, no tax bill, no transportation bill, no bonding bill is a political win come November because it's an opportunity to blame the other team," Reinert said.

Meanwhile, Rep. Erik Simonson said doing nothing this session would jeopardize several regional projects including the Duluth airport runway and St. Louis River cleanup. Both need state dollars to fill-out federal allocations.

"I think it's important to look at the projects that you invest state dollars in that you can in turn leverage a fair amount of federal dollars," Simonson said. "Those are the types of projects that you can't really afford not to invest in."

The Governor and Senate Democrats have proposed bonding in the one billion dollar range while House Republicans have suggested $600 million package, though they haven't specified a list of projects. Regardless, Schultz said Duluth's steam plant project can't be left out.

"That's my top priority," Schultz said. "I'm not going to be willing to compromise or sign a bonding bill unless it has the steam plant in it."

Reinert said all of the requests from the region have compelling reasons why timing is key. He said the Glensheen Mansion is visibly in need of repairs and the Lake Superior Zoo still requires recovery funds from the 2012 flood.

"I think if it does not get funding this year, it's the last chance. In another year or two, nobody cares about the flood anymore, even in our area, let alone parts of Minnesota," Reinert said. "Instead of trying to pick project over project, we should be arguing for a bill that's large enough for all of these projects to be in and still be regionally balanced."

That conversation is what Schultz wants to see happen, and she hopes it doesn't happen behind closed doors and without opportunities for the public and even all legislators to participate.

"Minnesotans expect a lot more of their politicians and they expect us to go down to St. Paul and get things done for the entire state and that's not happening right now," Schultz said.

More hopeful than he has been in weeks, Simonson said he has reason to believe a list of Republican-endorsed projects could be released by mid-week. He said in both the House and Senate there is still time for compromise.

"If they put out a bill close to the end of the session and they actually want it to pass, they have to work with the DFL caucus in order to get it to pass because they don't have enough votes on their own to do it," Simonson said.

As for a transportation bill, Governor Mark Dayton has promised to deliver his compromise to republicans on Monday.