The projection does not include potential costs from the drugs to other government-run health programs, such as the ones that cover current and former members of the military. Nor does it include costs from use of the drugs for purposes other than those stated on their label, the out-of-pocket costs to insured people from them, or the costs to commercial insurance plans.

As a result, Durham said, the nearly $50 billion tab "is a very conservative estimate in our view."

"We expect spending to significantly increase beyond this figure," he said.

Durham said that although patients "rely on innovative, lifesaving medications ... soaring prices jeopardize access for those who would benefit the most from these treatment."

He called for more transparency in the justification for prescription drug costs and for "a sustainable pricing solution that will ensure patients can access the medications they need."

Read MoreProposed Obamacare rate in Texas tied to big loss



Durham noted that the projections related to breakthrough drugs represent just a fraction of the increased national spending on medication, which reached a record $374 billion last year. That was 13 percent more than in 2013, and was the biggest percentage hike in a decade. Almost half of the percentage increase was due to breakthrough therapy and specialty drugs.

The drugs eyed by Avalere for its study included three that came on the market in the past six months: Viekira Pak for hepatitis C, Ibrance for breast cancer, and Eylea for diabetic retinopathy. The others are due to come to market this year through 2020, and include a new cystic fibrosis drug from Vertex Pharmaceuticals called Orkamib, and Rociletinib for lung cancer.

Avalere selected the drugs for analysis that were likely to generate the highest revenue for the makers over the next decade.

"These 10 drugs represent a small subset of the more than 5,400 medications in the drug pipeline," AHIP said in a statement. "With many more drug manufacturers seeking breakthrough status and more than half of the total pipeline in later stages of clinical development ... total prescription drug costs are expected to dramatically increase in the coming years."

AHIP's membership consists of insurers whose plans cover much of the costs of medications. AHIP has been vocal in its complaints about these expenses, particularly after the introduction in 2013 of the hepatitis C medication Sovaldi, which costs $84,000 for a standard treatment regimen.

Sovaldi's cost, Durham said, is emblematic of the trade-offs between the benefits of a medication and "prescription drug prices that defy gravity."