Brad Johnson stands next to Isabelle Road as a car drives by on Tuesday. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Nearly 40 rural Boulder County residents have signed petitions calling for lowering the speed limit on Isabelle Road east of North 95th Street from 50 mph to 40 mph.

Those residents said they also want stricter enforcement of the speed limits on Isabelle to reduce accidents, protect the people and properties alongside those roads and improve the safety of motorists and cyclists traveling them.

Most drivers now routinely ignore Isabelle's current 50 mph posted limit, Brad Johnson, 10161 Isabelle Road, told Boulder County commissioners last Tuesday.

"They're going way too fast," often exceeding 65 mph, Johnson said in an interview.

He said the situation has worsened as growing numbers of people use Isabelle as a short-cut between North 95th Street and U.S. 287 as they commute to and from work.

Many of the non-injury accidents on that stretch of Isabelle go unreported, Johnson said. He cited fender-benders at 95th as well as spinouts all along Isabelle.

Johnson accused county transportation officials of failing to recognize the problem's seriousness.

Late last month, a group calling itself "Friends and Neighbors of Isabelle Road" presented the Board of County Commissioners with petitions signed by 39 people urging the commissioners, the Boulder County Transportation Department and the Boulder County Sheriff's Office to enforce and lower Isabelle Road's county-set speed limits.

Advertisement

Sheriff Joe Pelle said in an email that "this is a common complaint on county roads throughout the county. Particularly at rush hour times."

Johnson showed up at the commissioners' monthly public comment opportunity to read the petition into the record last Tuesday morning.

"Fifty mph is simply inappropriate for our country road and is extremely dangerous," according to the petition.

The petition said other nearby roads "all have significantly lower speed limits," such as 35 mph on Erie Parkway, 40 mph on Valmont Road between North 63rd and North 75th streets, 45 mph on Valmont between North 75th and North 95th streets, and 45 mph on North 95th between the Lafayette city limits and Lookout Road.

Pelle said his office is already "stretched pretty thin," making it difficult to devote deputies to speed enforcement on a specific road for any length of time.

Said Pelle: "On an average shift there are approximately eight deputies covering the 750 square miles of the county. Each is responsible for responding to calls and complaints for an approximate 100 square miles of patrol district.

"They spend the majority of their time on calls for service," Pelle said. "There is not a lot of 'unencumbered' patrol time. We all enforce traffic laws when we can, including myself and other command personnel as we traverse the county."

Pelle added, though, that when it comes to special crackdowns on speeders, "we do not have a traffic unit dedicated to this purpose, nor the type of patrol coverage enjoyed by city police departments."

Several of the petition signers added their own written comments and complaints to the lower-speed-limit plea they've made to county officials.

"I have a hard time crossing the road to get our mail," said Dale Craig, 9745 Isabelle Road. "I'm worried about our dog wandering out into the road."

Said Claudia Lainson, 9760 Isabelle Road: "We are very concerned about the many accidents the large and small animals who sometimes are in the road, and the children who live and play in our rural neighborhood."

Robert Lorenz, 9741 Isabelle Road, wrote: "Sometimes I am putting my life at risk just pulling out from my driveway, due to the approaching traffic speeds."

County commissioners' chairwoman Deb Gardner told Johnson last Tuesday that she'd already discussed the Isabelle Road neighbors' concerns with Transportation Department director George Gerstle.

Gardner said that "we're certainly open" to addressing those concerns, as long as that can be done within procedures used to set and change speed limits.

Gerstle said Boulder County has been getting speeding complaints about Isabelle Road users for at least the past couple of years.

However, the county must follow standards that consider such things as documented crash histories and whether speed was a contributing factor in each of those accidents, Gerstle said.

Gerstle said Boulder County plans to do another Isabelle Road speed study early this spring, to see how fast motorists are typically traveling and evaluate other factors that would be used to determine "the appropriate speed limit posting on Isabelle Road."

Gerstle said one factor that goes into deciding the limit for a specific road is "the 85th percentile speed" — the speed below which 85 percent of the traffic is actually traveling.

"This is a nationally accepted standard for determining speed limits, making it a consistent measure of reasonable driver behavior," Gerstle said.

Other factors, Gerstle said, include residential and commercial driveway locations — particularly where there may be driveway "friction" with "lots of turning traffic throughout the day"— as well as roadway geometry, bicycle use, the presence or absence of shoulders, recreational crossings and school bus stops.

"It is important to keep in mind that merely reducing the speed limit does not necessarily reduce the speed at which people actually drive," Gerstle said.

"If the speed limit is reduced too far below what people perceive as a safe driving speed, they will ignore the speed limit and go even faster than if the speed limit is closer to what is perceived as a safe travel speed," he said, such as that suggested by the "85th percentile speed criterion."

Pelle said he personally lives on a county road north of Longmont "and can verify that speeding on my county road is a problem. But I also understand that there are not enough deputies to patrol my road with any kind of frequency."

Said Pelle: "We focus our efforts on public safety and crime trends. This includes speed enforcement, especially in school zones and that type of thing. But we also have a multitude of criminal crime patterns like vehicle break-ins and burglary that we try to pay attention to."

The sheriff said his staffers "provide patrol but also court services, manage the jail, do civil service and coordinate emergency services like wildfire and search and rescue ... We do the best we can."

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc