Much of the early reaction to President Barack Obama's proposal for tuition-free community college for many students has centered on cost - can the nation afford the $60 billion price tag?

Cost is not the only factor. Some experts have pointed to other needs facing America's community colleges and other reasons why so many students fail to graduate on time with an associate degree or work certification.

When assessing just the price, though, it is important to keep the money in perspective.

Is $60 billion a lot?

It is a large pile of cash, to be sure. It would be roughly enough to pay for the entire education budget in Alabama for a decade. It also would be a 19.4 percent bump in federal spending on financial aid program.

But in the context of the federal government, $60 billion spread out over 10 years is not an enormous sum of money.

The Obama administration has not provided enough details, and U.S. Rep. Bradley Byrne - a Fairhope Republican who sits on the House Education and Workforce Committee - has suggested the $60 billion estimate is far too low.

Assuming $60 billion is the true cost, though, the annual cost presumably would be lower in the early years and higher in the outer years as the cost of college rises and more students attend. For simplicity, let's assume an annual average of $6 billion. That is less than a tenth of 1 percent of the $3.9 trillion that the federal government will spend this fiscal year.

It would be akin to a couple earning $50,000 a year deciding to treat themselves to an extra dinner out once a year and having to find an additional $75.

It is far less costly than Obama's other signature domestic program, the Affordable Care Act, which will cost an estimated $1 trillion to $2.6 trillion over 10 years.

At $6 billion, the annual cost of the tuition program represents a little less than 9 percent of the budget of the U.S. Department of Education. In that context, it's a more significant increase - like that $50,000-a-year household trying to come up with $4,500 to pay for the kid's private school.

What about Alabama's costs?

Under Obama's plan, the states would have to come up with matching funds for 25 percent. How much that would be in Alabama is unknown, because there is no way to know how many students would qualify and how many would enroll. It is not clear, for instance, how many students maintain a grade point average of 2.5 or better, one of the eligibility requirements.

It also is not clear how many students are attended full- or half-time and are enrolled in programs that would meet conditions laid out by the administration.

There were 18,469 first-time freshmen in the system in fall 2013. Taking that number as an estimate, multiplied by the average tuition of $3,390 and the cost in Alabama would be $62.6 million The state's 25 percent share would come to a little more than $15.6 million.

For perspective, $15.6 million is less than 3 tenths of a 1 percent of the Education Trust Fund. For our family earning $50,000, it would be like putting up $160 and having a relative pay the rest of the cost of a $640 dining room set.

It is much less expensive than it would be for Alabama to expand its Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act -- something Gov. Robert Bentley recently has hinted at. Even at a 10 percent match, a 2012 study by the University of Alabama at Birmingham estimated that when the state match is fully phased in, it would cost Alabama $222 million in 2020.

Still, $15.6 million is not an insubstantial sum for a state that is struggling to figure out how to close a budget shortfall for non-education programs that is at least $260 billion for the coming year and that has seen deep education cuts since the end of the last recession. A law passed by the Republican-controlled Legislature in 2011 also prohibits education spending from exceeding the average revenue from the previous 15 years.

Supporters hail the law for imposing fiscal discipline and predictable spending that is not subject to midyear revisions when rosy economic projections fail to pan out. But if legislators stuck to those caps, it would mean they would have to find the $15.6 million by cutting elsewhere in the education budget.

Whether the cost of Obama's community college proposal actually would be $6 billion a year or whether it is a good idea for the federal government to invest in free tuition at the community college level are questions for policymakers and voters. Ditto for what new taxes or spending cuts would be the best way to finance it.

But the actual amount of money is not extraordinary. If the government simply borrowed an extra $6 billion, it would add about 1.2 percent to the final fiscal year 2014 federal budget deficit.