As students across the Rio Grande Valley flood back to schools and the summer heat notches down during the fall and winter months, the cold and flu season approaches.

Pair that with contact sport seasons starting across the Valley and there are bound to be a few broken bones — and a trip to a local emergency room.

Most emergency room wait times in the Valley climbed higher than the Texas average of 16 minutes before patients see a doctor. That’s almost half of the 26 minute national average.

Longer wait times can mean extra stress for patient and for hospitals, which are under pressure to keep times low while prioritizing care for those who need it first.

Sandra Puente, 37, of McAllen, said she’s had good and bad experiences at hospital emergency wait rooms in the past. Most recently, she said it was a breeze.

“It was really fast, I was surprised,” Puente said of a recent trip with her 5-year-old son at the Rio Grande Valley Regional Hospital emergency room about three weeks ago. “He had some chest pains, so we wanted to make sure it wasn’t something to do with his heart.”

Puente said that within 20 minutes she was seen by a doctor and out the door within an hour.

But Puente said it hasn’t always been so rosy. One time her daughter had accidentally poked herself in the mouth with a pen and they waited for hours.

“My daughter was bleeding and they told us after she could have hit an artery,” she said of her experience at the McAllen Medical Center, where she said they waited four hours to be seen by a doctor.

HOSPITAL RESPONSE

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services data show that in 2013, most Valley hospitals’ ER wait times ran beyond state and national averages.

Rio Grande Valley Regional was the quickest ER across the region, with wait times averaging 13 minutes before a patient can see a doctor.

“Both Rio Grande Regional Hospital and Valley Regional Medical Center are very pleased that their (emergency department) wait times are below both the Texas and national average,” hospital spokeswoman Mariana Tumlinson said.

South Texas Health System declined an interview for this story, but announced it plans to open two new stand-alone emergency rooms — one this winter in Weslaco and another in Mission in the spring.

South Texas Health System, which operates McAllen Medical Center, Edinburg Regional Hospital and several other local hospitals, recorded a 32-minute ER wait time. Officials disputed that figure, saying their average wait time is below the national average at 25 minutes.

“We always look to improve wait times to enhance our patient’s experience.” South Texas Health System spokeswoman Cari Lambrecht said in a statement of the six-hospital network.

McAllen Medical Center offers an “ER Reserve” website that allows patients to schedule a time for “less serious” emergency care and allows patients to wait at home and can make an appointment up to 12 hours in advance. Posted on the company’s website is an ER wait time of two minutes before a registered nurse follows up with a patient.

Knapp Medical Center in Weslaco recorded the longest ER wait time among hospitals in the Rio Grande Valley.

“For the past year, Knapp Medical Center has seen an increase of Emergency Department patients, which has contributed to longer wait times,” Knapp spokeswoman Dinah Gonzalez said in a statement. “To aid us in our commitment to serving our patients, Knapp has recently implemented a number of process improvement initiatives in our Emergency Room that will reduce wait times from their currently historic levels.”

In the middle of the pack fell Mission Regional Medical Center, Starr County Memorial Hospital and Doctor’s Hospital at Renaissance in Edinburg.

DHR chief executive Israel Rocha Jr. said it expects to fall in line with the national average this year and have been looking into “fast track” centers to expedite care. Nurse practitioners currently meet patients first and assess the severity of their symptoms.

“The triage process helps us get to patients who need to care the fastest,” he said and attributed the longer than average wait times to an influx of patients who need care. “I think we have a growing population and we have more patients in the Rio Grande Valley, however we saw the numbers and it’s something that we are working to improve.”

HEALTHCARE LAW

Industry advocates said that long wait times in places with large indigent populations like Hidalgo and Starr counties are caused by bottlenecks of patients without insurance.

“Those wait times are the result of people not having a private health insurance option so they go to the ER to get the care they need,” said Lance Lunsford, spokesperson at the Texas Hospital Association. He added that hospital emergency rooms are mandated by federal law to provide some care to all individuals.

“The higher the rate of uninsured, the higher the demand in an ER versus where it should be: a primary care setting,” he said.

Advocates for state expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, passed in 2010 and largely ignored by Republican-controlled legislatures, say the crowds are likely to grow.

“The fact is until we have expanded Medicaid, working poor people are going to be using the emergency room like a night clinic,” said Ann Williams Cass, executive director of Proyecto Azteca and chair of the RGV equal voice health working group.

Cass said that about 300,000 residents in Hidalgo County who are at or below 100 percent of the poverty rate are in a “dark hole,” working minimum wage jobs but can’t afford $400 a month for health insurance.

But she said the future of any Medicaid expansion in Texas is dim; the proposal didn’t make it out of legislative committees at the state level since Gov. Rick Perry announced he would veto the bill.

And all federal healthcare clinics will face 70 percent cuts in funding if no resolution is reached by federal lawmakers, who have until October to avoid another fiscal cliff.

“They will be waiting until they are so sick they need to use the hospitals,” she added.

kmosbrucker@themonitor.com

For the most complete version of this story, log in or subscribe to MyMonitorNews.com.