Open enrollment begins Monday for the health care program that Gov. Tom Corbett created and Gov.-elect Tom Wolf promises to dismantle.

What that will mean for those who enroll in the program, called Healthy PA, is not clear. The program could extend health insurance to 600,000 Pennsylvanians, including many working poor who earn too much money to qualify for government subsidies but not enough to afford monthly premiums.

Under Wolf's plan, those people would still have insurance, but they would have it through a simple expansion of Medicaid, as many other states have done under Obamacare.

"This has been clearly communicated to the Corbett administration," Wolf spokesman Jeff Sheridan said. "They are putting [Healthy PA] infrastructure in place and spending money they know will be undone, so it's wasteful."

Sheridan said the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid in Washington, D.C., have assured Wolf that Pennsylvania can abandon Healthy PA at any time to expand Medicaid as originally envisioned under the Affordable Care Act.

Shifting gears now wouldn't be easy, said Kait Gillis, state Department of Public Welfare spokeswoman. The state has already reprogrammed the integrated computer systems it uses to determine eligibility for benefits such as food stamps, home heating assistance and, now, Healthy PA, she said.

"These systems are very complex. You can't just flip a switch," she said. "That's not a possibility, and we have to remain on track to make sure these individuals have access to care."

The Affordable Care Act gave states the option of broadening eligibility for Medicaid beginning last January. The federal government would pay 100 percent of the cost until 2016, after which states would have to pay a portion that eventually would be capped at 10 percent.

But Corbett, who as attorney general signed on to a lawsuit challenging the health-care law, joined more than 20 other governors, mostly Republicans, in rejecting outright Medicaid expansion — and the billions of dollars in federal funding that would have come with it. Instead, he came up with his own plan, which he said would save the state money over the long term.

Under Healthy PA, the state's 14 existing Medicaid plans will be reduced to two — a high- and a low-risk option based on health history — provided by private insurance companies. Most of the 2.2 million Pennsylvanians, or one in six residents, currently receiving Medicaid will be automatically enrolled in one of these two plans.

Meanwhile, most of the 600,000 people to whom coverage will be extended will be able to choose from separate private plans that vary from region to region across the state. (In the Lehigh Valley, plans will be available from Geisinger Health, UnitedHealthcare, UPMC, Gateway Health, Vista, and Capital Blue Cross.)

Participants won't pay any premiums in the first year, though starting in 2016, those earning more than 100 percent of the federal poverty level — $11,670 for individuals — will pay 2 percent of their income. They could reduce those costs by engaging in certain healthy behaviors or voluntary job training.

"I think there is a middle course here," said Sharon Ward, executive director of Pennsylvania Budget and Policy Center, which promotes policies that lift people out of poverty.

Healthy PA should be implemented, but with modifications, she said. For example, Pennsylvanians who now have Medicaid coverage should be allowed to keep their current plans, rather than being forced to switch to Healthy PA.

"The Corbett administration needs to be more cooperative," she said. "If that happens, we'd be a long way toward making the Medicaid expansion a reality."

A July report by President Barack Obama's Council of Economic Advisers calculated Pennsylvania had given up $2.4 billion in federal spending in 2014 by rejecting Medicaid expansion.

Meanwhile, as of September, Pennsylvania had spent $48 million in federal and state funding to prepare for Healthy PA, Jen Branstetter, a policy director for Corbett, said at the time. Gillis said the state also is hiring 480 people in counties across the state to help administer the program.

"We're always worried any time you have to expand the size of government. That means fewer resources going to other things … schools, roads," said Elizabeth Stelle, a senior policy analyst at the Commonwealth Foundation, a Harrisburg think tank that supports free-market solutions. "But the reality is you'd need those extra people whether you did a Healthy PA expansion or a regular Medicaid expansion."

If Healthy PA is implemented as planned, which Gillis insists it will be, Wolf will not be able to do anything about it until after he takes his oath of office Jan. 21.

Sheridan said though Wolf is committed to doing away with Healthy PA, the governor-elect has yet to establish a timetable for doing so. But whenever the transition from Healthy PA to Medicaid takes place, he said, "no one will lose coverage."

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130

HEALTHY PA

What: Health insurance for those earning too much money to qualify for government subsidies but not enough to afford monthly premiums.

When: Enrollment starts Monday for coverage starting Jan. 1

How to apply:

• Online at COMPASS.state.pa.us

• By phone at 1-866-550-4355

• Complete a paper application and return it to your local county assistance office

• In person at your local county assistance office