"We’re sure that our venue will be a big hit with your friends, family, and co-workers..."

Advertisement - story continues below

Though Harry Reid still has some 22 months before he leaves the Senate floor for the last time, there’s already at least one offer from a famous Nevada business to host the senator’s official retirement party — a celebration that the venue tells Reid “may even help lessen the animosity between you and your Republican acquaintances.”

In an open letter posted on its website, Sheri’s Ranch — a legal brothel located in Pahrump, Nev., sixty miles west of Las Vegas — congratulates Reid on his “exemplary service” to the country, the state, and the “working girls” who are especially grateful for Reid’s leadership in ramming Obamacare through the Congress.

“We are sorry to hear that the Silver State’s most tenacious public servant will not seek reelection in 2016, and your plan to retire from politics.”

Advertisement – story continues below

A few passages in the letter posted by the ranch — which bills itself as a resort and spa as well as a brothel — are of particular interest.

One section notes that, though Sen. Reid is a Mormon, he has been an ardent supporter of LGBT rights and “worked to ban workplace discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.” That’s a big feather in Reid’s political hat, according to the letter writer, considering the, well, extremely liberal and open-minded work practices of the ladies at the facility.

Another curious passage in the letter to the minority leader of the Senate notes that “many of your colleagues are intimately aware of our offerings.”

Advertisement – story continues below

There’s no real explanation of exactly what that revelation means, but one doesn’t have to exercise the imagination too greatly to get the point. The letter does mention that Sheri’s Ranch offers “numerous Jacuzzi rooms popular with our friends from the political arena.”

It’s no surprise that Harry Reid’s office has not responded — at least not publicly — to the invitation from the very grateful “courtesans” of one of Nevada’s pleasure destinations.

h/t: PJ Media

Advertisement – story continues below