Doug Ducey (Photo: The Republic)

A new survey by Conservative Leadership for Arizona -- the group run by political operative Sean Noble -- found the race for governor is between state Treasurer Doug Ducey and former GoDaddy counsel Christine Jones.

Many political observers have dismissed the group's polling because of Noble's strong support of Ducey. However, increasingly, outside observers and pollsters have also declared the governor's race a two-way showdown between Ducey and Jones.

The poll of likely Republican voters shows Ducey leading the governor's race at 26 percent with Jones within striking distance at 22 percent. Former Mesa Mayor Scott Smith has 14 percent, followed by Secretary of State Ken Bennett at 11 percent, former Maricopa County Attorney Andrew Thomas at 6 percent, and former California Congressman Frank Riggs at 2 percent.

Christine Jones (Photo: The Republic)

Nineteen percent of those surveyed said they were undecided.

"Our newest poll this week shows that the massive amount of money Christine Jones is spending on TV is helping her and she has gained 10 points in 5 weeks," a memo by Noble says. "As evidenced by the numbers below, this is looking more and more like a two-person race between Ducey and Jones."

A snapshot of another political poll that included questions about the governor's race put Ducey at 23 percent and Jones at 18 percent.

Of those surveyed by Conservative Leadership for Arizona, 79 percent were Republican, 21 percent were independents. Illegal immigration was the top issue voters thought the candidates should be talking about, followed by job creation and the economy, protection of Constitutional rights, "repealing Obamacare's Medicaid expansion, government spending, repealing Common Core school standards and energy issues.

Other highlights from key races:

Attorney General: 39 percent of voters said they would've voted for Republican Attorney General candidate Mark Brnovich if they race was at the time of the survey, followed by incumbent Tom Horne at 25 percent. More than a third said they hadn't decided. Sixty-one percent of those surveyed had an unfavorable opinion of Horne; 18 percent had a favorable opinion and 15 percent had no opinion. Thirty percent of those surveyed had no opinion of Brnovich, 9 percent had an unfavorable opinion and 7 percent favorable opinion. His name ID was at 46 percent.

39 percent of voters said they would've voted for Republican Attorney General candidate Mark Brnovich if they race was at the time of the survey, followed by incumbent Tom Horne at 25 percent. More than a third said they hadn't decided. Sixty-one percent of those surveyed had an unfavorable opinion of Horne; 18 percent had a favorable opinion and 15 percent had no opinion. Thirty percent of those surveyed had no opinion of Brnovich, 9 percent had an unfavorable opinion and 7 percent favorable opinion. His name ID was at 46 percent. Secretary of State: Most voters haven't decided who they'd vote for in the Secretary of State's race -- 53 percent were undecided. At the time of the survey, 21 percent said they'd vote for Michele Reagan, 17 percent for Wil Cardon and 9 percent for Justin Pierce.

Most voters haven't decided who they'd vote for in the Secretary of State's race -- 53 percent were undecided. At the time of the survey, 21 percent said they'd vote for Michele Reagan, 17 percent for Wil Cardon and 9 percent for Justin Pierce. Treasurer: Seventy percent of voters don't know who they'll vote for in the Treasurer's race.

Seventy percent of voters don't know who they'll vote for in the Treasurer's race. State school's superintendent: Superintendent John Huppenthal may be in trouble. His primary challenger Diane Douglas was at 32 percent in the poll, Huppenthal was at 25 percent and 43 percent were undecided.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1m1S4WF