Open enrollment through the Obamacare marketplace starts Nov. 1 through Jan. 31, 2016. (Photo: Jon Elswick, AP)

It's time to shop.

Premium rates for plans available on Delaware's Obamacare marketplace are posted and ready for consumers to peruse through the Delaware Department of Insurance's website.

But due to double-digit rate hikes approved by the federal government, Delawareans shopping on the marketplace and not eligible for tax subsidies through the Affordable Health Care Act should be ready to shell out some additional dollars.

"Naturally people who get the subsides are not going to be as impacted with these rate increases as those who do not," said Linda Nemes, assistant director of market regulation for the Delaware Department of Insurance.

There are three insurance carriers offering plans on the marketplace. In total, there are 29 individual plans and 15 small group plans offered to employers.

Of the individual plans, rates for Highmark Blue Cross Blue Shield increased 22.4 percent and by close to 17 percent for both Aetna Life and Aetna Health insurance plans.

In the small group market, Highmark plans increased 12.7 percent and decreased 6.1 percent for Aetna.

Base premium rates only increased between 3 and 4 percent last year.

Nemes said the department has not heard of many people dropping plans because of the high costs.

"The subsidy amounts and the help is set with the ACA, but as far as the actual plans, people can shop. They are not stuck in their current plan," she said.

Federal officials are anticipating that 10 million people will have an Obamacare plan by the end of 2016.

Last year, 25,036 Delawareans enrolled for coverage through the marketplace. Of those, about 83 percent qualified for a federal tax credit of about $260 per person, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Tax credits are based on a person's annual income.

Supporters of the Affordable Care Act cheer after the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Obamacare tax credits in June 2015. Open enrollment for health insurance on the Obamacare marketplace this year begins Nov. 1. (Photo: Jim Lo Scalzo, European Presspho)

Plans are still divided by the same four levels of coverage: platinum, gold, silver and bronze with supplemental emergency plans.

Shop "just as we do with our purchases," Nemes added.

Premium rates vary by age, family size, government subsidies and smoker/non-smoker status. The larger the family, the larger the premium. If you’re single, as you age, your premium increases as well. For most health plans, smokers pay more.

One of the least expensive premium plans from Highmark, for instance, without subsidies costs $202.73 per month for a 21-year-old single, non-smoker; one of the more expensive plans without subsidies boasts a premium of $1,549.34 for a 65-year-old smoker.

Nemes said there should be a year-to-year comparison posted on the department's website before open enrollment kicks off Nov. 1 to compare what was available this year with last year. Enrollment runs through Jan. 31.

Increases have been felt nationwide, she said.

In Delaware, one of the major drivers for the increased rates were increased utilization and pent-up demand. People who were previously uninsured were using their health plans to get needed, specialized treatments they had never had before, Nemes explained. Preventive care and pharmacy bills were also costly.

Plans need to be affordable, but insurers can't go under, she added.

"Of course we all have concerns about the consumer," Nemes said.

"There is a balance that needs to be maintained."

Officials are expecting the increases to taper off as healthier, younger consumers start enrolling in the marketplace.

Delaware's rate of millennial Obamacare sign-ups, at 23 percent, is among the lowest in the nation and 5 percentage points below the national average, but Nemes said that is not the factor driving the state's increased health plan rates.

"I think the rates in Delaware are based on the factors that I had previously given," she said. Though, she added, "Certainly having younger healthier people certainly helps with the cost."

People who choose not to purchase health insurance will face a penalty under the Affordable Care Act. The annual penalty nearly doubled from last year to $695 per adult and $347.50 per child, or 2.5 percent of a person's annual household income, whichever is greater.

Coverage purchased through the marketplace last year expires Dec. 31.

People will be automatically enrolled in their same Obamacare plan if it's still offered, with the same premium tax credit, if they don't update or change their application by Dec. 15.

However, your income has changed and you're eligible for tax credits, your premium will need to be readjusted. If the changes are not made by Dec. 15, you may be asked to pay back part of the premium.

For Obamacare coverage to begin Jan. 1, people must enroll by Dec. 15.

To check out the rates yourself, visit delawareinsurance.gov/departments/rates/ratefilings.shtml.

Jen Rini can be reached at (302) 324-2386 or jrini@delawareonline.com. Follow @JenRini on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1RKGRMf