The Floyd Healthcare Management board is expected to create tonight a new subsidiary to be called the Accountable Care Organization of FMC, LLC.

Its board of directors will include Floyd Medical Center President and CEO Kurt Stuenkel, and Drs. George Bosworth, Joseph Biuso, Joe Vaughn and Frank Don Diego.

The goal of accountable care organizations is to ensure that patients, particularly those who are chronically ill, get the right care at the right time without duplication of services, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Greg Polley, vice president for payer contracts at FMC, said the new organization is needed to contract with Medicare to participate in a shared savings program, created in January 2012 under provision of the Affordable Care Act.

“We’re just now getting to the point where we’re ready to apply and do one of these,” Polley said. The program will be initiated for a three-year period of time.

To participate in the shared savings program, the accountable care organization must agree to be responsible for at least 5,000 Medicare fee-for-service patients. Polley said that in 2014 FMC provided service to more than 9,000 Medicare patients.

“This will be a way for us to learn how to begin to manage care within new payment arrangements that are coming,” Polley said.

FMC won’t know what kind of savings the program will generate until next year, Polley said — after federal regulators compare the individual hospitals’ performances with previous benchmarks.

“We know that they will come from things like reducing readmissions, keeping people in the outpatient versus inpatient setting, those types of normal ways of improving care,” he said.

Earlier this year, Emory Healthcare and Aetna announced the formation of an accountable care organization. In that case, the ACO is designed to improve coordination and delivery of care to Georgia patients insured through Aetna.

Harbin Clinic and Cigna announced a similar collaboration in July 2014.