COLUMBUS, Ohio, June 2, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Buckeye Community Health Plan (BCHP) today announced that, effective May 1, Cleveland Clinic facilities and providers are part of the in-network coverage for Buckeye Community Health Plan -MyCare Ohio product and its Medicare Advantage product.

"We are pleased to add Cleveland Clinic hospitals and providers to our network for Medicare patients. This addition allows seniors age 65 and older and Ohio dual eligibles to be able to choose Buckeye as their preferred health plan," Ronald Charles, M.D., vice president of medical affairs for BCHP, said.

"At Buckeye, our first priority is providing access and choice for top quality health care and service to our members. The expansion of our relationship with the Cleveland Clinic is an important step toward the goal," he added.

Dual eligibles are among the sickest and lowest income individuals covered by both Medicare and Medicaid.

Medicare primarily covers the costs of acute hospital care, physician services and prescription drugs, while Medicaid generally helps to cover Medicare premiums, Medicare cost-share and long-term care as well as non-Medicare services.

The federal Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (CMMI) was created through the Affordable Care Act to encourage states to integrate physical, behavioral, and long-term care services into a seamless and comprehensive care experience for Medicare-Medicaid enrollees. Ohio Medicaid received approval through CMMI to design and implement the Medicare-Medicaid Integrated Care Delivery System (ICDS) MyCare Ohio program.

This announcement is particularly significant for dual eligible patients in the Northeast region where eligible individuals have until the end of July to finalize their managed care plan choice. Northwest Ohio (Toledo area) region enrollment is currently open for MyCare Ohio through May 31 and in the West Central Ohio region (Dayton area) where MyCare Ohio enrollment is open until June 30.

About Buckeye Community Health Plan

Buckeye Community Health Plan is a managed care plan that has been providing services in Ohio since 2004. Buckeye is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Centene Corporation, a leading multi-line healthcare enterprise offering both core Medicaid and specialty services. Information regarding Buckeye is available via the Internet at www.bchpohio.com. Buckeye can be followed on Twitter as @Buckeye_Health.

Logo- http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130927/CL88116LOGO

SOURCE Buckeye Community Health Plan