Marine veteran Kyle Kelly lost his left leg just above the knee because of deteriorating health symptoms he attributes to Gulf War Syndrome.

The jobless, homeless, wheelchair-bound man was positioned at the entrance of a Veterans of Foreign Wars post Thanksgiving morning because of a glowing, unquenchable spirit.

The 44-year-old man gave cheerful greetings to fellow war veterans who came Thursday to “VFW 1” to share a Thanksgiving feast on Santa Fe Drive. VFW 1 was the first post established by the organization in the country, in 1899.

“I have no family, so this is my family,” Kelly said smiling warmly, when asked what he was thankful for. “I’m grateful for this nation. I’m grateful for the camaraderie of my brethren.”

He explained that the reason he joined VFW 1 was because it wasn’t just a bar where veterans sit around and complain about their hardships.

It is a place that tackles veterans issues with ongoing fundraisers, such as helping them get jobs, education and a home, Kelly said.

The post sponsors yoga classes, sells artwork of post members in a gallery and offers a heaping plate of turkey with all the fixings on Thanksgiving day.

The feast was provided by a veterans group founded by Tony Garvin called Boots On The Ground for Boots Not Around, which honors the 66 Coloradans killed in action during the Iraq war.

A single pair of boots was placed on the edge of one of many long dinner tables patriotically decorated in red. The chair in front of the boots was leaned against the table for a Colorado veteran who died in the war.

Minutes before the feast, Diana Aragon bustled through the building as she helped to set up the buffet. She was there in honor of her husband, retired Master Sgt. Pete Aragon, who died of cancer in April.

“He was the glue that held this post together. It was important to him,” said Aragon as she wiped away tears. “Now that he is gone, I want people to know who he was.”

Dozens of men, many wearing jackets displaying patches from every branch of the military, bowed their heads when “Papa Joe” Carlie, 61, said grace before the Thanksgiving meal. He prayed for the veterans.

“You know without them, there would be no freedom,” Carlie prayed.

After the prayer, Carlie loaded up his plate with turkey, stuffing, corn and cranberry sauce and sat down next to a homeless veteran, a close friend. The Vietnam War Army veteran said his shoulder is designated for homeless veterans to cry on. The country should at least provide a home for veterans who risked their lives for their country, he said.

“Several of our brethren have died right on these streets in Denver,” he said.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or @kirkmitchell and denverpost.com/coldcases