Amazon is creating its own online shopping holiday for Amazon Prime members on Wednesday to celebrate the company's 20th anniversary. Philippe Huguen/AFP/Getty Images

Amazon is declaring a new national holiday Wednesday, one devoted to online shopping and bolstering its own business at a time of ferocious competition among customers who prefer to shop on a computer or mobile device.

Amazon's Prime customers are being treated to the new annual shopping holiday commemorating the 20 th anniversary of the site - which comes ahead of the launch of a new online competitor, Jet.com, next week.



The new holiday features deals on gadgets from Apple and Google, along with Amazon's products including Kindle and chances to win gift cards from the site. Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba used the similar tactic of manufacturing a shopping holiday in 2009 called "Singles Day," which helped the company generate $9 billion in sales on Nov. 11, 2014.

This shopping bonanza available only to customers who pay the $99 per year subscription to Prime is also a ploy to block increasing online delivery competition. The faux holiday comes days ahead of the July 21 launch of Jet.com, which aims to offer prices five to six percent cheaper than any other site by applying the wholesale shopping approach of companies like Costco to e-commerce.

"We only profit from memberships fees, not on what you buy on Jet, and savings keep growing in real time as you build bigger baskets," says Liza Landsman, executive vice president and chief customer officer of Jet. "We start by looking for the best prices across the Web and match the lowest when we can and give you member savings on top of that so every day has great deals."



Not to be outdone, Walmart is offering its own special offers on Wednesday to spur shopping and tout its own revamped e-commerce platform, stating in its announcement "you shouldn't have to pay $100 to get great deals," taking a swipe at its larger rival Amazon.

"We're standing up for our customers and everyone else who sees no rhyme or reason for paying a premium to save," Fernando Madeira, president of Walmart, said in the press release.

Summer is also a lackluster month for online shopping, so "Amazon is trying to boost sales in a slow time of the year," along with adding more incentive for people to become Prime members, says Karsten Weide, a vice president for media research at International Data Corporation analyst firm. Indeed retail sales in June fell below expectations, dropping 0.3 percent from a strong sales month in May, according to the Census Bureau, reflecting how shopping declines at the start of summer.

Online shopping holidays like Cyber Monday and Black Friday remain popular, but the National Retail Federation predicts that people will use any excuse to chase savings because of the convenience of mobile devices.