Sioux Falls, SD

Inwood, Iowa donated a fire rescue unit to help Delmont. That information was previously incorrect in this story.

The Delmont Mayor says her community will never be the same after an E-F2 Tornado ripped through the small town. However, the residents are not letting the tragedy bring them down.

Cleanup was quiet today in Delmont. Heavy rain made the area muddy and officials didn't want heavy equipment getting stuck. Mayor Mae Gunnare says that's slowing down the process by at least a day. But she's not complaining.

"We do need rain, we're in an ag state so let's continue with it," Gunnare said.

It's been a heartbreaking week for residents. This Methodist Church has been part of the community for decades. After the tornado twisted the building's foundation, it will be demolished in the next few days.

"It's really something because it has a lot of memories. We went to Sunday School here and it's just a lot of memories. It's like something is gone, something missing," Dick Striel said.

As the debris continues to pile up, there's help for residents. A building in town is now the community distribution center. There's a wide variety of supplies to help those dealing with this difficult time.

"It's for anyone impacted in this community. Not just for the folks at ground zero," Gunnare said.

If you're interested in volunteering you can come and check in. The city's mayor says donations are also greatly needed.

There's plenty of clothes, but the town does need things like pots and pans, as well as rakes.

It's been a difficult seven days, but the residents are rallying together.

"People are really coming together. It's a town where if something like this happens, they all work together," Striel said.

Now Gunnare wants to move past the heartbreak. The city has a Memorial Day Celebration every year. It's usually at the Legion building, but that's being used as the distribution center. Gunnare says the celebration will still happen, as she wants the community to get back to normal as best they can.

"We didn't ask for a tornado last week either so we all have to be adaptable and think what's best for our community right now. As long as we're together as one that's the main thing in my books right now," Gunnare said.

One of the biggest losses in the community was the brand new fire hall. To help fill that need, Delmont received a donated fire rescue unit from Inwood, Iowa and a fire truck from Fairview, South Dakota.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:

Inwood, Iowa donated a fire rescue unit to help Delmont. That information was previously incorrect in this story.

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.