Earlier this week, Burger King surprised its fast food rival with a peace offering in the form of a hybrid hamburger named the “McWhopper.”

The very public proposal was to have Burger King and McDonald’s come together for Peace Day on Sept. 21 and offer a burger that combined each chain’s signature burger, the Whopper and the Big Mac.

Burger King took out full-page advertisements in The Chicago Tribune and The New York Times to make its proposal known. They also created a website to explain the idea, complete with a letter to their burger rivals.

Since Peace Day asks the public “who will you make peace with,” Burger King wrote to McDonald’s that they “call a ceasefire” on the burger wars.

“Let’s end the beef, with beef,” the website says.

All of the proceeds from the proposed event would have gone toward Peace One Day, a nonprofit organization.

However, McDonald’s was not interested in a burger-related peace treaty.

Soon after Burger King’s proposal went public, the CEO of McDonald’s took to their social media to pen a response back to Burger King.

Though the post did call the proposal a good idea for a good cause, McDonald’s countered that the two companies could instead do something “bigger” to make a positive impact.

There was some cheekiness to the post from McDonald’s, with the brand politely chastising Burger King for comparing the business-related competition to the reality of war.

McDonald’s ended the post with the quip, “P.S. A simple phone call will do next time.”

Though the McWhopper isn’t happening, this story exemplifies content marketing, as the proposal has gotten a ton of news coverage.

An NBC affiliate in Atlanta even decided to make their own McWhopper for National Burger Day yesterday.

Whether people considered the move a publicity stunt, a brilliant content marketing strategy or a total waste of time, it has put a major spotlight on the International Day of Peace.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments