There are four basic ways to change the food system. I talk about three of them a lot: The first is to eat differently, focusing on good food and especially plants; the second is to bring change to your work, whether that means becoming a farmer or helping other people eat better through your role as a teacher, doctor, artist, techie, lawyer or journalist. The third is to work locally to effect change in, for example, school systems or municipal politics.

The fourth is the toughest: Change the system that governs everything, including food. This means changing dominant economic theories and practices, and indeed the nature of capitalism itself. That isn’t happening anytime soon.

But incremental changes are possible within that system. Some believe that food is a bipartisan issue, since it’s in everyone’s interests to eat better and to protect the environment from the ravages of industrial agriculture. But it’s also true that public health, income inequality, mitigating climate change and fighting racism (just a few examples) are bipartisan issues as well, and we know how slowly change comes with those, even though change is in the interest of all but a few defenders of the status quo.

The fact is, it’s easy to predict where most members of our two major political parties will stand on almost any issue. And food, like most of these other examples, is deeply partisan. Since one party will fight social progress pretty much no matter what, people who care about good food have to make the other party — the one that claims to fight for progress — do so.

The Obama administration has been recent history’s most vocal and progressive when it comes to food. But it has often been swimming against the tide because Democratic candidates are usually positioned as non-Republicans rather than as progressives with an innovative national campaign.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Such a campaign would propose to improve the lives of working people by raising the minimum wage, establishing better policies for sick leave and family leave, creating better jobs and working conditions, improving the safety net, and supporting the re-establishment of unions, and truly progressive taxation on the rich and on corporations. And so on; these are also “food issues.”

Ignoring these issues in the midterm elections gave Republicans what they wanted: a series of contests between not very different candidates, half of whom were in the party of a largely unpopular and arguably stymied president. The results were predictable. (That Obama’s project has been blunted by an often spiteful Congress is true, but when people’s standards of living fall the party in power suffers.)

Still, many successful Democrats these days are genuine progressives, and good on food as well. In the Senate they include Sherrod Brown (Ohio), Richard Blumenthal (Connecticut), Jon Tester (Montana), Cory Booker (New Jersey) and Kirsten Gillibrand (New York); in the House, Chellie Pingree (Maine) (full disclosure: a friend), Tim Ryan (Ohio), Earl Blumenauer (Oregon), Rosa DeLauro (Connecticut), Louise Slaughter (New York) and others. Ryan, Pingree and Tester, who is a farmer, have undoubtedly been helped into office in part by their stands on food issues.

From this perspective, perhaps the most interesting result in this election was the defeat of Steve Southerland, a two-term Florida Republican congressman who worked hard to cut food stamps and to require those who did get them to do mandatory work. (He also voted to repeal the Affordable Care Act over 40 times.) It’s not so much that Southerland was defeated, but how: the two-year-old social welfare organization Food Policy Action (F.P.A.) threw its limited resources behind Gwen Graham, in what was a close race, believing that it could demonstrate the importance of food as an issue.

I talked to Tom Colicchio, the well-known chef and F.P.A. board member, about this. “We targeted Southerland,” he said, “not only because of his poor voting record on food but also because we knew that he was vulnerable.” Colicchio believes that F.P.A.'s work “made a difference.”

We are beginning to see the power of food as an issue.

Seven months into office, Obama did mention a national soda tax, and later promised to “let folks know” whether their food was genetically modified. (We know how that worked out.) But as a candidate he certainly wasn’t asked, in an open forum, where he stood on eliminating the nonmedicinal use of antibiotics in raising animals, sub-minimum wages in food service, restricting the marketing of junk food to children, and so on. Americans are increasingly aware of and concerned about these issues, and come 2016, it’s the job of F.P.A. and of everyone who can be active in national elections to grill candidates about their views and hold them accountable for their words.

In other words, it’s our job to push for progressive stances. Because many of today’s Democrats, in order to demonstrate that they’re loyal Wall-Street-supported neo-liberals (but not Republicans!), often begin negotiating from a position of compromise. Cuts in SNAP (food stamps), for example, were all but inevitable in the Farm Bill, because Democrats were among the first to propose them.

That’s got to stop. In food as in other issues, Democrats must put forth policies that are wholly different from — and better than — the Republicans’. People often vote for candidates who represent change. And, historically, in the United States big-time change comes from social movements and from swings in voting blocs. We saw this in the 1930s around labor rights and the beginnings of the social safety net, and in the 1960s around civil rights and the safety net’s expansion.

Food policy has the potential to change the way people think and the way they vote; if we make our candidates take progressive positions on food, we’ll be forging more progressive candidates. For people interested in good food, there’s no better work to do.