Duncan Barry

• PL pledged not to increase expense of politicians but appointed largest cabinet ever • PM, ministers scramble to launch pre-electoral pledges days before government marks two years in office • PL’s major achievements so far: Energy tariff reductions and free childcare

This week marks the first two years since the PL was entrusted to govern. The following is an overview of Labour's pre-electoral pledges; which have been implemented and which have not, either because they have yet to be or because they did not seem to work out when put into practice.

Marking the government's first year in office on 13 March 2014, Deputy Prime Minister Louis Grech - who is also tasked with seeing that the manifesto is implemented in its entirety - said that the Labour government implemented 30% of its electoral manifesto and a third of the budgetary measures. Until December last year, 42% had been implemented.

If one were to sift through the electoral manifesto, one would find that a vast chunk of it has been implemented to date but the PL's major pledges - those of converting the Delimara power station from heavy fuel oil to gas and the building of the new power station, are still in the offing. The power station project was meant to be finalised this month but work is still in its early stages. The government has now issued a new deadline for the project's completion; June 2016.

Worthy of note is that one major scheme introduced by this government was the Individual Investor Programme (IIP), the only difference to the rest of the proposals being that Labour never floated this idea before the 2013 general election, be it through its manifesto or otherwise. Also known as the golden passport, this scheme was introduced amid strong opposition from the PN.

Whether one agrees with the programme or not, the IIP has received over 400 applications since its launch, which will in turn result in over €450 million in Foreign Direct Investment.

Education

In January 2013, the PL had unveiled the party's roadmap for education - considered as a main pillar. The core principles were that education would continue to be free of charge and that more young people would progress to a post-secondary level of education and beyond.

One of the PL's major pledges in the education sector was to retain stipends for undergraduate students, while another was to distribute tablets among Year IV schoolchildren with the aim of improving their IT literacy.

While the PL stuck to its pledge - that of retaining stipends and increasing them proportionately to account for an increase in the cost of living - the tablet programme is still in its pilot-project phase. In the meantime, fourth graders eagerly await their promised tablets.

Investing in schools

The PL's declarations of its commitment to invest in existing school facilities continue to this day. Throughout the past two years, no new schools were built. However, Education Minister Evarist Bartolo had made it amply clear - in April 2013 - that no new schools could be built for the time being because there were no funds available to repay a €73 million loan taken by the Foundation for Tomorrow's Schools.

As far as literacy levels are concerned, the National Literacy Strategy has been launched by government. The Strategy is based on more opportunities for reading time in Maltese and English, the use of new technologies and the provision of a richer variety of reading material.

Respect towards teachers, more parental involvement

The PL's promise to ensure students respect their teachers while extending the educational experience of children outside school, by encouraging more parental involvement, has began to be put into practice. One of the first steps this government took when it comes to students' respect towards teachers was that of ensuring that students who disrespect their educators will face disciplinary action.

Last month, the MUT and the education ministry issued a joint statement asserting that disciplinary action would immediately be taken against misbehaving students.

Steps that could be taken against the parents of misbehaving students were being contemplated. These steps came about after some students attending a Hamrun School took things too far, even going as far as allegedly assaulting their teachers.

In January, the Education Plus programme was launched by Prime Minister Joseph Muscat and Education Minister Evarist Bartolo with the aim of reshaping the educational experience of Maltese children. The Education Plus programme aims to enhance the educational experience of students by involving the community, including employers, in children's education.

As a measure aimed at reducing traffic on our roads, the government sought to incentivise the use of private transport for church and private school students, thereby offering a tax credit of €150 to all those who use this mode of transport as opposed to their parents' personal vehicle.

While the Mcast project in Paola is still in process, the Mcast Gozo Campus in Ghajnsielem was inaugurated in October last year. Postgraduate education forms an increasingly important part of our country's economic and social agenda. It is a key element in lifelong learning. To this end, the government extended the Scholarships Post-Graduate Scheme, providing more opportunities to promote further specialisation at higher levels of education.

The EU-wide Youth Guarantee scheme was also launched in Malta. This scheme is aimed at tackling the issue of youth unemployment. According to the Prime Minister, one in three youths are finding a job as a result of the programme. The government is also tackling the rate of absenteeism.

Economy

Statistics published by the National Statistics Office revealed that Malta registered the second highest economic growth among the 18 countries which form part of the Eurozone during the second quarter of 2014. The IMF had last year predicted that Malta would register around 2.2 per cent economic growth between 2014 and 2015, but it recently increased this to 3.1 per cent. Debt is forecast to fall to less than 70 per cent by 2016 and nearly 60 per cent by 2020.

The government implemented the last tranche of the PN commitment to cut the income tax rate from 29% to 25%.

On excessive bureaucracy, the government has started to implement measures to cut down on bureaucracy across the board but still has a long way to go. Malta had been listed amongst the worst countries to do business in, due to the excessive bureaucracy that exists. The 'Doing Business' report had shed light on how easy or difficult it is for a local entrepreneur to open and run a small- to-medium-sized business when complying with relevant regulations. It measures and tracks changes in regulations affecting 10 areas in the life cycle of a business: starting a business, dealing with construction permits, getting electricity, among others.

A number of incentives for start-up companies have been implemented, both in Malta and Gozo. The only difference between the two islands is that potential entrepreneurs from Gozo are granted a higher tax credit than those from Malta.

The government said that it is fully committed and has the electoral mandate to enact a Family Business Act, with a view to promote family businesses and facilitate their continued existence, but the act has not yet been implemented. It is expected to come into force this year.

As from 1 January this year, the final tax on transfers of immovable property acquired after 1 January 2004 was reduced from 12% to 8% of the transfer value, while the rate in respect of transfers of immovable property acquired before 1 January 2004 is that of 10%. It will no longer be possible to opt out of the final tax system and therefore to be taxed on the profit. Furthermore, no deduction of expenses will be allowed in arriving at the transfer value. Individuals who do not trade in immovable property and who transfer such property within five years from the date of acquisition, will be taxed at 5% (instead of 8%) on the transfer value

Maritime hub

The idea of a maritime hub is gradually becoming a reality and the government recently announced that it has invited Ablecare Oilfield Services Group (the preferred bidder) to develop part of the 175,000m2 former Malta Shipbuilding site into a regional maritime, oil and gas industry hub.

Work on the BioMalta Campus - a life sciences centre - continues and is reaching its final stages. This project was launched during the previous legislature. The project will enable the creation of a research, development and innovation cluster and is being developed by Malta Enterprise.

Female participation rate 'increasing'

A number of measures to boost female participation in the labour force are bearing their fruit. Dr Muscat recently said that as a result of a number of incentives and family friendly measures, Malta is witnessing an increase in the rate of economic participation by women.

As planned, Air Malta now falls under the remit of the Tourism Ministry. Meanwhile, the national tourism policy was launched earlier this year. The government is currently listening to suggestions from industry stakeholders.

The initiatives of UHM's Jobs Plus are gradually being implemented, including the free childcare scheme, which has seen parents who work a 40-hour week and send their children to child care centres saving an average of €6,000 annually. Dr Muscat said that the free childcare service would eventually be dubbed as one of the biggest achievements of a Labour government. The Skolasajf and Klabb 3-16 programmes have been extended to provide more support for parents who work at more affordable rates.

Combating precarious work

One of the Prime Minister's decisions to curb precarious working conditions was to announce that contractors who promote such conditions will be barred from participating in the bidding process tied to public tenders. The idea of fighting such conditions is being constantly pushed by the General Workers' Union, however the government still has a long way to go to eliminate this phenomenon, as stories of underpaid workers continue to surface.

As recently as last week, many ministries were scrambling to launch as many initiatives that were mentioned in the PL's electoral manifesto as possible, before the government marks its first two years in office. As late as Friday, the Prime Minister announced that companies that persist in employing workers with poor conditions may be blacklisted for a period of six months to two years if found guilty.

A Labour government was meant to draw up a charter of workers' rights, but by the looks of it, this has not yet become a reality.

Principle Permanent Secretary Godwin Cutajar has been tasked with overseeing the public service. He has also been tasked with seeing that the services offered are improved. The government has so far implemented 142 simplification processes in the public service and 46 more are in the process of being implemented.

Better paid maternity leave

Women in the last four weeks of their maternity leave will be paid the equivalent of a minimum wage by the State, an increase of €6 per week. An improvement in the maternity leave for self-employed women is the increase of €73 per week. Low-income earners are entitled to a supplement of €400 for each child (€200 from the fourth child onwards) with the condition that each child must have a school attendance rate of at least 95%. This is one of the measures to cut down on absenteeism.

Energy tariff reductions

Energy tariffs were reduced by 25% for households as promised, while businesses are expected to start benefitting from similar reductions as from this month.

The government has been stating that it will decommission the Marsa power plant. Two years on, only a small fraction of the plant has been dismantled. While some argue that this may have been a cosmetic move, others say that it came about as a result of the new power station delay and therefore could not be fully dismantled until the new power station is built.

Water-saving kits were meant to be distributed to households to help them reduce consumption by up to 25 per cent - as had been announced by Energy Minister Konrad Mizzi - but to this day, households haven't yet received them.

Oil exploration

Oil, to everybody's dismay, has not been found within Maltese territory as yet. But Minister Joe Mizzi recently signed an Exploration Study Agreement with oil company Ratio Malta Limited - an affiliate of Ratio Oil Exploration Limited, an oil and gas company based in Tel Aviv, Israel. This, after Genel Energy threw in the towel on its endeavour to find oil in Maltese waters.

A viable Enemalta

The Maltese government signed an agreement with Shanghai Electric Power (SEP), making it a stakeholder in Enemalta with a 33% stake. SEP will invest €320 million in Enemalta - €100 million of which will be direct capital and the rest will serve as an investment in the BWSC plant to cover the cost of its conversion to gas. The investment will help reduce Enemalta's debts. The agreement is to cover three main projects. In the meantime, uncertainty among Enemalta's workers continues to grow.

Health

The PL government stuck to its pledge and healthcare continues to be free for all. However, its pledge to make the hospital more efficient has failed thus far, especially due to the overcrowding problem, which continues to escalate.

There has been a significant decrease in waiting lists at the hospital. Waiting lists for surgeries and MRI scans have been shortened.

Out-of-stock medicines; delivering medicines to your doorstep

The government also managed to solve the problem of out of stock medicines. But its pledge to deliver medicines to the homes of patients who have mobility issues still remains a mere promise.

The government's idea to cut down on overcrowding at Mater Dei's emergency department, by encouraging patients to visit health centres, has not yet left its desired effect. Besides, customer care at the various health centres still leaves much to be desired.

As for the Gozo General Hospital, Gozitan cancer patients are now being treated at a newly refurbished unit within the hospital. The national breast screening programme continued as planned, while the government launched the colorectal cancer screening programme last week.

The Oncology Hospital project, within Mater Dei, has reached its final stages.

Dignity for the elderly was one of the government's priorities, but stories of patients dying in hospital corridors continue to surface, along with claims of elderly patients transferred to elderly homes in a bad state and dying shortly after.

The long awaited makeover of the Young People's Unit at Mount Carmel Hospital began recently and the new therapeutic unit will be opening its doors to adolescents this summer.

Civil unions

The civil union bill was enacted last year, while legislation is in place to prevent discrimination across the board.

Sick leave proposal

The proposal to extend sick leave to parents in order to take care of their children when they are sick was welcomed by Forum Unions Maltin, but the employers' association voiced strong opposition. So far, this concept has not yet been put into practice and no plans seem to be in the offing in its regard.

The government launched is national active ageing policy. The retirement age for Maltese workers will not be increased, as had been pledged. In fact, as recently as last week, Dr Muscat said that the issue of pensions will not be solved by having the retirement age increased, but by encouraging more women to enter the workforce.

Independent living has been a key concern for parents whose children are disabled. The government has already modernised a number of properties, making independent living for the disabled possible. As for disabled persons joining the workforce, the government enforced a 1967 law, binding employers to employ disabled persons.

Gozo

Making Gozo more accessible still remains a major factor which has not been tackled as yet. The idea of a bridge, or an airstrip for that matter, is still being discussed. The same goes for a cruise ship terminal in Gozo. But those who board the Gozo Channel can now benefit from free Wi-Fi. Meanwhile, work on the Cittadella continues. Reduced fares for those crossing to Gozo has also helped boost Gozo's economy.

Animal rights

A commissioner for the protection of animals has been appointed - a first for Malta - while pet recreation areas have been set up.

Mepa reform

While the Mepa reform continues, environmentalists have stated that the situation at Mepa has gone from bad to worse.

National Traffic Management plan

If a plan has been implemented, it is definitely not working. The traffic problem in Malta continues to worsen. Measures have been implemented to reduce traffic recently though, such as having bus commuters purchase pre-paid tickets, so that buses don't have to wait for long at bus stops, creating a traffic jam in the process.

Labour's pledge to improve on the bus service has not proved to be one of its major achievements either so far. However, it recently awarded a contract to a Spanish bus operator. Time will tell whether the service will improve.

Regarding road infrastructure, one of the biggest projects that is currently under way is the Coast Road project. The Dock No. 1 project in Bormla was completed thanks to EU funds and the persistence of Minister Joe Mizzi.

Carnival village

Carnival enthusiasts have long been calling on past governments to allocate space for their floats. A PL government recently announced that it will be allocating them space in Marsa, in the form of a carnival village. Rehearsal space for musicians will also be created in the same confines.

Justice reform

A bill, which was approved in committee stage earlier this week, was hailed by Parliamentary Secretary for Justice Owen Bonnici as the beginning of a long process of reform in the justice system. The proposed act, which amends various laws related to criminal matters, will become law once it is approved in its third reading and signed by the President, a process which should be a formality given the support it has received from both the government and the Opposition. So far, not much of the proposals of a report on the reform have been implemented though.

Meanwhile, as promised, the Whistleblower Act came into force, while the bill for the removal of prescription on acts of political corruption was also approved.

16-year-olds have also been granted the right to vote during local council elections.

As part of the reform on drugs, those caught in possession of not more than two grams will now face a commissioner appointed to review such cases. Those who appear before the commissioner twice will be asked to face a board, chaired by Judge Giovanni Bonello.

Reducing the expense of politicians

The electoral manifesto highlights that a PL government would reduce the expense of politicians by having ministers and parliamentary secretaries earn the same wages as PN ministers did before the PN tried to give its MPs a 'secret' honoraria.

Although a PL government stuck to its pledge on the honoraria, it appointed the largest cabinet ever, resulting in the most expensive cabinet Malta ever witnessed.