Photo

Whitney Wolfe, the former vice president of marketing at Tinder, the online-dating app, recently filed suit against her former employers. She claims damages for sexual harassment, discrimination and defamation and also details the story of her contributions to the company’s founding.

The allegations she levels at her former coworkers tell a larger story, though, about how tech start-ups try to spin their stories of how an idea is generated and successfully brought to life.

The coveted founding story starts with a college (or high school) dropout who noodles on his computer and creates a world-changing innovation. (An engineer from M.I.T. or Harvard is a close second.)

Once the start-up is established, product control is prized to maximize flexibility; the preferred means of growth are “boot-strapping” (financing the company through personal means or the company’s early revenue) or a successful Series A round of fund-raising from venture capitalists leading to an I.P.O. (Selling your start-up to a wealthy, powerful company like Google, Apple or Facebook may leave the idea intact and the founders flush, but autonomy will be lost, and the founders will be left riding the bus to work.)

Tinder didn’t strictly follow this narrative: The app was born under the aegis of an incubator at IAC, an Internet company. After Ms. Wolfe filed her lawsuit, Nick Summers, who wrote a profile of Tinder for Bloomberg Businessweek in 2013, revisited the subject to reveal how the company had tried to hide certain aspects of its history.

In his initial reporting on Tinder, Mr. Summers found that Sean Rad, the chief executive, and Justin Mateen, the chief marketing officer, were reluctant to admit IAC’s role. “Tinder would check all the boxes of the classic rocketing digital start-up success — college dropout founder, colorful offices, young users, and a geometric growth curve — if it weren’t for one minor detail: It’s not actually a start-up. Tinder will never have a splashy initial public offering or the thrill of announcing a billion-dollar acquisition by a large corporation, because it’s already owned by a large corporation.”

Mr. Rad and Mr. Mateen “were keen to hide this arrangement,” Mr. Summers wrote, “and pretend that they were living the dream of being wined and dined by Silicon Valley moneymen.”

Mr. Summers’s account of a manipulated founding story didn’t strike readers as unusual — and may point to another underlying reason why Ms. Wolfe’s early contributions have since been obscured.

Just about every major LA tech co rewrites their origin story. It is a town of storytellers after all http://t.co/xSHpuPek39

— Sean Percival (@Percival) 3 Jul 14

Commenters discussing the Tinder lawsuit on Hacker News wrote, “If you don’t create this false narrative (and let’s be clear, 90% of the startup narratives you hear are altered to make the story more attractive…), people won’t pay attention.” Someone else posted that a successful start-up born out of an incubator that is funded by a multibillion-dollar company “is far less compelling for everyone than ‘we had this idea for this app and it spread like wildfire and now the VCs are coming knocking at our door.’”

Media coverage of the tech industry often offers factors that are most likely to create a successful business. Last November, TechCrunch studied the top 39 “unicorn companies,” businesses that have made more than $1 billion. The article breaks down attributes of each company to identify indicators of success.

Of the companies considered, 90 percent of factors were shared. These included “enterprise founder/CEOs with technical degrees; companies with 2+ co-founders who worked or went to school together; companies whose founders had prior tech startup experience; and whose founders were in their 30s or older.” Mr. Mateen and Mr. Rad may have taken note that successful companies had three or fewer founders; none had greater than six.

Shanley Kane, a “cultural critic” of Silicon Valley, argues that these heroic stories conceal social realities and perpetuate the inequality of the industry. In an interview with Fast Company Labs, she argues that this narrative conceals the privilege of the dropout coder. Many of these dropouts, she argues, must have had money behind them and access to computers from a young age in order to become a successful entrepreneur. “The high school dropout story is always the story of a white guy. You never hear about women who drop out of high school and go on to found companies.”

Ms. Kane points out that most individuals leading start-ups tend to be single, white men without the obligations of family weighing on them. “There are a lot of people who can’t take advantage of those opportunities: People who don’t have parents subsidizing their living, people who have school debt, people who have families, who need to be able to support other people whether those are parents or children or a partner. It’s this fairly narrow class of person which has a certain level of economic stability that is able to take a risk like that.”

The tech industry has been criticized for its embrace of “culture fit.” Companies hire based on a candidate’s ability to mesh with the culture of the organization as it already exists, but given the overrepresentation of men in the industry, that often means women and people of color are disproportionately affected by “culture fit.” Ms. Wolfe’s gender, in the prevailing narrative of start-up success, was another strike against her.

Ms. Kane says of culture fit: “On the surface level it tends to mean ‘We just don’t like you. You’re different from us. We don’t want to figure out how to work with you.’” When the standard of proof for hiring or firing someone only has to be “culture fit,” it’s easy to see how discrimination can quickly become a problem and how start-up culture can become fairly homogenous. Ms. Wolfe claims that when Mr. Mateen was harassing her, she went to Mr. Rad for help. His response was that she was being “annoying” and “dramatic,” as documented in her lawsuit: “Mr. Rad also told her if she was unable to ‘disengage’ it would be her fault, not Mr. Mateen’s.”

Sexism in Silicon Valley — not to mention its diversity problem — is well documented. But how will people who have remained outliers in the industry be written into the narratives of success?

I am 100% sure that in January, the Tinder CEO told me they had a female co-founder. http://t.co/02EDbLinr5 — Tess Rinearson (@_tessr) 3 Jul 14

Revisiting his Tinder story, Mr. Summers concludes, “Start-ups fail and succeed because of the real actions of their workers, not because of an agreed-upon myth created after the fact.”