We’re happy for local hooch. Blissful about homebrew. And cocktail parties are back in vogue (as if they ever left those who truly love them).

Retailers and stylish crafters are joining this home-happy-hour trend with furniture, barware and accessories with cosmopolitan flair. All you need are a few invitations, snacks and some good music for the party to begin. Let’s pop the cork on what’s new.

The bar cart

“Nowadays, entertaining does not have to mean having a glitzy full bar. Bar carts have become more delicate, refined and smaller in scale, so you can tuck them into a corner of a room or blend them in with the rest of the furniture,” says Veranda magazine’s market editor Catherine Lee Davis.

West Elm’s Parker slim-profile cart in acorn-stained walnut veneer with brass rail trim has a mid-century vibe. The walnut-stained Dodson cart features a flip-down front concealing a mirror-lined interior with plenty of storage. And a cart in polished nickel with two foxed mirror shelves evokes Art Deco glamour.

If you want the look of a built-in bar, consider Pottery Barn’s modular collection of wine grids and drawered cabinets. In black or mahogany finish, the pieces can be configured to look like a hutch or buffet.

If you’re setting up a first apartment and don’t have much money, turn to local flea markets and a trusty can of spray paint. Old nightstands, those metallic kitchen carts from the 1950s, tool trolleys, medical-supply carts or other rolling furniture can be spiffed up with paint, paper or other embellishments such as stick-on tiles and mirrors. Pop the words “DIY bar cart” into Pinterest.com, and you’ll come away with hundreds of low-cost, high-style ideas.

New old-fashioned

Davis says that with barware, the trend is toward shaking it up. “We see lots of different materials like hammered silver, tortoise or shagreen,” she says. “It’s all about mixing and matching. After all, entertaining should be about having fun.”

Colorado designer David Rasmussen’s black walnut stemware is distinctive and beautiful. New York artist Aymie Switzer’s laser-etched cedar coasters depict neighborhood maps of many major cities, including Philadelphia, Chicago, Boston and San Francisco. Coasters recycled from old tires are stamped by Los Angeles artists with different graphic number fonts; all are at uncommongoods.com.

Gent Supply Co. (gentsupplyco.com) has a natty collection of coasters, glassware and flasks printed with illustrations of turn-of-the-century gentlemen duelers, narwhals, anchors, and animals dressed in distinguished garb.

Artist Richard E. Bishop, known for wildlife etchings in the 1930s, ’40s and ’50s, has his work on an array of bar glasses and decanters. Ducks, trout, foxes and horses set a “country house” tone. See them at richardbishop.com.

Once again, you can do this yourself: An inexpensive set of flat-sided old-fashioned glasses, retro stencils and paint are all it takes.

All the trimmings

A punchbowl that rests in the clutches of an octopus, and a sculpted shell held by a delicate coral stand are part of an aluminum barware collection at Z Gallerie (zgallerie.com). There’s also a faux crocodile service tray in rich eggplant, studded with silver rivets, that makes a sophisticated statement.

Silver cocktail picks and stir sticks topped with airplanes evoke the Second World War. And a mirrored sign with phrases like “Stirred” and “Straight Up” printed in a gold retro font would make great wall art.

At Homegoods, there are hammered metal cocktail shakers with handy drink recipes printed on the side. Standing wine buckets are useful accessories, leaving more room on dining tables and buffets for nicely sized tools — small muddlers, sieves, scoops and tongs, for example — that will have amateur bartenders looking like experts.

What goes in

Making a good martini may be an art, but how about making your own gin? No bathtub is required, just a kit like one from Uncommon Goods containing all the spices, juniper berries and accessories needed to turn garden-variety vodka into a custom gin.