Renner, SD

For several years Ida Sievers, didn't feel quite up to par. The 47-year-old Renner woman didn't see a doctor because she wasn't covered under Medicaid and didn't feel like she could afford insurance.

"I knew something was wrong," Sievers said. "I was dying, and that was that."

After two years of not feeling well, Sievers finally went to the doctor. They diagnosed her with leukemia, which had spread to her stomach.

"I was two weeks out. Two weeks longer, and they wouldn't have been able to help me," Sievers said.

"We have talked to lots of patients over the years who had to make a choice between having food on the table and a place to live or cancer treatment," American Cancer Society Chief Cancer Control Officer Dr. Rich Wender said.

Wender is in the state talking about how expanding Medicaid would help South Dakotans battling cancer. South Dakota is one of the 19 states that have not expanded the program.

"We're now showing more and more data that the 31 states who have found a way to expand Medicaid through various models are starting to see better health outcomes," Wender said.

Wender says there are two reasons for this. Those who have coverage are more likely to get screenings to prevent or catch diseases early. They also have better access to quality care.

"Any efforts we can to help people get access to insurance either through exchanges or innovative models to get more people covered through Medicaid will be good for cancer patients," Wender said.

Governor Dennis Daugaard has appointed a special coalition to explore expanding Medicaid. A 2013 study says expansion would cost the state more than $100 million dollars through 2020.

Thankfully, Sievers is in remission after months of treatment. She's also happy to report that she has insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

"I almost lost my life over it. To have this insurance for me and my husband is a huge, huge relief," Sievers said.

Health Beat {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.