If you're a veteran attending Power in the Pines this weekend, check out services offered by Serving Those Who Served.

(The mobile Serving Those Who Served access trailer at an event at PNC Bank Arts Center, via NJ Hospital Association)

LAKEHURST, NJ -- Getting access to health care has been a vexing problem for many veterans.

It's a problem that the New Jersey Hospital Association is trying to address. Through its Serving Those Who Served intiative, the association is hoping to connect veterans with the assistance they need to address their health concerns. And they're offering that assistance through the guidance of someone who best understands those needs -- another veteran.

Serving Those Who Served will be trying to reach out to veterans attending this weekend's Power in the Pines Air Show at Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst. Veterans who need health screenings, assistance signing up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act or need health care information can come to the Mobile Satellite Emergency Department, staffed by Rowan Family Health, for help, organizers said.

The Mobile Satellite Emergency Department, a fully equipped mobile medical facility, will be parked at the American Legion Post 294 at 39 Fort Dix Rd., Pemberton, and will be available from noon to 4 p.m. both Saturday and Sunday. The American Legion post is on the southwest side of the Joint Base.

Serving Those Who Served has hired U.S. veterans as "health navigators," to help people sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, but they also are teaming with NJHA member hospitals to provide free health screenings to service members.

No appointments are necessary for the health screenings, organizers said. Health Navigators will be available outside the mobile facility to provide information, assistance and referrals to their fellow service members. Services

available may include blood pressure screening, stroke risk assessment, blood glucose screening, behavioral health screening, referrals for additional services and peer support.

There also will be mobile health screening events in Millville and in Wildwood in the coming weeks:

May 20 and 21, from noon to 4 p.m., at the Millville Army Air Field Museum, 1 Leddon Street, Millville.

June 2-5 at Wildwood Convention Center, 4501 Boardwalk, Wildwood, in conjunction with the N.J. State Elks Convention.

For hours and additional information visit Serving Those Who Served on Facebook at www.facebook.com/ServingThoseWhoServed or contact Veteran Navigator Norm Glover at nglover@njha.com or 609-608-2337.