The slew of regulations released by the Obama administration Wednesday to implement the federal health law included confirmation that some labor unions and businesses would get a break from the law’s so-called belly button tax.

Federal officials signaled in November they were planning to let some organizations that offer health insurance off paying a reinsurance fee on each person they cover, which goes into a fund to compensate insurance carriers that end up paying big medical bills now they can no longer charge riskier people more.

The fee was $63 for 2014, and applied to spouses and dependents as well as policyholders, which is where it earned the nickname “bellybutton tax.” Large employers and organized labor had campaigned against the fee because they said they were being asked to subsidize commercial insurance companies and could not afford it.

For 2015, the fee has been set at $44 — but it won’t apply to any plan that is both “self-insured” and “self-administered,” the Wednesday rules say. Some union plans could fit that definition, though not all.

Many bigger businesses and unions, which employ other companies to act as their plan administrators, have already said they don’t think this will go far enough to help them.

But they’re not the only critics. Commercial insurers have said they need the payments from the reinsurance fund and any exemptions would make everyone else pay more than they should. GOP lawmakers have also been critical of what they describe as an effort by the administration to carve out an exemption to the tax specifically for the unions that were supportive of the health law and are now complaining about it.

The Department of Health and Human Services nodded to some of these criticisms in its rule, saying: “Several commenters stated that the proposed exemption inappropriately treats self-insured plans with TPAs differently from self-insured, self-administered plans, and will inequitably shift reinsurance costs from self-insured, self-administered plans to self-insured plans with TPAs and health insurance issuers. Several commenters stated that the proposed exemption inappropriately favors ‘union plans.’”

Federal officials said in the rule they believed the plans were “a unique subset” and the exemption was narrowly drawn, and that as a result, “we estimate that the exclusion of self-insured, self-administered plans will have a small effect on the 2015 uniform contribution.”