Barack Obama is going to be in the history books.

This will happen regardless of his critics or his fans, both of which are legion. It will happen regardless of who wins the White House in November 2016. It will happen whether you love him adoringly, deride him with cynicism or hate him with all your heart, or whether you somehow have managed to be one of the few who took no sides, choosing a nuanced take on the modern—marked by partisans, stymied by political gridlock—presidency.

Maybe you don’t think he’s that great. Or maybe you have a picture of him hanging up in your living room next to a trio of faded portraits of Martin Luther King Jr., John F. Kennedy and Jesus. Regardless, he’s going into the history books because Barack Obama is the first African-American president, a feat once deemed so impossible, many thought that it wouldn’t be seen in their lifetimes.

And come January 2017, that “is” will turn into a “was” as a new president is sworn in and into history Obama goes. But before we get to that moment, The Root plans to take a good, long look at the highs and lows, feats and defeats, that make up the Obama presidency. And so we debut His Lasting Legacy, our new monthly series on that presidency. Each month until the election, The Root will examine some part of the Obama presidency—from race and foreign policy to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights, the Affordable Care Act and more. We will examine his relationships, family, politics and promises to the American people.

To kick things off, The Root spoke with two observers of Obama’s historic presidency: Andra Gillespie of Emory University, who teaches and researches African-American politics, particularly that of the post-civil-rights generation, and is finishing a book on Obama’s legacy—Symbol, Substance and Hope: Race and the Obama Administration—due out in late 2016 or early 2017; and Saladin Ambar, associate professor of political science at Lehigh University, who focuses on American politics, the presidency and governorship, and American political development.

Both academics had a lot to say about Obama’s legacy.

The Death of Post-Racialism

Gillespie put things into context, citing how racial progress has always come with setbacks, and how the incredible progress of the first African-American president’s election came with unprecedented political gridlock and a rise in racial tensions and animus. She posited that this is the lens through which the Obama presidency will have to be viewed as historians examine his efficacy as president.

One can’t separate the president from the turbulent times.

“[A lot of African Americans think] racism has definitely hindered his process in his ability to do anything in general,” said Gillespie, who believes that blacks will view what Obama went through during his presidency “through the lens of race.”

Gillespie said that Obama experienced a “backlash” after his historic election, “in part due to race.” She said that history should have warned us that this would happen, but instead America was seduced by the notion of a “post-racial” movement.

The movement was a bust.

I think he’s going to be viewed as a transitional figure, someone who was not quite part of the civil rights era, yet not young enough to belong to this Black Lives Matter generation.

“Racial progress in the U.S. is not linear; it’s a jagged political process,” Gillespie said. “[University of Connecticut professor] Jelani Cobb brought this up at the dawn of the Obama administration, the notion that stunning racial progress is met with resistance. … We shouldn’t have been surprised that President Obama got called out on the floor of the House during a joint session of Congress. We shouldn’t have been surprised about the jokes that got discovered. We should have expected that, and that’s still likely a part of the narrative and is definitely going to make Obama more sympathetic in the minds of some people. [Historians] will take this into account as they’re assessing.”

A Man of Transition

Ambar, while acknowledging the racial discord that has marked Obama’s presidency, talked more about the at-times awkward in-between space the president holds within African-American society.

“I feel that most black people in the United States understand that he is deeply confined by his office,” Ambar said. “You can even physically see it sometimes in how he shifts in his chair.

“I think he’s going to be viewed as a transitional figure, someone who was not quite part of the civil rights era, yet not young enough to belong to this Black Lives Matter generation,” he continued. “He is often mentioned as a figure from the Joshua generation, the first group of African Americans to obtain political and economic success during a time where they had to be first. Part of that transitional legacy will be lots of praise and pride for Obama, but there will also be tremendous disappointment.