.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — The price tag for providing health care to hundreds of thousands of low-income New Mexicans is rising, and state lawmakers said Tuesday they are concerned future costs will be unsustainable as they work to balance the budget.

New Mexico is one of the states that opted to expand Medicaid under the U.S. Affordable Care Act. Enrollments have surged beyond initial projections, and federal aid will soon be scaled back, putting more pressure on states to come up with the difference.

Rep. Jason Harper, R-Rio Rancho, said the state’s high poverty level means there’s a greater federal match to help pay for the program, but Medicaid still accounts for about one-sixth of the state’s budget. Escalating costs caused by higher enrollment and less federal help amount to a ticking time bomb, Harper said.

“I think having one out of three New Mexicans’ health care being covered by Medicaid is going to be the budget buster,” he said during Tuesday’s Legislative Finance Committee meeting in Santa Fe. “I just think this is not sustainable, and we need to be very careful.”

The financial concern was shared by Rep. Larry Larranaga, R-Albuquerque, chair of the House Appropriations and Finance Committee. Total spending on Medicaid — projected to near $6 billion for the next fiscal year — means the health care program will become more of a priority than higher education, he said.

“This is not a pretty picture,” Larranaga said. “It’s something we’ll have to deal with.”

State officials are requesting nearly $1 billion from the general fund for Medicaid for the 2017 fiscal year, an $85 million increase from the previous year. That request accounts for a drop in federal funding, higher enrollment and a shortfall this year.

Lawmakers asked Human Services Secretary Brent Earnest if there were areas where spending could be trimmed. Earnest said the department already has used a series of cost containment measures to whittle down the budget request.

The state’s Centennial Care program, in its second year of operation, is designed to focus on prevention and coordinated care in an effort to control future expenses by curbing costly hospital stays, Earnest said.

New Mexico is not yet at the point of having to consider changes to benefits or rates to make ends meet, he told lawmakers.

The cost estimates will become clearer once the state finishes negotiating rates with managed care organizations, Earnest said. That’s expected before the Legislature meets in January for its 30-day budget session.

More than 822,000 New Mexicans are enrolled in Medicaid. That’s about 100,000 more than initially projected, Earnest said.

By May 2107, enrollment is expected to reach 920,000 people, or nearly half of the state’s population.