Buy Photo This is view of the Rutherford County Courthouse from West Main Street. (Photo: Helen Comer/DNJ)Buy Photo

MURFREESBORO — A resolution encouraging Tennessee officials to not advance U.S. Supreme Court decisions in conflict with the state constitution was unanimously approved by the Rutherford County Steering Committee on Monday night.

The generic, non-binding resolution advocated by former County Commissioner Adam Coggin will head to the Jan. 14 meeting of the Rutherford County Commission with a recommendation to further define the meaning of the measure.

With its final product, advocates for the resolution want state lawmakers to feel the support of local communities to not act when the Supreme Court issues rulings they believe violate state law, Rutherford County resident David Hoke said .

“They’re the ones that can rise up against the federal government,” Hoke said.

Those rulings could include ones about gay marriage and the Affordable Care Act, Hoke said.

Supporters of the resolution said the state should fight for its 10th Amendment rights that allow powers not claimed by the federal government be allocated to the states.

Others, including committee chair, Trey Gooch, called for the resolution to be expanded to included executive actions and bureaucratic rules.

While the measure passed unanimously, it did not evade questions about its intent from some commissioners.

Commissioner Robert Peay said some federal decisions make him sick to his stomach, but he needed to know who would decide which court decisions would be fought before giving his ultimate support.

“I don’t know what you guys are trying to do,” Peay said. “Are you asking not to follow the law of the land?

Peay said people have to respect the rule of law as Americans, even if they don’t respect the legal decisions made in the country.

“We have to respect everyone,” Peay said. “That’s the thing about living in a democracy. We live in a republic, I understand that, but everyone has to live together.”

Hoke said the state constitution and the rule of law would dictate how any potential law would be applied.

The resolution would only encourage state lawmakers to not accept federal actions and not force them to do anything.

“The people have got to understand and begin to see if we don’t do something, we can’t defend ourselves at the state border,” Hoke said.

The resolution would also send members of the Tennessee General Assembly the message that their actions need to back up their anti-federal government rhetoric, said Commissioner Brad Turner, the steering committee’s vice chair.

“If your actions don’t back that and you don’t stick up for us, that does us no good,” Turner said.

Reach Brian Wilson at 615-278-5165. Follow him on Twitter @brianwilson17.

Read or Share this story: http://on.dnj.com/1OKjbE0