ENLARGE The carefully prepared production holds up well, despite its oddities. Cory Weaver

Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.

This year's seven-week Bard SummerScape focuses on Franz Schubert, though, as is often the case with this imaginative festival, the staged opera production explores an obscure work by one of the central composer's contemporaries. Carl Maria von Weber left his mark on music history with the supernatural yarn "Der Freischütz" (1821), a cornerstone of German Romantic opera; "Euryanthe," which had its premiere in Vienna in 1823, was not so fortunate. Its disappearance is most often blamed on the oddities and inconsistencies in the libretto by the poet Helmina von Chézy.

Euryanthe Bard SummerScape Through Aug. 3

Oddities there certainly are, but in the carefully prepared Bard production, the piece holds up well. It is musically rich, lyrical and expansive, and its accompanied recitatives flow organically into the arias and choruses. Weber excelled in creating atmosphere with the orchestra, and his depiction of the psychological states of his four central characters is acute. "Euryanthe" is also interesting for its chronological position: I heard echoes of Beethoven's "Fidelio" (1805), and it seemed clear that Wagner not only cribbed the central plot idea of an evil duo ensnaring a pair of innocent lovers for "Lohengrin" (1850), but was also inspired by the opera's robust male choruses.

As for Von Chézy's libretto, it is no more improbable than plenty of others that have passed muster. Certainly its obsession with female purity is not unusual. The story is set in medieval France (think knights, dragons and courtly love). Count Adolar, betrothed to Euryanthe, is the target of a plot by the jealous Count Lysiart, who is in love with Euryanthe himself. Lysiart provokes Adolar into a wager: He will prove that Euryanthe is unfaithful, or forfeit his lands and titles to Adolar. If she is unfaithful, the reverse will happen. This is not the friendly sparring of Mozart's "Così fan tutte," however; the question of fidelity is deadly serious, and there's a lot on the line.

Euryanthe is pure, but her frenemy Eglantine, who actually hates her and loves Adolar, tricks Euryanthe into telling Adolar's darkest secret: His sister Emma killed herself after her own beloved was killed in battle. Lysiart and Eglantine team up and reveal the secret to all. The betrayal—if Euryanthe is telling intimate secrets to Lysiart, she must be unfaithful—thus supposedly proved, Adolar and Euryanthe are stripped of their possessions and status and driven into the forest. The third act is a bit tortuous: Adolar can't bring himself to kill Euryanthe, but he does kill a serpent that attacks them, and then leaves her alone in the wilderness. Eventually, the plot is uncovered, the villains punished, and the lovers reunited. Even Emma, an unquiet ghost, is finally allowed to rest, because the tears of an innocent victim (Euryanthe) fall on her ring.

Director Kevin Newbury chose to deal with the plot inconsistencies by updating the opera to the Victorian era and its buttoned-up attitude toward female sexuality. Aided by D.M. Wood's evocative lighting, Victoria Tzykun's simple but elegant set stressed the difference between the interior, protected world of the court and the threatening forest: Its seemingly solid walls could become translucent, showing the twisted trees beyond. Jessica Jahn's silver-gray costumes for the chorus—the men in uniforms, the women in exaggeratedly corseted gowns—emphasized the repressive nature of the court. When Euryanthe was shamed and banished, she was stripped of her (red!) dress and shoes and chased into the wilderness in her white undergarments, with a red "X" painted on her bodice.

Mr. Newbury also gave Emma (the nonsinging Ann Chiaverini) a more prominent role: Her suicide and furtive burial were pantomimed during the orchestral prologue, her ghost appeared frequently, and her tomb—a trap door—was regularly opened. Ghosts are seemingly acceptable for the 19th century, but not malevolent serpents: The fleeing lovers were incongruously attacked by the giant root ball of a tree that descended from above.

But the plot really demands a conquered serpent, which made me wonder if perhaps the medieval setting might have actually been more consistent than the update. The tribal nature of that society, and its emphasis on vows and fealty for the security of the community, and the killing of the serpent, with its heraldic connotations of virtue, could have made for a deeper interpretation than the simpler theme of individual infidelity. Certainly the prominence of the chorus, superbly prepared by James Bagwell, a character in itself with its vivid declarations of loyalty and anger at betrayal, stood for the importance of social order.

The vocal star of the evening was tenor William Burden, who gave a searingly emotional performance as Adolar. Returned from war, limping on a wounded leg, and actually older than the other principals, he created the impression of an uneasy man who has seen evil and is just waiting for the next blow. Ellie Dehn was a fragile, open-hearted Euryanthe, though her sweet, pointed soprano tended to thin in its highest register. Wendy Bryn Harmer was properly serpentlike as the malevolent Eglantine, with a big, edgy sound that found its apotheosis in her final outburst, when she reveals her duplicity and her triumph at the supposed death of Euryanthe. Baritone Ryan Kuster brought a venomous enthusiasm to Lysiart; he was especially good in his potent Act II aria, which begins with his unrequited love for Euryanthe but switches quickly to his lust for vengeance. Bass Peter Volpe brought gravity to the role of King Ludwig. Conductor Leon Botstein led the American Symphony Orchestra in a lively reading that was particularly sensitive to the details of instrumental mood painting, like the soft, spooky strings that accompanied Euryanthe's revelation of the secret, and the haunting bassoon that accompanied her abandonment.

Ms. Waleson writes about opera for the Journal.