A chaotic scene unfolded in Black Forest on Saturday morning as authorities investigated two separate deadly shootings at homes in the community north of Colorado Springs that are likely to be connected.

El Paso County Sheriff’s deputies weren’t saying much about the shootings, only that a killer was on the loose, he was driving a stolen minivan and they wanted to talk to a “person of interest.”

Two people were dead and another person was injured after the shootings that occurred at homes about 2 miles apart.

Authorities did not divulge much about the crimes and were careful about identifying a possible suspect. They said they are looking for a white man in his 40s, who was dressed completely in black and may have been carrying a black duffel bag.

They also said they wanted to speak with a “person of interest,” Kenneth “Tex” Lankford, 47, who has a connection to one of the homes. They did not specify the connection.

Lankford has an extensive criminal record in three states and was out on a $1,000 bond on an assortment of charges, including drug possession with intent to distribute and possession of a weapon by a previous offender. He was also charged Oct. 17 with owning a dangerous dog that caused injury or death.

He also owned a home on Shoup Road in Black Forest that was destroyed in this summer’s wildfire. Records indicate he lived there with Terry Thoke Trout.

“We are not identifying him as a suspect,” said Sgt. Joe Roybal, spokesman for the El Paso County Sheriff’s Office.

The names of the slaying victims have not been released.

Sheriff’s investigators warn that if anyone sees the suspect, they are not to approach the man because he is considered armed and dangerous.

The license plate of the 2002 red Honda Odyssey is 048-GJB, Roybal said.

“We are processing two different crime scenes,” Roybal said. “But we don’t know if the two incidents are related or not.”

At about 8:30 a.m., a 911 call came from 11725 Timberlane Court in Black Forest, with the homeowner reporting he had been shot in the face by an intruder.

According to records, the home is owned by Thomas and Carol Fowler.

A neighbor, who asked not to be identified, said both the Fowlers were shot and the wife was dead. The neighbor said the intruder had stolen another neighbor’s van and fled the scene. No motive has been determined, Roybal said.

The other scene was at 6685 Burrows Road, about 5 miles east of the Timberlane residence.

Neighbors on Burrows Road told reporters from KMGH News that a man named Ken lived at that residence with his wife or girlfriend and had moved there after the Black Forest fire. They told the TV station said he occasionally sleeps in a tent on the property.

Lankford first went to jail when he was 19, and has been in and out of jail ever since, said his uncle, Norce Lankford, 62, of Longview, Texas. The younger Lankford was arrested for numerous charges, including selling drugs, burglary, theft, forgery, assault and aggravated assault.

“He cannot come here, absolutely,” Norce Lankford said by phone Saturday evening. “I’m from Texas. If he pulls a gun out here, I’m going to have fun.”

Still, his uncle said, Kenneth Lankford has one of the biggest hearts and will do anything for people. He added that his nephew has been running a pawn shop in Colorado Springs. “When he got on drugs he had a very hot temper,” Norce Lankford said. “He’s from Texas. When you want to get after it, we do it.”

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, denverpost.com/coldcases or twitter.com/kmitchelldp